PARTHENISSA, That most Famed ROMANCE. The Six Volumes Complete.

COMPOSED By the Right Honorable The Earl of Orrery.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Blue Anchor in the
Lower-Walk of the New Exchange, MDCLXX-VI

To my LADY NORTHUMBERLAND.
MADAM,
WEre this Present but as great as the Confidence which makes it, I should then
have assumed that as my Election, which now I do as my Penance. For
Parthenissa has protested to me, though she have been nourished in misfortune,
yet my Pen has been her highest; and that to Dedicate her to any but my Lady
Northumberland, were to injure her as much in the address of her Adventures, as
in the Relation. Perhaps Madam, my opinion may be yours, and that you will
esteem her as guilty in her Justice, as I am in my fault, since the penance
she enjoins me for one crime, is to commit a greater. It Is the respect I owe to
you and to Truth, which makes me use this expression, for I cannot write of
Parthenissa so ill, but to write to My Lady Northumberland is worse. But Madam,
that you may not conclude me a wilful offender, which seemingly I may appear,
by a knowledge of the greatest fault, and then by an election of it: I have
this to allege in my justification, that had not the Theory of Virtue taught
me the noblest operation of it, is to pardon offenses, your practice had: For I
have found you as much pleased in conferring on me your pardon, as I have been
to receive it, or troubled to need it. So that I cannot term that a crime in
which you take delight, nor condemn that performance which affords you any;
neither can you suspect this Truth, when for the manifestation of it, I decline
not so criminal a proof. Thus Madam, you may see I injure you, but to do you
right, and publish my transgression, but to do the same of your Mercy. But
since Parthenissa has used me at a contrary rate, I shall not scruple to
imitate her example, and to render her fault as evident as she has mine: It Is,
Madam, that she offered me her pardon for this Book, if in it I would draw her
Copy by making you my Original; but my respect and my disability rendered me
incapable of the Will and Power of effecting it, neither can I better
illustrate the greatness of the former, than by proportionating it to that of
the latter. You would not be what you are, could I have made her what she would
be; since to render any resembling you, were to injure you in your noblest
Prerogative, and to act a crime, which Nature has not, or rather could not
perform. Besides, Madam, could I have represented her such a perfection, I
could not have committed that offense, for which this reparation was
prescribed, for I could not have continued the Romance, since thereby my Hero's
friendships must have yielded to their Loves, and with much more reason, than
their doing so, could have been condemned. There is a necessity in Books of
this nature, that the Beauties in them must have some particular charms, the
one above the other, but you possess all those graces in a more sublime
perfection, than any one of them; does any one of them, and I have heard
Parthenissa profess with as much concern as truth, that if there be any thing
in the Book which bears her Name that relishes of the Romance, it is only
because you are not the subject of it: Your Beauty would bring credit to more
transcendent things, than are there related, and make that which would require
Faith in any other case, appear as much Reason in yours, as that which confines
me inviolably to the highest ambition'd Title of,

MADAM*
Your most Obliged, most Faithful, And Most Obedient, Humble Servant.
PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK I.
THE Sun was already so far declined, that his heat was not offensive, when a
Stranger richly Armed, and proportionably blessed with all the gifts of Nature,
and Education, alighted at the Temple of Hierapolis in Syria, where the Queen
of Love had settled an Oracle, as famous as the Deity, to whom it was
Consecrated. The Stranger having disarmed himself, and learnt the unusual
silence of the Goddess, commanded his servant to enquire out some retired
lodging for him, which whilst he was doing, his Master walked about that sacred
place, without so much as considering the beauty, and rareness of the
structure, and with so languishing and careless a pace, that those which
considered it, easily judged, 'twas chiefly the distempers of his Mind, which
had so strong an influence over his Body. Amongst many that were so employed,
Callimachus, the Prince of that holy Society, was so ravished with those charms,
which in spite of fortunes cruelties, did yet inhabit his face and shape, and
so strangely sympathiz'd in those crosses, whose effects were not more
apparent, than their causes unknown; that he could not abstain from
interrupting the strangers melancholy, by going to salute him, where after
those civilities which are usually practiced in such encounters, he invited him
into a less frequented walk than that he had chosen: The stranger informed of
his quality and profession, was unwilling to be uncivil to either, and
therefore obeyed his invitation, but had far rather employed the time of the
Oracles silence in the entertainment of his thoughts, though they never
permitted him so much as a good expectation, always representing his hopes and
fears through a false Optic, which had so transcendently altered him, that if
the Gods could have been mistaken in the infliction of their punishments, so
strange a change had made them doubt, they had been so in him.

The good Callimachus, who judged by the relics what the perfection had been,
led him purposely alone into a solitary Walk, to learn his Adventures, and
perceiving the unintermissiveness of his melancholy, he took that for the rise,
and told him, I have had no small dispute, Sir, with my self, before I resolved
to beg of you a relation of your life; for I know by experience, that the
repetition of a misfortune is a new one, but the great Goddess, whose unworthy
Priest I am, has often raised a curiosity in me to learn the Adventures of
many who come to consult her Oracle, and afterward has inspired me with such
advice, that from thence they have derived their future happiness: And I am
strongly persuaded you may enjoy an advantage equal unto many others, if you
will furnish me with a resembling means. Alas, Sir, the Stranger replied,
though I am confident your Goddesses favors to you are great, and that your
judgment is so, yet the higher Powers have so incessantly persecuted me, that
my folly would proportion my misfortunes, did I expect any ease but in the
Grave; neither do I know whether then I shall be at quiet; for sleep being the
Image of Death, and my Dreams tormenting me as much as my Thoughts, I may with
too much reason suspect, that what is the remedy of all afflictions to others,
will loose that property where I am concerned. The virtuous Callimachus here
interrupted him by saying, I shall not much wonder that your miseries are
great, since your diffidence of the Gods is so: They are never more offended
than when men despair of their Providence, nor readier to assist, then when
there is no visible relief, and yet a firm reliance on it: The Deity being
never more apparent than in doing things as well beyond the Expectation, as the
de^ert of Man. Then taking the Stranger by the hand, he begged his pardon for
so necessary an interruption, beseeching him to believe that great Truth, which
both his profession, and experience made him utter. The Stranger found this
reprehension to be as just as civil; and after having assured Callimachus that
'twas his melancholy (not he) that had offended, did offer him as a Penance to
relate his Fortunes. Callimachus being highly satisfied with it, answered him,
You see how much the Gods are pleased with those which assume their quarrel,
for my performing it has not only produced the ambition'd effect of making you
perceive your fault, but has besides procured an engagement I was almost as
impatient of, and would it might please those Powers to give me the means as
certainly to remedy your misfortunes, as I am confident I shall be a sharer in
them. By that time this Civility was answered, they were come into a Walk so
covered with Yew and Cypress, that it appeared a fit Scene for so sad a Story,
where Callimachus's silence made the Stranger begin this ensuing Relation.

The Story of Parthenissa and Artabanes.
THough my misfortunes are of so sad a quality, that I should rather publish
than conceal who I am, since I might find by divulging my self, that cure from
my Enemies resentments the Gods have hindered my own from performing, yet
because they have commanded me to learn my destiny from this Oracle, I am
determined not to contribute any thing which probably may hinder it, and if by
that answer it gives me: I find my Death as necessary as I now believe it. I
had rather also erect to be obliged to my own hands for my Cure, than to those
of my Enemies; it is upon these considerations only, that before I proceed any
further, I must beg your secrecy; my actions as you will understand by the
sequel of my discourse, having raised me Enemies whose power is as great as
their malice. Callimachus would here have made him Protestation of that
inviolable silence he desired, but the generous Stranger would not permit him,
believing himself sufficiently certain of it, by having acquainted him now
necessary it was: And therefore not to give the holy Priest any time for so
needless an assurance, he thus continued his Story. My name is Artabanes, I was
born in the Reign of Orodes, the present King of Parthia, who is also called
Arsaces, (which is the name appropriated to all those Kings, in honor to
Arsaces, the first Founder of that Monarchy) I had my education with Orode's
eldest son, the Prince Pacorus, whose favor I possessed in no unconsider^ble
degree, while I had the honor to be near him. My Father, whose name is
Moneses, might now by a just succession wear the Crown of Media; did not a
nobler Principle invite him to decline it. He was Uncle to Tigranes, the last
King of that flourishing Country, and only Brother to Tiridates his Father,
who, by the infusions of evil Counselors had received so great a jealousy of
mine, that to vindicate his innocence, and to remove his Brothers suspicions,
he retired into Parthia, where Orodes's entertainment was worthy the great
Blood of the Arsacides, of which Moneses has the honor to be descended, and
in a short time, gave him his only Sister the Princess Ebuzara, who having
presented my Father with the unfortunate Artabanes (three years after) with
Lindary, she dyed, but Arsaces affection for her Husband did not, and he
multiplied his favors on my Sister and me so abundantly, that a long while we
little found the want of so excellent a Mother, his transcendent care so well
supplied that loss. Moneses had his education among the Grecians, whose Customs
he so highly valued, that I was no sooner fit to learn, than he had by liberal
Pensions procured many of that Country to render my Education perfect; in all
which exercises, as well of the Mind as of the Body, those that flattered me
would say, I was no ill Proficient. One day as I was waiting on the King, there
came in a Lady in Mourning, who presented a Petition to him; But oh Gods! with
so much majesty and humility together, that I admired how two such distant
things could meet in one subject, her Eyes had antipathy to the Liberties of
our Sex, destroying all those that beheld them, her shape and motion had
peculiar Charms, and she had a certain vivacity and air in her countenance,
that assured me her wit was not inferior to her beauty, and yet one might
easily perceive, that Time, which is the ruin of all other Faces, would but
improve hers, she being not then above fifteen years old. I must ingenuously
confess, my heart by some extraordinary motions foretold proportionate events,
and the sight of so many perfections made me inquisitive of her name which
possessed them: A Courtier which stood by, soon satisfied my curiosity, by
acquainting me her name was Parthenissa, that she was the only heir of the
generous Miraxtorses, who had been long General of the Parthians, that this
young Princess petitioned the King for a continuation of that Principality,
which had been enjoyed by her Father; who from all his services and victories
derived no other advantage, than the honor of acting them, and at his death had
left no other Wealth behind him, but that of a high Reputation. While the King
was reading her Petition, I took the opportunity of saluting her, and after
some little civilities of telling her, Madam, I find two things since my coming
into this Chamber worthy of my wonder, that Miraxtorses's deserts should
Petition for a Reward, and that you should present it, or if I am singular in
both these causes of admiration I have a third, in which I shall have as many
of my opinion, as beholders of what creates it; If, Sir, replied she (with a
little redness) I had no better hope of success in my desires to the first,
than I have no pretense to the last cause of your admiration, I should despair
of my request, or at least only expect that from the Kings favor, which I now
assure my self to receive from his Justice. Madam (said I) you have so good a
Title both to what you petition for, and to all I ascribe unto you, that I
shall think you do more wrong the fair Parthenissa by disclaiming so great a
truth, than Fortune has, by necessitating you to desire, or Arsaces can, though
he declined granting it; which least he should, I humbly beg you not to refuse
the duty of my friends or my interceeding with him. Then without staying for
her consent, lest she should reject the first proffer of my service, I went
immediately blushing and trembling to my Father, who then came in, and besought
him to employ his power with Orodes, in a cause so worthy his soliciting, and
the Kings concession. Moneses, who was always inclined to actions of this
quality, so powerfully persuaded Arsaces to grant the fair Parthenissa's
request, that he did it. You may easily imagine I received no small contentment
in this little service, especially when after I had begged her to accept it as
an earnest of what I was confined to pay her; methought her blushes placed a
true interpretation on my meaning: But after that little disorder was past,
whether to disguise it, or out of a true sense of what she was then going to
say, I cannot tell; but I can, that her answer was, My obligation to you (Sir)
is so extreme great, that it makes me almost question the Kings justice, or my
Fathers merits, which needed so powerful an intercession. I had no leisure to
reply, for Arsaces retired into his Cabinet, and she to her own house, whither
I desired to wait on her, but she would permit me to do so no farther than to
her Chariot. I withdrew my self immediately after to my own Appartment, and
passed the rest of the day with some impatience, longing for a Darkness equal
to that which began to diffuse it self over my Thoughts, that I might the more
uninterruptedly entertain them. As soon as I was a-bed, instead of that rest I
usually took, I found mine was disturbed by a throng of Assailants. But
Parthenissa's beauty had assumed so transcendent an Empire over my memory, that
my reflections on it almost suppressed all others; which made me begin to
imagine it was Love, by my then resenting what I had heard of it. I must
confess this did somewhat surprise me, for my Governor had imbued me with so
bad a character of that passion (he being a Stoic) that I feared it almost as
much as I admired Parthenissa; which made me call into my memory all those
Antidotes he had given me, As the poorness of submitting to a Sex the Gods had
given ours the Authority over: The vast troubles in purchasing our desires: The
smallness (commonly) of the value, if obtained; or the natural Inconstancy of
Women, which by depriving us of a known felicity, renders the loss greater.
That by the definition of Love, the Chase is a greater happiness than the
Quarry; For Love is a desire, and we never desire that which we enjoy,
therefore with the fruition the Love ceases; so that the best of Love is to be
ill, but to be well again; Who would be a Votary to that Passion? Many other
arguments my memory would have furnished me withal, had not the growing Idea of
Parthenissa's beauty made them vanish; and then my Reason taking her Defense,
furnished me with these Answers. That the Precedence that our Sex had over hers,
was rather an Assumption of our own, than a Concession of the Gods; for amongst
those Creatures which purely observe the Dictates of Nature, and can neither
Lie nor Dissemble, the Feminine Sex is courted by the Masculine; or if the
Divine Law gave the last pre-eminence over the first, yet the Law of Custom did
suspend it. That the consideration of troubles to a mind capable of so high a
Design as the adoring of Parthenissa, should rather inflame than diminish the
courage. In what darkness had the World lived, if difficulty had not rather
added to, than suppressed the Desires of generous undertakings: As for the
smallness of the value if obtained, that is not the fault of Love, but of
Choice. That Inconstancy is not hereditary to the Sex, the examples of
Lucretia, and many others sufficiently evidencing, that is not their Nature,
but their Vice: That it would be a difficult thing to persuade a man who might
grow rich, out of that desire, from an apprehension that if he became poor
again, his loss would be the more unsupportable. And lastly, to Loves being a
desire which cease with fruition; we might as justly say, that a Merchant
which courts Wealth, and makes his life his trouble to obtain it; when he has
his end, may as properly be called poor, as an enjoying Lover, by fruition,
ceases to be one; for when he once has the possession, so many unfancy'd joys
disclose themselves, that they afford sufficient nourishment to preserve, if
not increase the fire; and the desire of the continuance of that happiness does
still maintain Love, if Love were only a desire: For Fruition is not like
lighting, that vanishes so soon as it appears, but as the Elizian Joys, whose
greatness consists in the duration; so that Love is better in the Quarry than
in the Chase; yet the latter is a happiness too, only as the means, but
Fruition perfects happiness as the end. I tell you these little Reasonings, not
that I esteem them worthy your attention, but to acquaint you with
Parthenissa's power: since to captivate a heart that had no aversion to Love,
is as common, as to subdue one so prepossest with a prejudicate opinion of it,
was only fit for Parthenissa's Beauty, in which all virtues were so evident,
that I needed not the help of time, but of sight to disclose them. I will not
trouble you any more in telling you how long it was before I did submit, since
at last I was necessitated to it, and had no sooner resolved there was no mean
between my misery and her favor, but I applied my self to all ways I imagined
might render me the least unworthy of it. And to show how much the Gods
contributed to the growth of this passion; there fell out after many
revolutions, an accident (even when my sufferings must have disclosed what I
had brought my words to conceal) which did not only acquaint her with the
greatness of my flame, but did also inspire her with one which has since proved
so fatal to us both. There was an Ancient custom in Parthia, to celebrate the
Anniversary of the Kings Coronation, with all the shows of magnificence and
joy, which the Art or Affections of the people could invent; and because the
Parthians were ever esteemed the Warlik'st Nation in the whole World, to
continue that just reputation, they declined all those effeminacies which are
so predominant in other Courts, and absolutely addicted themselves to such
Martial exercises as are nothing less pleasing and delightful than the others,
and yet fit and prepare men more for the real use of Arms, and Acquisition of
Glory. 'Twas this practice, which made the youth about the Court, to publish
over all Asia a solemn Tilting, where such as had any skill and courage were
invited to show them, by diverse Heralds expressly sent into all the Kingdoms of
the East. And though this was more upon Gallantry than any other score, and
that the Laws of it extended only to breaking of Lances, yet there happened an
accident which wholly subverted the first intention of so innocent a meeting.

The exercises of it were to last three days, and Fortune, to evince her
blindness, had permitted me the two first to remain victorious: But as I was
coming out of the Lists, attended by the acclamations, and company of my
friends, we heard a great noise of Trumpets and Clarions, which imposed on us a
general stop and silence, the King too, and all the Court, at so unexpected
Music, returned to their seats to learn the cause of it: Their curiosity was
soon satisfied by the appearing of Four and twenty Blackamoor Pages, richly
clothed, and well horst, who carried each of them at the end of an Ebony stick
tipped with gold, the several Picture of some excellent Beauty: These were
followed by their Master, who was advantageously mounted, and whose Helmet
being opened, discovered a Face more capable to create fear than any other
Passion; and yet even in those barbarous features, there was an ample evidence
of a resembling courage and magnanimity. As soon as he was come near the
highest Scaffold, he sent one of the six Pages which followed him, to enquire
where the King was; who having obeyed, and satisfied his Lord, he himself
immediately advanced toward Arsaces, and made him a salutation much after the
rate of these ensuing words. Sir (said he) I am of that Arabia, which is called
the Happy, and am in some degree allied to the King of that Country; I adored
a Beauty there, which had no defect but her cruelty, and though that soon ended
with her life, yet my Passion instead of dying with the object of it, did the
contrary; for it increast to such a height, that it seemed all those flames
with which she set so many hearts on fire, flew into mine, as the seat of the
great'st and perfect'st Empire: And though time be the common cure of most
misfortunes, yet it proved the increase of mine; for the more I reflected on my
loss, the greater I always found it; and at last the operation of so just a
grief, reduced me to so deep a melancholy, that my King came to visit me, and
to cure my Passion, spoke so many impious things against the perfection that
had created it, (which he injuriously said was equaled by many) that not
daring to expiate his offense with his life, because of his character, I
publicly vowed never to continue in his Dominions, and that I would visit all
the Courts of Asia, to justify that none but my own King durst say any Beauty
was comparable to that of the fair Mizalinza's. To effect this, I instantly
abandoned the place of my birth, and published my design, and the conditions of
the Combat, (if any were so vain as to undertake it) which were, That whosoever
should defend the object of his Passion, by equalling it to her that created
mine, in case I became victorious, he should give me the Picture of his
Mistress, which I ever after carried with me, and hung up as a Trophy. These
Four and twenty several Beauties had the ill fortune to be compared to
Mizalinza's, and by the Death, or Conquest of those which adored them, are now
to wait upon her, whom their deluded Lovers equaled them to. The fame of this
great meeting, has drawn me Sir to your Court, where if any be so presumptuous
as to justify such folly, I will not with my Lance alone (which I understand
is the only Arms of this Tilting) but with my Sword maintain a truth which
Mizalinza's eyes, more than the defeat of the greatest Courages in the World,
has abundantly justified. But perhaps (he coutinued) that the sight of this
charming beauty, will produce a confession, which may exempt my Sword from that
trouble; Thereupon with a deep reverence, he drew out the Copy of so glorified
an Original, and having exposed it to all our views, he further added, that if
any durst undertake to lessen her perfection by a comparison, that the next
morning he would appear on the same place he was then on, to manifest to the
offender, that nothing but his blood was capable to wash away his crime. Then
without staying for any answer, he retired to his Lodgings, and left us in as
great an astonishment at his insolence, as at his Passion; But Arsaces, who was
a Prince that in his youth had been blessed with a high valor, did so
exceedingly resent the impudence of Ambixules (for so this Arabian Prince was
called) that he publicly professed, if none in his Court had the courage to
fight with him, he would do it, for the defense of an Imaginary Mistress, rather
than suffer an affront to be done unto the Parthians, as great even as the
insolency with which it was committed. There is no doubt but that Orodes's
Court was then replenisht with Men, who apprehended nothing in dangers, but
that they were not great enough; Yet at that instant, the loves of the major
part were so unhappy, that they durst not acknowledge the Objects of them, and
'twas upon that score only, this Arabian had like to have engrossed an honor
without drawing his Sword, greater than ever he had obtained by it. The same
misfortune had then an influence over me, and I dare truly profess, if I had
any uncertainty in the undertaking to punish Ambixules insolence, it proceeded
not from my apprehension of him, but Parthenissa, for whom I durst hardly
acknowledge openly I had a Passion, till she in private had approved it; But I
thought the crime of that presumption would not equal that of the tacit
confession and beauty transcended hers, and that I had a less Title to her
anger, by discovering my flame to defend her right, than expose that to any
apparent injury, by a concealment of it: Neither was it impossible but I might
return from the Combat without receiving any such wounds, whose cure might
necessitate my discovery, in which case, I was resolved to conceal my self, and
not acknowledge my Passion, till she, to whom it was addressed, would bless me
with the reception of it. 'Twas with these and many such reasons, that I
assumed a resolution to become the Protector of an Excellency, which had no
misfortune, but that it needed one, or that it had one so unworthy that honor
as Artabanes: I kept this determination exceeding private, least if it had been
discovered, my friends might have denied my first essay in Arms to have been
against so known a Conqueror; I had some difficulty too, to fit my self with
Armor, for that I had made use of the two precedent days, was too publicly
known to have been used the third. But, I remembered that the Prince Sillaces,
my most particular friend, and who merited abundantly to be so, had an
excellent one, which he had made for that solemnity, but being unfortunately
troubled with an Ague, he was necessitated to decline showing his skill and
gallantry, which indeed I apprehended more than any others. These Arms I sent
privately to borrow of his servant, who, knowing his Prince could not possibly
use them, sent them to me; and I found that they were very fit, our shapes, and
heights being as resembling as our friendships. I will not amuse my self to
tell you how impatiently I past the night, nor how early I came to the
assignation, lest some others should have prevented me: I shall not only let
you know, that I was there before any that might have had my design, and before
Ambixules too; whom I did not long expect, and how at his entry into the Lists,
managed his Horse with so much art and grace, that he attracted all the eyes of
the assistants: After he had ended, I began the same exercise, to show him I
was not ignorant of it; But not to dress a true story in clothes of a Romance,
I will pass by the descriptions of our Arms, Devices, Motto's, and all things
of so low a nature; to acquaint you, that Ambixules having repaid me the
civility of looking on his Horses manage, demanded of me the sight of my
Mistresses Picture; to which I told him, That the Excellency I adored, would
not be what it was, if it lay in the power of Art to represent it; but that the
Original being present, I would conduct him to it; where his Justice must be as
blind, as she herself is painted, if he did not adore what he came to injure.
Come, said Ambixules, smiling, I will go see this Beauty, to convince you by a
demonstration, that he which has seen Mizalinza's eyes, can be conquered by no
others; but (he continued) though contrary to my practice, I am content to
begin the Combat before I see your Mistrisses Picture; yet you must oblige your
self, that some friend for you, after your death, will let me have the reward
of it. This insolence did not a little offend me, but being resolved to repair
the wrong with nobler Arms than those which had committed it; I only told him,
I was confident to give him the recompense of his Victory, before he won it,
since it was impossible to see Parthenissa, without carrying away her Image. By
this time we were come so near her, that I went to the Scaffold she was on, and
without lifting up my Helmet (to continue my disguise) I saluted her with a
respect equal to my Passion, and told her; Madam, if I have the confidence to
beg your permission to vindicate your beauty, it is out of a certainty that the
success of so just a dispute, cannot but prove as fortunate, as that it needs
not any defense: Neither do I draw my Sword to justify that you are the
persectest of your Sex, but to punish Ambixules for not acknowledging it.
Whilst I was speaking these few words, she was in some disorder, yet it was so
innocent a one, that it rather was a friend than any enemy to her beauty; but
she quickly suppressed it, to answer me. Whosoever you are, that to give a long
proof of your Courage, give as little one of your Judgment; I shall conjure you
not to undertake a defense, where the injustice of the quarrel may give your
Enemy an advantage, which I believe he would hardly obtain on a contrary score.
Madam (I replied) I know how to distinguish betwixt your Modesty and your
Justice, and consequently to attribute to what you now speak, to the first; but
if you have so partial a character of the fair Parthenissa, I will convince her
by an experiment, how much she has injured herself, and my election. Thereupon
saluting her with an infinite humility, but without staying for any reply, I
desired Ambixules to return to the place of Combat, and to hasten a decision of
it; but he was so intent, and ravished in the consideration of Parth^nissa's
beauties, that to interrupt his thoughts, I was forced to tell him, Ambixules,
I fear if you continue longer in the employment you are in, I shall have but
little honor in my Victory, having to deal with one who will have lost his
heart. This truth made him ashamed of what he should rather have gloried in; so
that turnnig about his Horse, he rid with me where the Judges attended us, and
by the way assured me that my Mistress had so much of Mizalinza in her, that
having vanquished me, he would desire no other Picture of her than that which he
carried in his memory. This Antedated Victory I excused upon the same score
that I had the former, being by this time come where it was no time to talk. I
will pass by acquainting you with the joy Arsaces had to perceive this Arabian
was not altogether unlike to escape unpunished; the general wonder of all the
Court who I was, and the secret repining of many Beauties to perceive
Parthenissa's could find a Protector, when none of theirs had any; to tell you,
That the three first courses, we broke our Lances with equal advantage; and
perceiving they were too civil Weapons for our designs, we both, as if it had
been by mutual consent, drew out our Swords, and soon made each other feel of
what temper they were of; but Ambixules having given me a furious reverse,
which I was endeavoring to repay in the same coin, his Horse unexpectedly rose
before, so that what I intended for his Master, fell upon him, and the blow
being given with all my strength, and lighting upon his head, cleft it in two.
I was extremely troubled at this misfortune, and having begged Ambixules pardon
for an undesign'd wrong, I trotted some seventy paces from him, and lighting
off my Horse, I returned again, and told him, That to manifest I would take no
advantage over him, but what I had by the goodness of my quarrel, and that what
I had done was unintended, I came to offer him, if he thought he had any odds
in fighting on Horseback, to send for a fresh one, that then he should make
choice of that or of mine; or if he esteemed himself in as good a condition on
foot, I was ready so to finish what we had begun. The Arabian replied, That he
knew his courage gave him sufficient advantage over me in whatsoever posture he
was in; and since I had killed his Horse, he would not so long a time suspend
his revenge, as that which must be spent in sending for another. This rudeness
so incenst me, that I repaid it with some dangerous wounds, but at the last,
finding his fury more than his strength made him continue the Combat, I retired
two or three paces, with intention to preserve a valor I could not but esteem,
though I had received some dangerous effects of it, and told him; You see
Ambixules the power of Justice, which has reduced you to a condition of
acknowledging, rather than persevering in your error, and that advantage which
the goodness of my cause has given me, I desire only to employ to obtain a
confession from your tongue, which your weakness has already made. Nor my
weakness, nor my tongue (said he) shall ever confess you have any advantage
over me, and whilst I hold my Sword, you shall find me a subject fitter to
create your fear than your pity. Thereupon he renewed the Fight with much more
strength than I thought he had left him; yet for a while I only defended my
self, but when I perceived his blows were so brisk, that my charity might prove
my ruin, and that he had so much vigor, as I might kill him without a stain; I
cried out to him; Since my civility cannot make you acknowledge what your
justice should, your death shall. Finishing these words, I made him soon feel
the punishment of a fault which might have had a milder reparation, if the
continuance of his insolency had not rendered him unworthy of it. But to
conclude this Tragedy, as soon as he fell, he told me, Whosoever thou art, I
forgive thee that death, which by my being worsted, is rather my joy than my
trouble, and though I scorn to beg my Life, (were it in thy power to save,
which I thank the gods it is not) yet I do not, to conjure thee, to assure that
Beauty which to have fought against does more afflict me than to be reduced to
what I am, that 'twas her Eyes which inspired thy Arm, and weighed down mine;
and, that had not shame been more prevalent with me than truth, I had been her
Champion, and not her Adversary; Conjure her to pardon a crime which I expiate
with my blood, and which my hand should have punished for her, if thine had not.
He would have continued his recantation, by which I perceived I had not only
killed an Enemy, but a Rival, had he not found, that his Tongue began to
faulter, which made him, though with much difficulty, turn himself toward the
place where Parthenissa was, and not having the strength to speak to her, he
lift up his hands to implore that pardon his hasty summons hindered him to
express. As soon as Ambixules was dead, all his Pages came, and presented me
those Pictures, which had been the rewards of their Princes former Combats and
desired me that they might have his body to carry into Arabia, which I yielded
unto; and then taking all the consequents of my Victory, I went with them to
Parthenissa's Scaffold, where I found her by an excess of goodness weeping the
death of her Enemy, which made me envy what I had deplored, and forced me to
think my success a misfortune, since it created the fair Parthenissa's tears,
who judging of my disorder by my silence, wiped them away, and thereby gave me
the confidence to present her with all those fair Captives, and to tell her,
That the Originals of them could no more complain against their Servants
unhappy defense, since thereby they had the honor to be hers, which was a
felicity greater than any could have attended their success. I then acquainted
her with Ambixules last injunction, which I said was a proof that not only he,
but his reason was vanquished, and that if he had earlier confessed a truth which
he could not but be convinced of, I would rather have elected to have employed
my Sword against my self than him; so great and just was the respect I paid all
Adorers; under which Title I implored a pardon for having brought that to a
dispute which needed none, and that her justice would acknowledge, what that of
the gods had, by the event of our Combat. To which Parthenissa replied: I am
convinced of nothing by your Victory, but of your Civility and Courage; the
last of which, you are certainly very confident of, when you durst undertake to
employ it in so unjust a quarrel; neither can I doubt, by electing me for the
subject of your difference, you had an intention to manifest, that your Sword
needed no other assistance, but what it received from your Arm, and the
concealing your self after a performance, which the severest modesty might
glory in, confirms me, that you injure your Courage to avoid doing the like
unto your Judgment, and find more shame in owning the object your Quarrel, than
satisfaction in the effect it has produced, Ah! Madam, I replied, do not impute
the concealing my self to any thing but the respect I pay you, which is so
great and just, that I had rather decline what you are pleased to say I may
glory in, than hazard your anger by disclosing who I am; the apprehension of
the latter being far more prevalent with me, than any advantage I can derive
from the former. But after some discourses of this quality, observing, that not
only all the Court, but Arsaces himself, was coming toward Parthenissa's
Scaffold, I thought it high time to retire, and therefore made haste to tell
her, that I was resolved to a concealment of my name, till by a succession of
services I induced her to pardon the score upon which they were performed. A
little Blush which this declaration caused, gave me a belief, that she
understood my meaning, and the apprehension I had for her reply, as well as
being environed by the crowd, made me take my leave, but on an instant, I found
a certain coldness like the hand of Death seize on me, and suddenly after, I
fell pale and speechless at Parthenissa's Feet. This unexpected accident had a
very powerful influence on her whilst she knew me not; but after she had
discovered who I was, by some peoples pulling off my Helmet, to give me a
little air, she abandoned herself so much to excess of grief, that many
attributed the effects of her good nature to a more obliging cause; and
doubtless, had I seen how happy I was in my misfortune, I had blessed those
wounds which were the causes of it. In brief, as soon as those which stood by
knew me, they cried out, Artabanes is dead: which repeated noise coming at last
to Moneses and Lyndadory's hearing; they ran transported with admiration and
grief to the place where I lay, and where they found Parthenissa with one hand
stopping a spring of blood which issued from a large wound Ambixules had given
me, with the other endeavoring to wipe away two springs of tears which ran
from her fair Eyes. That charity gave them as high a subject of acknowledgment,
as the occasion of it did of grief: But at last, a Litter being brought, and my
blood stancht, I was carried to Moneses's Palace, accompanied by the tears of
those, whose Acclamations I so lately had. Arsaces did me the honor to walk a
foot by my Litter, and to see the first dressing of my wounds; where he
received an assurance from the Chirurgions, that I had none which were
dangerous; that loss of blood was the greatest harm I had sustained, and that
rest was one of the best remedies they could prescribe; Wherefore my Chamber
was immediately emptied of all but my faithful Symander; But this deep silence
was so far from producing the effect which those that enjoined it expected;
that it did a contrary one, for then all my thoughts began to assault me. What?
said I to my self, can Parthenissa have a greater assurance of the vastness of
my Passion, than her knowledge of those Beauties which created it, and the
services I have this day rendered them? She were as unjust as she is fair,
should she desire any stronger proof of my Affection. But suddenly my opinion
changing, methought I heard Parthenissa say, Presumptuous Artabanes, do thou
esteem me at so low a rate as to think, that nothing which thou have done to
day deserves me? Thou have loved me because I was lovely, the greatness of thy
Passion renders thy service the less, and thou have more injured me by thinking
my beauty needed that defense, than obliged me by assuming it. This reproof,
which my distemper made me fancy, came from the Oracle of my Fate, had so
powerful an operation, that I cried out; Yes Madam, I acknowledge your
reprehension to be as just as my presumption is great, and I am now so sensible
of my Crime, that if you do not speedily pardon it, I will revenge you upon the
miserable Artabanes; it is but letting these wounds weep blood until their
source be dry; so Death more pitiful than you, will make my punishment the way
unto my quiet. These words spoke in a high tone, made Symander almost as
frantic as my distempers had me; for being ignorant of the cause, he concluded
the height of my Fever made me rave, and fearing lest I should put my words in
practice, he ran to the Bed's side, and flinging open the Curtains, besought me
in tears, not to make my self the means to increase a danger, which of it self
was but too desparate: This action of his put me out of that deep melancholy
my Love and disorder had led me into; and turning from him with a great sigh, I
replied, Alas, Symander, thou would indeed think my condition desparate, if I
assured thee my wounds were the least torment that I suffer. Sir, said the
faithful Servant, if I thought so, let your torment be never so high, mine
would be equal to it. I will then conceal it from thee, I replied, for I love
thee too well to load thee with an unncessary grief, the weight whereof is
such, that I should think it a crime to wish it on my greatest Enemy. Ah! Sir
(he answered) give not my a^^^ction for you so ill return as to make it render
me incapable of serving you: It may be, when I know the cause of your grief, I
may find out a remedy, my riper years may know what yours have not attained
unto, and if the sacrificing of so poor a thing as my life can any way
contribute to your quiet, I shall think it gloriously bestowed. His discretion
and fidelity, made me disclose my Passion, having first confined him to an
inviolable secrecy, by all those Protestations which might positively do it.
As soon as I had acquainted him with this secret, I perceived a visible
alteration in his countenance, as if the knowledge of this disease gave him an
assurance of the cure; and that his words might do what his looks had, he
immediately told me: if your recovery, Sir, of the wound you received from
Ambixules were as certain as of that Love has given you, my joy would be then
as great, as now my apprehension is: for I am confident your virtue and merit,
will obtain her affection, or your judgment, and resentment will prove your
cure. Do thou think, said I, may Passion has already so dethroned my reason,
as to credit what without any thou assurest me of? but allow I were blessed with
perfections as great as thou can fancy, yet compared with hers, they would
only serve but as their foil, and consequently, the more her perfections are
disclosed, the more it would bring an accession to my now cause of adoring
them, were that capable of any: other Lovers may hope by a resemblance in
merit, to create one in Love, but the object of mine is so peculiar in her
Prerogative, that what others drive from Sympathy, I must from Mercy: and to
expect my Judgment should recover me, were the same as to expect what gives
the wound should cure it too; since judgment acts in me, what fancy does in
others, and finds more reason for my slavery than I can find to decline it: to
hope too for liberty by resentment, were a folly only fit for her pity: the
Mariner that is going to be shipwrackt, may as justly hope by quarrelling with
the winds to free himself, as I, by electing the same course, may expect a
resembling event: Alas her eyes are my destiny, and it is not my will, but they
that govern me; yet were I at my own dispose, I would not alter my condition;
for the contemplation of her Beauty, though she prove cruel, is more
Transcendent felicity than others derive from fruition; so that thy advice must
not be how to fly, but how to conquer. To which he answered, Is there then no
Mean to be expected in your Fortune? None (said I) you take a way which looks
as if you shunned your end; for can you think, while you contribute to your
sickness you advance your Love? No, but the contrary, for this disorder not
only deprives you of your good Mien, but of time to Court the fair Parthenissa
in, and if you have Rivals (as sure such Beauty cannot but create you some)
what happy opportunity do you present them? Besides, if you are so negligent of
your health, the want of that will make you incapable of what you need not
apprehend on any other score. Ah! Simander (I cried out) thou speak of a
felicity fitter for my desires than expectation; but why do thou flatter my
hopes with joys that will ever be notional, and do like Dreams, which making
me believe any airy happiness, please me for a moment, but when I wake again, I
pay with all real torments an imaginary Heaven, Truly Sir (replied Simander) I
have always esteemed despair as great a Crime as presumption, and must
therefore beg you, as Parthenissa's perfections keep you from being guilty of
the last of these, so let your own secure you from the first. After he had
spoken this, he was silent a while, and then he thus proceeded: I have, Sir,
always observed, that interessed parties, whatever the business is, are the
unfittest to conclude, especially in the affairs of Love, where Modesty has so
much dominion; and therefore, if a third person were employed, whose secrecy
and judgment were equally unquestionable, I think it would much contribute to
your design, especially if it were one of the same Sex, and therefore (Sir)
your sister the Princess Lindadory, if she could be engaged, 'twould turn my
hopes of your success into a certainty, the opportunities she may obtain may be
denied to you, and she may suddenly procure from Parthenissa a Declaration,
which nothing but sufferings and time can obtain by you. This advice I so well
approved of that I commanded him immediately to put it in practice, and though
he persuaded me by many motives to defer it till the morning, yet my impatience
was more prevalent with him, than his reasons were with me. As soon as he had
brought Lindadory to me, and that she was set on the Bedside, I took her by
the hand, and having pressed it between mine, I looked upon her steadfastly, and
with a deep sigh, asked her, Do you love me sister? Is the poor Artabanes's life
of any concernment to you? to which she answered, If I thought Brother you asked
this question as doubting it, my trouble would be as great as my affection:
Dear sister (I replied) this proceeds not from my doubt, but to hear my joy
repeated, for the state I am now in is so sad, that I am forced to summon all
my felicities, to keep me from despair; the cause of it is, that I am in Love,
and the object of mine is Parthenissa, who to see, and not to have a Passion
for, were as high a miracle as is her Beauty; and though she prove cruel, yet
her hatred could not be a torment greater than my folly, should I for that
decline adoring her. Thus you see clearly your Artabanes's condition, and now
do not so much wrong it, as to think I make it worse than it is, for if I
could, it would not be so great a torment. I will not so much abuse your
patience (said Artabanes to Callimachus) as to relate every particular
circumstance of this Story; it shall suffice I tell you, Lindadory, who loved
me perfectly, and knew my disposition so, did not oppose that which was my
desire, especially being grounded, as she confessed, on so much reason and
justice; and therefore we then resolved, that she should be my Agent and
Confident, and that the next day she should visit Parthenissa (as sometimes she
used to do) and carry a Letter to her, which I then writ, but with much
difficulty, both in respect of the pain my wounds gave me, and procuring
Lindadorys and Simanders permission, who were apprehensive, that sitting up
(though in my bed) would prove prejudicial to me, but having vowed to them not
to do it, would prove much more so, I had the liberty to write these words:

ARTABANES to the Princess PARTHENISSA.
IF by the loss of the greatest part of my Blood, I have discovered a Passion,
which offends the fair Parthenissa, I am ready to shed the residue of it to
appease her; but before I obey a Sentence, I cannot more apprehend than I will
readily execute; I must beg her to believe that the wounds I have received from
her Beauty, are far more dangerous than those I have received for it; It Is
Madam, at the last extremity, that I make my pen assure you of a Truth which my
fainting forced me to disclose; and which I confess, should rather be employed
to implore your Pardon than repeat my Crime: But I am necessitated to extremes,
and by so resolute a confession, induce you to Pardon a Passion whose greatness
you cannot doubt, since I cannot conceal it: or else condemn the Possessor of
it: if you choose to put your Justice in practice, I am resolved to become its
executioner by declining a recovery of these wounds Ambixules has given me,
that the World may believe I dyed for the Fair Parthenissa, and not by her. But
if she elect to make use of her mercy, she will preserve a flame which has no
fault, but the ambition of aspiring so high.


The success which my sister assured me of, whether to create my belief, or to
acquaint me with hers, made me after her departure take some rest, though mine
was often interrupted through different dreams; but no sooner the day appeared,
which I did so long for, than I did as much so, that it had been ended. I could
never imagine till then, that impatience was so great a deluder, for mine
forced me to think it the longest day that ever I had seen, though it were but
the first of the spring: but the occasion which made it seem so tedious, was,
that, at night Lindadory had promised to bring my definitive Sentence. At last
the so much desired hour arrived, and immediately after, my sister, who was no
sooner come into my Chamber, than I endeavored to learn in her countenance her
success: But Sillaces, who could not contribute to his health, by seeing the
condition of mine, came then to give me a visit, whose company before was ever
as pleasing, as at that instant it was the contrary: Love having so much of
meanness in it, as to make us prefer our own interest before our friends. But
lest that impatience I was then in, should yet seem to transport me, I must
tell you something of the generous Sillaces, who has been so great an Actor in
the ensuing Story. He is Prince of Tabienv, and of an Extraction as famous for
Antiquity as Virtue: If Fortune had been as prodigal to him as Nature, he had
long since been possessor of Lindadory, and enjoyed a perfect happiness: But
his chiefest Riches consisting in that which the Old think to be only the
Ornament, though it be in effect the Essential part of Men; and my Father who
esteemed a virtuous person without Riches fitter for his Acquaintance than
Alliance, denied Sillaces my Sister. His Passion for Lindadory was till then
unknown to me, and that which gave me the first suspicion of it, was, the
alteration I perceived in both their countenances that night, when he so
unhappily came in to disturb us: I believe he easily found by our silence, that
his company was not so pleasing as it used to be, which he since told me he
attributed to some light I had discovered of his Passion, not that he feared he
would oppose it, but that I was offended to learn it of any but himself. As
soon as he had taken up this opinion, he concluded himself fit company for
nothing but his thoughts, and therefore, immediately withdrew to entertain
them, leaving me at liberty to do the same with Lindadory: To whom I abruptly
said with all the impatiencies of Love, Fear, and Hope, Dear Sister, What must
your Artabanes expect? Have you received any return, which may build my hope on
Justice? If you have not, I should be as cruel to my self as Parthenissa is to
me, if I endeavored to preserve a life she is so intent to destroy: But if you
bring me comforts, you will raise joy unto a height it never until now attained
unto. Brother, she replied, I find my waiting on Parthenissa, that her
reserv'dness is proportionate to all her other perfections, and consequently
the procuring so much as I have done, assures me, if all your Felicity consists
in the obtaining her Favor, you are not far from your desires. This I speak to
stay your longing, for now I must tell you, I never (till your interest engaged
me) so narrowly obser'vd your Mistress; but in this short while I have
discovered so many fresh Graces in her, and those shine so clearly, that not
only I do extol your choice, but wish my Sex were changed, that I might be
your Rival: For the Beauty of her Mind equals, if not transcends that of her
Body, and what my compliance yesterday approved in you, this day my Reason
does. Dear Sister (said I, interrupting her) though I am ravished with this
description of Parthenissa, how imperfect soever it be, yet I must deprive my
self awhile of the lesser happiness, and beg to learn the greater, which is to
know, if for this pleasing joy you put me in, I am not more indebted to your
kindness than hers? This you must tell me truly, for you cannot long deceive
me; and if once I find you do, by all that is holy, I Will take so severe a
revenge upon my self, you cannot but repent you were the cause of it; for
deprivation of hope is the highest misery but deprivation of possession:
Therefore, Dear Lindadory, I conjure you by your affections, tell me really
what interest I have in the Felicity before you tell me what the Felicity is;
for I have none; the knowledge how great the Blessing is, will but
proportionately increase the Torment of being denied it; and if I have any, you
are too cruel thus long to keep me in suspense. My indiscretion (said he) would
equal your impatience, should I praise a happiness you so justly ambition, if I
knew you should never possess it; but since you enjoin me so powerfully to tell
you what I have done, you shall first learn, I have acquainted Parthenissa that
you love her, but with a Passion as far above all others, as the Beauty is
which creates it: and to confirm her in that belief, I presented her with your
Letter, which she made some scruples to receive, but my importunities suppressed
them; that at last she read it; and then told me, I have so little title both
to the perfections, and the power your Brother ascribes unto me; that I receive
them rather for Civilities than Truths. Oh gods! (I cried out, interrupting
her) can she be ignorant of that which is so visible? Or can so high a virtue
be capable of as high a dissimulation? Brother (said Lindadory) your impatience
makes you practice in your self what you but now condemn in me. Can you blame
(I replied) so necessary an interruption? Shall Modesty be esteemed a greater
virtue than Justice? Or are they inconsistant together? But I beseech you
proceed, and grant me now your pardon, for which, I will engage my self not a
second time to need it. I had no small trouble (said Lindadory) to make her
confess she believed your affection was such as you described it, but the labor
was far more difficult to procure from her any thing to you, that might give
you that assurance. But (she continued) to obey your injunction, I will not
give you all the particulars by retail, knowing, that to relate the means, is
only pleasing but as it conduces to the end; which is, that I have brought you
a Letter from Parthenissa. Ah Sister! (said I, starting up) How many
obligations have you contracted in this one? then calling for a Lamp, after
having a thousand times kissed, and idolatriz'd the fair Character, I read these
ensuing words:

PARTHENISSA to the Prince ARTABANES.
IF by a loss of the greatest part of your Blood, you have discovered that
which was an offense, you have discovered too that which is partly the
reparation; since what acquainted me with the fault, acquainted me with the
punishment of it; and if I have now any resentments, they will sooner be
satisfied by your preserving than by your shedding that which is left.


Alas, (said I, having ended reading) I may with much greater Justice say of
this Letter, that it has more of Civility than Affection, then she of mine,
that it had more Civility than Truth. Then letting my self fall into my bed
again, I continued; Unfortunate Artabanes, thou art yet as miserable as ever;
for here is not a enough kindness to make thee live, nor cruelty to make thee
dye. I now perceive there may be cruelty in not being cruel enough; that a
little kindness may be a great cruely, and that suspension may be so ordered,
that it may prove as great a misery as deprivation. If your complaint were just
(said Lindadory) I should be so far from condemning, that I should participate
with you in it. Take heed Artabanes, lest you offend the gods; and that by not
valuing this high favor, you thereby provoke them to recall it. If every day
you make an equal progress to this, believe me, the wound of your mind will be
sooner cured than that of your body: Remember, if she were as soon obtained as
asked, that might in the future trouble you as much, as the fear of the contrary
does at present: Since it is in Love as in War, where the greater the difficulty
is in the success, the greater is both the satisfaction and Glory of it. If
(said I) Parthenissa's perfections needed a foil to set them off, there might
be some reason in what you think has so much. But in the possession of
Parthenissa, all joys are included, and not one without it, so that nothing
but the end here can be termed Felicity. I must confess, that in meaner
Affections so much Nourishment as this would preserve Hope from Death, but
where the cause of the Love, and the Love it self is so infinite, if all things
else be not resembling, my sufferings must: The wanting of never so little less
then what will of necessity suffice, is as bad as if all were wanting; as well
in then Food of the Mind as of the Body; therefore to be kind, and not kind
enough, does too deservedly lose that name and operation: You must not
therefore measure my condition at the same rate with other Lovers, but
proportionately to the Beauty I adore, and then you will conclude as right as
now you do the contrary. All the Arguments Lindadory could use, were not of
sufficient force to moderate my despair; me-thought Parthenissa's Letter had so
much of indifferency in it, that I could not have too much of sorrow for it;
and that which proved no small accession to mine, was my sisters confession,
how difficult it was to obtain so little, which too I received rather from her
importunity than Parthenissa's favor. These, and ^any such reasons, which my
despair furnished me withal, created in me ^belief, that it were to be cruel to
my self, not to die of those wounds which were such, that they made the way to
Death far easier than to recovery, and consequently it had been a weakness
equal to the punishment would have attended it, if when the means to end all
miseries was easy, and the way to begin miseries was as difficult as to
persevere in them, I should have declined the first to embrace the last; in
which resolve my Body so well seconded my Mind, that my Fever so increast all
that night, as the next day, when my sister came to visit me, I was so near
losing my life, it had almost cost her her own, for she fell into diverse fits
of swounding, and the last was of so long a duration, that Symander, who stood
by, imagined she had led me the way to death; but when she was recovered from
her seeming one, she begged me with a throng of sighs and tears, not to cast my
self away, out of an imagination I was miserable, when really I was otherwise,
which if I would give her a little time to evince, I should be assured it from
Parthenissa. Ah! sister (I replied) if you could perform what you say, my
recovery would be as certain and speedy as my death will be without it, Dear
Brother (said Lindadory) give me but one days respite, and if I do not satisfy
my engagement, inflict on me what punishment you please, and I will willingly
endure it. All the penance (I replied) which I will impose on you, if you
prevail not, is, That you will give me leave to die, for then you cannot more
oppose my doing so, then my condition will require it. While we were in this
discourse, one of my sisters servants came and acquainted her, that Parthenissa
was come to give her a visit: Lindadory turning toward me, told me softly,
receive this as an earnest from the gods of their future blessing, who have
doubtless sent her hither purposely to contract the time of your suspension:
Immediately after she went to her Chamber, where Parthenissa was, who
perceiving by my sisters eyes, as well as countenance, that some grief sat upon
her heart, she told her, Madam, the place from whence you now came, and the
effect of some great sorrow, which is too visible in your face, makes me
apprehend something of danger in your brother. Would it might please the gods
(replied Lindadory) that you would as soon apply the remedy to my grief, as you
have found out the occasion of it, which if you will be but resembling to your
power, you may perform as easily as desire; for my brothers danger is the cause
of that effect you seem somewhat concerned in, for though those wounds
Ambixules gave him are very dangerous, yet those you have given him are much
more so, and creates his and my greatest apprehension: Therefore, Madam,
consider the ruinous estate he is in without the felicity of your Favor, and
receive this as a certain truth, that unless you assure him of it now, it will
be too late to do it hereafter: Give I beseech you to my prayers and his
condition, what I am confident you would hereafter to his services, if he could
live to pay you them, and then gratitude will act in him what hope would.
Lidadory's reason, and the sad extremity I was in, furnished her with so many
arguments, both to move Parthenissa's judgment and pity, that at last, with
much difficulty, she acknowledged never to have had a higher esteem for any
than for me, and her inclinations wereof such a quality, that by my services
and fidelity, I might in time procure no unfruitful return of them. This
declaration was as pleasing to Lindadory as my recovery; for indeed it was in
effect the same thing; she begged her therefore to give me a visit, and assure
me of what she had then said. Parthenissa would have left that employment to
Lindadory, but she excused herself, by alleging it would be too good news to
be credited from any but herself; adding further, that she might perform a
visit of that high concernment, with so much secrecy, that none could ever
discover it, there being a back-stairs, which went out of her Chamber into
mine, where no company then was (least it might interrupt my rest) and I am the
more pressing in it (continued Lindadory) not only as it will be the efficient
cause of his preservation, but that seeing him in the forlorn condition he is
in, you may never hereafter quarrel with your modesty for condescending to that
now, which if any longer delayed, would prove ineffectual. Then without so much
as seeming to suspect a refusal, she took her by the hand, and having led her
into my Chamber, she opened the Courtain and told me, Brother, I here present
you with the rarest Physician in all Asia, whose skill I believe your very
sight will convince you of. I could not fancy that this rare Physician was
Parthenissa, and knowing all others disability in my sickness, I did not so
much as turn my eyes that way, but being somewhat offended, that she who knew
so well the nature of my disease, should be so mistaken in the means of my
cure, I replied, Sister I perceive, that Parthenissa has rejected your Prayers,
and that you have as a last Essay, brought this Physician to practice on me as
on a lost Patient; but it is in vain; I that feel the power of her Beauty will
never so much wrong the effects of it, as to believe any can cure my wounds but
she that made them: let me therefore desire you to implore this last favor from
her, that before I die, she would look upon the miserable Artabanes, and give
me leave once again to see that Beauty the cruel (but fair) cause of my
Martyrdom, which I have so much reason to hate, and yet have more not to do
it; that she may hear how zealous I Will pray for the preservation of my
murderer, and that she may live in joys as great as she has the power to
confer on me. These sad words had a powerful influence on Lindadory, who
fancying it a sin to jest so cruelly, begged me to turn about with such
earnestness, that at last I did: but great gods! How was I surpised? My
amazment was such, that joy had liked to have performed what grief but begun.
Lindadory's raillery, and this surprise was of very much use to Parthenissa,
who was so confused when she considered the action she had undertaken; that
though the time of her silence was long, yet (as she told me often since) she
was as long before she was able to speak to me; but perceiving I was at least
in an equal perplexity, that did somewhat assure her; and then approaching to
my Beds-side, she told me, I am come to know ( Artabanes) whether the power you
said I had over you was a Civility or a Truth? but I too visibly perceive it is
only the first, or else your recovery before now had assured me the contrary.
Ah! Madam (said I) reproach me not the crime you your self make me commit; for
'twas not your commands alone could make me live, but something added to them,
which I thought fitter and easier for you to imagine than I to name; but your
not taking notice of it; alas, did to too much, and being deprived of my
hopes, I resolved under an appearance of cruelty, to be merciful unto my self,
and by yielding to one death, to free my self from a thousand* Neither, Madam,
can I think you will be offended at that Election, since by disobeying you
once, I render my self for ever incapable of doing so again, but by my
obedince, either your cruelty must have been as great as your Beauty, or my
sufferings would have far more troubled you, then this one breach of your
commands. I perceive (replied Parthenissa) that you counterfeit an ignorance
only to extort a knowledge, which is fitter for my blushes to assure you than
my words; but to evidence how great a power the Princess Lindadory has over me,
I do not only command you to live, but shall judge of your passion by your
obedience, and reward it so too. Alas, Madam (I replied) must I then derive my
Felicity from a third person? and must the Means lessen the End? To which
Parthenissa presently answered, Your scruples are much greater than their
cause, which entirely to remove, I conjure you endeavor Recovery, which
effected, I am confident, I shall soon give that to your Merit, which I now
say, I do to your Sisters Commands. If (I replied) I must expect that Blessing
by that Title only, from this moment I renounce all hope of it, and therefore
if you are not resolved of your self to confer it on me, I beseech you let me
dye, otherwise you may be cruel, in thinking not to be so. Madam (said
Lindadora) I beg you to receive these importunate effects, as coming from a
noble Cause, a Love so perfect, that nothing but a retribution, which is so,
can confer on it any quiet; and since you have thus far proceeded, let not
Words divert you, when the Action does not, but by assuring him you will be
favorable, preserve a life which I dare justify, is wholly yours, and as
wholly depends upon what you shall now speak. I know not (replied Parthenissa,
pulling down her Veil to conceal her Blushes) what to say, but if what I have
already spoken, do not satisfy, what you are pleased to undertake, I will
confirm. Divine Parthenissa (said I, printing my burning Lips upon her Hand) I
desire no more, and may Torments equal to your Hate (if such could be found
out) fall on me, if ever passion was so pure as mine, or shall prove so
constant. After a thousand assurances of my Joy and Fidelity, we heard Moneses
knock at the door, which occasioned Parthenissa, and Lindadory to retire softly
the same way they came; for we thought it not fit he should then know any thing
of our affairs. As soon as they were gone, he came in, and having enquired of
my health (which he found to be somewhat bettered) he went away again. In
brief, my speedy recovery being enjoined me, as an evincement of the greatness
of my Flame, I was so willing to embrace any thing might advance it, that in a
short time my wounds were fully healed, and then every day I gave the fair
Parthenissa so many new confirmations of my Passion, that at last she assured
me of hers. I can truly affirm, never two Hearts were more perfectly united,
than ours. And if at any time so many perfections made my Desires rebel against
my Reason, she immediately suppressed them with Reason; which was not only an
argument of the vastness of her wit, but of the proportionate power she had
over me. But why do I name the Felicities we possessed in those glorious days,
when they were so short, that the time that I have been telling you of them,
seems to me to be longer than they themselves were; and when they do but serve
to add unto miseries, which are but too great already, and are any other way
incapable of accession. Fortune, which has been always ingenious to persecute
me, no sooner acquainted me with the blessing of Parthenissa's Conversation
then she severed me from it: For there happened a difference betwixt Arsaces
and Artabazus the King of Armenia, concerning the bounds of their Kingdoms; and
as it is ordinary amongst Monarchs, which are above the Laws, to have immediate
recourse to their Swords, and make them both plead, and determine their
dispute; so did they, and by it engaged all the Gallantry of both their
Kingdoms. I was ambitious to do something that might give me an interest in
Parthenissa by my Actions, and therefore resolved to undertake the Voyage; I
waited on her, to acquaint her with my design, and found her alone in her
Cabinet (as she confessed to me afterward) preparing Arguments to divert me from
that War, which she apprehended my Honor would engage me in; but I interrupted
her thoughts by telling her, Madam, the joy of your Affection makes these Wars
(the way to Glory) troublesome; for Love delights in none but what it self
creates. Truly Artabanes (she said) you can show me no greater, nor pleasanter
effects of your Flame, than in observing what you now speak, since in this one
action we give and receive assurances of each others passion; for I have
sufficient proofs of yours, when your Honor cannot vanquish your Love, and
when you care not to satisfy the World, so I be pleased: And you of mine, when
the highest condition, (that of your Glory) cannot be of sufficient force to
make your absence tolerable. Alas, Madam (I replied) how miserable am I then?
that must plead your Commands, and make use of Arguments, which if they
prevail, banish me from my Felicity, and if they do not, make me unworthy of
it: But since inevitably I must fall into one of these misfortunes, I had
rather embrace the first, which though it make me perfectly wretched, yet
'twill extenuate your choice unto the World, by evincing that the Man you
elected to honor with your Affection, valued not the hazarding of his life to
merit it; and since, to the further manifestation of that Truth, he dare expose
himself to the miseries of absence, who can suspect he will decline any other
proof of it? I now perceive (said she) Artabanes, that you only hitherto
pretended a perfect Love; for one that is so, confines it self to the Object
loved, and makes the satisfying of it, it is only end: Alas, had I stood upon
these Niceties, and not more considered you than the World, you had never taken
my Heart by Assault, but by Siege. To which I replied: It Is not only, Madam,
to please the World, but to establish my Felicity in the Future: for this War
will every day create new occasions for my Rivals to purchase Glory, and
knowing your Justice, to be equal to your other Perfections; I would not by my
idleness provoke yours so much to make me miserable; But then, it may be you
will answer, your inclination leads you to honor me with your esteem, more
than any other; but I beseech you, Madam, consider how weak a Title that will
appear, when manifested Virtue shall come in competition with it? No, fair
Parthenissa, give me leave to act upon this Stage, where I will do such things,
that if Merit could claim an interest in you, you should be mine by right, and
I will no longer own the great opinion you have of me to your Goodness, but
your Justice. Cruel Artabanes (said Parthenissa) have all the Vows of Love
wrought so little on your belief, as to think it possible, I can be any man's
but yours? And that which you even now styled Justice in me, would be
inconstancy and perjury: besides, these high things which you propound unto
your self, cannot be attained without resembling dangers, and should you
miscarry in them (as the events of War are blind and uncertain) how miserable
would my condition be? when the universal knowledge of your Virtue, will so
drown all men in Grief, that those which should afford me any Consolation, will
need it themselves: and every Man will be a fresh Object to renew my Sorrow:
Besides, what you would so hazardously court and solicit, is of so
speculative and airy a quality, that neither the simplest, nor the wisest
Soldier in the Army, would now exchange conditions with the famous Alexander,
the great ingrosser of it. That, Madam, I replied, would rather evin^e a want
of Virtue in the Living, than the Dead: so perhaps, many Women now would not
change condition with the excellent Lucretia, and yet that does not prove but
hers is more to be ambition'd. To contract my Relation, I made use of so many
arguments, that at last she resigned the Field, but I perceived it was with
much reluctance, for she said, How just a cause have I to complain, that either
my affection is not less, which might render your departure supportable, or
that being so great, I cannot have proportionate Arguments to divert your
Design. But believe me, though my Judgment be convinced, it is fit for you to
undertake; yet my Love will never be so. Ah Madam (said I) how kind, and how
cruel are those words, for your Love transcending your Judgment, how vast an
evincement is that of its being so; and on the other side, how cruel is the
purchase of that Felicity, by rendering your Love (the greatest of my blessings)
now the greatest of my troubles. After I had done speaking, she leaned her
Cheek upon her Hand, and having thought a while, she looked on me steadfastly,
with Tears running from her fair Eyes, and told me with a languishing voice,
Artabanes, since you are resolved to go, I conjure you by your Passion,
remember that we have exchanged our Hearts, and that loving Parthenissa, as you
say, more than your self, evince it, by having more care of her Heart, than if
it were your own. And since you will allow nothing to surpass your Affection;
yet at least allow mine to be equal to it, and then consider those Torments my
death would be to you, and be not too prodigal of that life, which if lost,
must involve me in resembling ones. These Words and Tears were so moving, that
I held it rather a Duty, than a Weakness, to accompany her in the latter, which
she perceiving, began to ask me forgiveness, by having made me err by her
example, and then went to a little Cabinet in her Closet, where she took out
her Picture, which she presented me, and I vowed to wear, as long as that
other, I could not but carry about me whilst I did my Heart. If you have ever
resented the pleasing Flames of Love, you may then partly guess how cruel this
separation was; otherwise, your imagination will be as far short of
apprehending, as I am of expressing it. But this being nothing essential to our
story, I will pass it over, by telling you, that Pacorus, eldest Son to the
King, was General of the Army, but my Father had the Superintendency of all:
his deep experience giving him that Honor, with as little Dispute as Envy. The
Prince was accompanied by his Brother Phraates, and all other Great Men of the
Empire, amongst whom, Surena was the chiefest, either for Person, Wit, Estate,
or Power, but of an Humor so uncontrollable, that it clouded all his other
Virtues. These Troops were generally the gallantest, and best fitted, of any I
ever yet beheld; and in my opinion, the Roman Legions were as far short of
them, as they excelled all others. After the Army was in a moving posture,
Moneses led the Body of it, by easy marches, toward Miramnes, a strong Town,
which the Armenians had newly besieged with 50000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, the
King being there in person. Pacorus remained at Court ten days after, to
receive his Instructions, and by that time Moneses was within three days march
of the Enemy, the Prince and all his Court overtook him, where a Messenger,
from the ^overnor of Miramnes, assured Pacorus, that if in three weeks he had
no relief, it would be too late to send him any. The next morning therefore he
took a view of his whole Army, which consisted of near near 40000 Foot, and
15000 Horse, but so much of resolution appeared in the Officers and Soldiers
looks, that he thought every hour of delay so much time stolen from the Glory
of his Triumph. The consequence of this place was such, that immediately a
Council of War was summoned, where after a long Debate, the Result of it was;
That the Prince sent a Herald with a Letter, to the King of Armenia, to invite
him on the large, and adjoining, Plains of Arontes, to decide their difference
by a Battle, which would end the War, and the Miseries that inevitably would be
a consequence of it. Artabazus having consulted with the Chief Officers of his
Army, returned this Answer,

ARTABAZVS King of Armenia, to PACORVS, Prince of the Parthians.
The same Consideration which invites you to decide our Quarrel by a Battle,
moves me to accept it, and since the Gods are our Judges, we need not fear
Partiality, the justest Sword will be the sharpest, and therefore the Conquered
shall be esteemed guilty, by

ARTABAZVS.


This Answer was no sooner read, but Orders were given to every Chief Officer,
to repair to his Charge, and to exhort the Soldiers to perform their Duties
with Courage and Vigilance. The next day we discamped, and pitched our Tents in
the Plains of Arontes, the Scene of the intended Tragedy. As soon as we were
quartered, we might perceive the Armenian Army marching down the Hills of
Fenistia in exact Order, and camped so, some forty Furlongs from us. By mutual
agreement, both Armies rested themselves two days, that they might come the
third, unharrast to the Battle. In the mean time, Moneses appointed to every
one his Command. The Prince honored me with the leading of 2000 Horse, all
Volunteers, and composed of the Youth and Gallantry of Parthia, with whom I
resolved to act something worthy the high Title of Parthenissa's Servant. At
last, the long desired day appeared, but so Black and Cloudy, that it hardly
deserved that name, as if the Heavens had put on anticipated Mourning for so
many succeeding Funerals. Presently those vast Plains were covered with Armed
Troops, and the Generals having taken all the advantages the ground would
permit, gave the Signal of the Battle: At the first shock, the Field was
strewn with dead Bodies, and such a shower of Arrows were shot into the Air,
that the God's were hindered from seeing or relieving either party. There were
a thousand things performed, which did better merit the Sun for Spectator in
all his Glory, than those sad and gloomy Clouds. But the Victory which was a
long time in suspense, at last seemed to declare it self on the Armenians side,
by the valor of a young Gentleman, who with near 3000 Horse, carried Death to
his Enemies, and Victory to his Friends, wheresoever he appeared. So much
Gallantry, I thought, was a fit Object for our Swords, and turning to my
friends, I told them so, with this little addition; It Is too low to imitate those
that have done well: Let us be examples to them, to do better, for you see the
day is lost, unless recovered by our Valors; and Victory will now be so
precious, it cannot be too dearly courted. They all unanimously approved my
resolution, and presently I led them where Artavasdes was, (for so was this
young Conqueror called) who perceiving our design, and guessing by our
Countenance, we were not Men to be slighted, presently rallied all his
Soldiers, who were eagerly pursuing the Parthians. By that time he had drawn
them up, I charged him, telling my companions, I would not invite them to that
which I would not be a sharer in: I was so well seconded by those which
followed me, that after a generous resistance, we broke those victorious
Troops, and had the execution of them, as long as they had had it of ours, and
I was so far engaged in the pursuit of this Rout, that at last I perceived the
Standard-Royal, which was guarded by at least 8000 select Men, which was to me
rather an invitation to attempt it, than the contrary, but least many might
have been of a different principle, I told my Troop-Companions, it is true,
their number surpasses ours, but you have just now learned, that Victory is won
by Virtue, not by Multitudes; you have done things which will not be believed,
but by some such powerful Witness: for to our own Glory (but to our Countries
shame) we are not only the Actors, but almost the only Spectators, and as
your Valors have no limits, let your success be resembling. By one general
Acclamation, they protested they would follow me to Death or Victory; I gave
them no time to cool, but by a successful Charge, I made a breach for them to
enter; they lost not the occasion, but with Vigor and Resolution improved it.
As we had almost effected our design, the same Artavasdes, who had done such
noble Actions in the beginning of the Battle, and was beaten by his Men's Fears,
not his own, (for they had carried him away in the Throng) rallied again some
of his resolutest Troops, and was come with them to relieve the King; which he
did with so great fury, that my Men lost all the Glory of their former Actions,
by an ignominious flight. I could not believe it at the first, but seeing it
was in earnest, I cried out; It Is your Swords, not your Feet must save you,
which you may effect by almost your desiring it, for the Enemy are not obliged
to their Valors for this disorder, but your Fears: If you doubt this Truth, do
but turn your Faces, and their Flight will assure you it. But when I perceived
they were as deaf to me, as to their Honors, I told some which were running by
me: Is it thus then that you perform your engagement of following me to Death
or Victory? I will never live to see your shame, nor to participate with you in
it: Assure the Prince and my Father, I will sell my life so handsomely, that it
shall neither disgrace my Country nor my Blood. Having so said, I thrust my
self into the midst of the Enemy, with a resolution to dye, and invoking the
fair Name of Parthenissa, my Rage made me do things, which my Courage only,
could not have performed for I made a Lane through the thickest Troops, and my
blows were so happily directed, that wheresoever they did light once, they
needed not to do so a second time. Many of those which fled, hearing my last
words, turned about to know what I would do, but when they saw my resolution,
and the unexpected success which attended it, many who were gallant, found my
design so much so, that they returned to share in it, and others who perceived
that those which thought to preserve their Lives, did lose them, and that he
which endeavored to lose his, did preserve it, the same cause which made them
decline the Fight, made them return to it. I must confess, I was as much
surpised, as pleased, when I found my self so well followed; I imputed it to
the invocation of Parthenissa, and was assured, that the same power which has
occasioned the greater change, which was, to make those that fled, to fight
again; would also perform the lesser, which was, to make those that returned to
fight, overcome an enemy they had so lately worsted. Whilst this heat lasted,
we engaged our selves so far, that Fear produced the effects of Courage, there
being no safety but in Victory, so that I had much ado to credit my Eyes, the
last testimony of my companions valor, having quite defaced the former of
their want of it: At last I perceived one, who by the care they all showed, of
his preservation, I resolved was the King, which made me cry out, There, fellow
Soldiers, there is that which will make the conclusion of the day more Glorious
than the Progress, and will both finish our dangers, and reward them too. They
were so sensible of what I said, that their valors gave an undeniable proof of
their being so; and the greedy desires I had to merit the Title of
Parthenissa's Servant, made me address my designs only at the King:
concluding, all consisted in the taking of him; and though Nature had denied me
a Crown, yet by my Courage, to present one to Parthenissa, I knew would be more
pleasing to her generous disposition, which much more esteemed the effects of
Virtue, than those of Fortune, or Birth: To be short, after I had received some
Wounds, which were rather marks of Honor, than Danger, and after Revolutions
and Confusions, which were derived from the mingling amongst us, of another
King of Armenia, at least, one exceeding like the first, in his Armor and
Furniture, as well as by the Horse he rid on, and disresembling him in nothing,
but what more pregnantly confirmed me, he was the real Artabazus, since the
highest Valor was fittest for the highest Title; I dismounted this second
Commer, whereby the first found and made opportunity of escaping, which the
last no sooner observed, than he told me, Generous Enemy, though my Body is at
your Mercy, my Liberty is not, this Sword, more kind than Fortune, will soon
ease me of all the miseries this day has involved me in, unless you will grant
me one condition, which if you do not, I will deprive you of all those
advantages you do pretend unto by my Captivity; It is, that being a Prince, I
may not be disarmed, nor yield my self a prisoner to any but your Prince. I
thought it unjust, to destroy a Valor as high as the Title of him that possessed
it, and when my Enemy was too much in my power to remember he had been my
Enemy, and yet I esteemed it reasonable, that those who had been my companions
in Action, should be the like in Advice. I found all their opinions
proportionate to my own, which I informed him of, in such submissive terms,
that he assured us, Fate had in some sort repaired his Misfortunes, that being
destined by his, to be a prisoner, he had fallen into hands, which knew the
respects due unto his quality. 'Twas observable, that in the taking of this
prisoner, it seemed we had taken the Hopes of all his Party, at least deprived
them of any, but by flight, which they so universally began, and continued,
that they gave us more trouble to kill, than to break them. At the end of the
execution, I found Pacorus with a joy in his Countenance, as great as his
success, he immediately ran to me, and after a thousand embraces assured me,
that the King owed his Crown, and he himself his Life and Honor to me; and
that the Obligations were such, that it would be a Crime as great, to hope the
requiting of them, as the misfortune of the incapacity of doing it: many other
expressions of his Favor, he honored me with, which I have now as absolutely
forgotten, as I was then unworthy of them. But I remember, I besought him to
place those high Civilities, rather upon my Companions than Me, as being an act
of greater Justice, and consequently more proportionate to his Inclination: But
Sir (I continued) the gods have not only favored your Arms, by an entire
defeat of your Enemies, but by furnishing us with the Power of Presenting you
with the most considerable of them, as well for Title as Virtue. I then
presented him with our Prisoner, at which, though his Joy were very great, yet
it was very short of my amazement suddenly after, when the imagined King
pulling off his Helmet, discovered a Face so full of Beauty and Courage,
equally mingled, that it produced in all of us, the same effect it had in me,
and a silence too as general; which he begged a continuance of, and which the
Prince having enjoined, he addressed himself unto him in these terms. Sir,
there is not one of the Armenians this day but I, that has not just occasion
to complain against Fortune, since in so public a calamity, she has yet
furnished me with means to serve my King, for I am not what I feigned I was, but
by seeming to be a King, I preserved one. I know this Declaration does surprise
and incense many, but the action is too glorious to be concealed: I served
Artabazus in the beginning of the Battle, by force, but when Artabanes Sword
proved too powerful to be resisted (for those were his very words) I then by
policy endeavored to perform, that which was denied me by the other. My Joy
had been more perfect, had my first design succeeded, but yet I am not divested
of all, since the last did: the end being still the same, though the way be
not: Some for this (Sir) might beg your pardon, but I will not, for that were
to confess a fault, where there is none, neither will I so much as expect my
Life at your hands; since that were to act with the hope of something besides
serving my King, which was that I only ambition'd. No, generous Pacorus,
consider that I deprived you of a King to grace your Triumph, and put in
practice what the consideration of that loss inspires you with, so you will
oblige your self, by sacrificing to your Resentments, one that has so highly
injured you, and yet as highly glories therein, and you will oblige me, by
making me a Martyr to my Duty and my Honor. The apprehension I had, lest this
Confident (though generous) Speech of Artavasdes (for that was his name) might
invite Pacorus, to confer on him his desires, made me tell him, Sir, I do not
find that you have occasion to be offended at this change; for it is not the
Name of King, that can make us ever apprehend a contrary success to that the
gods have given you this day, but Virtue and Gallantry, and we have found so
much of both, in this Gentleman, that I believe the Armenians have suffered a
greater loss, than if we had taken their King; for his Perfections transcend
that Title, and it is more worthy of your Arms to take the gallantest, than the
greatest of your Enemies: And, Sir, to evince, I do not speak this, to raise
the value of the Present, my Friends and I have offered you, I humbly beg
Artavasdes Life, which we shall not only receive as a reward above the services
we do this day pay you, but above all we can ever; for besides the preserving
of so generous an example for all Men to imitate, 'twould be an ill president,
to see a Prince punish a Subject for being faithful to his King. Pacorus, who
truly was generous, told me; If any thing could make me offended with
Artabanes, 'twould be this unnecessary interceding; for the services you have
rendered me, will drown under the name of Gratitude to you, that good usage my
inclination leads me to confer on the generous Artavasdes but I here publicly
profess, that the Life I give him, proceeds from a true sense of his Virtues,
which I do not only value, but admire, and if I may obtain his friendship, I
shall esteem it a happier purchase, than that of his Person, or that of his
Kings. Then addressing himself to Artavasdes, he told him; If I were absolute
Master of my Actions, I would from this instant restore to you that liberty you
have so meritoriously lost, but being accomptable to Arsaces, I shall beseech
you to accompany me to him, whether I shall suddenly go, and I am so confident
to obtain your freedom, that I dare almost assure you it: Besides, this small
time may procure me the happiness of your acquaintance, which I so much value,
that if I do obtain it, I shall justly believe it is the greatest advantage I
derive from this days success. To this high civility, Artavasdes replied; Sir,
never till now was I perfectly vanquished, the fortune of War could give you
but power over my Body, my Mind being free, retrenched you from the noblest
part of your Victory; now it is entire, and you have made me as enamored of
Life, as I was of Death, since by enjoying the former, I hope to find an
occasion to evince my Gratitude to him which gave it me. Many civilities past
between them, and afterward between Artavasdes and me, whose friendship,
though I have ambition'd with an infinite concern, yet, as he afterward
assured me, it could not transcend that, with which he desired mine. At the
conclusion of these civilities, Moneses came toward us, the care he had of the
Army, and of some wounds he received in the Fight, hindering him from being a
Witness of their beginning. But the Prince seeing him coming, went to meet him,
and told him so many handsome things of me, that I could not have been more
pleased to have deserved, than I was ashamed to hear them. The next day the
Funerals of the Dead were celebrated, and in one general Fire, the Parthian,
and Armenian Bodies were reduced to ashes. The season being very ill to
prosecute the War, and the numbers we had lost, rendering us unable to do it,
Pacorus resolved to return to Nineveh, whither he commanded me to attend him,
that the people (as he said) might see their Deliverer. Artavasdes also waited
on him. When we came within twenty furlongs of that great City, Arsaces, and
all the Court came to meet the Prince, and congratulate his success. Pacorus
would needs present me to the King, and expressed so much affection to me, in
the relation of that late Battle, that my blushes will not permit me to repeat
it, not the civility Arsaces honored me with. But all these favors were as so
many obstacles, to hinder me from waiting on the fair Parthenissa, which after
a thousand importunate Ceremonies, I did. Who can express the vast Felicity
this favorable interview did bless me with? the many commendations coming from
that fair Mouth; those Raptures of Joy for my safe return, or those Holy Vows
of Constancy. but why do I dwell so long upon this Subject? since it was but
momentany, and served but as a Prologue to those Miseries, which are as endless
as they are great. Artabanes would have continued his Relation, but that
Callimachus being acquainted by his Servants, that Supper was ready, besought
him to defer it till the day following, which Artabanes obeyed, and having only
taken as much nourishment as would suffice Nature, he retired into those
magnificent Lodgings, Callimachus had prepared for him, where he past the
Night, as he was accustomed to do, which was, in the contemplation of his sad
condition, that furnished him always with so many Arguments, for the
impossibilities of its alteration, that it made Despair to appear Reason.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK II.
THE morning was hardly old enough to permit a visit with civility, when the
impatient Callimachus went to Artabanes Chamber, to beg a continuance of that
Story, whose beginning had so satisfied him; But Simander assured him, that his
Prince was gone an hour before into the Grove of Cypress, to entertain his
melancholy. Callimachus (whose Curiosity was so great, that it was incapable
of Delay, went presently to find him out, which, after a diligent search he
did, in one of the most retired and obscure corners of it, and in a posture
better expressing Sadness, than Eloquence could; his Back was leaned against a
withered Tree, his Eyes erected toward Heaven, his Arms folded one within the
other, and so many Tears running down his Cheeks, that if moisture could have
revived that dead Trunk, it had needed no other Rain for its recovery. And that
his words might express what his gestures did, Callimachus heard him cry out.
Ye Gods! must I never be acquainted with your Power? but only through those
Miseries you cast upon me by it? alas! Why do ye furnish me with so much
Frailty, and yet provoke me so much to despair: or Why do our Priests teach us
there is a Providenc; when you are so careful by your Actions, to evince the
contrary? then hanging down his Head, he continued in a perfect silence, till
he himself drew it by a second Deluge of despair, which drowning both his
Devotion and Reason, necessitated him to expostulate thus, with whom it was a
Crime to do it. But what sins have I committed, to deserve so deep a suffering?
yet, allow my Guilt had been too great for your Mercy, your Justice might have
inflicted a punishment on my person, which might have equaled my offenses; for
you are no gods, if you are not infinite in all your Attributes; but being so,
why did the fair Parthenissa suffer for my fault? or else was it a more
sensible way of persecuting me, to do it through Her? If this were your Design,
O gods! I have more reason in exclaiming against you, than you had for imposing
on me, that which provokes me to it; and to it; and to afflict the innocent to
torment the Guilty, does rather argue Malice than Justice.

This impious reasoning frighted the good Callimachus, who fearing lest it
should continue, discovered himself, and by a sharp and eloquent Reprehension,
disclosed his anger, and the justice of it. To which Artabanes replied, That if
he were acquainted with his Miseries, he would impute what he had then uttered,
to his sufferings, and not to his irreligion. Alas, Artabanes (said
Callimachus) how does your Passion blind you? For you do not consider, that Sin
is as odious to the Deities, as inseparable from Humanity; that it is an
unexpressible Mercy, they do not inolve us in all those Miseries, their Power
and Justice is capable of: and whilst there is any Curse not yet inflicted on
us, we have more reason to esteem them unjust for their Clemency, than for the
contrary. 'Twas with such Truths as these, that at last Callymachus dispersed
those Clouds of Despair, which so darkened our unfortunate Lovers Piety, and
then conjured him to finish that Relation he had the day before begun. To which
Artabanes replied: I entertained you the last night with the beginning of my
own story, but now I must in order to it, acquaint you with that of my Friends;
the generous Artavasdes, who was taken Prisoner, (as you heard) in the Battle
of Arontes, and whose Gallantry had received a Punishment almost as great as it
merited the contrary, had not I had the happiness to prevent it.

The King of Armenia with the Relics of his broken Army, retreating into his
own Kingdom, attempted a small Town of the Parthians, called Offala, imagining
by the taking of so little, to disguise a loss which had been so great. The
Garrison being inconsiderable, as well for their Numbers as Resolutions, at
first summons condescended to a Treaty, and then to a Surrender; but had four
and twenty hours given them for the packing up their Baggage, during which, the
Armenians had free access at their pleasure, which proved fatal to the
Parthians; for Artabazus's Soldiers, whether to revenge their Companions deaths
at the precedent Battle, or out of some dispute which happened betwixt those of
the Army and the Garrison (as the Armenians gave it out) put all that were in
Offala, as well Citizens as Soldiers, most barbarously to the Sword; which
news, as soon as it came to Arsaces knowledge, so infinitely transported him,
that he vowed, the generous Artavasdes Blood should expiate his Kings Crimes,
and be a sacrifice to the Manes of his murdered Subjects. And though Pacorus
represented how unjust a Revenge this was, being a violation of that quarter of
his life, which he had too generously hazarded, to lose it in a way, which was
so much the contrary, yet the King vowed by his Fathers Ashes (an oath that he
never mentioned, but afterward he was unalterable) that Artavasdes should dye.
I was present when this sad determination was taken up, and finding how unlike
my persuasions were to deserve that name, I resolved to prevent my Friends
Ruin, and hinder my Prince from acting it, in a way too as unfitting for him,
as the punishment was unworthy the Person for whom it was intended. To effect
this, I went instantly to look Artavasdes out, for (though a Prisoner) without
any engagement, he had what liberty he desired. After a diligent search, I
found him in a Wilderness of one of the Palace Gardens, where having acquainted
him with what had happened, and was resolved, I begged him to retire a private
way that led to my Lodgings, where he might remain secure, till his escape were
believed so certain that it self might contribute to it: But his generosity was
so great (knowing the danger to be so, in which I should fall, were he
discovered) that his care of me had like to have rendered mine fruitless for
him, for it was so long before I could prevail with him, to accept of his
safety by a hazard of mine, that the Kings Guards were already abroad for his
Committal, and had not the way been very private to my Chamber, we had
(doubtless) been discovered before we had reached it: but we came at last safe
thither, where I commanded Symander to wait on him, and permit no other of my
Servants that Honor, nor to know of his being there; From thence I went to
learn what course was taken for his discovery, and how failing in it, was
relisht; I was soon acquainted, that all the gates of Ninive were shut, and
that one Rysolis, a friend of mine, was that night with some of the Guard to
follow Artavasdes (in case he were not found out before his departure) and that
his believed escape had so much exasperated the King, that he gave strict order
none should pass the gates without his own License, till Rysolis's return; who,
by chance, I found, as he was preparing himself for his Journey, and by his
expressions quickly observed how much the Office displeased him; His affection
to virtue and to me, made me discover to him where Artavasdes was concealed,
and conjured him to let him pass as one of his Troop, and thereby render what
was intended for his ruin, the means of preventing it. This request found a
ready return; for he was as joyful to serve me, as unwilling to obey his King
in so unjust a command: Then having promised me, that within two or three hours
he would call at my Lodgings; and undertake my desires; we separated our
selves, he to prepare himself, and I to acquaint Artavasdes, with his civility,
who embraced it with moderation, and then told me, If I thought it would not be
too great a trouble to you, I would employ the time I have left, in telling you
the particulars of a life you are so earnest to preserve. To which I replied,
That it was a favor I should have passionately begged of him, had not the
apprehension of being thought too curious, been more prevalent with me than my
own satisfaction, but since he was pleased to make that Overture, which nothing
else had hindered me from making, I would listen to his adventures, with an
intention which would speak how highly I was concerned in them. Artavasdes
having told me I could not be concerned in any thing that was more mine than
himself, began this ensuing Story.

The History of ARTAVASDES and ALTEZEERA.
IF ever Love had an absolute Empire over any heart, and was at the same time
admitted with a Joy that was so, it is over mine, but then I speak as great a
truth when I assure you that this extraordinary effect had a proportionate
cause, and that the Beauty, which prints her Image in me, does it with a stamp
as pleasing as indelible; and to know this the more perfectly, you must first
understand that my Father, whose name was Annexander, is a Prince that
possesses the highest power in all Armenia, and derives his Pedigree from
Ancestors whose Antiquity and Virtue have made them equally Famous; and though
they never had the glittering trouble of a Crown (which succession and not
virtue commonly casts on Men) yet they never wanted one of Laurel; it seems
too, that the Fates destined our Family to furnish a General to the Armenians,
for in nine descents successively, one of it had always that Honor, and
possessed virtues, of so peculiar a quality, that with truth I may say they have
been as glorious in their actions, as our Kings in their Titles. My Father, who
was nothing degenerated from his Predcessors, is so entirely Master of all
those realities and ornaments which render a Gentleman worthy that name; that
Artabazus, our present King, as a reward of his services (which were the
placing of his Father and him in the Throne of Armenia) gave his Aunt the fair
Lindesia to him for his Wife, from which Marriage I had the honor to proceed.
But before I do so in my discourse, I must take a little digression to give you
a Character of those persons I shall be necessitated to mention in it. Our King
had another Aunt married unto Celindus, who was a Prince enriched with many
good qualities; but his natural ambition (which received so great an accession
from this alliance) made him employ them in such Criminal Designs, that they
proved more destructive to his particular, and to his friends, than if they had
been vices.

Artabazus has but one sister, much about the age of his own legitimate son,
the Prince of Tigranes (which is a name as much affected to the Royal Blood of
Armenia, as Arsaces is by that of Parthia) these two have abundantly evinced
that the Body is the molde of the Soul, for Tigranes's shape is so horrid, that
nothing can transcend it but his conditions, and truly the first is only
tolerable but because it manifests what the second is. But the Princess
Altezeera has all the gifts of nature in so unaccessional a degree, that
nothing can excel the perfectness of her Body but that of her Mind, whose
morning, though adorned with all that so tender a youth was capable of, gave
but an imperfect earnest of what her noon did produce. I must confess I was not
so much master of mine own affections, as not to burn at so pleasing a fire,
but resented a pain, which till then I never was acquainted with, for she had
so equal a proportion of Divinity and Beauty, that my Flame participated so
equally of desire and adoration, that neither could suppress the other. Oh!
gods, could I but tell you Artabanes what she is, I should have your excuse for
what I did, which was, that I resigned my liberty with more joy than any other
could have recovered his. But yet my Flame was as invisible as great, for I
concluded, the Beauty being extraordinary, the way ought to be so, in which I
disclosed that I adored her. After an admiration and silence of a year,
according to the common Computation, but an age according to mine, (such
torments are there in a concealed Fire) my Father, who (admiring the high
virtue of the Romans, always held a proportionate correspondency with them,
partly out of a sense of their Gallantry, as also to make use of their Power
and Justice in case Celindus should rebel, who wanted not the will but the
opportunity to do it) to acquire himself more intimately their Friendship, and
to instruct me in the Civil and Military Discipline, sent me to Rome, whither I
willingly went, hoping that success in Glory, might be the way to success in
Love. After I had observed the most beneficial things there, I came to the Army
of Lucullus, who was by the Senates orders making then a bloody War against
Mithridates, in which expedition, I gave some such proofs of my courage, that
he offered me any command which a stranger might pretend unto. I declined this
great Civility, by alleging, that my unexperience, as well as years, made me
fitter to obey than command, that my chiefest desire was to have the honor to
be near his person, and that any Office which should deprive me of that end,
would be rather a punishment than a preferment: Not to trouble you with too
many particulars, though I would not take upon me any charge, yet I so fully
satisfied Lucullus with my refusal, that he never declined, nay, rather
augmented his affection for me, and sent Letters in my favor to the Senate:
but that I was more justly proud of than all this, was a perfect friendship I
then contracted with the generous Ventidius, a Roman Patritian, who was, even
to wonder, blessed with all the graces of Nature and Education. About this time
my Father, to make the Romans place a higher value on me sent Two hundred young
Gentlemen, of the chiefest Families in Armenia to serve under me, which the
Roman General much approved, and with whom I dare without vanity say, I did so
many services, that he (though of an extraordinary ambitious nature) was yet so
just as often to attribute much of the Glory of his success to our Valors. I
will not tell you the events of that War whilst I was in it, since the miseries
of Mithridates and the fame of Lucullus are yet so recent. Anexander, who began
to suspect that Artabazus, who absolutely declined Mithridates, in the
beginning, would now assist him, the Roman success rendering him jealous of it,
commanded me to return into my own Country, after two years absence; which
Summons I obeyed, and went home with Letters to my King and my Father, more
filled with Lucullus's praises than truth. All those young Gentlemen which had
escaped the fury and uncertainty of War; returned with me. The desire we had to
see our Friends; and I particularly to behold the fair object of my Passion,
which was much increased by absence (for Love has that property, that as long
as it has an existence; it will have a growth) made us so to hasten, that in
fifteen days we arrived upon the confines of Armenia, and having a desire not
to give any warning of our arrival, that we might the more agreeably suprize
all those who were concerned in it, we marched with our Helmets on, and with as
little rest as the necessity of our Travel would permit. The sixth day after
our coming into Armenia, just as the Sun began to enlighten the World, we might
perceive from the top of the Hill we then were on, the City of Artaxata. The
sight of that place, the then Residence of Altezeera, so transported me with
joy, that in the contemplating of being so near her, I discontinu'd traveling,
and having stopped my Horse, offered some vows to the god of Love, that he would
inspire the Excellency I adored with a true knowledge of the greatness of my
Flame, and incline her to recompense it, but only according to the vastness
and true virtue of it. Observe, I beseech you in this accident, how the gods
favor the innocent, and by how strange means they work out their deliverance.
That little Rapture I was fallen into, had caused all the company to stand, as
I told you, it was in the place from whence we might see Artaxata, and those in
it, and in the adjacent Plain betwixt the City and the Hill, might discover us.
By that time I was beginning to descend the Hill, we descried a Horseman that
came out of a Wood some thirty Furlongs from the Town, galloping toward us,
and I, by chance, being a good way before my Company, he no sooner came within
call, than he commanded me to tell Palisdes from Celindus, that the King and
Altezeera were but newly come out, that we should return to our station, and
not appear till Tuntini^s were engaged. This unexspected Message much amazed
me, yet as soon as I heard those names, I began to suspect some treachery; for
my Fathers frequent Letters, when I was in the Roman Camp, he acquainted me,
that he had too-well grounded jealousies of Celindus's ill inclinations to
usurp the Crown; and therefore, turning about, I commanded my Company to do the
like, and as soon as we were out of the sight of Artaxata, I left Celindus's
Soldier in charge with one of mine, commanding him not to discover himself or
us, and to have a care of what was committed to his. Then I went and ordered my
faithfullest Servant Philanax to light off his Horse, to hide himself amongst
some Trees on the top of the Hill, and never to have his eye off the Plain, but
as soon as he should see any fighting, immediately to give me warning of it. I
(...) placed Scouts upon all the adja^ent. heights, whom I commanded to give me
advertisement of what they should discover. Having thus disposed of things, I
returned to my Troop, assembled the chiefest of it, and acquainted them with
the jealousies I had, that Celindus intended some treachery to the King and
Altezeera, how that many things concurred to change that suspicion into
certainty, as that of the Soldiers taking us for a Troop that were to execute
something by Celindus's orders, that apparently the design was upon Artabazus
and Altezeera, by his saying they were but just then come out; that his naming
Tuminius, and taking us for Palisdes's Troop, argued there were many in the
enterprise; in a word, all those circumstances concurring, they were confirmed
in my belief; and after a small consultation we resolved (the time being so
short) to make Celindus's Soldier confess the whole Conspiracy, either by fair
means, or by torment: In order to which we went and told him, we were not
Palisdes's Troop, but strangers coming from the Wars, and returning to our
Country, that we had heard much of Celindus's Gallantry, that we concluded his
design was virtuous, and that if it were communicated to us, we might do him
service. The Soldier who had a quick apprehension, finding all was lost,
unless by some subtilty he remedied it, answered us, I guess the design is
noble by the undertakers of it, but my quality is so low, that I only act in
obedience of my Officers commands, and not being able to inform you of the
enterprise, I shall advise you to send with me some of your Party to Celindus,
who is not above twenty furlongs hence, and I make no doubt, if Virtue and
Reward will engage you in his attempts, you shall want neither. We quickly
found by his way of speaking, that his condition was not so mean as he would
have persuaded us, and therefore, concluding he had some design by so plausable
a pretense, to free himself out of our hands; and that no fair ways would
prevail, pulling off my Helmet, I made my self known unto him, and drawing out
a Ponniard which I wore constantly, I vowed by all those Oaths which men have
most reason not to violate, That if he disclosed not the whole design, I would
instantly kill him, but if he would, I Would not only engage my self for his
pardon, but to give him as high Rewards for his turning honest, as he could
pretend unto, if his wickedness had its wished success. I added to those
threatenings and promises all the arguments my judgment could furnish me to lay
upon the deformity of his hopes. The certainty of so sudden a Death, and the
horror of Conscience, made him by many sighs acquaint us with his repentance,
and that he desired no greater reward, than to have been kept from doing ill.
He then informed me, that his name was Evaxes, that he was one of the chiefest
in this Conspiracy, and that all those who were engaged in it, put on Common
Soldiers habits, that in case the design succeeded not, they might remain
undiscovered: That he had been drawn in by Celindus's charming Eloquence, who
having had some vent of Annexander's suspicion of him, had withdrawn himself
into the Province of Saccasene, where he was Prince and Governor, as well by
interest as Commission or Birth: That Celindus was resolved to kill the King,
and to marry Altezeera to Tuminius's eldest son: That the Prince Tigranes was
privy to the Plot, but would not appear openly, till he saw what success it
had, but that Celindus had only engaged him in it, to make his party the
stronger, and for an invitation thereunto he was promised to be continued in
the Throne after Artabazus's Death, he having in return, engaged himself to
give the Princess Altezeera to Tuminius, which should be no sooner effected,
than Celindus was resolved to make away Tigranes too, and thereby settle the
Crown upon his own Posterity; the Laws of the Armenians not excluding the
Female Sex: That to effect this, he had sent diverse Troops out of his
Government to lie in the places adjacent, and that they might not be suspected,
the Troopers came in by two and three in a company, disguised in the habits of
Peasants, and carried their Arms so privately, that it was impossible to
discover them; that having learned by his intelligencers the King and Altezeera
were to hunt that day, he had sent Tuminius with Two hundred Horse, which lay
in Apollo's Grove, who was to kill the King, and those that followed him; and
to carry Altezeera to the ruins of an old Chapel, where, in a small bottom,
Celindus, and some Three hundred Horse lay, to secure his retreat to Artemita,
which is the first Town in his Government, and but an hundred furlongs from
hence: That Palisdes (Celindus's other son) was appointed with 500 Horse more
to continue upon the Hill we then were on, least Annexander (who to prevent any
ill accidents had drawn 5000 Horse into Artaxata) should relieve the King and
the Princess before they came to Artemita, where there was a considerable body
of Foot, and the rest of the Army (with which he designed to reduce all Forces
or Places that should oppose him) were quartered not above 20 furlongs off.
This Relation (my dear Artabanes, continued Artavasdes) gave me as much Horror
as Amazement; and while I was enquiring what might be the cause that Palisdes
was not come, one of my Scouts came galloping and told me, he discovered a body
of about 500 Horse, not eight furlongs off, that came on a round trot, almost
the same way we had marched. This Troop we easily imagined was Palisdes, whom I
resolved to Charge, but first of all, dispatched away an Express to my Father,
to acquaint him with what I had learned, and to conjure him to send out as many
Horse as possibly he could spare, under some good Commander, but not lead them
himself, lest the Town might be betrayed in his absence. Evaxes assured me
thereupon, that Artaxata would be lost if he were once out of the Walls, for
Celindus had many Partisans there, that waited only such an opportunity to
betray it. This being done, I began to order my Troop, which consisted of 150,
but of so clear Valors and Resolutions, that those virtues supplied the
defects of their numbers. But Evaxes, who perceived my design, begged me not to
put all to the hazard, having so few Men, and having to deal with those whose
Resolutions were as great as their Crimes, that he had thought upon a
stratagem, which might effect my design, without the hazarding it, which was,
that he would go acquaint Palisdes that Celindus had sent him purposely to
assure him, that Artabazus and Altezeera were upon some intelligence returned,
and that therefore he should immediately dispose those Five hundred Horse into
their several quarters; with orders to be in the same place the next morning,
if they received no fresh ones to the contrary: That he, with the chiefest of
his friends, should go into the little Valley near the ruins of that old
Chapel, where they would consult what was most expedient to be done, upon the
intelligence they had and could learn. This, said Evaxes, you need not be
diffident will have a wished success, for Palisdes knowing the power I have with
Celindus, will obey any Orders I shall bring him in his name. But he continued,
You may suspect I will betray you, and lay this design for the obtaining of my
liberty, which I would have you believe is for the securing of the Kings: I
must confess my former undertaking has been such, that all the civil Man is
capable of, may be believed in me, with some appearance of justice: But I
invoke the gods to be my witness, and beg them to be my punishers, if my heart
and my words are not the same: But I will not desire that obligation of you as
to credit me, send a couple of these Gentlemen along, one at my right hand* and
the other on my left and if I fail in my engagement, let them pierce me with
their Javelins, and let that be my reward. This discourse of Evaxes had
something of probability in it, and knowing it was but fighting, (which I
determined to do) in case he should betray me; I resolved rather to trust
absolutely to him, (which if he had any principle of virtue) would bind him
then to evidence it, than by sending two Gentlemen with him expose them to an
unavoidable loss, as likewise by trusting of him but in part, invite him
thereby to be false in the whole. Having made this my election, I told him, Go
Evaxes, and by so handsome an action efface the guilt of your precedent Crimes,
you shall be accompanied with nothing but your goodness, which I know will be a
confinement to you to do well, than if all our Swords were at your Breast to
punish you, should you do otherwise. To which Evaxes replied, that if he had
been still in the darkness of his former Principles, so perfect a truth would
have lighted him into the way of virtue. Having so said, he advised me to
withdraw my self into a small bottom nigh the highway, that I might remain
undiscovered till the Enemy were in the Toil, and I that would send one along
with him to the top of the next Hill, to give me warning when Palisdes and his
friends should advance, and to advertise me if I were betrayed. These last
words he said smiling; and I having told him that I would send one for the
first reason, but not for the last, Evaxes gallopt away, accompanied with a
Gentleman, whom he placed upon a rising ground, where he might easily discover
the effect of his Embassy: To be brief, Evaxes so ordered his affairs with
Palisdes, that he sent back his Troops, and came along accompanied with Twenty
of his Friends, that were the chief of the Conspiracy, who carelessly riding,
fell into our hands, and though surprised, made so gallant a resistance, that
ten of them were killed before we could reduce the rest. Those that remained
alive (in which number was Palisdes, though somewhat wounded) we resolved to
present unto the King, that justice not force might be their Executioner.
Having thus happily begun our first enterprise, Evaxes offered to endeavor the
delivery of Celindus into our hands by the like stratagem, but were interrupted
by Philanax, who came all out of breath, and told me, that he saw many Soldiers
in the Plain, who fought so furiously, that it was easy to be imagined the
gaining the Victory was very considerable to them, but that the number was
unequal, and that those which were the lesser, seemed to have nothing but their
resolutions to keep them from being vanquished. The great apprehension I had,
least my relief might not come time enough, gave me Wings, so that though I
came not so soon as I desired, yet I had this consolation, that I omitted
nothing which was in my power. When I was within some few paces of the Scene
where this bloody Tragedy was acting, I might perceive a small company of
Gentlemen, that had cast themselves into a Ring, and in the hollow of the
circle had placed one who I imagined was the King, and defended him with
courages fitter to be admired than described; but their virtue was yielding to
their Enemies Numbers, had not we then come to their rescue, and the sight of
so much barbarousness having inspired me and mine, with as much Fury, we fell
upon them with such violence, that we reduced them to that condition, which
their Rebellion deserved. Artabazus (for it was he) finding himself so
miraculously preserved, came to me (for he found, by the respect all those of
my Troop paid me, that I was their Chief) and told me; that he must attribute
so miraculous a deliverance to the Tutelary gods of Armenia, whose Altars
should speak him grateful, and whose Instruments in his preservation, should
find him so, if any thing in his power could do it, and therefore he desired to
know those to whom he owed his Life. We told him, that as soon as all was
ended, we should satisfy all his Commands, and in the mean time we assured him,
that we had the Honor, to have so near a dependence on him, that all our
actions were so far from meriting, that they were less than our Duties: But Sir
(I continued blushing and trembling) I beseech you, what is become of the
Princess? Alas (said the King) in the beginning of the Fight, I sent her away
under the Conduct of Nearchus, with twenty Gentlemen more, whom I soon observed
were followed by near thrice as many of the Rebels: what success Nearchus and
his companions have had, I know not, but I am fearful by the Sacrificing of
their Lives, they have only thereby assured their Fidelity, and the Conquest
of their Enemies. As the King was speaking, there came toward us one of the
Princesses Pages, who seeing the number of the Dead, imagined that it was the
Kings party defeated, and tnrning about, sought his preservation in the
swiftness of his Horse; but the Livery being known, and guessing at the
mistake, I followed and cried out to him, that we were the Kings Servants, and
desired to know where the Princess was; but his fear made him suspect every one
that had but a Sword in his Hand, and certainly we had not overtaken him, had
not his too much haste been the cause of it; for his Horse being run off his
Legs, fell so heavily, that I had leisure to come up to him, and having
inquired where the Princess was, I could get no other answer from him, but
Quarter, Quarter; and indeed, he was so really possessed, that I was one of
Tuminius's his party, that nothing I could say for a long time, could make him
believe the contrary; but at last, some of the Kings Servants being come, he
perceived his Error, and then told us; That Nearchus, with those twenty
Gentlemen he had taken with him, were, when he came away for relief, generously
disputing the Princess's safety, in so advantageous a place, that none could
come behind, and but five abreast before; but that most of them were
dangerously wounded, and if they had not a sudden relief, they would be
incapable of any. I commanded the Page to show me immeditely where they were,
and having gotten some twenty of my friends with me, I left the rest to guard
the King, and flew with them to the place where the Princess was. Gods! what
fury was I possessed with, when I saw the poor Nearchus, with four more,
disputing Altezeera's safety, I fell upon them with all the rage her danger
could inspire me with, and cried out, Courage brave Nearchus, the gods, who are
concerned in Altezeera's innocence, and your Valor, have sent them both this
Relief. My generous companions, who were equally animated with me, did actions,
almost worthy the cause they fought for, and Nearchus finding so unexpected a
succor, gave proofs of an exceeding high courage; but we found Tuminius his
numbers, might, in time; have made our success doubtful, and knowing the
influence a Commander has over his Men, I called out to him: It Is I Tuminius,
that am come to take from thee Altezeera, if thy valor fly as high as thy
desires, thou should by killing the Ravisher of them, manifest to that fair
Princess, thou have a resolution able to overcome all obstacles that dare
oppose it. Tuminius, who wanted not courage, answered me: If there needs but
the killing of thee, to assure her that Truth, she shall not long doubt it; and
would to the gods, I could as easily vanquish her disdain, as all my other
Enemies: He had no sooner done speaking, than he made himself a lane through
the Throng, and having separated my self from my companions, commanded them to
let us alone, till Death or Victory decided the quarrel. Tuminius having
ordered his Men the like, we began to fight, but with so much earnestness, as
if the Conqueror had expected Altezeera for his reward; I must confess, I was
so ashamed that one guilty Man, in the presence of my Princess, and for her
safety too, should dispute so long the Victory, that I pressed him so vigorously,
and so unfortunately for him, that my Sword at last having found the defect of
his Armor, pierced him through and through, at which thrust he fell, and with
that stream which issued from his wound, he breathed out his life. All my
friends made a great shout at my success, and fell so briskly on Tuminius
Soldiers, that by their fury, and by the loss of their Commander, we had a
Victory so cheap, that it hardly deserved that name. The Field being wholly
ours, I lighted off my Horse, and with an infinite Humility, went to Altezeera,
and told her; Madam, The gods of whom you are so perfect a Copy, have sent me
hither, to serve you against your Enemies, and have given you an entire
Victory, lest their Justice or Power by your loss, or want of revenge, might
have been called in question. I must confess, said she, the actions I have seen
you do for my deliverance, assure me, it is more than a humane Power which has
effected it, but the gods, whose delight is to relieve the innocent, made me
not despair of their help, though the means (till your arrival) was unseen:
But, Sir, shall I desire you to add two favors unto this I have already
received? that I may know to whom I owe the preservation of my life, and
perhaps my Honor, and that if there be any hopes of rescuing my Brother, you
would employ your Sword in so just a quarrel, Madam (I replied) my Name has
been so little beholding to my Actions, that by them it is not considerable,
but for the King, I have already had the happiness to serve him, and if I be
not mistaken,, that Troop which you see marching this way, attends him by my
Orders. How? (said Altezeera) does Artabazus as well as I, owe his safety to
your Sword? sure then your Name cannot be so unconsiderable, as you would make
me believe it is, or if it has been, it is so no longer; but I am consident you
will not discover it, to hinder us from being ungrateful, which unavoidably we
must be, if once we learn to whom we are Indebted. Madam (I replied) to take
you out of that Error, I will acquaint you who I am, that you may know, I have
only hazarded a Life in your service, which I am resolved to spend in the same
employment: then pulling off my Helmet, she no sooner saw my Face, but she
cried out, it is Artavasdes! and there wanted nothing to make my Joy as perfect
as my Safety, but to owe the latter to his Gallantry. Just as I was going to
reply, the King (who had learned by some of my Troop, who I was (and by one of
those who escaped Tuminius sword, what I had done,) came running to me, and
having embraced me a thousand times, told me, I see Artavasdes, that Virtue is
born with us, not infused into us by Education, otherwise you could not be
possessor of so great a quantity, in so tender an age. Sir (said I) your
goodness being too great, makes you place a resembling value upon my services*
and I should be guilty of an equal presumption, if I did not attribute your
expressions to any thing sooner than your Justice, But, Sir, let not the joy of
your safety hinder us from receiving the benefit of it, nor me from bringing
this Gentleman to kiss your hands, who has washed away his criminal intentions
by his gallant performance. Thereupon I presented Evaxes to the King, who
acquainted him with all Celindus and Tygranes's designs, and that we had taken
Palisdes, who being showed to the King, discovered as much guilt in his Face,
as he had in his Heart. Artabazus commanded he should be safely kept, and
ratified all I had promised to Evaxes; then learning that Celindus had yet
three hundred Horse betwixt us and the Town, we thought it not fit to lose any
time, and therefore having by Artabazus command, and her permission, taken the
fair Altezeera behind me, and ordered our Men, we began to retire toward
Artaxata, when our Scouts came immediately, and brought us word, that Celindus,
with above 400 Horse (for fear multiplies) was marching directly toward us,
and was but six Furlongs off. As soon as I heard it, I turned about to the
Princess, and told her, Madam, I am in a greater conflict with my self, than I
can have with the Enemy, whether I should commit you to the charge of some
Gentleman, swiftly Horsed, and endeavor to secure your Retreat, or else by
dying at your Feet, take the opportunity to acquaint you with that, which I
shall not have the confidence to do, whilst I am sure to outlive the
discovery. To which she answered, I have so good an opinion of Artavasdes, that
I shall esteem my self as safe under his Sword, as in Artaxata, and I cannot
conceive that his Heart is capable of any thing which his words dare not
reveal. Madam (I replied) I must confess I am guilty of a crime, but the cause
of it is so Glorious, that if it were not committed against you, I should not
call any effect that proceeded from it by such a name. But, Madam, the Enemy
approaches, and I must put you in some place of safety, that I may by the
hazarding of my life, secure yours; and would to the gods, the loss of mine
could give you as perfect a security, as the ending of it in your service would
give me a satisfaction. The King by this time was come so near us, that I could
not receive any answer from my Princess, and asked me what order I would settle,
for the receiving of so bold a Guest; for he was determined to derive his
preservation wholly from my Sword. I answered so large a Favor with a
resembling humility, and having conjured Nearchus, to have a care of the
Princess, I lighted from my Horse, took down Altezeera, and set her up behind
him; then kissing her hand, I told her softly, Madam, inspire me by your
Commands, that I may perform things worthy your looking on; and remember, if I
dye in the acting of them, you lose the faithfullest servant, that ever your
perfections did acquire you: But she was so perplexed (whether through
apprehension, or any other cause) that she only answered me in Tears, which
nevertheless, coming from her fair Eyes, enflamed me with as high a Fire, as
ever they shot into any Lovers Heart. Celindus by this time was come so near,
that I had only leisure to conjure the King, that he, and the Princess would
fly to Artaxata, whilst I amused the Enemy; and having left 50 Horse for their
Guard, I divided those that remained into two Bodies, as the Enemy had done
theirs, and having in few words, told my companions, how highly they were
obliged to their fortunes, that had furnished them with an occasion to show
their valors before, for the greatest Monarch of the East, and the fairest
Princess of the World, and how the Victory, which was the only way to preserve
them, was as certain as their cause was just; I began the Charge, and fighting
under the conduct of Justice, Honor, and Love, I soon made a breach for my
valiant friends, who being carried on with a generous desire, routed that Wing
we attempted, and thereby made a passage for Nearchus, who lost no opportunity,
but got by with the King and Princess. But Stratolis, who commanded the left
Wing of our Horse, had not so good success; for though he disputed the business
with sufficient courage, yet he was overpowered, and at last worsted, so that
in effect, we were but as we begun; for what I had gained, he had lost, only
the King and Altezeera, by my good fortune, got that other of passing by. We
instantly rallied again, and determined only by skirmishing, to make good our
Retreat, and not to hazard all at one Charge, lest if foiled, the King and the
Princess might not recover Artaxara. Our resolutions had such good success,
that I held the Enemy in play long enough for Nearchus design, had not the
subtle Celindus imagined that I would send the King and the Princess away with
a small Guard, and with the rest justify the retreat, which caused him to lay a
hundred Horse in Ambush betwixt us and the Town, who falling suddenly upon
Nearchus, so terrified his Men, that most of them were cut off, before they put
themselves in a posture of resistance. One of the Run-aways fled to me, and
with a countenance which acquainted me with his fear, told me, all was lost, if
I did not instantly remedy it. I left most part of my Horse with Stratolis,
whom I commanded to amuse the Enemy, and with thirty of my friends, ran to the
place where my help was so needful. But alas, the first thing I saw, was a rude
Soldier, who had dismounted Artabazus, and was going to plant his Poniard in
his Breast. This impious action gave me so just a resentment, that I clove with
one stroke the offenders Head in too, and leaping off my Horse, mounted the
King upon him, and seized on another that ran about the Field without a Master.
But gods! to how unparalleled a height was my anger raised, when the piercing
shreeks of the fair Altezeera reached my Ears: For Nearchus being killed, one of
Celindus Officers had seized on her, and was carrying her away. I profess
ingeniously, my dear Artabanes, that sight did so transport me, that I think a
Legion could not have hindered me from relieving her danger, or killing the
causer of it. So that having made a passage through the throng, I soon made
another through him, and by that thrust, deprived him both of his Life and
Hopes. Then taking the overjoyed Altezeera behind me, I went to the King, whom
we overtook, retreating toward Artaxata; but when we were come within some ten
Furlongs of it, we discovered a Body of near Five hundred Horse, coming toward
us in a cloud of Dust, as fast as they could gallop. Altezeera, who had
generously opposed all perils, now began to faint; but I told her, Madam, the
god's, who have hitherto protected you, have thereby taught you not to despair,
and I am confident you are so highly cherisht by them, that if nothing but a
Miracle can effect your preservation, yet you shall not be denied it, or fall
into your Enemies hands, at least that Fate shall not be yours, whilst I have a
Sword, or Life to oppose it, my duty, and a higher consideration exacting it
from me: I begged her therefore, not to contribute to the danger, by being
astonished at it, nor to let go her hold; for I was confident, fighting for so
transcendent a perfection, my courage would proportion my cause: Having thus
said, she embraced me with so great a satisfaction for the transported
Artavasdes, that had it proceeded from Love, as it did from Fear, I had wanted
little of perfect happiness;but though the effect came from a wrong cause, yet
I blessed the danger, that gave me so high a contentment: But, alas, her
apprehension soon ended, and my joy with it, for we found it was the young
Amidor my Brother, who by my Fathers command, was come out to rescue us, having
received that advertisement I had sent him. In this general satisfaction, I
alone was extremely perplexed, having bought the public security at too dear a
rate for my particular, yet the consideration that by it Altezeera was out of
danger, whose contentment I still preferred before my own, did soon banish all
those sad thoughts, and having sent 200* of those Horse, under my Brother to
help Stratolis, with the rest we marched to Artaxata, where Anexander, and all
the City, received us with Faces that spoke their contentments. It were
superfluous to tell you what Artabazus said to my Father, and all those with
him in my favor, I will therefore only acquaint you, that Altezeera (whose
Beauty was grown to such perfection, that it made me almost irreligious, by
desiring to see no other happiness) having led me aside, told me, Artavasdes, I
should too much wrong my resentments, if I coulp hope to describe them. To save
me from Tuminius's insolency, and his Passion, are obligations of so high a
Nature, that they resemble his Virtues, which conferred them on me. Madam (I
replied) in serving you, I have performed my duty, and received my reward; But
Madam, had Tuminius the confidence to make his addresses to you? He had, (said
she) and would have persuaded me, that this enterprise was only the effects of
his Love, not his Fathers Ambition. Alas Madam (I answered) then he was
pardonable, if at least he is so, that cannot avoid committing of his fault.
How? (said Altezeera) now you know the cause of his Crime, you seem to approve
it. No Madam (I replied) but pity his inevitable fate; I say inevitable,
because experimentally I find it so. This I spoke in disorder and trembling;
but alas, I had immediately much more cause for both, when I heard her say, Ah
Artavasdes, I have been too patient, and by my not suppressing your first
inconsiderateness, have thereby authorized what you have since committed, yet I
give this presumption to your services, but let me have no repetitions of it,
least you force me against my inclination to become your Enemy; she was going
away with that reply, but I conjured her before she went, only to hear mine,
which she said she granted, not to me, but the company, who otherwise might
suspect in her disorder, the cause of it. Madam (said I) the same consideration
hinders me from flinging my self at your feet, and begging your forgiveness,
and though I thought Tuminius excusable in daring to adore you, knowing by my
self, how impossible it was to do otherwise; yet I held him withal, so worthy
of revenge, that to be sure he should not avoid it; I inflicted it on him with
my own hands, and before you see me next, you shall be convinced, I will not
practice what I condemn, and that I can punish as well as commit a fault. These
words I delivered with a Countenance and accent as sad as themselves, which the
fair Altezeera was so sensibly moved with, thet she told me; Though your Crime
be great, yet I desire no other reparation, but that you will not repeat it:
And since you assure me, I have an Empire over you, larger than I thought;
evince that truth, I conjure you, by attempting nothing against your life. I
shall obey you, Madam (I replied) but I beseech you, receive this obedience as
the highest demonstration of it that I am capable of, for my torments are as
far from being described, as (I fear) they are from being cured: which I must
not expect from Time, but Death, which is a Truth, if all things fail of
evidencing to you, my Death will not. Though she were going from me, yet I am
confident she heard my last words, (but her disdain, though I had armed my self
against it) wrought so powerfully upon me, that Annexander perceiving the
disorder I was in, came to me, and attributing it to a slight wound I had
received in the Fight, told me, that I should do well to retire to his
Lodgings, (which were in the Palace.) I obeyed his commands, and having took my
leave of the King, I did the like of Altezeera, but with a Countenance so
appropriated to my Condition, that she being moved with it, bad me have a care
of my health, which words made a great impression in me, for I could not
believe she was so kind out of a design to crown my Affection with a reciprocal
one, nor so cruel, as to preserve me only to torment me. In this suspense I
arrived with my Father at his Chamber, where Lindesia solemnized her joy for my
safe return, and after I had paid her that which my Duty and Inclination
exacted from me; I begged leave of Annexander, that I might, with some Horse,
go see what success my Brother and my Friends had; as I was receiving his
answer, Amidor, Stratolis, Evaxes and the rest, came into the Chamber, and told
us, they had defeated all Celindus's Troops, but that he himself had fled, when
he saw that releif coming to the King. My design being so stopped, after I had
received all my Friends Civilities, and an Order, next morning, to wait upon
the King, to consult what was to be done for the suppressing of Celindus; I
retired into my Chamber, under pretense, that a slight hurt required some rest,
as the best remedy; Having thus freed my self from all but my own thoughts, I
went to bed, where thinking to be alone, I found my self most accompanied:
There the Perfections of the fair Altezeera did so manifest themselves, that I
was wholly taken up in the contemplation of them; but when I began to consider,
that all those distinct Beauties were as so many Enemies, that had designed my
destruction; I could not abstain from saying, Unfortunate Artavasdes! what
envious power is it, that has made thee love so high an Excellence, that it is
as great a sin to expect the obtaining of her by Merit, as a weakness to
believe she will be won without it. Dye then, Artavasdes, and by one resolute
action, declare the greatness of thy respect, and that of thy sufferings which
necessitated thee to such a Cure. But alas, I continued, that remedy is denied
me too, so that I cannot live but in torment, nor dye, but by disobedience, the
first is consistent with my Nature, and the last with my Duty. Yes, thou must
live, I continued, after a long silence, since Altezeera has commanded it, and
who knows, but thy sufferings may raise her compassion, and the vastness of thy
future Services, convert it unto Love: but suddenly those pleasing thoughts
vanished, having no other Foundation, but a hope so ill grounded, that it was as
much weakness to expect her affection, as it had been a happiness to possess
it. Whilst I was in this manner entertaining my sad thoughts, the day appeared,
and the Sun found me as full of misery, as it had left me in. But Annexander
having received advertisement, that Celindus was drawing his Army together, to
gain that by a great force which a small one, and fortune, had denied him, came
into my Chamber to give me advice of it, and to acquaint me, that Tygranes was
fallen sick; after Artabazus had acquainted him that he knew all his designs,
and severely reproved him for them, but that the King suspecting he
counterfeited one suffering, the better to escape another, had placed such
strict and vigilant Guards about him, that his desire of flying to Celindus,
should not be greater, than the impossibility was. I seemed to be extremely
affairs ashamed when he came in, to be found so lazy, in a season, when our
nats made it a vice rather than a fault, though indeed I needed Rest more than
to have been condemned for taking too much. But lest my Father might discover
something by my sadness, I concealed it as much as I could, and by talking of
Tygranes condition, endeavored to take him off from being too intent in
considering mine. As soon as I was ready, we went to the King, who used me with
transcendent favor, and having assembled the Council, some advised considering
Artabazus weakness, and Celindus power, that it were fit to use him with all
civility, to grant him his desire, and endeavor by protraction to reduce him
to his Duty; others were of opinion, that when Princes capitulate with Rebels,
they do thereby discover their own weakness, and declare that to be Fear, they
would have to be thought Mercy, which is a Virtue that loses its value when
employed on those that dispute with Swords: some said too, that if it were
requisite to grant Celindus any Conditions, 'twere fit that it should be when
he implored, and not when he attempted to force them: others believed, that to
intend to grant them then, was to be resolved never to do it; since his Army
and Faction was so numerous, 'twas improbable he would be ever reduced to so
low a posture, and that Armenia would be destroyed for a Ceremony of State, by
deferring to act that but a short while, which necessity would enforce us to at
last: but the result of all was, That the chiefest of the Nobility and Gentry
which were with the King, should immediately go into their own Countries, and
with all expedition raise what Forces they could, and bring them to Thospia, a
Town of great importance, both for the bigness, strength and loyalty thereof;
That Celindus thereby might be either persuaded or forced to his obedience. In
pursuance of which, Anexander was sent with all the considerablest Men in the
Kingdom, to raise an Army, and the care of the Town, and the Forces of it, the
King committed to my charge, which employment I willingly attended, as the
means to be near, and serve the fair Altezeera. Anexander being dispatched, and
Artabazus having sent me my Commission, I presently repaired those
Fortifications that were defective, made new ones where they were needful, sent
out parties to fetch in Provisions and Forage, and to destroy what they could
not bring away, slighted all Grounds that were favorable for approaches; and
in a word, forgot nothing that I thought requisite for a Siege. I found the
number I had within, were (Inhabitants and all) 14000 Foot, and 1400 Horse,
which I divided into several Troops and Companies, and to avoid all Treachery,
made them still draw Lots for their Guards. But in all this noise of War the
silent fire of Love did still possess me, and what with incessant toilings, and
distemper of mind, I so fell away, that a slow Fever seized on me, and
doubtless I had yielded to it, had not the care of preserving my Princess given
me Supernatural Forces. This declination was so apparent, that Altezeera was
not ignorant of it, and (as she assured me afterward) simpathiz'd with me in
it, but her Spirit was greater than her inclination, and consequently my pain
than either. But while things were thus in Artaxata, Celindus was not idle, and
having got Advertisement, that Anexander was gone to raise an Army; he resolved
to employ his for the taking of the Town before Anexander was able to relieve
it, and in pursuance of that determination, the tenth day after our Fight, he
presented himself before the Walls of Artaxata, with an Army of about 50000
Foot, and 10000 Horse, well fitted with all things that he wanted, only a good
quarrel. The order in which they marched, made them as formidable as their very
numbers, and having drawn up in a Plain, on the East side of Artaxata, they
advanced the two wings of their Army by degrees, and environed the Town, having
cast a Bridge of Boats over the River Araxis, which separates Artaxata by the
middle, and began by flinging up of Earth to secure themselves from our
Sallies. The King from a high Tower of the Palace, perceived all the motion of
that great Body with a resembling Fear, which truly was one of Artabazus most
predominant defects* for he was timorous to such a height, that it made his
Subjects bold, but Altezeera (who was then with him, and whose spirit was
hardly capable of apprehension, considered those with indignation, which her
Brother looked upon with terror; in the mean time I had ordered all the Soldiers
to their several Posts, and being not able to endure Celindus so near, without
tasting of what composition his Army was made of, I got a thousand Horse, and
as many Foot in Arms, and by a furious and unexpected Sally, forced the next
Guards to a hasty retreat, and in the disorder thereof, routed some
Reserve-Troops, which came to oppose us; The Camp at this hot Alarm, was
presently all in Arms, and sent out three Bodies of Horse, who added to our
success, instead of finishing it, and some of them that escaped our Swords, told
such miracles of our Courages, to apologize for the poorness of their own, that
Celindus in person, at the head of 4000 Horse, came to know and redress his
condition. This made me think of retreating, not being so perfectly acquainted
with my Soldiers Valors, as to believe they might not be vanquished without
being killed, and having such good success, I was loath to adventure all the
gallantry of the Garrison at one push, where the advantage, if we had success,
could not be so great, as the prejudice, if we had been denied it. Therefore I
sounded a Retreat, and as I was making it leisurely, Celindus sent 500 Horse a
full gallop to engage us, which they did; and thereby too so far engaged
themselves, that not fifty ever got off, but yet truly they defended themselves
so well, and rallied so often, that I was much troubled such gallant Men shonld
be so ill employed: but their obstinacy in refusing quarter, made us think it a
Justice to give them none. The execution indeed was bloody, for by those that
reckoned most moderately, in all this fight there were esteemed near 4000 to be
killed, and we lost about 300. This was our first Essay, and with this success
we returned into Artaxata, before Celindus could come to the place of revenging
those deaths he had been a sad spectator of. Having by a short speech thanked
the Soldiers and Officers, and commended their Valors, I took one and twenty
Colors, which were the marks of our that days success, and went to the
Palace, to present them to Artabazus, who having seen what we had done (to
honor us the more) came with Altezeera to the Gate, where laying them at his
Feet, I told him; Sir, my fellow Soldiers and I, humbly present you these marks
of the goodness of your quarrel, and beseech you to receive them as Fruits of
our Fidelity, and as an earnest of what we will hereafter pay you. To which
(having first embraced me) he replied, Let not your Civility, under the name of
the goodness of my quarrel, rob you of that Glory your Gallantry deserves; it is
that which presents me with these effects of it, and which indeed is so great,
that I know not whether I should sooner elect, to have Artavasdes, or Justice
on my side, but having both, I am as secure as the gods can make me. After some
civilities, the King retired into the Palace, and the Princess to her
Apartment, where observing my deep melancholy, she told me, smiling, If I knew
not perfectly your zeal to my Brothers service, I might, by your sadness,
(after having paid him so signal a one) suspect your Victory was rather your
misfortune than design. Madam, (I replied) if it were so, I should rather be
guilty of no Crime, at least, if it be none to imitate you; for what in
raillery you say of me, I fear I may with too too much truth say of you in a
Victory, which though you knew but lately, you have long since acted. The fair
Altezeera blushed at what I had spoken, which made me (apprehending her reply)
not give her the leisure of making it, and therefore I hastily continued; but
Madam, if I have cause to be satisfied with my Fortune, I am certain I have not
to be so with my condition, for though the first gave me those ensigns, yet
the last necessitated me, to present them to another when you stood by, at
whose feet I have prostrated them with much more joy, than I took them; but
alas, my condition forces me to performances against my inclination, which yet
would be something extenuated, if as you are convinced of that truth in this
particular, you would pardon it in another. Altezeera by not taking notice of
what I desired, and feared she would, did it in my opinion sufficiently, and
obligingly: But that I might make no sinister, or advantageous construction of
her silence, she told me; The victory you have so presently obtained, could not
have been more just, than you be in so bestowing those signs of it, so that I
am more obliged to your intention, than I should have been by your performance,
and yet in the first I discover how concerned you are to oblige me, since
rather than not do it, you would commit an injustice. Would to the gods, Madam,
I hastily replied with a deep sigh, you had the same indulgence for me; but,
Madam, I continued, will you permit me sometimes to believe you speak what you
do not intend, by being now convinced you do so? for you cannot be so ignorant
of your own power, and the duty I owe it, as to imagine I can owe more, or so
much to any other creature. The fair Altezeera, who apprehended the continuance
of this dispute, might prove a continuance of her trouble, to put a period to
it, told me coldly, I see, Artavasdes, you must be victorious in all you
undertake, and to be conquered by your civility, is as unavoidable for your
Friends, as to be so by your Sword, is for your Enemies. Ah Madam (I replied)
if you see me not, what you say you do, you may when you please, and by
permitting me to be victorious over your Disdain, you may make me triumph over
the Enemy I most apprehend, and thereby render me as incapable of losing, as of
needing any other Victory. Whilst I was thus speaking, the fair Altezeera
assumed a countenance so full of Severity and Majesty together, that I
understood her answer before she spoke it, though it contained these cruel
words. Since Artavasdes, you will force me to understand you, unless I would
acknowledge my self as insensible, as I fear (by your thus proceeding) you
believe me, I must tell you with a plainness as great as yours, that the first
time you speak to me of your Passion, it shall be the last, and if you desire
the continuance of my esteem, you must neither solicit my Love, nor acquaint
me with yours, since if you do, I shall not only revoke that, but try if my
Brother will be more successful than I have been, in teaching you the respect
you owe, and ought to pay me. She had no sooner done speaking, then she retired
into her Closet, in which she locked her self up, and left me in confusions, as
great as their cause. O gods! what did not say or think against my Princess
cruelty, since it even proportioned the vastness of that Passion which was the
object of it. I had longer continued in that fatal entertainment, had not some
of her Women come into the Chamber, and lest they might guess at the occasion
of my sadness, by the visibility of it, I forthwith went to my own Apartment,
where I spent the residue of the day, and the succeeding night, in all the
Agonies, and Tortures of a great and fruitless Passion. Many days I struggled
under that burden, to which, doubtless I had yielded, if Altezeera's safety,
and the honor of having it committed to my Sword, had not been the most
predominate. Celindus in the mean time assumed a Resolution of storming
Artaxata in the open day, in a confidence, by so braving an attempt to efface
his late affront, knowing that in all Wars, especially Domestic ones, the
people judge of the progress by the beginning, and that whoever does lose his
reputation, will soon after that, lose his Hopes and Army. This intelligence
was brought me by a faithful and intelligent Spy, who came from Celindus's
Camp, and who had seen the scaling-Ladders, the Faggots, and the rouling
Bridges all fitted. This Advertisement I instantly communicated to Artabazus
and the Council, who were all astonished at Celindus resolution, and believed he
durst not have assumed it, were he not favored by some of the Garrison; the
probability of which opinion made me have a care of securing all within, as
well as opposing those without. The night before this intended assault, not
knowing whether I should outlive it, and to render my death pleasing, or
necessary, I went to Altezeera's Apartment, where having begged, and obtained
the honor of a private conference with her, after a small silence, and great
disorder, I told her, I should not, Madam, have presumed to appear again before
you, to discover my repeated Disobedience, had not I faithfully endeavored, to
the uttermost, to have avoided it, but having found, that the Passions your
Beauties do inspire, are not to be cured but by you, or death, and that that
Truth cannot be a greater one than that is, that you are resolved to decline
being my Restorer; I am come, Madam, to conjure you by your own quiet, and
mine, to permit me in this following occasion to seek out, and embrace a cure,
your Justice, or cruelty denies me. Did not I conclude, that the ending of my
life now would be more advantageous to you, than the continuance of it could
prove, during the Siege and Danger, I would rather groan under my Miseries,
than ambition for them such a period. It Is not much, fair Altezeera, that the
miserable Artavasdes implores; for he begs not that you would make him happy,
but that you would permit him to be no longer miserable, which will not only
act his cure, but your revenge also for having needed it: On which latter he is
as intent as on the former, and desires it as much on your score as his own.
These words delivered with a Look and Accent, that were very moving, proved so
with her, to whom they were addressed, who with a countenance that told me so,
replied. Though I confess your perseverance in your Passion, and Disobedience,
does much trouble me, yet I know not whether your death would do it more, and
till I have resolved that doubt, I desire you not to do it; and if that be not
sufficient, I command you it, and shall judge of what you would persuade me, by
observing whether what I say can persuade you. If, Madam (I replied) my
sufferings were with hope, I might by my Reason, raise my Fortitude to the
requisite height, and therefore I do now in some sort, rejoice at the
unpromisingness of my condition, that as my Flame excels all others, so the
Beauty which inspires it, may abundantly find by Obedience, the visibility of
that distinction, to be as great in the Effect, as in the Cause. But, Madam, I
humbly conjure you, if in the duty of preserving you, I fail in that other of
obeying you, ascribe it to the real Cause, and give my death that sensibility
which you have denied my Life. This is a Mercy which Compassion may obtain, if
not Cloak, and though I should ambition the last, yet I dare not hope it, and
implore your pardon for presuming to name it. I shall know, said Altezeera
hastily, how to distinguish between what seeks you, and what you seek. And
therefore believe me, if I find you guilty of the last, I shall deny your death
not only the first of those two things you mentioned, but both. These last
words she delivered going away into her Closet, and her eyes were so covered
with tears, and her cheeks with blushes, that I knew not whether compassion, or
a more obliging cause carried her so hastily away. As soon I found I was alone
(which I had not for a good while, so much my doubts, my fears, and my hopes
were predominant) I went to give the necessary orders for the reception of
Celindus, the certainty of whose intended assault next morning, I had that
night confirmed unto me by repeated Intelligences. Aurora did but begin to give
the World notice of the days approach, when the shrill Trumpets, and other
Warlike Instruments, invited the Soldiers to draw out of their Camp, and to
march to the storming of Artaxata, which, if taken, would end the War, and
satisfy both their avarice and ambition. Celindus, to animate his Army, made
them a short speech, and therein acquainted them, That their interests as well
as courages invited them by one gallant Action to conclude that War, which time
would render more difficult, and perhaps unfeasible; That his happiness or
misery depended upon their Swords; as well as their reward and honor did upon
his Fortune; That since the ties were mutual, the hazard would be so likewise;
That therefore he would be as well a Companion with them, as a Commander over
them; and would have as great share in the danger as the glory, which he
doubted not was as certain as it would be great, having those whose courages
would court victory so handsomely, that her Injustice must be as high as their
Valors, if she did not fling herself into their arms. The Soldiers encouraged
by so obliging words, testified their Resolutions by a shout (which was almost
as loud as their guilt) and Celindus with the generous Phanasder, (his
Lieutenant General) having ordered the manner of the Storm, the first Troops
advanced, and discharged a shower of Darts upon those which I had appointed to
man the Walls, and playing without intermission upon the Battlements, they did
(under favor of their shot) advance their Battering-Rams, their
Rolling-Bridges, and their Scaling-Ladders, which were all ordered with so much
advantage, that the Rams having made a breach, Celindus in person, at the head
of Four thousand Men, presented himself at the mouth of it, with so assured a
countenance, that the dull Inhabitants, and some Soldiers which had the guard
of that quarter, fled, and left him the passage clear. Whilst these things were
acting on the North side of Artaxata, I was disputing against Phanasder the
weakest place of it, which he had assaulted with so much fury, that I
atttibuted our Victory to the justice of the gods, rather than to any humane
means, and I had but newly beaten him off, when a Soldier that fled from the
Breach which the Enemy had entered, came running to me, and told me, that
Celindus with near half his Army was within our Walls. This news (as you may
easily imagine) did not a little surprise me, and having leisure to exclaim
against Fate, that thus endangered Altezeera, I took most of those men with
whom I had defeated Phanasder, and ran with them to the place the Soldier
guided me unto, where I found that Celindus had possessed himself of that Street
which led directly from the Breach unto the Palace, and was already beginning
to force open the Gates of it, when I cried out, hold Celindus, do not think
the gods have so much abandoned the innocent, as to permit the King and
Altezeera to fall into thy Power, the ill success of Phanasders Forces, shows
that they are under the protection of Divinity, and if that argument will not
make thee credit it, thy own defeat shall. Finishing those words, we thrust our
selves into the thickest Squadrons, where my valiant Friends so well acted
their parts, that we soon clothed them with their own Livery (despair.) But I
must give Celindus that due, that what Troops our Resolution disordered, his
rallied again. To be brief, we were so tired with our former action and this
too, that we had been absolutely vanquished, had not Amidor come to our Rescue;
who having defeated those Assailants that had stormed his Quarter, and learned
the danger I was in, came with 1000 Men to my relief so seasonably, that it was
when we fought not in hopes to avoid being defeated, but to avoid deserving to
be so. This supply so disheartened Celindus, that he began to think of a
Retreat, which almost as soon was put in practice: but the Enemy were much
astonished when they heard a hideous cry behind them, which was occasioned by
some 500 Men that Amidor had sent secretly out of a Salliport, who unexpectedly
falling upon those that guarded the Breach, made them fly to Celindus for
safety. We so husbanded this disorder, that we absolutely routed the Rebels;
and the slaughter had been much bloodier, had not I been the occasion of
hindering it; for during the Fight, I received some wounds, out of which ran
such abundance of Blood, that in following the execution, I fell down pale and
speechless, and suddenly a rumor being dispersed that I was killed, Amidor,
and all the rest were so much concerned in my loss, that they neglected
increasing Celindus's; who in our disorder found his safety. When Amidor and
the rest of my Friends came to me, they saw me environed with dead Bodies, and
with as little sign of life as those I was amongst, yet they carried me to my
Chamber, and laid me on a Bed. The news of Celindus's defeat, and my death,
came at the same time to the Palace, and as two contraries of equal strength,
the one destroyed what the other raised, only the King and Altezeera
(especially the latter) seemed to be more concerned in my loss than their own
safeties. The former considered me as one, whose past service had rendered me
considerable, and whose present condition made him think my help would have
proved so, which were the grounds whereon he built his grief. But the latter,
besides those considerations, added that of her Friendship (and perhaps
affection) which drowned all the lesser ones, as the Stars are not seen when
the Sun appears. The first thing she imagined (as she afterward told me) was,
that the gods had resolved to ruin her Family, and as an earnest thereof, had
taken away the chief Supporter of it, (for that was the Title her Goodness gave
me) to the end she submitted with much less reluctance than to the means; But
(as her mind was never at rest) she believed on the other side, that my death
was the effect of her Cruelty and my despair; and then she abjured all those
severe Laws, which under the name of a great distance in Blood, consines us to
much greater from Felicity. The horror which invaded all her Faculties was very
great, whilst she looked upon herself as the cause of my death; but it was
suddenly raised to a higher pitch; For when she was considering the sadness of
her condition, she had withdrawn herself to a Window that looked into the
Court, where she had not been long, when she might perceive Amidor, and the
rest of my Friends carrying me all pale and bloody toward my Chamber; That
object having raised her grief to an incapacity of being raised higher, she
suddenly accompanied my loss with a flood of Tears, and having fetched two or
three deep Sighs, fell into a swound. (Happy Artavasdes, that by a supposed
Death, discover'dst that Truth, which to have been certain of, thou would^st
have purchased with a real one: But rather wretched Artivasdes, that thy Fate
should be so different from thy desires, that whether living or dead, thou
should always torment the fair Altezeera.) But the noise of which the
Princess made by her fall, was the cause that some of her Servants ran to help
her; who having employed all the Arts they knew (after an hour) recovered her
again. In the mean time, whither by the motion whilst I was carrying to my
Chamber, or what other cause to ascribe it to I know not; but I was no sooner
laid upon my Bed, than I began to give some signs of life, which Lindesia (who
sat weeping by me) perceiving, began with raptures of joy to raise her hopes,
and to imagine, that by the help of some able Chirurgions I might be recovered,
which being sent for and come, and having searched my wounds and dress^d them,
found they were very dangerous, yet to console my Mother, told her they were
^urable; and having given me some Cordials which brought me to my self again,
they withdrew themselves, The first thing I asked was, whither Altezeera was in
the possession of Celindus? To which Amidor (who had not stirred from my
Bedside) answered me she was not, and that we had obtained so entire a
Victory, that nothing could could it but the condition I was in. I lifted up my
eyes and hands as my retribution to the gods, and conjured Amidor, that his
Affection to me might not endanger the Town, the preservation of which I now
wholly left to his care, and that he would go to Artabazus and receive his
orders, and assure Altezeera, that nothing but the impossibility of not waiting
upon her should have diverted me from that duty and happiness. Amidor to
satisfy me, went unto the King, and told him how miraculously the gods had
restored me to life, and that I had sent him to acquaint him with it, and to
receive his commands whilst my weakness rendered me incapable of that honor.
Artabazus seemed to be as much pleased as surpised with this news, and would
needs have gone and visited me; but Amidor told him, that I was but newly come
to my self, and that the alteration which so great an honor would necessarily
produce might be prejudicial to my health; therefore humbly besought him to
delay that high favor till I were in a condition fitter to receive it. The
King at last yielded to Amidor's request, and committed the charge of Artaxata
to him, who immediately went to Altezeera's Chamber, and sent in to desire the
honor of speaking to her. This message exceedingly perplexed her, for she
imagined he came to accuse her of being my Murderer (for she had not yet heard
I was alive) and in a manner acknowledging herself guilty of it, she knew not
with what face to entertain him; yet at last she sent him an admittance,
knowing that the sight of her grief would rather make him pity than condemn
her. (But you may wonder (generous Artabanes) continued Artavasdes) that
Altezeera should believe my Brother knew my Passion. To which I answer, That
Amidor and I had so perfect a Friendship, that she believed I had nothing of
reserve for him, neither indeed had I. Altezeera who lay upon her Bed, (and who
had sent all her Servants out, that none might be witness of that freedom which
she resolved to give her sorrows, and entertain Amidor with) no sooner saw him
come, but with Eyes full of Tears she told him, Are the gods then, Amidor, so
much declared our Enemies, as to rob us of Artavasdes? I say our Enemies; for
ties of Friendship are as great as those of Blood; and as you had the honor to
be allied unto him by the latter quality, so I had the satisfaction to possess
him in the former. Alas! How dear have we bought our instant safety? It Is by a
loss that nothing could augment but our outliving it. She would have proceeded
in this sad, and pleasing language, had not her Sighs and Tears hindered its
continuance; which speechless Orators so well acted their parts, that though
Amidor knew their cause was groundless, yet it was impossible for him to
abstain from keeping her company; which she perceiving, forced herself to tell
him. No, no, Amidor, it is I that am only guilty, and should only bear the
punishment; my cruelty is the source of all our miseries, but I will take so
severe revenge upon my self for it, that you shall say, though I knew not how
to recompense Love, yet I knew to punish Ingratitude. But Amidor, who was
confident that this discovery of Altezeera's affection would be more powerful
toward my cure than all other remedies, thought it high time to disabuse her,
and therefore told her, Madam, Artavasdes is too much your Servant to leave
this World without your permission, your commands exacted that at his hands,
and the gods who knew how how just it was for him not to disobey you, have
restored him to life, but it will not only last long enough to beg your leave
to dye, if you are resolved to neglect and scorn his Passion. How! (said the
Princess, starting up) does Artavasdes live? This delusion, Amidor, this
delusion cannot last, do not flatter me into a Joy, which, if not real, will
make my misery the geater; it cannot be, I saw him dead. Madam ( Amidor
replied) would he were as certain you would not scorn his Adoration, as I am
that he lives to pay it you, his happiness would be then greater than your
doubts. My happiness, said Altezeera would be as great as my torment, could I
but credit what you say. Madam (said Amidor) if you suspect this truth, your
eyes may give you that satisfaction which my words cannot, by my waiting on you
to his Chamber, where your suspicions will soon vanish. I accept your offer
(said the Princess, abandoning her Bed, and giving Amidor her hand to lead her
thither) for I can have no quiet whilst I have any doubts. ut, Madam, (said my
Brother) let me beg you to leave all your disdain behind you; for the least
quantity of that poison kills all his hopes, and consequently himself; it is not
now with him as at other times, where rigor did appear Justice, his sufferings
and services now style it Ingratitude, though he gives it still the former
name, and only expects his felicity from your goodness, not his condition. So
high a Modesty (said Altezeera) merits an equal Reward, and I should be too
unjust should I deny it him. By this time they were come unto my Chamber, and
finding none in it but one of my Pages, Amidor commanded him out, and opening
the Curtains, told me the Princess was come to visit me. The sight of so high a
Beauty produced a proportionate effect; for before she was come in, I could not
turn in my Bed, but now I did toward her, and with a firm voice told her, At
last (Madam) at last the gods have heard my Prayers, and commiserating my
condition, have made my Enemies swords more pitiful than you; they have given
me that death you were pleased to deny me, and in so blessed away, that it is in
defending and not disobeying you; so that nothing could add unto this Felicity,
but that I had deferred receiving of these charitable Wounds till the last day
of the War, that you might have had no further use of my services, and that
your security and my quiet might have been established at one time: But, Madam,
since the gods do call me from you sooner, I conjure you to remember I died
serving you, and let that extinguish your resentments against an ambition which
cannot be greater than was the impossibility of avoiding it. Alas, Artavasdes
(said Altezeera) think not of dying, the gods who have already raised you from
Death to Life will perfect that good work: They are too just to rob us of you.
They would be too cruel Madam (said I) did they restore me to my health; Your
Disdain prepares me torments so great, that Death is a comparative happiness
unto them. But, Madam, I do beg your pardon, you commanded me not to trouble
you any more with my Passion, and I Will obey you, only let me beseech you to
receive these importunities as my last Crimes, and upon that score to forgive
them; for I vow never to offend you more. Nor I (said the fair Altezeera) to
receive your addresses as an offense: No ( Artavasdes) your Virtue has obtained
the Victory, and I command you now to live, that I may show you by my affection
I know how to value and recompense yours. Alas, Madam, (I replied) What do you
do? You may indeed by this art hinder my death awhile; but as soon as I
discover I am deluded, by all that is most Sacred, I will not live a minute:
Take heed, fair Princess, you may do like a merciful Judge, who when the
Delinquent's ripe for Death, and made his peace with Heaven, by giving him a
pardon, his future courses may be more criminal than his precedent ones, and
thereby make that which was intended for his good, the occasion of his greater
ill. Banish those groundless fears (said Altezeera) for my intentions are as
clear as you persuade me your Flame is, and as a confirmation of it, I engage
my self before Amidor, never to decline what I have promised. Ah! Madam (I
replied) Why am I not in a condition to fling my self at your feet as some
expression of joy, which certainly cannot kill, since I am yet alive: But, my
Princess, give me leave not only to call Amidor, but the gods to witness, that
I will never decline the Passion that I pay you, but will maintain my Flame
alive even in the Grave; for having vanquished your Disdain, it cannot be
overcome; and if ever I alter this profession, make my future punishment equal
to my present felicity. As I had done speaking, Lindesia came into the room,
and my Princess having commanded my Love to be as silent as constant, withdrew
herself, and left me in such ecstasies of joy, that they had like to have made
me ever incapable of any; for all my wounds fell fresh a bleeding, and I was so
taken up with my present raptures, that had not Lindesia been more careful of
me than I was of my self, I had dyed in, and by them; but having discovered
that my sheets were all bloody, she came running to me, and so timely, that the
least delay had rendered her care fruitless: But my wounds being again bound
up, they enjoined me to take my rest, as the best and easiest cure. Thus, my
dear friend, you see how at last my desires were crowned, and little obstacle
remained to the perfection of my happiness, but my health, which by degrees I
recovered, and that which contributed most unto it was, the daily visits of the
fair Altezeera, whose conversation charmed my ears as much as her Beauty did my
eyes, and every hour discovering new perfections, I blessed that suffering which
had given me so high an interest in them. My wounds which admitted of forty
days for their cure, did little afflict me, because the Enemy never attempted
any thing during that space against Artaxata, which was occasioned by those
wounds Celindus had received in the Assault; in which also he had lost so many
Men, and so many others were rendered useless; that whilst he was recovering he
sent Phanasder for a Recruit, and had drawn his Aamy some twenty Furlongs from
the Town, contenting himself to block it up at so civil a distance. But as if
Fortune believed it necessary that nothing should be done whilst the chief
Actor in either side was unable to appear; she so ordered all things, that at
the same time I was perfectly cured, Celindus was so too, and Phanasder came to
the Camp with a supply of near Ten thousand Horse and Foot: So considerable an
addition raised Celindus his hopes, and being ambitious to recover his losses,
and to employ the fury of those new Men on some design where disadvantage of
being repulsed could not be so prejudicial as the honor of success would be
glorious, elected the storming again of Artaxata, as most proportionate to his
Revenge and Ambition; and having made his chief Officers approve of his design,
he gave order that all things should be in a readiness for so bold an one. But
whilst Celindus was troubling himself to be Conqueror of a Town, I was so in my
affection, and was more satisfied in my Victory, than he could have been in
his, had his pride and designs arrived at their ambition'd period. O Gods!
what uninmaginable joys do mutual fires create in Love; at least mine were so
great, that whereas in other affairs the ignorance of things hinders us from
describing them; here the knowledge of them produced the same effect: In brief,
our Passions so increast, that we thought all conversation but our own was as
troublesome as that was pleasing; and therefore studied how to be private
without discovering that Flame, which we at least as much endeavored to
preserve so, till a fit opportunity were offered to move Artabazus to unite our
hearts by an Hymenaeal tie as firmly, as they were already joined by sympathy
and inclination. One morning whilst the Sun was yet but rising, I waited upon
my Princess into a Garden of Pleasure, contiguous to the Palace, and adorned
with all that Nature and Art was capable of; there the Company separating
themselves to take that divertisement which was most agreeable to their
fancies; Altezeera and I by degres left those that waited on us, and entering to
an earnest discourse, we engaged our selves unawares into a little Wilderness,
in the center whereof was a spring, whose water was received into a Cistern of
Alabaster, which was held by a statue of a Nymph cut in white Marble; There we
might perceive a Gentleman whose postures as well as actions expressed his
troubles; and though we could not discover his face, yet we might his tears
running down it into the Cistern, and in such abundance, as if the Fountain and
his eyes strove which should most load the fair Nymphs Arms. Such an unexpected
accident had made us desire to learn the cause of it, and fetching a small
compass by the help of some Orange Trees, we came so near, that without being
seen we might see him and hear him; and as his mind was exceedingly agitated,
so we were not long in expectation, till we heard him fetch a deep sigh, and
then casting up his eyes to Heaven, cried out; Miserable Amidor (for 'twas he
indeed) shall not the Divinity which dwells upon her face, thy friendship, nor
his engagements suppress thy Passion? Shall the highest Beauty make thee commit
a resembling Crime? O no, rather than interrupt so pure a Love deprive thy self
of Life, and by a gloririous Death settle their quiet, and confer on thy self
thine own. Then he paused awhile, and suddenly striking his hand upon his
breast; he sighed, and said: O -- it cannot be -- her eyes inspire no Flames
which reason can extinguish, he knows their power is not to be resisted, and
being instructed with the cause, if he be reasonable, he cannot blame the
effect: and if he be not, he is not worthy of thy friendship: but alas, thou
talkest as if he were the only obstacle, when thy own defects will perhaps
more fight against thee, than thy fidelity unto thy friend, or thy Mistresses
to him. Then weeping awhile, he continued; What? shall the apprehension of ill,
make thee as miserable as the real ill? Fie ( Amidor:) can a courage capable of
loving her, be capable of fear? No: it is not in thy nature nor thy custom to
apprehend, but this timerousness is the effect of thy treachery to thy friend,
and since the gods so punish the thoughts of wickedness, how much more will
they the wickedness it self? Cast away then so criminal a Passion, or if that
be impossible, at least by concealing of it, so torment thy self, that if
before, or after thy death they discover it, they may rather pity than condemn
thee. Having so said, he borrowed some of that water he had given the Nymph,
and having washed his eyes, that they might not betray what he resolved to keep
secret, he went away, but not in a greater trouble than he left Altezeera and I
in, for we found by his discourse, that the object of his Love was to the
object of his friends, and that his friendship and affection were the causes of
so noble and sad a conflict; But we could not sufficiently admire his
resolution, which we esteemed so generous, that we assured our selves, a reward
equal to his virtue would crown it: and being both much concerned in him, we
determined by a curious inspection into all his actions to discover who they
were that caused his disorder, but if that course did not succeed, then by
acquainting him with what we knew, engage him to tell us what we were ignorant
of, that we might employ our selves the better to serve him. In this design we
returned to the Palace, where we found that many of the Inhabitants of Artaxata
had petitioned to Artabazus to commiserate their condition, since by their
wants they were reduced to such misery, that if by some means, a Peace were not
concluded with Celindus, or the Siege raised, they must yield to him rather
than to Famine. The perusal of this Paper, much perplexed the King, as well from
the consideration of his Subjects wants, as the knowledge of their impudence,
and the fear of their treachery; but before he made them any return, he
consulted with those about him, who were all (except Crasolis) of opinion, that
a mild answer should be given them, and by kind usage and assurances of a
speedy remedy to all their grievances, endeavor to keep them within the limits
of their duty; But Crasolis, whom we too apparently suspected was a friend to
Celindus, represented, that under the formal humility of a Petition there might
be treachery concealed; that the not suppressing of such insolent demands in
their very birth, would authorize their growth; that lenity insuch a case would
appear fear, and that would introduce a ruin: That if (on the other side) a
vigorous remedy were applied, it would not only extinguish the first sedition,
but deter the people from a second: and therefore he was of opinion, that some
of the chiefest contrivers of the Petition should be instantly executed in the
Court of the Palace. Thus Crasolis would have raised the Kings Enemies within
the Walls, as well as without, that Celindus might make use of the disorder;
yet he would have that pass for his courage and honesty, which indeed was his
treachery. But the moderate advice took place, and the people, upon the Kings
engagement of soon remedying their miseries, returned with blessings for him,
whose ruin was designed by Crasolis in their petitioning. The night which
succeeded this day was not half spent, when the advancing of Celindus's Army to
Storm Artaxata the second time, gave us a hot alarm; but being advertised of
his design, he found us prepared to oppose it. Perhaps he thought that darkness
would be more favorable to his Arms than light, that his Men not seeing the
danger, would go more resolutely on it, or that the enterprise would be more
formidable unto us, when obscurity (the ingenderer of confusion) was joined to
the horror of an Assault. But my dear Artabanes, I will not so much trespass on
your Civility as to particularize all the accidents which happened in that
bloody Night; it shall suffice to tell you, that after the Town was won and
lost three times, we at last remained the Possessors of it, (though it cost us
much blood, and the Enemy more) but that which brought us so often into hazard,
was, That Artaxata was twice set on fire, by the treachery of those within,
which requiring many hands to quench it, robbed us of so many hands for our
defense. Some Prisoners that we took acquainted us who were the Traitors, which
being seized upon, confessed their Crime, and received the punishment it
deserved: There was also one of the Prisoners that being upon the point of
death, and repenting his Rebellion, sent to me, and to discharge his
Conscience, assured me, that Celindus had a friend in the Kings Council, who
gave him a constant intelligence of our proceedings; but he could not inform me
of his name, yet by some circumstances, I was fully satisfied that it was
Crasolis; but the King believed him both so honest and so able, that if he had
merited as well the first of those attributes as the last, Artabazus had been
as happy as he was deceived in him; But he possessed the King so absolutely, that
he only looked through his eyes, and heard but with his Ears, which excess of
favor that perfidious man husbanded to his own, not his Kings advantage.
Celindus, who perceived that force was unsuccesful, and that two assaults had
cost him near 7000 Men, lost all hopes of taking Artaxata by Storm, and
therefore began to make his Approaches, and endeavor to possess himself of that
by industry and time, which valor had denied him; but not wholly to rely upon
the blind events of War, he designed to attempt something by Treaty; and lest
that moderate way might appear to his Army the effects of fear and despair, he
clothed it with a pretense of rendering us thereby the more secure, and
consequently the more surprizable, or if his overtures were yielded unto, they
should bring as much advantage to his party as a Conquest could. This opinion
carried so good an appearance with it, that he obtained his Armies concurrence.
But the great hazard Artaxata was in, in the two precedent Assaults, and the
scarcity of Victuals which now began somewhat to afflict the Inhabitants
(though not in so high a degree by as much as was represented to Artabazus)
gave Celindus's Partisans too plausible a rise to renew their former requests,
and to put the King in mind of his engagement of soon ending their miseries by
Treaty or Force. The multitude much discontented by the length of the Siege,
greedily laid hold of the exhortation, and came far more numerous to the Palace
than the first time; the King having received their Petition (as his custom
was) assembled his Council, to give them an answer; And the fair Altezeera,
whose Virtue and Birth gave her an equal interest in the Public, was by the
Kings command at that consultation, where whilst we were debating of an answer
for the Petitioners, an Officer came to give me notice that a Trumpet, with a
Gentleman sent from Celindus, desired admittance, having some things of high
concernment to offer, touching a happy Peace. The King thought this a fit
occasion to defer giving the people an answer, and commanded them to retire,
which they did, but with bitter execrations, that if they had not a speedy
return, and proportionate to their demands, they would act that which they
only mentioned in their former Petition. Crasolis omitted not to take notice
of that insolent expression, but the people being gone, there arose a dispute,
whether the Gentleman employed from Celindus should be admitted. Those that
were of that opinion, fortified it by representing* that the Laws of Custom,
and of Nations, allowed Princes to hear the desires of their rebellious
Subjects, otherwise the War would never determine, but by the absolute
extirpating of the offenders, where the expense of Treasure, the hazard, and
the time, would not be repaid, were the victory never so perfect. That it might
be Celindus would propound some conditions which would suit with his own
interest, and the Kings too; That if his motions were not heard, the people
might be possessed they owed their ruin to the Kings wilfulness, and that they
were much more humble and reasonable, than perhaps they really were; that his
Affirmative being not to be confuted by any apparent proof, might pass for
current, and the Armenians thereby enraged, might run to the last extremes;
That the Propositions must be reasonable or unreasonable, if the first, then to
be embraced, if the latter, then to be rejected; and by a Declaration convince
the World that they were so, and finally by demonstrating the insolency of his
demands, confirm Subjects in their Loyalty, and satisfy strangers with the
equality of their proceeding. Those that were of a contrary judgment,
alleged, That the Law of Custom in admitting Rebels to capitulate with their
Princes, was not binding in it self, but only as far as advantages might be
derived from it; that Celindus his craft and wickedess were so great, that the
first gave as little Hope of obtaining any advantage by Treaty, as the latter
of enjoying it, if obtained. That no miseries which could befall a King* by
being overcome by his Subjects, could equal the infamy of yielding to them,
since the first is an act that the gods force him unto, but the other a misery
he throws himself upon, and he is more justly to be condemned, that makes
himself the instrument of his own ruin, than he who is found to be made so by
a power he cannot resist; that by rejecting his demands, the people will
probably assure themselves, that Artabazus is in a good condition, and that he
has some certainties of a speedy and sure relief, since otherwise he would not
decline any overture of Agreement; That this will invite their patience, and
continue their Loyalty; That the state of affairs were not so low, as to act
those things which necessity only can render legitimate; That to divulge his
overtures, might prove ruinous, how insolent soever they were, for if they
offered peace upon any Terms, the people who judge of the goodness of the
offer, by the benefit which they derive from it, will think their ease cannot
be too dearly purchased, and thereby make that which is designed to engage them
more vigorously in the Kings service, the way to make them all embrace
Celindus's, But not withstanding these Arguments, the King inclined to the
first opinion, and the Gentleman being admitted, he presented the King, upon
his knees, a Letter from Celindus, and being ordered to withdraw, Artabazus
opened it, and commanding it to be read, found in it these ensuing words.

CELINDVS Prince of SACACENE, to his Sovereign ART ABAZVS, King of both the
Armenians.
THE god's shall bear me witness with how much sorrow I have considered the
goodness of your disposition, so highly misled and abused by the subtilty and
wickedness of Anexander, and with what reluctance (having fruitlesly attempted
all other means to free you from so low a subjection) I have been necessitated
to make use of force. I conjure also the same gods to make me the object of
their fury, if having your engagement for the banishing of Anexander, and all
those whom he has infected with his Principles, and the giving the Princess
Altezeera to Palisdes, I do not instantly lay down Arms, and count it more
glorious, to return to my first Quiet and Condition, than to possess as many
Crowns, as you have Subjects; and as the former of these is the only way to
put the affairs of this Kingdom in a right temper; so the latter is the only
means to confirm and settle them in it. I shall therefore humbly beg you so to
consider of this request, as that it may not produce a de^ial; but by granting
it, remove all the distractions of your Subjects whose misery, by the
continuance of a War, must be cast upon your score, and whose redress shall be
the intent endeavors of

CELINDUS.


THe Letter was no sooner ended, but some of the Council represented to the
King, that the requests were as unpardonable as he that made them, and that
though they had not been so, yet they might have been more aptly offered before
he had attempted any violence against him or Artaxata, That being made after,
they were to be looked upon as the effects of his despair, not to that pretext
he seemed to cloak them withal; That Anexander was the chiefest Pillar that
sustained his greatness, which made Celindus so earnest to remove him, thereby
more secretly to ruin it, and that to sacrifice so faithful a Servant to
Celindus's ambition, was under the appearance of banishing but one Man,
effectually to seduce most men; who seeing Virtue was ruinous, would find
sufficient motives in their nature, as well as interest to make them decline
it; That to deterr Celindus from storming any more Artaxata, 'twould be fit to
give him advertisement, that Palisdes should be exposed to all the Darts and
Arrows that were flung or shot at those defended it; To which last motion
Amidor replied, That it were not only to wrong our courages, but to make
Celindus believe our condition was very low, when we elected, for our
preservation, courses that were so much so; that if he were repulst, he might
persuade his Men, he owed the Affront not to our valors, but to his fears of
destroying Palisdes, whereas 'twere wiser (as well as more generous) to
purchase our securities by our virtue, which would, in his first attempt, cut
off all his hopes of a second. This was much controverted, but at last,
Crasolis made this ensuring Speech; Sir, As I cannot look upon your present
condition without great horror, so I cannot without a resembling joy, consider,
that there is yet some overtures made, by which you may be preserved from
ruin; for indeed it is a signal mercy of the gods, that Celindus, who has had
so much wickedness, as to act what he has done, should not carry on his design
to the uttermost, but that his power being boundless, his ambition should yet
put limits to its self, and offer to be contented with a part from you, when by
himself he might possess the whole: But Sir, as those Gentlemen which have
spoken already, do well observe, we shall pay dear for this peace; it is true,
but yet, if we accept not of it, we are like to pay dearer for a War. I must
confess, to banish Anexander, goes as much against my Reason as Inclination,
and to sacrifice so generous a Subject to a Rebel, is to make us hereafter
embrace Vice for our Interest, To give the Princess too unto Palisdes, is that
which will render our sorrow, as great as is Celindus's ambition in demanding
her, or Palisdes happiness would be in possessing her. These Sir, are the
effects that will proceed from granting his Requests, but alas, what will be
the Miseries that attend a refusal of them? Anexander, instead of banishment,
to be murdered before your eyes, Altezeera forced to be Palisdes Wife, your
own Life made an Oblation for the assurance of Celindus's, your faithful
Servants exposed to torments as great, as their Fidelity merits recompense, and
in a word, your Kingdom suffers miseries sufficient (if rightly placed) to
punish the crimes of those that are the causers of them. But (Sir) as we have
seen the inconveniences of granting his demands, through the optic of our
averseness to the action, so let us consider them, in their last formidable
dress. To consent then to Anexanders banishment, if you look upon it, as in
relation to your self, is, by being deprived of his conversation (it may be too
but for a short while) to settle the quiet, of your people, and free your self
from apparent ruin; if in respect of him, I knew his generous disposition so
well, that he will embrace his retirement as his happiness, being your Majesty
and your Kingdom will derive theirs from it. To give Altezeera to Palisdes,
methinks has nothing in it of so much ill, as the being forced unto it; for
Palisdes Person and Birth are eminent, and all his actions and inclinations
generous, except this last, where his Fathers Commands, and not his own Desires
have made him faulty, and when Crimes do bear the name of Duty, they are fitter
to be pardoned than condemned, being the effects of a noble cause; and if his
highest Vice be his Obedience to his Father, what will then his Virtues prove?
The Princess too, not being engaged to any, may, with less reluctance, give her
self to Palisdes, whose Youth is so promising, that it is probable she may
establish her own felicity, by restoring that of the Armenians, and instead of
the giving a portion with her, you may receive a Kingdom by giving of her, (for
so I look upon it, as the state of your affairs now stand) in a word, when I
consider that we hear not so much as hopes from Anexander: when I see Celindus
with a powerful Army under your Walls; and when I came but even now from
hearing those within them (whom too you rely upon for your preservation)
threaten, nay swear to deliver you up to your Enemies, with execrations, which
give me as much horror to relate, as if they executed them; I cannot, though
with sadness above description, but give my humble opinion, that Celindus
should have his Request granted. Many of those that were guilty of Crasolis
Crimes, and of Fear, so fortified his opinion by diverse other arguments, and by
their concurrence, that I found Artabazus yielding. Great gods! who could then
relate the several disorders I was in? but alas they were nothing then, to what
they did increase unto, when I read upon my Princesses Face, the Indignation
which such Councils had raised in her; the sight of which made me address my
self to the King, in a posture that did something speak my resentment, and tell
him. Sir, That Celindus who has had the impudence to take up Arms against you,
should demand the Princess for Palisdes is not strange, but that any Loyal
Armenian should advise you to grant it, is that I cannot sufficiently wonder
at: the best construction I can make of those, who are of that opinion is, that
their fears exceed their judgments (may be their honesty.) Shall his defeats
be the steps to his ambition? and shall our having given them drown our
Courages? the gods forbid: But Sir, allow we were as low as these Men's spirits
are, which gave that counsel, what heavier yoke can we groan under, than that
we would now submit unto: shall our fears give that to Celindus which his
Courage never could purchase? and shall we by a preposterous apprehension, count
all those deliverances the gods have hitherto sent us, as so many Omens of our
ruin? or else Sir, have these Men seen any coldness in our courages, on which
they build their despair? if not; why do they so much wrong them? what, shall
Altezeera, who is a recompense too high for Virtue, be a sacrifice unto
Rebellion? O Sir! do not by such a recompense, invite your Subjects in the
future to revolt: what guilt can be so ugly that such a reward will not invite
us to embrace? let us not then by contributing unto the Crime, make our selves
worthy of the punishment; not let these men's timerousness persuade you to that,
which if once acted, the gods must never after protect you, unless they have
designed to appear as unjust as they would have you be to your self and the
Princess, who are more threatened by their fears, than our condition. But as I
was going to continue my discourse upon those subjects that related to the
suppressing of the mutinous people, and my Fathers particular, a Gentleman came
in and told Artabazus, there was one which wore Celindus Colors, being well
mounted, was escaped from the Camp, and though followed by five or six of the
Enemy, had recovered the Port, and begged earnestly to be presented to the
King, alleging that it was about affairs of high concernment, and which could
admit of no delay. Artabazus commanded forthwith, that he should be brought in.
The Man no sooner heard the permission, (for he waited at the door) than he
flung himself at the Kings feet, and told him, Sir, Anexander, after a thousand
difficulties, which nothing could render supportable, but the consideration of
him for whose sake he endured them, has brought an Army of 30000 Men into
Thospia, where a violent Fever, (envious of his glory) has flung him into his
Bed, and though his torments are very great, yet he resents none so fully as
those which proceed from the impossibility of his serving you in person: but
since his fatal sickness (as if all things had contributed to increase that
misfortune) there has happened so high a dispute betwixt Stratolis and
Falintus, who should have the happiness to command the Army for your relief;
that some sad events are thereby already fallen out, and hourly will be
augmented, unless Artavasdes (who they all beg for their General, during
Anexanders indisposition) be instantly sent to take the charge of the War, and
lest your Majesty should doubt the truth of what I now deliver, I shall humbly
desire you to peruse this Ticket, which being presented, we found 'twas signed
and written by Anexander, and only begged the King to credit whatsoever he
should relate. The joy we all received at the assurance of so powerful an
Army's being ready to relieve us, did mitigate our sorrow, at the hearing of
Anexanders not being able to Head it. But Artabazus and the Council, (to lose
no time) thought best to dispatch Celindus's Messenger without the honor of an
Answer, which they concluded was the fittest they could return his ambitious
desires, and to send me that night away, though the wicked Crasolis opposed the
latter, alleging, that the Town would doubtless be lost, if I were once out of
the Walls, that probably I might be taken or killed, endeavoring to pass the
Enemies Guards, that then, not only Artaxata, but the Army would lose its
Head, and chief Defender, and therefore he was of opinion, 'twere better to
send a Commission jointly to Stratolis and Falintus to command the Army, than
to expose all to so great a hazard. This advice was not given out of any
affection to the public, or my particular, but that he believed, by joining
of Stratolis and Falintus, there would arise such distractions, as Celindus
might enjoy the advantages of them. But (as I told you, this Council at that
present took not place, and to omit no opportunity, I went to take leave of the
King. and assured him, that within fourteen days, I would either make him
absolute Monarch again, or by my death evince that 'twould not be the defect of
my desire, but of my Power; and since the time was so short, I begged him to
give me an assurance, that he would not (before those days were efflux'd) admit
of any Treaty with Celindus. The King having satisfied my request, embraced me
very affectionately, and conjured me not to fail at the time appointed, lest
the people should force him to accept of those conditions, his Reason and
Inclination made him equally detest, which having faithfully promised, I went
to my Princesses Chamber, who not being able to conceal her grief, had
commanded all her servants out of the room, and lay upon a Bed, abandoning her
self so excessively to sorrow, that I surpised her in the greatest height of
hers, and told her, Madam, if I could admit any doubts of an ill success, where
your safty is concerned, so bad an Omen as your sadness is would infuse them
into me. To which she answered, I must confess, Artavasdes, that when I
consider the many dangers you must expose your self unto, and the many more
that you will, I find my Tears so just, that I esteem it a sin to redeem them,
neither can you believe the assurances I have given you of my affection to be
as real as indeed they are, without considering my grief, as a necessary
Tribute of my Love, and not an Omen of your ill success. My Princess (I
replied) your sadness could not but kill me, did I not look upon it as the
effect of so happy a cause, but pardon me if my zeal to you be so great, that I
even condemn the demonstrations of my own felicity, when they prove troublesome
to you. Alas, said Altezeera, what would you have me do? not to deplore your
absence, is inconsistent with my affection, and to do it, is prejudicial to
your contentment, but since it is impossible to suppress the first, at least by
a quick return, make the last cease, which can admit of no ease, during your
absence Madam (I replied) the gods shall be my witness; that I will neglect no
time, nor shall any thing but death hinder me above fourteen days from coming
to adore you at your feet: Celindus and his Army shall feel what fury possesses
me at this separation, and my their sufferings know, how dangerous it is to
oppose Artavasdes, when Altezeera's safety is the quarrel. But, said the
Princess (interrupting me) take heed you do not so much trust your courage, as
not to consult your judgment, and to mitigate that heat which may prove so
fatal to us both, remember that what Artavasdes suffers, Altezeera does, and as
you love her life, preserve your own. I should be too prolix my dear Artabanes,
should I tell you all the words that sad farewell furnished me with, I will
therefore hasten to a conclusion, and only let you know, that having kissed my
fair Princess hand, I took leave of her, and then of Amidor; to whom I left the
care of Artaxata, and what I valued infinitely above it, and having given a hot
alarm to every quarter of the Camp, but that through which I past, I arrived in
two days after at Thospia, where I found Anexander in much danger, by the
violence of his Fever, who haing commanded me to leave the care of him unto
the gods, and to employ all mine for the Kings deliverance, I forthwith
acquainted the Army with my Commission, who joyfully received me, and lest
delays might prove prejudicial, we marched with what expedition possibly could
be made, toward Artaxata, and the tenth day after my departure from thence, I
camped thirty Furlongs off Celindus, upon a Hill, within sight of the Besieged,
where having called a Council of War, by their consents, I sent a Trumpet to
him with this ensuing challenge.

ARTAVASDES to CELINDVS.
DId not your taking up of Arms against your King assure me, that you believe
there are no gods to punish wickedness; I should despair of your accepting a
pitched Battle for the ending of the War, lest terrified by the Divine Justice,
your guilt should weigh down your Sword: but your rebellion demonstrates, that
you believe no Deity but Power, and since your Courage is the best of your
Qualities; I should gladly receive an assurance, that to save many a thousand
lives, you would venture your own against me in a single combat. But whether by
Battle or Duel, I leave it to your choice, either of which shall be highly
acceptable, as an assured way to punish Celindus, by the hand of

ARTAVASDES.


CElindus having perused my Letter, thought fit to give me Battle, knowing that
his Army could have no Provisions but what they fought for, and that Artaxata
had so good a Garrison, and my Forces were so numerous, that if he defeated not
the one, or took the other, he must in a short while, be blockt up, and then
his party which follw'd his fortune, not him, would desert him; therefore
thinking my defeat would be more facile, than taking the Town by Storm, he sent
me this Answer;

CELINDVS to ARTAVASDES.
I Accept of the Battle, that the gods by your defeat may declare they are as
just, as you think me the contrary. To morrow by the Suns rising, I shall be in
the adjoining Plain, at the head of Fifty thousand Men, who are too greedy of
Honor to suffer me by a single Combat, to rob them of their share in the glory
of an entire Victory, which will be as certainly ours, as that you have an
Enemy of

CELINDUS.


THe Trumpet being returned with this pleasing Answer, I found that nothing but
the gaining of a Battle could more satisfy my Army, than the assurance of one,
which being suddenly to ensue, every one was employed in performing what was
fit for so considerable a day, which no sooner appeared, but both Armies marched
out of their several Camps, and being drawn up, expected only the signal to
begin the Fight: Celindus, who knew that his Fortune depended upon the gaining
or losing of that Field, had left no Forces to justify the ground he had won by
approaches, being assured, that if he were Conqueror, Artaxata, without the
formalities of a Siege, would be one of the first Fruits of his Victory; yet to
delude those of the Town, and to keep them from sallying, he left as many
Colors flying as were usually upon the Guards, with certain Men well mounted,
who had order (in case of a Sally, to run away with them unto their Army. A
little before the Battle, Celindus made a Speech to his Soldiers, and I to
animate mine, told them these few words. Friends, and Companions in Arms, I
speak unto you more out of custom than need; if I thought any thing could raise
your courages above that which nature has, I might represent unto you the
justice of the War, the glorious objects for whom you are now to decide it,
your Wives, your Families, and your Liberties, who all expect their settlement
from your Swords: There is something too above all this, which I might mention
(for these must dye with you, sometimes before you) it is Honor, which is
eternal, and will make your memories precious to posterity, when other things
will be forgotten, and turned into dust. But (my generous Friends) I see so
noble a resolution in every one, that I will no longer detain you from that
Victory, which your Cause and Looks assure me of. These words being finished, I
advanced with the right wing of my Horse, and so vigorously charged the Enemies
left, that we instantly routed them, and had an Execution as bloody as their
crimes deserved: But Celindus, who led the right wing of his Army, wherein he
had placed the gallantest of his Cavalry, fell so vigorously upon Stratolis,
who commanded my left, that after a small resistance ( Stratolis being killed)
Celindus made many others follow his fate, to redress which disorder, I left
some few Troops to chase the scattered Rebels, and rallying the rest, ran to
the rescue of my Friends, whom Celindus on my approach forsook, and having
drawn up a second time, and learnt that it was I that came to fight with him;
he advanced some hundred paces from his Body, and calling me out by name, told
me, It Is now Artavasdes that I shall satisfy both your desires, I have yielded
to a Battle, at the requests of my friends, who would not permit me to ingross
that honor to my self, which by their valors, they were confident would be
largely distributed amongst them: and now I seek a single combat to please my
own inclination, to demand satisfaction for Tuminius his Blood, and your
insolent challenge. We were both so earnest to lose no time, that we spent no
more in words, but began a Duel, in which the gods so favored the justice of
my Sword, that Celindus fell by it; but those Horse which were spectators of
his death, so resolutely endeavored to revenge it, that it cost us dear before
we could reduce them to what their valors merited, but not the quarrel in
which they employed them. Whilst these things were thus acting, Phanasder and
Falintus, who commanded the Foot of both Armies, had not been idle: but
Falintus, who was overpowered, after a vituous resistance, was taken by
Phanasder, who, to shelter him from the fury of his Soldiers, had covered him
with his own Body, and received some wounds that were designed for his
prisoner. Evaxes, after Falintus's misfortune, still disputed the victory,
though his resistance proceeded more from his resolution than his numbers,
which were so diminished, that he was just upon the point of being conquered,
when a Body of about Fourteen hundred Horse, and Four thousand Foot sallied out
of Artaxata, and so opportunely on the Enemy, that it restored the courage of
our fainting friends. Gods! what prodigies of Valor did I see their Leader
act: He pierced the thickest Squadrons like Lightning, and, in a word, so
changed the face of affairs, that Phanasder, from conquering began to defend
himself; to effect which, he had gotten near Eight thousand of those who had
most resolution, and having cast them into a square Body, resolved to ^ell his
Life so dearly, that the Purchasers should repent the bargain. In this posture
stood affairs when I came from defeating Celindus with nine thousand Horse, and
all the Foot I could possibly rally, I confess, it pitty'd me to see so many
Armenians exposed to death, whose courages deserved a fortune as good, as the
condition they were then in, was the contrary, I therefore commanded all the
Soldiers of my Army to draw off, that I might endeavor to save their
Contrymen. So pleasing an Injunction, obtained a ready obedience, and
advancing near enough to be heard, I represented to them, that the care I had
to make my Victory as little stained with Blood, as the necessity of it would
permit, made me offer them in Artabazus name, a general Pardon, so they would
lay down Arms, and engage, by their future Loyalty, to efface their present
want of it. They all answered me, that they had vowed their Lives and Fortunes
to Phanasder, and what he thought good, they would submit unto. I then desired
to speak with him, which he no sooner understood, than he came out unto me, all
hideous with Blood, and asked me what it was I would have. I told him, 'twas
his, and the safety of those few the Sword had spared; That he had practiced so
much gallantry to Falintus, that it made me earnest to preserve the posessior
of it; and that the condition he was in, was so unfit for resistance, that the
acting of his destruction, was easier than the desire of it. I am, said
Phanasder (interrupting me) as much above your Power, as your Threatening, for
the gods which have been so cruel, have yet left me a Heart to desire death,
and a Sword to act; for that which I have done to Falintus, 'twas the self-same
honor guided me unto it, which makes me hate to owe my life unto my Enemy. How
willingly (said I) would I change that name, and be esteemed your Friend? to
purchase it, I will confess, Fortune, and your want of it, reduced you to what
you are. I will engage my self to obtain for you, and those under you, an Act
of Oblivion from the King, and I will only beg that you will confer your
friendship on me, which I will value at a higher rate than all the other Glory
I shall derive from this days success. It Is a strange thing how much civility
works on a generous Mind; what the advantage I had over him, nor the fear of
death cold act, my kindness did, which proved so prevalent, that flinging away
his Sword, he came to me, and embracing me, said; It Is now indeed Artavasdes,
that I am vanquished. Your goodness makes me confess, that which your Sword, nor
all the World besides could have persuaded me to. I should be now as unjust as
you are generous; did I not with joy embrace a Friendship, which I will ever
value above all things, but my Honor. After a thousand Embraces, and
Assurances of an Eternal Friendship, Phanasder led me to the relics of his
Army, and commanded them to fling their Arms down at my Feet, to whom he said,
they owed their lives, and many other expressions of a quality, too tedious to
be related. Things being brought to this happy period, I left my Army in the
Field, in which they had gained so much Glory, and taking Phanasder, and some
twenty of my intimatest Friends, I gallopt to Artaxata, to give Altezeera and
the King an account of our success, and to receive their Orders; when we came
to the Gates I found them shut, and having told the Guards who I was, they
instantly admitted me, and informed me, the King and the Princess were
Sacrificing for the Armies success: I went directly thither, and lighting at
the door, all armed, sprinkled with Blood, gave so hot an Alarm to the people,
that they began with hideous cries, to fly out of the Temple, imagining we were
Celindus's Soldiers, who having got the Battle, were come to seize upon the
King, and that which more confirmed them in their fears, was the sight of
Phanasder, whose Face, (by the loss of his Helmet) was uncovered, and the great
shouts those of the Garrison made when they were informed, by some that came
along with me, of our Victory. Artabazus all the while I was coming toward
him, was moveless as a Statue; but the fair Altezeera, no sooner saw me tread
upon the first steps of the Altar, but drawing forth a Poniard, which she had
concealed for a last remedy, was lifting up her hand to have plunged it into
her Breast: but observing her design, I prevented it by seizing that cruel
weapon, and pulling off my Halmet; gods! what a sudden alteration did that
action cause? it was so great, that the King, Altezeera, and all the company
hearing at the same time of Celindus's his defeat, and death, did not then
relish that happiness with so high a contentment, as they said it deserved. But
at last their joy having dissipated those Clouds, which fear had ingender'd,
their contentment was proportionate to the change. Artabazus gave me all the
testimonies of his favor he was capable of, but Altezeera did in such obliging
terms, express her contentment and affection, that I was ravished in the
contemplation of both. But after I had given the King and my fair Princess an
Account of our success, I presented Phanasder unto Artabazus, and having
acquainted him with my Engagements, and magnified his Gallantry, I not only
obtained what I had promised to him and his, but also Celindus his Government
for him. That which made me so intent on Phanasders advantage, was the high
opinion I had conceived of him, and the confidence I had, that it was grounded
on a proportionate Justice. But amongst all those friends which came to
congratulate my Victory, I mist my dear Amidor, and inquiring the cause of it,
I learned, that the Forces which had sallied out of the Town, were under his
Command, that 'twas he had done such miracles, and that probably having
followed the execution somewhat vigorously, he was not returned to the Camp
before my departure from it. I rested satisfied therewith, and received the
Kings Orders to quarter about Artaxata, till he saw whether those Towns which
had declared for Celindus, would return to their Loyalty without being forced
unto it: And least any disorder might happen in the Army by my absence, I was
going thither, when (alas) I met my poor Brother, mortally wounded, carrying by
to his Lodging: so sad an object soon clouded all my joy, and made me return
with him, to know what I might expect of his fate. The ablest Surgeons being
sent for, searched his wounds, and found they were incurable for their Art. But
the generous Amidor perceiving by their looks, our fears, seemed to be as full
of satisfaction, as we were really the contrary, and having conjured the
Chirugeons to deal clearly with him, whether there were any likelihood of
recovery, he received from them a sad Negative. Then turning toward Lindesia,
(who abandoned her self to an excessive Grief) he begged her not to be more
afflicted for his death, than he was for to dye; That it being a Tribute,
humane nature was to pay, he was happy that it was in so good and glorious a
Cause. Then desiring all those that were in the room to leave it, except
Altezeera (who was come to visit him) and I, he addressed himself to us with an
accent capable to inspire pity into a fury, and told us. Since my own weakness,
as well as the Surgeons judgment, assure me I must dye, I have begged this
opportunity to reveal a secret to you both, which no torment should have made
me disclose, and which I am confident my Actions never did. Know then, to
silence your sorrow, that these mortal wounds are the effects of my desire, and
not my ill fortune, for it was necessary for your quiet, as well as mine, that
I should receive them, since I could not resist the inevitable charms of
Altezeera's Beauty: start not, Artavasdes, for by that time I have finished my
discourse, you shall have more cause to pity than condemn me: the highest
Powers shall bear me witness, how much I did resist this criminal passion, how
it forced, not found an admittance, and when 'twas gotten in, how I purchased
its silence by my torments; yet at last, finding it would be conqueror, I
resolved to end my pain by death, which I sought so many several ways, that it
must have been unjust, had I not found it out. You weep, fair Princess, is it
for sorrow, that by dying, I shall be so soon freed from those sufferings my
Crime deserves? the compassionate Altezeera, who all this while did melt away
in Tears, perceiving he was silent, in expectation of her Answer, told him,
alas Amidor, what actions have I ever committed, that you should judge me
guilty of so high a cruelty? 'Twere more charitable, as well as just, to
attribute these demonstrations of my grief, unto my pity, for your condition,
which so abundantly deserves it. Why then Madam (replied Amidor) you can pity
me, after the knowledge of my fault? Great gods! to what misery do you reduce
me? thus to convert that which should be my greatest joy, into my greatest
torment, and thereby render any satisfaction at my death as impossible, as I do
ill deserve it; since not to receive her pardon, makes my death as full of
horrors, as the cause of it is of Beauties; and to obtain it, makes my crime as
great, as the perfection against which I have committed it. Ah Madam, dry up
those precious drops, or else shed them to wash away my guilt, for certainly
they are powerful enough to perform whatsoever you employ them for; And you my
dear Brother, (addressing himself to me) can you have so much goodness to
forgive your Rival, when 'twas not in his power to avoid that fatal Name? Look
upon those bright Eyes, which certainly will at the same time that they
acquaint you with my fault, acquaint you with the necessity of it, and obtain
your pardon for it. You that know so well their influence, must withal, rather
pity than condemn my submission to it. But I find death seizing on me; farewell
happy Lovers, may Joys, such as Raptures never reached, wait on your Flames,
may every thing contribute to make you as contented as I shall dye, having
obtained your forgiveness, which I beg with Tears; and if they find you
inexorable, I will with Blood -- Alas Amidor (I cried out) would it were as
absolutely in my Power to recover, as it is in my Will to forgive thee. Ah (said
Amidor) talk not of recovery, I would rather be my own Executioner, than by
living interrupt so pure a Passion; once again farewell, my summons is so short,
I shall have only time to beg you, never to think upon Amidor, clothed in his
ambitious desires of possessing so Divine a Beauty, nor with his unavoidable
infidelity to his Friend and Brother; But when you consider him, let it be in
his penance for his crimes, and let that voluntary death he has so resolutely
exposed himself unto, obtain that mercy for him, which he implores with his
last breath; and so indeed it was, for having with one hand, taken the
Princesses, and kissed it, and with the other embraced me, his fair Soul fled
away, and left its noble dwelling in our Arms. Who can repeat the sad words so
great a loss extorted from us, which really we found of such a quality, that we
despaired to find a cure even from time. The King' and all those that were not
enemies to virtue, did manifest a resembling sorrow, for his Youth was as
promising as it was unfortunate. Here (said Artabanes to Callimachus)
Artavasdes could not resfrain shedding some Tears, and perceiving I took notice
of it; he begged my Pardon for so just an effeminacy, and then hastened to a
conclusion in these words; Phanasder, who did now without reserve, embrace the
Kings interest, was so prevalent with the revolted Towns, that Armauria,
Artemita, and Tygranocerta it self, came upon their knees, and yielded up their
Keys and Lives to the Kings Mercy, and in a word all the upper Armenia, from
Niphates, did the like. But in the lower Armenia, Zenaxtus (a Brother of
Celindus's) kept entire the Provinces of Aerethica and Horzen, and the Towns of
Satala, and Nicapolis, who for all Artabazus threatenings and promises, would
not lay down Arms, but was preparing a vast Army to revenge his Brothers death,
and to act his Brothers ambition: which to effect, he sent to Arsaces, to
invade the higher Armenia, and assured him of a considerable Party appearing
for him as soon as he should pass the River Tygris, and offered him all the
Upper Armenia for his share, so that he might have the Lower for his own, which
nevertheless he would do homage for. You know, my dear friend, that this
overture was so listened unto by your King, that instantly he raised that great
Army which defeated ours, more by our valor, than by those that followed you.
Artabazus had some intelligence of Arsaces intentions, and to prevent them,
thought fit to raise an Army, and carry the War into your Country, to keep his
own quiet, at least, the Upper part of Armenia, and having given the Command of
a numerous one to Anexander, who was perfectly recovered, and ordered him to
suppress Zenaxtus, he laid siege to Myramnes, where you came to raise it, and
where I had the honor to become your Prisoner, which should be as pleasing to
me as my Liberty, did not my passion for Altezeera, make all things that banish
me from her, insupportable.

Thus the gallant Artavasdes finished his story, and gave me by it, as much
reason, as I had formerly inclination to love him. After some few expressions
of my esteem, both of his Passion and Virtue, I told him, it is with much
difficulty, (generous Prince) that I condemn the cruelty of my King, being it
furnishes me with an occasion to serve you; neither can you doubt, but I am
more a friend to your satisfaction than my own, when I deprive my self of so
great a blessing as your company, to restore you to the fair Altezeera's. Your
Civility (replied Artavasdes) is so obliging, that I must think any thing a
misery, that forces me from being near the Possessor of it; and do therefore as
much resent Arsaces injustice out of that consideration, as commend my good
Fortune, for making it the means of sending me to my Princess. After a Million
of inviolable Vows of Friendship, Rysolis came in, to whose immediate care I
recommended Artavasdes, Whom I will^ now leave returning to his happiness, and
continue the Relation of what divested me of mine.

The good Callimachus was so earnest in his intention, that he would not so
much as, by one word, give him the least interruption; which Artabanes
perceiving, he proceeded in the History of his own Life in these terms.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK III.
I Left off the last night in so glorious a p^osperity, that it was hardly
capable of accession, but by being incapable of Diminution; but alas, all those
morning glories were soon clouded: for Parthenissa was so perfect, that whereas
in other Women, Fancy is the Rule for Beauty, in her, Judgment was; and where
there were Eyes to see her, there was a Heart to adore her. In the beginning of
my Fortunes, I acquainted you with a Prince of the Parthians, called Surena,
whose Person, Extraction, and Parts, rendered him very considerable. This
Gentleman one day, saw the fair Parthenissa, and consequently fell in love with
her (for that was an unsever'd effect of seeing her) and as all things
naturally desire their satisfaction, and preservation, so the wound which those
fair eyes had made (though unvoluntarily) was too dangerous to delay the cure;
he found, after a long debate, that the Fire was too pleasing to be quenched,
that the end was so inviting, the way could not be the contrary, although none
could heal the wound but she that made it; and to say truth, my Rival had too
violent a flame to conceal it long, and thought it was to be unjust unto
himself, to languish without acquainting the Author of his Torments with them,
who perhaps, might be as willing to ease him, as he was apprehensive of the
contrary. This resolution once assumed, he conveys a Letter one evening into
Parthenissa's Night-cloaths (but by what Art I could not then imagine)
pre-supposing she would perceive it there, and so out of curiosity read it.
That which made Surena hasten this Essay, was, That the next morning Lindadory
being to Hunt a wild Bore, to sacrifice it to Ceres, as an Annual Duty, and
having learnt Parthenissa would accompany her, he imagined, that during the
Chase, he might discover what effect his Letter had produced; for not having
the happiness to be known to her, he could take no just pretense, to be
informed of it at her own house.

The morning destined for Hunting being come, and she intending to honor my
Sister with her company, I went to wait upon her to Court, and coming something
early, I found her not dressed; it happened too, that when I came in, Zianthe,
that waited on Parthenissa, and who was the only Confident in her Amors, was
gone out about some occasion; and my Princess uncovering her Night-Linnen, I
perceived Surena's Letter, but not knowing what it was, I told her (Laughing) I
see Madam, you have a Servant, besides Artabanes, that dares declare he adores
you; for by the place you think fit to give that Paper, I cannot but imagine
it is sent from some body that has a Passion for you. Parthenissa, who thought
it had been some Verses I had made, and hidden there purposely, told me,
smiling, I renounce all Servants but Artabanes, and to show you I am real in
what I say, I give you leave to unseal the Letter, and conjure you to read it
aloud. And I, conceiving it had been somewhat of Raillery opened it, and read
these ensuing words. SVRENA to the Princess PARTHENISSA.
(...) you knew how tedious, and how vast my sufferings have been before I took
this confidence of declaring them, you would rather admire so long a silence,
than condemn me now for breaking it: neither would I have ever disclosed my
Flame, but have died silently, admiring you, had I not thought this Letter a
lesser crime, than by an unlicens'd death, to have deprived you of your
passionatest Servant. But, Madam, my Reprieve is but short; for if you now
reject the faithfullest Heart that ever Love did yet inspire, I shall receive
it as your Commands, to decline adoring you, which since I cannot whilst I
live, I am resolved by death, to obey you, which I shall embrace with joy, if
it can produce any in the fair Parthenissa.




O gods! if Thunder had fallen at my feet, my amazement had been far short of
what it was at the ending of this Letter, and if silence had been a sign of
guilt, I might have thought Parthenissa capable of it: For my part I knew not
what to say, to suspect her constancy was a crime too great to enter into my
thoughts, and how that Letter was brought in the place I found it, I could as
little imagine, but lest my silence might breed in her, a sinister opinion of
my belief, I told her. Madam, I hope this experiment will make you acknowledge,
that my saying, I had as many Rivals, as beholders of you, was rather a Truth
than any thing else. I must confess, she answered, I had rather believed you
than have had this witness brought to convince me; but that Truth cannot be
greater than my admiration, how this Letter came hither, unless for your
diversion you writ it your self, and fixed a name to it, which I believe as
little dreams of Love for me, as I do to confer mine on him: And therefore, I
beseech you Artabanes, rid me of the trouble I am in, by telling me the truth.
Madam (I replied) by the respect I owe you, I neither writ the Letter, nor ever
saw it till now, but I do know the Hand to be Surena's. Upon this assurance, I
saw her put on a more serious countenance, and having continued silent a while,
she told me, I was, till now, confident, Artabanes, that you should need no
other way to reap my Heart, than by my Actions: but now I fear, to continue me
in your good opinion, I must make use of Vows, and consequently owe that to
your goodness, which I assured to my self always to obtain from your Justice.
Therefore I swear by all that is most holy, and by our endless Passions, I
never knew that Surena loved me, nor can fancy how this Letter came to my
hands; besides these Protestations, you may imagine, if I had had the
perfidious design of receiving any addresses but yours, I would never have
disclosed it my self. I had not the patience to hear her further, and begging
her pardon for it, I replied, Ah Madam, what do you mean, you could not use me
thus, but by esteeming me guilty of believing you unconstant; for the
punishment you now impose on me, is too great for any other crime: when you
would raise my Faith to credit any thing you speak, if you make use of Vows, or
imagine there can be a higher reason to induce my belief, than your commanding
it, you do me as great an injury, as I should do your Virtue, or my own
Felicity, could I think you capable of change; neither can I be more certain
that your eyes conquer whosoever they look upon, than I am, that your generous
Mind despises every Victory, but that over the too too happy Artabanes. Truly
(said she) if there be an obligation in doing Justice, I now received one from
you, and must increase the score, by beseeching your advice, how to suppress
this growing flame, with such secrecy, that none may know it lived, but we
that know it is dead; for if I do not answer him, he may feed himself with hope;
and if I do, I then acquaint him that I know his Passion, and though my return
be never so cold, he may impute it to a wrong cause, and so that which we elect
for the extinction of his Passion, may prove the nouriture. As I was about to
answer her, Zianthe came in, of whom Parthenissa asked very strictly, how that
Letter came, where 'twas found, who seemed to wonder at the accident, as much
as we, and upon her assurance of endeavoring to discover the Actor, we gave
over any further enquiry of it, and applied our selves, how to remedy the
business, and to ease the fair Parthenissa of it; I undertook so to manage this
new Love, as I would free her from any future trouble by it. Zianthe, who
imagined I would elect that course, which all Rivals use, to rid themselves of
their competitors, presently told her softly, that she foresaw I would decide
this difference by a Duel, which could not but be fatal to her, which soever
way Fortune inclined: For if Artabanes proved victorious, the strict
inhibitions the King had so often reiterated against Duels (though it were his
own Son that fought them) and the powerful prosecution of Surenas's Friends,
will, if he escape not the hands of Justice, assuredly bring his Head upon the
Scaffold; or if he do, then a perpetual banishment will inevitably follow, and
you must not expect, that his being the first Prince of the Blood, will be any
Title to hope for a sparing of his; on the other side, if Surena's Sword prove
victorious, you cannot any way fancy the greatness of your grief, but by
comparing it to that of your loss, and which soever way the chance does fall,
you must come upon the Stage, and then you are at the mercy of any that will
blemish your Reputation, which though unjustly taxed, is of so pure a tincture,
the stain will never be effaced. These reasons of Zianthe's, and many others of
the like quality, were so prevalent with Parthenissa, that she came to me, and
conjured me by the strictest ties she could invent, not to take any notice to
Surena of his Letter, which if I did, she would esteem it as an argument I
suspected her constancy needed my help, and she ambition'd I should derive the
entire possession of her Affection, only from Her, and not from my Sword:
Besides (she continued) what greater punishment can you inflict upon your
Rival, than to see him denied what you so absolutely possess; and if his
Perseverance be great, my Rigor shall not be inferior to it, which will render
him an object fitter for pity, than your hatred. Many other reasons she
alleged, and after all she would not quit her Chamber, till I had faithfully
promised to obey her. Immediately after we went to prosecute our intended
sport. That day Surena seemed to accompany the Prince Phraates, but it was
indeed, to wait an occasion, to know what effect his Letter had produced. The
assurance I had in Parthenissa's Virtue and Affection, made me further all I
could, my Rivals design, that she might find my confidence was more in her,
than in my self. But I easily saw, that Surena did not more endeavor to meet
her, than she to avoid him, yet at last in a narrow lane, where 'twas
impossible to do so any longer, I saw him fall into discourse with her, but
being at too great a distance, I could not hear it, yet I perceived by some
passionate gestures, he was very earnest in what he said, but after a quarter
of an hours time, the company parted them, and I easily read in his looks his
success. The Sun by his declining, warned the Hunters to retire, and
Parthenissa, accompanying my Sister to her Lodgings, begged her, that we might
be private, and then having acquainted her with my Rivals Letter, she told me,
You remember Artabanes, the long narrow lane we rid through, it was there where
Surena overtook me, and if he derived any pleasure from his entertainment, he
owed it not to my inclination, but my necessity. After a few indifferent
discourses, he told me, with some disorder, I perceive, Madam, by your shunning
of me, that my Letter, which declared my Passion, is fallen into your hands,
and I now find my apprehensions were not unjustly grounded. Sir, (said I) I
must confess this morning I found a Letter in my Chamber, which I burnt, if it
were, as you say, a declaration of your passion, would that were also reduced
to that nothing the Paper is. Ah Madam (he replied) can you be so resembling to
the gods in Beauty, and not in disposition? for they are never offended with a
Heart which does adore them with that devotion, which mine does you: if it be a
crime for me to love you, then it is a sin for you to be so lovely: and if my
Flame be an offense, you must quarrel with your perfections, which are the
causes of it. If your Passion (I replied) be so great as you say it is, I must
then believe your imagination, not your judgment, attributes those perfections
to me which has raised it, for Beauty being but Fancy, you may persuade those,
which otherwise would tax your choice, that you pereive as many perfections in
me, as I know I want, but lest your affection may prove a deceitful optic, my
Charity shall put you in the right way, which is to decline your addresses to
me, for besides my great want of merit, I am as rigid as the perfectest of my
Sex, therefore, I beseech you, owe this cure to your Reason, and not to Time.
Madam (he answered) it is Reason gave the wound, and neither Time nor your
Disdain, shall ever make me alter the resolution I have so justly assumed, you
may as easily hope to separate Light from the Sun, as my Heart from that
Passion which possesses it: no, fair Parthenissa, I am resolved, if I cannot be
Loves Favorite, I will be his Martyr, and if your Scorns cannot extinguish my
Desires, the coldness of the Grave shall never triumph over them, but the gods
will preserve so pure a Flame a live, to be a pattern for future Lovers to
imitate. Sir, (said I) so much affection deserves all that I can return, which
is my Friendship, and that again conjures you not to cast away so noble a
Passion on one that must be necessarily ungrateful, for that which you desire I
have given to another, and were it in my Power to recall it, it is not in my
Will. I hope this will show you with how much justice I entreat you not to
engage your self in so ruinous a design, for should I now confer on you my
Love, and you receive it, your indiscretion will be as great as you would
persuade me your passion is, for my constancy, (the cause of your contentment)
would be always the occasion of your fear. Ah Madam (he replied) would to the
gods you were but yet pleased to bless me with your Affection, for then the joy
would be so absolute, that I should only have the Power to contemplate it, and
not how I came to the fruition of it. But Madam, I am too bold to hope for any
pleasing answer, till my Services assure the vastness of my Passion. I bless
this hour, that gave me opportunity of telling you of it, and that your Rigor
cannot be greater than my perseverance. Thereupon (without sta^ing for an
answer) he went away; But I impute those words (she continued) to the first
flame of Love, which commonly is the most violent: For my part, I am resolved
to wear so much coldness on those actions which relate to him, that if he have
that spirit men believe, I am confident 'twill change his love into resentment.
Madam (my sister replied) I foresee many sad accidents will oppose your loves,
if by a speedy overture unto your friends you do not consummate a Nuptial; What
should divert you from that election? Your Flames are too virtuous and too just
not to be owned; and being so, who will oppose them; this declaration will
silence all Rivals growing Loves, and make your happiness as sure as 'twill be
great. Ah Sister (I answered) it is true, our Passions are so pure, they know
not a comparison; but yet my Father (whose commands I received last night)
will, I am fearful, resist this vast felicity; for as soon as I had left you,
he sent for me to wait on him, which I did, and after he had walked two or
three turns without speaking one word, he at last told me: Artabanes, The gods
having given me the blessings of a son, I have found so high an one in it, that
I shall enjoin you to endeavor to partake of the like contentment; I should
think my death as full of contentment as my life has been of honor, could I see
you matched in a Family that might assure me you should have a successor worthy
of ours: To effect this has been long my care, and never till now could
accomplish it: It is but lately I had a motion made me, which I much approve;
it is the Princess Zephalinda (Surena's Sister) whose Virtues, Beauty, Person,
and Blood, assures me you will think your self highly satisfied with such a
Marriage, at least I shall be. I must confess this declaration did infinitely
surprise me; but least he should guess the true cause of my astonishment, I
told him: In the first place Sir, as I cannot but return my humble thanks for
your care, so I must not but acquaint you, that I am not ignorant of how high a
concernment Marriage is, being happiness or misery, till death dissolves the
knot; and since Felicity is only opinion, there is none can prescribe positive
rules for the making it; but every man must be his own judge; contentment
something resembling men's tastes; that which is pleasing to one, to another may
be poison. The consequence being so great, and the choice not to be made by
Proxy, I shall beseech you give me leave to learn whether that Princess be
possessor of such perfectious as may assure me of such happiness: this nothing
but time can do; and if she appears not such to me as she does to you, I will
then acquaint you with it, and hope you will not compel me to make her and my
self miserable. As I am (said he) Artabanes indulgent to you, so I expect that
you be obedient unto me; and then he withdrew himself into his Closet. This was
the substance of his proposal, and my return to it, for I did not hold it fit
to acquaint him with my Passion till first we had advised together: for I
perceived by his last words how his inclination stood, and I too well knew how
difficult he is to be removed when he has once taken up a resolution not to be
so. Then I besought Parthenissa to honor me with her advice, since I had put
all that was dear unto me to her ordering. To which she told me. Moneses humor
(which I am absolutely ignorant of) being the chief thing in this affair, by
which we are to be guided, makes me as unfit to advise; as your knowledge of it
renders you most capable. Madam, (I replied) that my Father is resolved to be
obeyed is not more certain, than that I am determined the contrary, for in this
case obedience is a crime, so that the end being now resolved, we have nothing
to advise upon but the means that may best conduce unto it. Which in my opinion
Madam (said Lindadory) is, that Artabanes, make some seeming addresses to
Zephalinda (for Moneses is sooner vanquished by yielding than resistance) and
doubtless she cannot be so perfect (especially being compared with the fair
Parthenissa) but he may find some defect in her person or humor, which may
make his declining her appear an effect of his judgment, not disobedience: for
if my Father find his refusal of serving her, roceeds from his being possessed
with a Passion for another, he will impute my Brothers deserting Zephalinda to
his Pre-ingagement; and then I am so well acquainted with his disposition, that
it will be impossible to alter it. Thus by concealing your Flames a little
longer, you may attain that happiness which by a speedy declaring of them, may
receive many obstructions, if not an absolute ruin. Madam (said Parthenissa to
Lindadory) I much apprehend if Artabanes can have no other inducements to
obtain Moneses's permission of declining Zephalinda, and making his addresses
to me, than her imperfections, and my having none, that the argument may be
justly reverted by your Father, who may more aptly apply that to Zephalinda,
which your goodness confers on me. My Princess (I replied) there could be no
greater joy befall me than that Moneses were to consider both with the eyes of
justice, and that I were to possess his election, you will then quickly find
how injurious to your self modesty has been, and how vast a felicity his
judgment will confer on me. I have (said Parthenissa) so good an opinion of
yours, that I will banish those apprehensions the knowledge of my own defects
do raise in me; and they being suppressed, I have nothing to say against the fair
Lindadory's advice. It Is not enough (I replied) that you have nothing to say
against it, but if you will have it observed (Madam) you must strictly enjoin
it me, for I have so great a reluctance to that action, that it must be some
powerful Charm as your Commands which can make me undertake it. Since (replied
Parthenissa) the performance is so necessary, and that you assure me the only
means that must enable you to do it, is my Commands, I do enjoin you it, but my
affections make me (I fear) uncharitable to Zephalinda, by wishing, you may
quickly find as many defects in her, as I desire perfections to merit your
esteem. Madam (I replied) the first of your wishes is as unnecessary as the
last; for when Zephalinda is to be paralelled to you, it would be as difficult
to find no imperfections in her, as to find any in you. Having taken this
resolution, I began to apply my self to put it in practice; and that which gave
me some probability of its success was, that Zephalinda had as much aversion to
Love, as Beauty to create it. The first addresses I made her, were received
with a coldness proportionate to her practice and my desires. But I must
confess, I contributed as much as I could to it, and apprehended nothing so
much, as that which most men in Parthia would have esteemed their highest
Felicity. I know not whether that which I intended as the means to want her
affection, procured it: for I have been told, that some Women, where they find
but an indifferency, make it their design to bring it to an extreme; and so
men's coldness does often engender their Flame: But whatsoever was the cause, I
began too soon to perceive that which I too much feared; and knowing now she
once honored me with her affection, it would be difficult if not impossible any
longer to conceal mine; I resolved forthwith to acquaint Parthenissa with it,
who I found exceedingly satisfied with the ingenuity of my proceeding, and by
the greatness of her contentment for an action she could but in justice expect;
I somewhat believed she had a diffidence, whether that which was begun as a
pretense, were not turned into a reality; having once taken up this opinion, I
cast out some words which might give her a rise to conceive it, and she who had
as piercing an inspection as any Creature was capable of, soon conceived my
suspicions, and as readily acknowledged the justice of them, but with words so
aptly appropriated to her design, that she made that little jealousy the
highest obligation she could place on me, as proceeding from a proportionate
Passion: and to say truth, Zephalinda was capable of shaking a constancy less
firm than mine; for besides her Beanty, which was fitter for wonder than
description, she had a freeness and a grace in all her action, peculiar to
herself, and surpast by none but Parthenissa; her wit and virtue were
resembling unto all her other qualities, and (in a word) she enjoyed so many
perfections, that had I not been prepossest with a former Passion, I had
esteemed hers as great a happiness as I then thought it a misfortune. But
perceiving by Parthenissa's words, that she had contracted some little
diffidence of me, and knowing that where there is once a jealousy, every thing
contributes to the growth of it; I told her, Madam, since I find, that there
may be an ill construction made of that which I undertook but by your commands,
I am resolved with your permission (which I humbly beg) to take away all
occasion of such a misfortune; for being innocent I would not look like guilty.
The way, Madam, which I would propound, is, freely to acquaint Zephalinda with
our Passions; and truly I have discovered so much virtue and discretion in her
since my feigned addresses, that my duty to them, if not you, would confine me
to this; and which proceeding will not only take off her resentment for what
is past, but invite her assistance in the future, and that in my opinion can in
no way be so effectually done, as by obtaining from her to use me with a
disdain so unsufferable that my declining her may appear as just to my Father
as it will be necessary to me. Parthenissa would not grant my desire, till
first she had received reiterated assurances from me, that I made it, not to
satisfy her suspicion, which my expressions had not done sufficiently, but as
I held it a justice to Zephalinda, and the best way in order to our affairs.
This was no sooner fixed upon, than I applied my self to out an opportunity to
act it: and not many days after, I lighted upon one, such as I desired; for
going to wait upon Zephalinda, I found her alone in her Closet, where (having
shut the door) I flung my self at her feet, and told her, Madam, I know not
with what face I shall disclose a secret to you, neither do I well know how I
can longer conceal it: Your goodness makes me desire to tell it, and the same
goodness makes me a ashamed to do so; but since persevering in my crime, will
make the mercy I beg of you an injustice, I will no longer conceal it. It Is
Madam, though I have made my addresses unto you, I have given my heart and
liberty to Parthenissa; I was forced to this crime to obey Moneses, and
disguise a Passion as great as the offense by which I did so; but that which
somewhat extenuates my sin is, that as soon as I had the honor to know you, I
made my self known unto you, and as a testimony of the high and just opinion I
have of your virtue, the same instant in which I declared I have injured you, I
trust you with the power to punish it; my ignorance of you made me commit my
crime, and my knowledge of you makes my penance, which I am confident is more
severe than your justice can be. The gods shall bear me witness, had I not been
preingag'd, I should have implored the joy of your affection with raptures as
worthy the felicity, and I do ill deserve it; but since it was otherwise
destined, give me leave to conjure you to convert your affection into
friendship; I am capable of that, though not worthy of it; and since I cannot
give you the first place in my heart, permit me to give you an equal one in my
esteem: This Madam is the condition, and this is the request of the criminal
Artabanes; who can hardly have the confidence to beg your pardon, because he
knows himself unworthy of it; and having so highly wronged your goodness, must
not expect that for his satisfaction you will wrong your justice. Though I know
this discourse did trouble her, yet she concealed hers with so much art, that I
almost doubted what I was certain of; but judging by my silence that I expected
an answer, (...) assured me, she would not give i^ till I were risen, in which
I obeyed her, and then she told me, That you have obtained a Mistress,
Artaban^^, more worthy of you than I am, shall always be my satisfaction, and
not my trouble; if I have received your counterfeit Flame, 'twas because you
assured me it would create your felicity; and if I paid you a real one, 'twas
a duty to your merit; but since I loved you more than my self, and that the
declining of my affection will be more pleasing than the continuance; the same
consideration which made me give it you, will reduce me to recall it, yet I
could wish you had never raised it, or that you had applied some other cure for
its suppression; but I hope I shall be so much Mistress of my inclinations, as
if they have an existence, yet they shall be invisible; and if they must
trouble any, it shall be Zephalinda only, Who believing your professions
before her no title to them, too soon entertained a hope of that, which 'twere
an injustice to confer upon her: for that friendship which you beg, it shall be
paid you, with a constancy and zeal worthy the object; and I will value yours
at so high a rate, that I shall esteem it almost a sufficient reparation for
that pleasing happiness you have robbed me of. Ah! Madam (I replied) can you so
soon pardon, and so soon oblige? Will you then allow no interval between my
fault and your reward? If any thing could make me think my being Parthenissa's
misfortune this would; but my condition is such, that the breath I should spend
in the expressions of my gratitude, I must employ in begging you to increase
the causes of it; it is Madam, that you would henceforth use me in public with
your highest scorn; This my unworthiness and your resentment may quickly lead
you to; and upon this depends my future joy; but if you should entertain me so
in private, 'twould blast all my happiness, and destroy what it should build;
for by the knowledge of your virtues, I find your friendship is as necessary to
my contentment as Parthenissa's love. I know not (said Zephalinda) to what
intent you mean this; but if it be to delude the World, the action will be so
opposite to my inclination, that my ill counterfeiting will reveal what you
would strive to hinder. Then (I replied) I am undone, and to make my ruin more
sensible, it is by the greatest virtue that ever was possessed: but even now I
suspected your resentment would ruin me, now I find your goodness will: for
justice to condemn is common, but for friendship to destroy, is a fate only
fit for the crime of Artabanes, who is so unfortunate, that virtue loses its
nature where he is concerned. Zephalinda extremely perplexed to see me in so
great a trouble, told me, if by any action of mine I may convert your disorder
into as great a joy, assure your self Artabanes, I will force my inclination to
an obeying of you, and nothing but an impossibility shall hinder me from it;
therefore I conjure you acquaint me for what great advantage you would employ
my friendship, in a thing so inconsistent with it. Madam (said I) my Father,
who knows your merit, has so strictly enjoined me to serve you, that if by any
fault of mine I should decline adoring you, I must expect all that his
indignation can inflict on me, and lose the hopes of possessing Parthenissa by
his consent: your scorn may make the discontinuance of my addresses to you
appear a kind of justice to him, and so incline him to listen to my making them
to Parthenissa. You see by this how much I am therein concerned, and by it too,
how much I do respect you, for sooner than the world should say I forsook the
fair Zephalinda, I had rather give it so strong a testimony of my unworthiness,
as her neglect. Alas Artabanes (she answered) I had rather the world should
think you just by deserting me, than give it so infallible an argument of my
want of judgment as to decline your Passion; but since your happiness depends
so much upon my counterfeiting scorn, I will endeavor to build your joy by the
ruin of my own, and care not what men do think of me, so you thereby obtain
the happy Parthenissa. Judge Sir! if ever there were a higher generosity than
this of Zephalinda's: instead of revenging an injury, she pardons it, instead
of punishing an offender she obliges him, and so much to her own prejudice,
that to establish her Rivals contentment she ruins (by her confession) her
own. I must confess her virtue had so great an ascendant over me, that I had
almost deplored the hopes of my own felicity, since they were so likely to
ruin those of hers. You may easily guess, I left her with as high a
satisfaction of her virtue as I was troubled at the necessity of being
ungrateful to it. As soon as I came to Parthenissa I gave her by my relation so
just a cause of affection to Zephalinda, that from that hour she vowed her the
second place in hers. and in process of time, they contracted so firm a
friendship, that though her Brother were highly concerned in the breaking off
Parthenissa's affection and mine, yet she was not only our Confident but our
Counselor, and discharged both with such secrecy and judgment, that we knew
not which was most meritorious. But this friendship could hardly be greater
than that which Arsaces had for Surena, which did every day so clearly manifest
it self, that the Courtiers adored him as the rising Sun, and found the only
way to obtain any thing from the King, was to be promised it by his favorite,
who truly (setting the imperiousness of his humor aside) which doubtless he
had whilst he courted the Kings favor, he had charms hardly to be resisted:
Neither could Arsaces's affection to the Brother be greater, than the scorns I
received in public were from the Sister, which at first she personated so
well, that I was constrained often to wait upon her in private, to learn
whether that which we designed for a fiction were not metamorphos'd into its
contrary; but at last she acted them as a task, and so constrained, that her
behavior seemed to condemn me of that unkindness which her modesty would not
permit her words to do. But one evening I received a testimony of her
friendship proportionate to that Character she had given me of it; 'Twas a
little note which she conveyed into my hand, and though many were present, yet
it was so artificially that 'twas impossible any could take notice of it. The
words were these:

ZEPHALINDA to ARTABANES.
SUrena has not only discovered where you love, but that you are loved again,
he is resolved whilst you seemingly make your addresses to me, to make his real
ones to Parthenissa, and gain the King of his party, This you cannot resent as
an injury from either, having publicly declared a Passion to one, for whom
you have none. You had best therefore suddenly break off the false, and
manifest the true Flame; before Arsaces appear too openly for your Rival, who
then may look on your affection, as a contempt to his authority. Tell me
Artabanes, does not the betraying of a Brother, the advancing of my Rivals, and
the ruining of my own hopes, at least, deserve your friendship, and yet that is
all I demand, since the impossibility of expecting more, would be as great, as
the sin of doing so.


AS soon as I had done reading these few lines, I communicated them to my
Princess, who did not only much approve of the advice, but more of the
gallantry of her that gave it. The same night I waited upon Zephalinda, and
taking an opportunity, I made her Parthenissa's, and my own retributions, for
so unimitable a friendship; but time being exceeding precious, and there being
then with Zephalinda, Surena, Sillaces, Lindadory, Parthenissa, and many
others, the chiefest of the Court, I resolved no longer to delay that which was
designed between us, and having privately advertised Zephalinda of my
intention, I began a discourse of the importunity of Lovers, as a Rise to
effect it; The subject was so copious, that there wanted no matter of
entertainment, but that we insisted upon most, was occasioned by Zephalinda's
saying, that she admired at those, who when their Mistresses declared they
could not love them, would yet continue their loves: as if importunity could
engender Affection. To which Surena, as believing himself most concerned,
replied: I should (Sister) have an ill opinion of that General, who designing
to take a Town, would, upon its refusal to yield at the summoning, raise his
Camp, and march away: It Is just so in this case, what our desires cannot
perform, perseverance must, and since modesty and practice does allow Women at
first to deny their Servants, 'twould be a great want of discretion to take
that for their disdain, which is but their Passion. Madam (said I) there may be
something more added in this particular, for since by daily experience we find,
that a high Passion ingenders a proportionate Scorn, the first giving the
Power, if not the Cause unto the last, why may not we as well expect that an
opportunity may beget an affection, the difference being but equally great?
That which you say (answered Zephalinda) is a clear mistake, for certainly
never any Woman hated a Man for loving her, but she having some aversion to the
person, he imputes it to his Flame; but to that which my Brother says, I must
confess I think it a madness, where there is an affection to abandon it upon
the first refusal, but sometimes Men are apt to give our bashfulness a longer
being, than indeed it has, and have so good an opinion of themselves, that they
often call that which is our aversion, our modesty, and by making us better
natured than we are, trouble themselves more than they should: for my part, I
would deal ingeniously with my Lovers (if I had any) and tell them what is
modesty; and what is aversion, that they may owe their suffering to themselves,
and not to me, for I think it a Tyranny to make Men's Torments the witnesses of
my Beauty. I must confess, Madam (I replied) if all your Sex would practice
what you declare, we should have as much cause to admire their goodness, as
their beauties, but that which deludes many, is, that some Women have hated two
or three years, sometimes more, and then at last have loved those, whom they so
long slighted; and though examples of this quality be very rare, yet some
proving the possibility of it, every one flatters himself with a belief it may
be his fate; just as in War, where though but one amongst a hundred thousand
raises himself from a common Soldier to a General, yet the success of that one,
does raise more expectations, than the miscarriages of so many others do
deject. Besides Madam (said Sillaces) other Women, whose beauties have not
charms so strong, but their Rigor may prove their Lovers cure, do often hold on
their Servants by expectation, and so by Art supply the unkindness of Nature,
but where so many perfections reign, as you are Mistress of, that declaration
which you would have pass as an excess of goodness (and perhaps mean it so) may
appear as high a mark of your power; for knowing your servants to be surely
charmed, you may well advise them to assume their liberty, and they be no more
obliged to you for it, than when a Gally-slave is bid by his Keeper to get
free, and yet is still kept fast in Chains. I should too much trespass on your
patience, did I tell you all the particulars of that entertainment, I will
therefore only acquaint you, that some words were spoken, which gave me a fit
opportunity to beg Zephalinda, that since she had made a declaration of dealing
clearly with her Servants, in what related to her resolutions concerning them,
she would give me my sentence, by acquainting me what return that Passion, I so
justly paid her, might expect. Truly Artabanes (she answered with a gesture as
full of disdain in appearance, as it was obliging in effect) I thought my
actions would have exempted my words from that trouble, but since you will have
it in as much plainness as reality, you must know, I cannot receive your
passion, but if my saying will be a diminution of your grief, that it proceeds
not from any defect in you, or from any aversion to you in particular, but out
of a general aversion to Love, I may very truly profess it. Ah Madam, (I
replied) you are cruel in thinking to be merciful, and at once load me with so
much misery, that I must sink under the burden: You should have prepared me by
degrees for my ruin, and thereby have lessened it, at least of one misery,
which is the suddenness and unexpectedness of it: But Madam, do not think that
my discontent is of so mean a nature, that the consideration of the cause, can
lessen the effect: No, fair Zephalinda, that with which you would console me,
does but augment my Torments, for had you been capable of Love, I should by
Zeal and Sufferings have had some expectation to have created yours, but this
general hatred to the sweetest Passion, cuts off all expectation, and leaves me
as full of misery, as my ambition for so high a flame can merit: but Madam, may
not I fear some concealed love is the cause of this cruelty, or that some
happier, or more deserving Man, may make you alter this ruinous resolution?
Neither of both (said Zephalinda) I attest the higher Powers, that were I to
have any man, it should be Artabanes, but not having him, I vow by the
domestic gods, that listen to my oath, never to marry any other, and I conjure
you by your own quiet as well as mine, to speak to me no more of Love, nor
conceal for me any, lest you force me to that aversion for you, which nothing
but your perseverance can render legitimate; carry that noble Flame unto some
other object, whose antipathy to Love may not so blind her Judgment, as to
refuse your Passion, which I shall pray may be successful, and that your
Felicity may be equal to your merit; But if instead of my affection, you will
receive my friendship, I do engage my self to pay it you, and shall endeavor
by the perfectness of that, to repair the deficiency of the other. Ah Madam (I
replied) all the consolation you then give me, is, that every one that dares
offer you his Heart; shall be clothed in my Livery: but to make my torment
perfect, my sufferings proceed from one that at the same instant in which she
professes her self my friend, ruins me; yet I shall strive by my obedience, to
manifest how ill I did deserve my misfortune, and since making my self
perfectly wretched, must be an argument of that Truth, I attest the self-same
Powers, which even now you invoked, never to importune you any more with my
Passion; but by silencing or transporting it unto some other object, take from
us both the trouble, the continuance of it would create: but the high honor of
your friendship I embrace with a joy proportionate to the vastness of the
benefit, and will pay you mine, with a constancy, as great as you assure me
your aversion is to love. Who could express the astonishment of Surena, at this
profession? his endeavors truly were so pressing, to alter his Sisters
resolution, that it sufficiently revealed his concern in it; but all was in
vain, for after those protestations, we remained unchangeable. This business
thus handled, was, for a good while, the entertainment of the Court, and made
Surena so to hasten Arsaces to appear for him, that though an unexpected
accident fell out, which much contributed to the public, declaring my self a
Servant to Parthenissa, yet before I could effect it, Surena obtained from the
King a visit to her in his favor, which did exceedingly perplex our affairs,
and forced me to manage my Flame with as secrecy a troublesome as great; but
that which I told you, did so much advance my being at liberty to profess my
Passion to my Princess, was, that my Father, either out of the knowledge of the
World, and consequently of the emptiness of it, or else not being able to see
Surena in higher Power than himself, forsook the Court, and resigning up his
Estate and Offices to me, retired into a Solitude, where under a seeming
banishment from all Earthly Fruitions, he more perfectly enjoyed them, and
either out of a dis-affection to Surena, or out of his indulgence to me, he
gave me the free Election of my Mistress, and then (as I told you) withdrew
himself from those cares, which take away the relish of all our Enjoyments. But
Moneses could not more contemn the vanities of the Court, than Surena was in
love with them, he had nothing but succeeded as he desired, unless it were his
Passion, in which (though he neglected no opportunity, nor omitted to make use
of his Masters Power) his progress was so slow, that it clouded all his other
pleasures; and by his daily frequentation of Parthenissa discovering new
charms, it made his misfortune the more unsupportable; For my part, though I
had those public advantages of entertaining her freely, and the Kings Power
and Countenance to second my addresses, yet in those happy days I received in
private so many fresh assurances of my Princesses affection and constancy, that
I could hardly wish my Rival a greater misery than the continuance of his. In
this condition I was, when Fortune began to declare an irreconcilable hatred
to me, in which she has been so firm, that I admire from whence she has merited
the name of Inconstant. The Province of Tabiena, one of the most considerable
ones of Parthia, generally revolted, and the Rebels having, in a pitched Battle,
defeated the Kings Lieutenant, and killed 10000 upon the place, so exasperated
Arsaces, that he raised an Army of 80000 Men, to vindicate this disgrace, and
till it was upon its march, never would declare who should be General; but then
with a high obligingness, he told me, that he had made choice of me, as well to
follow his Inclination as Judgment, that I must perform Miracles, only to
justify the opinion he had of me, and that the next morning by the dawn of day,
as I valued his service, I was to repair unto my Command. I must confess I was
surpised, both at the thing, and at the suddenness of it, but since 'twas the
way to serve my Prince, and to Glory, I suppressed all those troubles which my
separation from Parthenissa began to create, and having with an humility
suitable to the obligation, accepted the Kings Commission, I went that evening
to kiss the fair Parthenissa's hands, and to offer up those sighs, which that
sad departure so justly exacted; but not finding her within, I expected her
return, and till then, I entertained Zianthe, my Princesses Favorite, who
after some discourse, drawing her Handkerchief, let fall a Letter out of her
pocket, and perceiving it sealed, I snatched it up, more out of curiosity, than
any other design, as soon as she saw I had it, she begged me with so much
earnestness, and in such pressing terms to restore it, that I began to suspect
it was something of concernment, and finding the Superscription a Cipher only,
I broke open the Letter, thinking it had been some private Amors of hers; but
alas,, soon found it was Surenas Hand, which Zianthe imagining by my amazement,
she gave a great shreek, and flinging her self at my feet; with her hands held
up, conjured me to restore, and not read it; but being thrust on by my ill
Fate, I kept her off, and read these words;

SVRENA to the Princess PARTHENISSA.
YOur apprehensions, Madam, are extreme just, for if Artabanes should discover
the change you have made in my favor, his revenge would be equal to the
greatness of his loss: I therefore highly approve of your opinion in employing
him to command the Army now designed for the suppression of the rebellious
Tabienians, and in observance of it, have got the King to sign his Commission,
and strictly to enjoin him to repair to his Charge by the break of day, his
absence will give us that liberty, which his being here will deprive us of, and
consequently render unfortunate,

SVRENA.


Oh gods! how many thousand distractions did the reading of this Letter involve
me in! I that resented the torments, cannot describe them, at first I was pale
as Guilt, and an universal trembling seized upon all my Body, yet presently,
the consideration of all my wrongs inflamed me with so much fury, that had
Parthenissa then come in, I had sacrificed her to it. But at length I cried
out, great gods! where shall Virtue inhabit, if Parthenissa be not a fit
Mansion for it? and who shall ever expect a recompense for his Fidelity, when
mine is thus rewarded? then looking upon that cruel instrument of my undoing; I
told her. Ha! Zianthe: how could you thus long conceal this Treachery? Sure
Parthenissa's wickedness is contageous, else your pity (if all other motives
had failed) would have made you disclose what the just gods could no longer
conceal. The wretched Maid finding my Choler raised to the highest pitch, flung
her self again at my feet, and with a flood of Tears told me. The concealment
(Sir) of your being so long betrayed, was as great a grief to me, as the
knowledge of it is to you, but I could not reveal that treachery without being
guilty of one to Parthenissa, and drawing by it a ruin on her as certain as
just. My innocence shall bear me witness, how I labored to divert her from an
action so perfidious, but when I found all was in vain, I was forced to submit
to what I could not oppose, yet with a grief, which equalled the greatness of
her crime; but since the gods have so evidently declared themselves in
revealing a treachery so secretly carried, I think it rather a Charity than a
Sin to acquaint you with that which I hope will prove your cure. After that
Surena began to possess the Kings esteem, I found a beginning of a coldness in
Parthenissa for you, and something of inclination for your Rival, which
increast proportionably, as Arsaces favor did, and that being come unto the
highest degree, this resembl'd it; in a word, I cannot compare the greatness of
her passion to him more fitly, than to that she formerly paid you: but perhaps
you may wonder why they should write to one another, having the opportunity and
freedom of conversation. To which I answered, Surena was suspicious, that all
Parthenissa did profess in his favor, was but merely to gain time, and to free
her self from the Kings importunities, who never left soliciting for his
Favorite; Now he knew, Letters were a proof that she could not deny, when she
might her words, therefore he put her to that trial, and besides, he showed
them to the King, as an evincement of his victory, which as he said, Arsaces
would not credit, but by some such undeniable testimony. Things being come to
this height, all their designs were, how to delude you, which truly they were
so industrious in, that I have as often admired at Parthenissa's Art in
dissembling, as at her treachery it self. Amongst all those Presents which
Surena sent her, she places on none so much value, as on a little pocket
Looking Glass, which of late you have seen her wear; and though the excellency
of the Workmanship might induce her to value it, yet the esteem she places on
it, proceeds from another cause, for between the Glass and the Case, in a
little Drawer, which is artificially shut with a screw, there is her Lovers
Picture; and, as if all things had contributed to undelude you, yesternight
something being amiss in it, she left it off to be mended. Zianthe without
straying to know whether I had a mind to see it, went and fetched it, to show
the truth of what she had alleged. The Glass I very well remembered, having
seen Parthenissa lately wear it, and set even a doting value on it; but the
rage of being so egregiously deluded, stifled those resentments my fury
inspired, which silence Zianthe attributing to my attention, she thus continued
her discourse. I have, Sir, given you a clear Narrative of my Mistresses
Infidelity, which indeed, is so excessive great, that I hope you will think it
a sufficient happiness to have mist her, and your Rival sufficiently punished in
obtaining her; in my opinion, the crime is so odious, that with the first
opportunity I will abandon her service, and think it more contentment to have
but a bare subsistence, where innocence is cherisht, than to possess all the
plenties of the Court, where Vice has so much dominion: all that I have to beg
of you is, that you will make the best profit of this discovery, without
revealing the Author of it, for it can be no advantage to you, and will be an
unavoidable ruin unto me. Zianthe thus ended her discourse, and filld' me with
so much fury, that without saying one word, I left her: but as I was going out,
I met a Servant of Surena's, who mistaking me for one of Parthenissa's menial
ones, desired me to tell Zianthe, that her Princess lay that night at Surena's
with Zephalinda, and that he was come to wait on her thither. This additional
proof of her inconstancy, made me say to my self: Is she then not only
contented to be wicked, but to glory in it? and has she no sooner led me into
misery, than she forsakes and insults over me? but yet (I continued) why do I
blame this action, for since she has stained her Beauty with infidelity, it is
an obligation to me not to hide it. Then, without so much as answering Surena's
servant, I went to my Lodging, but in such a posture, that had I met with any,
betwixt that place where I received so fatal a poison, and my Chamber, my
actions had discovered my condition. Being come home, I flung my self into my
Bed, and by a thousand extravagancies, expressed the miseries I groaned under; at
first I resolved to kill my self, having so much outlived my hopes, but the
horror of so barbarous a crime, and to leave the world without revenge,
retained me. Then casting up my Eyes to Heaven, my Tears invoked that Justice
my rage hindered my words from demanding. At length I cried out, Great gods!
Why do you tempt frail Man, so justly to destroy himself, and yet make it a sin
to do so? Or why is life esteemed a blessing, when without it we could not
suffer misery? Then pausing a while, and after starting up, I continued; Ah!
no, were to destroy my self no sin, I would not do it: First, those that have
injured me, shall dye, and then the triumph of my revenge will be pleasing: Yet
Parthenissa must not fall, her Sex preserves her; but to kill her Lover, will
be a more sensible grief to her, and consequently, a more pleasing joy to me.
But could thou, (I continued) Artabanes, look upon her with any satisfaction,
were her miseries proportionate to her crimes? O no, those charms would melt
thy anger into pity, rather kill thy Rival nobly, and show by his destruction,
how much she has mis-chosen; then fly into some Desert, where thou shall never
hear again the enchanting name of Parthenissa; and in the horror of some silent
Grove, pine away thy life as a Penance, for having believed any of her sex,
could prove constant.

My distractions were so high, that it was day, ever I could elect any
resolution, yet in the end I assumed this last, as finding it fittest for my
resentment and despair, and immediately calling Simander, I commanded him with
secrecy, and without dispute, to carry a Paper I gave him to Surena, and tell
him, I expected him in the Eastern Meddow, near the sacred Grove.

The Challenge contained these words.

ARTABANES to SVRENA.
TO possess Parthenissa, it is not enough to have her declare she loves you, but
you must dispute the Conquest with your Sword, and by that Trial prove, whether
the gods will be as favorable to you, as her infidelity. In a word, my death
must secure your Affections, and yours must revenge me on your perfidious
Mistress; and though her inconstancy render her unworthy my Resentments, yet
your addresses to her, after you knew of mine, renders you worthy of my revenge.


Simander immediately suspected what it was, but not imagining the cause, began
to make some question, for which I took him up so short, that I put a silence
to all his doubts, and sent him away to perform what I had commanded; then
dressing my self, I took one of my best Horses (for it is the custom in Parthia,
for all Men of quality to fight on Horseback) and went to the place appointed,
where I had not long been, but Simander came, and acquainted me that Surena
would be with me instantly. These words were hardly delivered; when I might
perceive him that sent them, only attended by one of his Servants. I had not
the patience to delay my revenge by any expostulation, but drawing my sword,
and galloping up to him, bade him defend himself. The first encounter, he gave
me a slight hurt upon the Bridle-hand, and I him in his right Arm, and after a
few passages for the gaining of the Crupper, I won his, and ran my Sword
through him up to the Hilt, with which he fell, and going to repeat my thrust,
the remembrance of his excellent Sister, stopped my hand, and made me tell him,
That which I have done, though it be too little for my resentments, yet it is
too much for Zephalinda's Brother, for which Relation I give thee thy life. If
(replied Surena) thou payst Zephalinda any affection, evince it in taking that
little I have left, she is so generous, she had rather hear I am dead than live
by my Enemies Mercy, therefore I conjure thee by those wrongs thou say I have
done thee, and by thy affection to my Sister, finish what thy good fortune has
so far advanced, and by one wound more, end those torments, my being vanquished
will throw upon me, and secure thy love to Parthenissa, which whilst I live,
will be unsafe. Why (said I) do thou by that name, tempt my fury, and revive
an anger, whose justice is declared in thy defeat; farewell, for I dare not
trust my self with my resentments. Ending these words, I turned to Surena's
Servant, and bade him have a care of his Master. Then going to my own, I told
him, come Simander, since death refuses to ease my misery, I will seek some
other cure, and commanding him to follow, I gallopt away whether my Fortune
would conduct me, and continued moving, till toward night, where coming into a
Grove, whose unfrequentedness was fit for my melancholy, as well as safety
(for I was loath Parthenissa should satisfy her Eyes with my Execution) I
lighted off my Horse, and giving him to Simander, I flung my self upon the
Grass, and there began to consider the sad condition I was in, which was so
much the more so, by how much my happiness had been so lately great.
Parthenissa's inconstancy appeared so odious, that I could not have the
patience to think on her, nor it. But that which caused indeed, my real grief,
was, the unworthy return my sad condition forced me to make the fair
Zephalinda, who for all her gallantry and friendship, had no other payment but
the neglect of her Affection, and the murder of her Brother. These thoughts
were more insupportable than my own misfortunes, and that which brought an
accession to mine, was, that my actions of Ingratitude would be as apparent, as
my sorrows for them would be the contrary. After a thousand reflections of this
quality, I resolved at last to write to her, and finding no Ink more proper for
the occasion than some Blood which ran from a slight hurt, I made use of it,
and writ these few words.

ARTABANES to the Princess ZEPHALINDA.
It Is in blood that I have offended you (Madam) and it is in blood that your
pardon is begged by the miserable Artabanes, whose Love and Hatred to
Parthenissa were ordained to make him equally injurious to your quiet. I must
confess, it had been more suitable to my despair, as well as friendship, to
have fallen by Surena's Sword, and so have merited your pity, rather than to
have been necessitated to implore your Mercy. But great gods! to what a strait
did you reduce me? To dye, had been the triumph of my Enemy, and to kill, makes
the trouble of my Friend; the first rendering me unfortunate, the latter guilty:
But since those Powers which create our destinies, has made the last of these
mine; I am resolved to take some such forlorn course, that though you cannot
commend the past actions, yet you shall the future sufferings I will inflict
upon the Criminal Artabanes.


I writ another Letter to Arsaces, wherein I told him, that I was almost as
much troubled to draw my sword against his Favorite, as at the cause of it;
that I had injured his Laws, to avoid doing the like unto his Judgment, which
might have received some blemish by his electing one to revenge a public
affront that wanted courage to resent a private one of the highest nature; that
though by this action I had rendered my self incapable of serving him, yet by
declining it, I had made my self unworthy of that honor; so that of two
crimes, I elected but the least. And since the gods by Surena's defeat,
declared him guilty, I could not believe that he which bore their Image, would
be of a different opinion. I folded these two Letters in a third, to my
generous friend, the Prince Sillaces, to whose care I commended Lindadory, and
all things else I had any concern for, and from whom I begged a thousand
pardons, for not having acquainted him at first with the cause of those
miseries, which forced me to a voluntary, and eternal banishment. Whilst our
Horses were taking that refreshment which their hard travel required, I was
disputing what course to elect, and after many Proposals, I resolved to pass
through Mesopotamia and Syria, and so thence by Sea for Italy, and in the
darkest horrors of those Mountains, which separates that Country from the
Gauls, spend those sad days allotted to miserable life. That which made me fix
upon this place above any other, was, that the horridness of the Alps would be
more suitable to my melancholy than any other, and by being in the heart of the
Roman Empire, I knew the innate hatred of the Parthians to that people, would
never permit those which should search after me, to doubt of my residence, or
if they did, the danger of coming into an Enemies Country, might deter them
from following me.

Here Artabanes putting a stop to his Narration, addressed himself to
Callimachus, and told him, I have, Sir, to obey your commands, forced my
inclination to relate unto you, a part of my unfortunate Life, least you might
have failed in the knowledge of those particulars, which perhaps Simander was
not perfectly acquainted with: But now, what is remaining he has been an Actor,
or a Sufferer in, and consequently, will omit, nothing that is worthy your
knowledge; I shall therefore beg you (if you are not already tired with the
hearing of my misfortunes) permit Simander, to put an end unto their Story, and
give me leave to absent my self from a relation that will awaken despair, which
of it self is but too apt to torment me. The good Callimachus having by a
thousand expressions, excused the rudeness of his curiosity, told him, Generous
Artabanes, I have already (I fear) so far transgressed, that I cannot expect a
pardon from a less goodness than yours, and therefore will not persevere in a
crime which may make you as justly my enemy, as Fortune is unjustly yours.
Artabanes having made Callimachus a return suitable to his civility, commanded
his faithful Simander (who was present at the latter part of his relation) to
satisfy his engagement, and then retired into a Solitude, to entertain his
Melancholy, which was too just not to be great. Artabanes was no sooner gone,
than Callimachus invited his faithful Simander to obey his generous Prince,
which he did, by continuing his Adventures in these words,

AFter my unfortunate Master had assumed a resolution so suitable to his
despair, and that all those reasons my affection furnished me with, could no way
alter it, I thought it my duty as much as 'twas my inclination, to bear a share
with him in all his miseries, and justify by my sufferings how ambitious I was
to deserve a favor which I had no title to, but his having conferred it on me;
and though by many persuasions, and commands, he dissuaded me from tying my
Fortunes upon one to whom (he said) the gods had so much declared themselves
Enemies, yet I was as firm in my resolution of waiting on him, as he was in his
of abandoning the World. By this time our Horses having taken that rest which
we thought fitting, we began to continue our journey, the Moon affording us her
Light, and the first Village we came unto, we wakened some Peasants, where my
Prince having sealed his Packet, engaged one of them (by giving him a good
reward) to carry it the next day to the Court, and present it to the generous
Sillaces. This being done, we continued our voyage, but because I have so many
essential things to relate, I will not load your patience by repeating all
those accidents which happened in our crossing of Syria, and Mesopotamia, nor
till our coming to Antioch, since without any considerable adventures, we at
last safely arrived there; only I may not omit to inform you, that in twenty
days travel, I never heard Artabanes repine at Parthemissa's cruelty, either
that his wrongs had extinguished his Love, or the greatness of his resentments
hindered the expressions of them; but I am the more inclined to believe the
latter, since his Sighs and Tears (his inseparable companions) acknowledged
some internal grief, produced them; and truly he was thereby so changed, that
had not his griefs been an undeniable proof of him that uttered them, I should
have suspected I had changed my Master. But as if all things had contributed to
hasten my Prince unto his solitude, we met a Ship at Antioch, ready to weigh
Anchor for Cyprus, where she was to unload her Merchandise in a Man of War,
that was directly bound for Ostia, which is a small Harbor the Tiber makes,
when it falls into the Mediterranean sea. This convenience we joyfully
embraced, and the Wind blowing fair at East, we were full of expectation in few
days to arrive safely in that famous Island where the Queen of Love had chosen
her earthly Residence. We were not many Leagues from our desired Harbor, when
those upon the Main-top that were looking for Land, cried out, a Sail, a Sail;
the Master of our Ship went instantly up to discover the truth of this Alarm,
and had not been long there, but clapping his hands upon his Breast, he said
with great Passion we are all undone, it is Menas, This was that Menas, Pompey
the Great took at Sea, when he commanded the Roman Fleet, and asking him how he
durst commit so high sins, as to kill those, and take away their Goods, which
never did him any wrong, was thus answered: If (said he) my Actions are Crimes,
why then do thou practice them? but because thou rob'st securely with a whole
Fleet, thou give thy self the name of a Conqueror, and because I rob with
more hazard, and but with one single Gally, thou call'st me a Pirate, when
there is no difference between our performances, but that which Force and
Numbers create. This bold, (and perhaps true) reply so operated on the generous
Pompey, that he gave Menas his life, for which he did him such signal services,
that at last he gave him too his liberty; but being accustomed from his Youth,
to that barbarous profession, he could not decline it, and in a short while
after fell to a relapse. He was indeed so famous in all those Seas, that
oftentimes his name presented him with Victory: and truly I believe we should
have felt, as well as heard that Truth, had not Artabanes, (perceiving our
fears) by a generous exhortation, invited us to a defense. For, if (said he)
your Enemies are generous, your Gallantry, if you be vanquished, will make your
usage so: if they are not, your resistance may purchase your safety, at least,
it is more like Men to owe our sufferings to our misfortunes than our selves. To
be brief, his ravishing Eloquence furnished him with such powerful Arguments,
that those timorous Spirits, which even now were ready co yield without
disputing the Victory, were now so altered, that they breathed nothing but the
combat. We were in all, (Passengers and Seamen) about an hundred, and my Prince
taking upon himself the whole charge, divided his Men into two Squadrons, the
one he took to himself, the other he gave me the honor to command. Then, lest
those new-raised courages should cool, he commanded the Pilot to tack about,
and resolved to save Menas the labor of overtaking him, who was chasing us
with Oars and Sails. 'Twas then I perceived in my generous Prince's Face, a
dissipation of those Clouds, his Miseries had there created, and in their
place, a Countenance so Martial, and so Charming, that 'twas as impossible for
his Enemies not to fear, as for his Friends not to admire him. By this time the
Pirates were so close come up, that Artabanes commanded the Seamen to grapple
Menas's Gally, and not giving him leave to Assault us, he leapt into the
thickest of the Enemies, and with his Sword made the Pass easy for those that
followed him. Our Adversaries, who were not accustomed to resistance, found
this Action as strange, as we knew it to be generous; and I believe their
amazement something contributed to our seeming Victory, but when those that
fled the fury of my Prince's Arms, had acquainted Menas, that unless he
appeared, and acted, all would be lost; that old Pirate, who at first thinking
us unworthy his Sword, had commanded one of his Lieutenants to take us, finding
our resistance needed all his Power, instantly armed himself, and with a select
number of Soldiers, which he always reserved for some such desperate exigency,
came out upon the Decks, where by the greatness of his loss, judging at the
greatness of his danger, he called up that Courage, which had made him so
justly famous, and therewith renewed the Fight with such resolution, that many
of our Men, being terrified with the Fury of his blows, began to shrink, and at
last, to retire unto their own Ship; this cowardice heightened our Enemies,
which Artabanes easily perceived, and observing, the turn proceeded only from
the Valor of Menas, he made a lane through all those that opposed his doing
so, and at last, joining with the old Pirate, with one blow, he struck him at
his Feet, and finding by the rare temper of his Helmet, that his fall proceeded
from being stunned, not killed, he was searching the defects of his Armor, to
finish his Victory: which whilst he was doing, one of the Pirates coming behind
him, had lift up his Sword to kill my generous Prince, but as the gods would
have it, I came to his rescue and with one blow cut that sacrilegious Arm off,
and with a thrust, ended his life. The noise which the Pirate I had killed made
in falling, saved Menas's life, for my Prince turning about, to learn from
whence that death proceeded, some of the Enemies (taking the opportunity)
dragged their Captain into the Stern-Cabbin. But to be brief, our companions,
whose Courages (by the sight of so much Blood) were quite drowned, abandoned
the generous Artabanes, who being too weak of himself, having only so unworthy
a Second as Simander, to resist such numbers as came fresh upon him, received
so many wounds, that his strength began to fail him, but yet upon his knees, he
so generously disputed the Victory, that Fortune by it appeared sufficiently
blind, for could she have seen his virtue, she could not but have rewarded it,
but at length he lost such a Sea of Blood, that he could make no more
resistance, and crying out, Ah Death! thou art merciful, and curest the wounds
which Parthenissa gave, He fell, (as I then thought) eternally. Oh gods! what
did not my rage then make me utter? I found my grief so much, that bestriding
my generous Princes Body, I cried out, finish, finish, ye barbarous Tyrants
your cruelty, and bend all your Swords ^against my Breast, for since you have
by Numbers, not Valor, destroyed the perfectest of Men, I will no longer
survive that loss; and indeed, their desire of Blood so well seconded my desire
of losing all mine, that having received as many wounds, as I was confident
would not give me the misfortune of out-living my Prince, I flung my self on
his pale Body and having a thousand times embraced him, and kissed his hands and
feet, I there fainted, acting those last expressions of my Fidelity. In the
mean while, Menas by the care of his Soldiers, being come again to himself,
demanded what was the issue of the fight, and what was become of him, whose
Valor he had, so much to his prejudice, resented? they answered him, that all
but the valiant Enemy he inquired after, and one more, had long since yielded
themselves to mercy, but he, as if his forces had been increased by his
Companions fears, was yet nobly disputing his life, which was so weakn'd by
many wounds, that if he were not yet dead, the time of his fall could not be
long. Menas, whose Nature had some light of generosity, though clouded by his
Profession, and the daily examples of cruelty, was so taken with Artabanes's
courage, that causing himself to be carried upon the Deck, did there intend to
preserve him, if it were in his power. I knew not whether the belief of our
being killed, hindered our Conquerors from doing us any further harm, or
whether my expressions and actions to my Prince, did suspend for a while the
cruelty of those Monsters, but whatsoever was the cause, they wounded us no
more after we were fallen, and Menas coming when the Pirates were beginning to
strip us, forbad it, and commanding his Chyrurgeons to employ all their skill
in our recovery, or if it were past their Art, then he ordered Galippus his
Lieutenant, to give us burial, as if himself had been in our condition. And
because his care should equal our need of it, he caused us to be brought into
his own Cabin, where our wounds being searched, the Surgeons assured him, my
Master had none that were mortal, and that only the loss of Blood had reduced
him to that extremity; For what concerned me, they told him, I was in much more
danger, but if they could draw out the head of a Javelin that struck in my
back, there might be some hope of my recovery. In the mean time, by strong
Cordials we came to our selves, but my Prince, long before me, and to my great
glory (as those that waited on us, told me) the first thing he said, was, Ah
poor Simander. For my part, as soon as I found my wounds dressed, and remembered
with what design I received them, I tore off all my Plasters, and calling
those that were by me, a thousand names for their care, I vowed by all the gods
I would no longer live. Then I begged them with Tears, to bring me to my
Masters Body, and permit me to expire upon it. They seemed to be very glad,
that my despair proceeded from a cause they could so easily remove, and
therefore to console me, they vowed my Master was alive, and in the same
Cabin; but I could not credit so great a happiness, till some of them
acquainted him with my diffidence, which made him force himself to say, yes
Simander, I live, Fortune is yet too much my Enemy, to end my miseries. Ah Sir,
(I replied, with excessive raptures of joy) your Virtue will at last conquer
her. 'T is a strange thing, how after the knowledge of my Prince's being alive,
I willingly endured all those hideous pains, which conduced to my recovery,
courting my Surgeons to hasten my cure, though by the increase of my
torment, that I might be quickly well, to be near my Prince, and to pay him
that service I have ever vowed him. During the space of a quarter of a year,
whilst our wounds were healing, we received as many civilities from Menas, as
we could have expected from our Friends, but we were no sooner perfectly
recovered, than he commanded my Prince to be brought unto him, (and with a
countenance (as barbarous as his Profession) told him, I have sent for thee, to
know what madness 'twas invited thee to make a resistance, where hope, (as
flattering as it is) could not afford thee a probability of success? To which my
Prince replied, with an assuredness more suitable to his mind than his
condition; I know not why thou should think it strange, that the desire of
preserving my liberty, should not be as powerful with me, as that of depriving
me of it, or of a little gain was with thee; but when my life was as great a
blessing to me, as now it is the contrary, I never knew why Death was not a
better election than Chains. Yet me thinks (said Menas) thou should not
prefer Death before Captivity, since the former cuts off all expectation, and
the latter allows thee some. The first (replied Artabanes) as it cuts off all
hope, so it cuts off all shame and suffering; and the latter, whilst it leaves
us only expectations of good, makes us resent all evil: but if there be any
Spirits so low as to make such a choice, I wish it may be their fortune. How
dare thou (said the old Pirat) so far provoke me, when thou know thy life
is in my hands? because (replied Artabanes' it is in thy hands. But why
(continued Menas) did thou tie thy self so obstinately to me, rather than any
other, when thou knew, that by it thou gave him the Will that had the
Power to punish thee? I found thee (said my Prince) the worthiest of my Sword,
and an action is gallant, it is not my custom to consult with Fear. Artabanes
had no sooner spoken these words, than Menas embraced him, and cried out, O the
most generous amongst Men! if Pompey the Great were not living, thou deservest
thy liberty: but to be his, is more glorious than freedom, and it is to that
Honor I design thee. After a million of barbarous Expressions of the highest
esteem he had of my Masters generosity, he declared, he should be his companion
till his arrival at Ostia (which was the place we had at first designed, though
for a different intention) where in few days after we came, and there Menas
elected fourscore of his best slaves (the most of the^ Gentlemen) amongst which
my Prince and I were two) and having tied to every of them a little Chain of
Gold as an evincement of servitude; he sent us ashore under the conduct of
Gallippus a Silesian, in whom he put his greatest confidence, and who was
ordered to present us to Pompey. The next day after our landing, we came to
Rome, and saw that glorious Town proud with the spoils of all the World, and
some of those great Men who from private Citizens raised themselves by their
virtue to give Laws to mighty Kings, and have in time added more Crowns to the
Empire of Rome than there are almost inhabitants within her Walls. But we soon
learned that Pompey the great had but lately undertaken the voyage of Asia, to
receive Lucullus's Command and Army, who was sent for back by the Senate,
being, after all his Victories, become a triumph to his Soldiers. Yet though
Pompey had left Rome, he was not gone out of Italy, but was necessitated to
remain at Capua, for some dispatches were not yet perfected. This made
Gallippus send a messenger to Menas for his orders, and us continue for some
time longer in Rome than otherwise we should have done. I cannot here omit a
very remarkable accident that besel my Prince, who as he slept, had a Snake
which came and environed his Temples, in the form of a Laurel, which a slave
possessed with Bacchus's spirit of Divination observing, cried out, that it was
an infallible sign of his being victorious and successful in the Wars. By this
Menas had sent directions for us to go by Land to Capua, where Pompey then was,
and where at last we arrived, and were by Gallippus presented to him, just as
he was going to take ship for Asia. This great Man (when he saw Artabanes) fixed
his eyes on him, and calling some of his familiar Friends, told them, Either
all the rules of Physiognomy are false, or that slave (pointing at my Prince)
is not what his present habit speaks him, but possesses a mind that deserves as
good fortune as that he is now in his ill. Sir (replied Gallippus) his looks
cannot promise more gallantry than his actions will make good; and had not
Menas esteemed it a higher hap-piness for him to be your Slave than to be free,
he had long since restored him to that liberty his misfortune not his want of
courage made him lose: Thereupon Gallippus told him all the story how my
generons Master was taken Prisoner, which when Pompey had heard, he replied,
The gods forbid, that because your Captain has a better opinion of me than I
merit, that therefore this Prisoner should undergo a misery which by your own
confession he does not but upon that score. Thereupon he commanded Gallippus to
set my Prince and me free, and to tell Menas, that furnishing him with an
occasion to oblige a gallant Man, was a greater present than all those other
slaves he bestowed on him. Gallippus who had contracted a high opinion for my
Masters virtue, was going with a great satisfaction to observe Pompey's
directions, when Artabanes's ill fate (which has never been tired with
afflicting him) made Lentulus Batiatus (who was extremely taken with my Prince)
so earnestly to beg him of Pompey, that at last (though with much reluctance)
he revoked his promise, and not only granted Batiatus's request, but also gave
him all those other slaves which Menas had presented him. This Batiatus was the
chiefest Citizen in Capua, and one who Pompey durst not disoblige, being of his
Council in that great design of making himself Emperor of the World, whose
foundation was then laid, but after was destroyed by the happier fortune of
Julius Caesar, who possessed what this did but imagine. Batiatus having waited
upon Pompey out of Capua, was no sooner returned then calling for my Prince, he
asked him, his Name and Country. Artabanes, whose hatred for him was as great
as just, told him, with an accent which expressed his resentment, That being a
slave, he had neither Name nor Country. Which reply so incensed the barbarous
Batiatus, that he commanded him instantly to be put into Chains, and kept with
his other common Slaves. Great gods! when I saw those hands laden with Irons,
which if virtue had been a title to Empire should have swayed the Scepters of
the World; What did not my fury suggest in me? I cursed a million of times
Parthenissa's inconstancy, that had cast my dear Master into miseries almost as
great as his virtue, and condemned with many imprecations the weakness of
Pompey's, which the desire of an unworthy Citizen could soon destroy: at last I
was resolved to acquaint our Tyrant with my Princes quality and birth, and by
the assurance of an excessive Ransom, free him from that Captivity his unjust
Fate had flung him into. But then the consideration of those sacred Oaths
Artabanes had extorted from me never to reveal that secret but by his consent,
suppressed my resolution, and made me take up that of endeavoring to persuade
him to it himself, or else to give me his permission for it. Therefore taking
my opportunity, I begged him with a stream of Tears, that he would not by any
obstinate silence undergo so low a destiny, but by acquainting Batiatus with
his quality, procure a civil usage till his Ransom came: That then he would
return into Parthia, there having obtained a pardon for Surena's death, evince
to Parthenissa, by a carriage void of all trouble, how easily he could divest
himself of his Passion, when she could throw off her Constancy; that it was her
virtue not her beauty only he adored: and since she could decline the first,
he could as easily the latter. Hold thy peace Simander (said my Prince,
interrupting me) do not add unto my miseries by thy impious discourse of
Parthenissa, she is yet the highest thing in my esteem; for I am upon better
consideration apter to believe 'twas some defects she found in me than any
which were in her, that made her recall the blessed joy of her affection; and
so that which thou termest inconstancy, may be her Justice. No, no, Simander
(he continued) since the gods have professed themselves so much my adversaries,
tie not thy fortune unto the most wretched of men: I have some Jewels that
escaped the Pirates, take them and buy thy freedom, then return into thy
Country; where I shall pray thou may enjoy a felicity equal to thy virtue;
and let me alone to wrestle with my misfortunes; for I had far rather perish in
this miserable Prison, and under the weight of these Chains, than see
Parthenissa scorn my Flame, or by her embraces recompense any others. By this
thou may in some sort guess at the greatness of my torments, when slavery is
a comparative happiness. My Prince had no sooner done speaking than flinging my
self at his feet, I told him, Oh Sir! Have all my miseries not yet obtained
your leave to bear a share in your misfortunes? Can you speak to me of felicity
when you are laden with Irons? Alas, What fault have I committed, that you
should esteem me worthy the misery of liberty? I attest the gods, that the
sense of your torments create the greatest I endure, and that I can drown my
own by the consideration of yours; whose liberty I would joyfully purchase by
the loss of my own eternally. Therefore, Sir, (I continued, embracing of his
knees) I conjure you by your virtue, and those services which I hope I shall
live to pay you, and by that Parthenissa, whom you do yet so highly reverence,
do not banish me from the glory of suffering with you, nor have so low an
opinion of my fidelity, as to think any thing but death shall separate me from
you. To which Artabanes replied, That his knowledge of my affection for him,
and not his diffidence of it, made him press me to return into Parthia, but
since I assured him, to be near his person, was a higher satisfaction, he
granted my request, though it were to the augmentation of his misery, which he
professed to me was much increast by the share I had in it. I had scarce kissed his
hands as an acknowledgement of his favor, and my joy, but Batiatus came in,
who commanded his Chains to be taken off, that he might be the fitter for that
employment to which, next morning, he designed him; then he selected some
twenty of the ablest Slaves, who, together with Artabanes, were set apart for
Gladiators, and then went away. The Gladiators (as the Romans call them) are
certain Captives who are kept to fight at sharp, one against another in
Amphitheaters, for their Masters, or the Peoples pastime, which sort of
Combats, always ends at least with the loss of much Blood, and oftentimes with
the lives of the Actors. As soon as my Prince learned by some of the other
Slaves what he was destined to, he cursed a hundred times his ignorance of the
Roman Customs that had saved Batiatus's life; for certainly, had he known the
cause why his Chains were taken off, he had employed them to kill the Commander
of it. But after having walked two or three turns, with looks and actions,
expressing his just resentments, he at last desired his fellow prisoners
silence and attention; which being easily obtained, he spoke to them much to
this purpose; Friends and Companions in misery, That Fortune has made us Slaves
is her fault, that we should continue so, will be ours, since a quiet
submission to her cruelty tacitly acknowledges we deserve it, and makes that
which is an effect of her blindess, appear a confession of her justice. You
have assured me often, that you are all Gentlemen, that Title obliges you
sooner to wear death's Livery than Batiatus's; let us therefore, by some
gallant attempt, show how worthy we were of Liberty, or by dying handsomely,
how unworthy we are of Chains: Death is the worst can befall us, yet it is a
comparative happiness to our present condition: If the gods do not favor our
endeavors, but take from us all those ways that lead to freedom, they do
thereby invite us to kill our selves; which to perform, is not to sin, but to
obey them. To move us to this, you see to what the cruel Batiatus designs us,
let us therefore resolve to morrow, when we are upon the Theater Armed, to make
use of our Swords to a contrary action to that, for which they were given us;
and since they delight in Blood, let us make them surfeit of it, by employing
our lives which they destined for their pleasure, unto their punishment: This
is the way, if we cannot reach our liberty, yet at least to reach revenge,
which will be as pleasing as the Irons we now wear are insupportable. My Prince
had no sooner done speaking, than, Canitius, (one of the chiefest amongst the
Slaves) replied, That he was sorry such powerful inducements were laid down to
invite them to that action, since their undertaking of it now, would rather
appear to proceed from their judgment, than their inclinations: That he so
well understood the hearts of his companions, he durst engage himself they
would every one of them elect Death before Slavery, but that he was of opinion,
they might obtain their liberty by a less hazardous way, than what was then
propounded; for every day (said he) the Gladiators are to fight, it is the
custom to feed them very early, that they may digest their Meat before the
combat, and be the better able to perform it. This being most certain, my
advice is, when our keepers to morrow come in to feed us, we seize upon their
Swords, and kill them, lest they should make any noise; then with their Keys
we may open the doors to our liberty, and perhaps (being early) the Streets may
be so empty of people, that with little resistance we may get out of the Town,
and recover the Mountains of Pettely, where it will be difficult, if not
impossible to take us. This motion was highly relisht by all the company, and
the only thing my Prince disliked in it was, that Batiatus would escape
unpunisht, but the rest consenting, he saw 'twas in vain to oppose it. You may
easily imagine we were not a little impatient till the break of day, which no
sooner appeared than our Keepers (which were four in number) came into our
Prison, where whilst they were distributing of victuals and blows together (for
Cruelty is a badge inseparable from their Office) Artabanes, Canitius, one
Castus, and I, drew out their Swords, and sheathed them in their own bodies,
with such expedition, that they had their fate before they could fear it: Then
taking their Keys, we opened the doors of the Prison, and coming into the
great Court of Batiatus's house (which we were necessitated to pass through to
get into the Street) we might perceve him (as the gods would have it, who
always punish cruelty) attended only by a couple of his menial Servants, and
(as we conjectured) coming to visit us; his amazement was so great when he saw
us all at liberty, that he had not power to fly, which gave Castus sufficient
time to take away his life, but his Servants escaped, and by their cries drew
many people into the Streets, most of them in their shirts, for it was very
early: Those of the Capuans that had Arms, perceiving we had but four Swords,
fell upon us very resolutely; and (doubtless) had cut us off had we not
recovered a narrow Lane, where my Prince, Canitius, Castus, and I (who were
those only that had Arms) making good the entrance of it, gave our Companions
time to break into a Cooks-shop that was behind us; where having fitted
themselves, some with spits, others with long knives, and such kind of Weapons,
observing how our Enemies increast, and that delay would bring a certain ruin,
we charged them so furiously that we made way through all those that opposed
us, and by the death of some 30 or 40, ecover'd that Gate of the Town which
leads to the Mountains of Pettely just as some of the Inhabitants were going to
shut it, who as soon as they perceived us, fled and left us a free passage, the
Capuans not daring then to pursue us any further. In this Retreat, my Prince
and Canitius brought up the Rear, Castus and I led our Companions; and though
we were four wounded, yet it was so favorably, that it hindered not our march.
We were not sixteen furlongs out of Cap^a (which according to the Roman account
makes two Miles) when we overtook some Horses laden with Weapons for Fencers,
going to Salapia, those Horse and Arms we seized on, (but did the owners no
harm) and had scarcely fitted our selves with them, when we might perceive 300
Capuaus, that followed us with an eagerness that spoke their intentions. The
inequality of our numbers did somewhat startle our Companions at the first, but
my generous Prince so animated them, that he made them not only resolve to
fight, but save the Capuans the labor of half their march; the Enemy perceiving
our intentions, received our charge with much resolution, but Artabanes gave it
with more, and did act in that occasion things so worthy himself, that at last
the Capuans were routed, and most of them killed, for we followed the execution
to their very Gates, which we found so ill guarded (an universal fear having
seized upon all the Inhabitants) that had our numbers been proportionable to
our advantage, we might have possessed that great City. But we were satisfied
with our success, and at night retired our selves to a place of very strong
situation, which Castus showed us, who, by good fortune was perfectly
acquainted with that Country. This place I speak of was a Hill of a great
height, in the middle of a Plain, about eight Furlongs circumference, and
inaccessible every way but one, by which also there could not come above five
a-brest; The next morning we met together to chose our selves a Captain,
knowing a body how little soever without a head is a Monster. My Prince was
elected, whose valor and conduct in the late Fight gave him that place without
either opposition or envy, to whom we all swore obedience till we might get out
of Italy, and so return to our own Countries, for we were of several Nations,
though the most of any one were Thracians. Then our new Soldiers desiring to
know their Captains Country and Name, came and begged of him the knowledge of
both, but my Prince, who would not acquaint them with either, lest it might in
time discover him, desired their excuse, telling them he was tied to a
concealment of both by some considerations: The Thracians then; who I told you
were the most in number of any one Country, cried out, that they would
thenceforwards call him Spartacus, which in their Language signifies Captain or
General, and all the rest willingly consented to it, which I shall beg you,
(said Simander to Callimachus) to take notice of, for I shall for a while call
my generous Master no more but by that name, since 'twas under it he purchased
so great a proportion of Glory, that it cannot have an end till the World have.
O gods! (said Callimachus to Simander) Is it then Artabanes, that under the
name of Spartacus, did from so weak a beginning shake the Roman Empire worse
than ever Hannibal did? And who so filled the World with his generous Actions,
that not to have heard of him is as great wonder as any he performed? This
(replied Simander) is that same, Spartacus, who coming into Italy a Slave,
loaded with Chains and Miseries, by his virtue and courage had certainly
subjected the greatest Empire of the World, if at lest his Soldiers had been
of that temper which Hanniballs were; for Spartacus knew as well how to make
use of a Victory as to win it, if that great general had done the like, and had
followed success as much as success did him, he had made the Carthaginians
Lords of all the World. One great advantage Hannibal had, which was, though his
Army were composed of several Nations, yet they never mutiny'd, but with as
much satisfaction as duty observed his orders. If my generous Master had
enjoyed that blessing, the Parthians had now held that Empire in possession,
which the Carthaginians only had in expectation, as you shall hear by the
sequel of my discourse. Which said Callimachus, I must interrupt, to beg you to
resolve me two doubts, the first is, Why the Romans gave out that Spartacus was
a Thracian? and the second, Why they said he was killed in that famous Battle
of the Trenches, which he fought against Marcus Crassus? To satisfy your first
doubt (replied Simander) I must acquaint you that those Thracians which gave
him the name of Spartacus, when they saw his glorious Victories, and that he
would not then discover where he was born, resolved since he took his name out
of their Language to give him his original from their Country, which my Prince
did not contradict for those reasons I formerly specified, so that the Romans
when they said he was a Thracian, gave out but that which they credited
themselves. To your second cond doubt, which concerns his supposed death, I
shall beg your patience but a little, that I may tell it you in its due order;
for I perceive by your questions you are already acquainted with so much of my
Prince's adventures, that it will very much shorten the Relation of them. I
must confess (replied Callimachus) though my profession and inclination have
made me these few years live a recluse life, and give me no great curiosity to
enquire after news, yet your generous Princes actions have reached my ears, but
in so confused a way, that you will do me a singular favor to acquaint me with
all the particulars, being so enamored of his virtue, that I cannot but be
highly interested in any thing that relates unto a further knowledge of it:
then begging Simanders excuse for having desired to anticipate his Relation,
which he besought him to receive as an argument of his great concernment in
Artabanes's safety, by his silence invited him to continue his discourse, which
Simander did in these words: I left off where Artabanes under the name of
Spartacus was chosen Captain by his companions, which title obliged him to
provide for all their fafeties: his first cares were, to fortify our Fort,
(which he did by making many Traverses upon the Avenues) and to procure a
Magaxine of Victuals, which at last he accomplished; but with much difficulty,
being constrained to fight for every thing he brought in. The Capuans too were
taking order for their safeties; and having found by their first essay, that
'twas not an easy thing to conquer us in the Field, but far more hardly to be
effected in the strong Fort we were in, having furnished it with all necessaries
for three Months, dispatched away some of their Citizens to Rome, to acquaint
the Senate with what was past, and to implore their aid for the suppressing of
their Bondmen (for so they always termed us.) The Senate taking their motion
into debate, and finding how great prejudice all Italy had received by the
Slaves that were risen in Sicily (which were not then quite suppressed) how that
from a weak beginning, they had made a dangerous progress, and that it would
bring their Fame and their Empire into contempt, when that their very Slaves
could endanger both, resolved for this expedition to employ Clodius the Praetor,
with Three thousand Men, who, having received his Commission (which was to put
us all to the Sword) left Rome, and by great marches advanced toward us: we
were not ignorant of these preparations by the industry of Castus (who knowing
the Country was empoly'd as a Spy, and till we were besieged, brought us
frequent and true intelligences; but at last the Praetor and his Army, (which
was recruited by some additional Forces out of Capua) were come so near us,
that they drew up in Battalia, and faced our Fort. Spartacus, who was resolved
to make them dispute every foot of ground, made some such vigorous Sallies,
that the Romans were hindered from Camping above 24 hours, and had our numbers
been equal to our resolutions, we had made our Enemies know, that those they
had to deal with, had nothing of Slaves but the Name. My Prince having
acquainted Clodus, by the loss of Two hundred of his Soldiers, of what temper
we made, gave him leave to settle his Camp, lest he might harrass his own Men
more than the Enemies. The Praetor, who understood the art of war, and knew the
truth of this Maxim, That a place strong by situation is easily blockt up,
elected that way of conquering us; But since I have so many things of Soldiery
to acquaint you with, I must run them over briefly, by telling you, That though
the season of the the year were very incommodious to lodge in the open air, yet
the Romans having endured a world of miseries by the fury of the weather, would
not (for all) decline their Seige, but by the continuance of it reduced us to
that extremity for want of Victuals, that we resolved, rather than suffer the
torments of Famine, to fall upon all the Army, and with our Swords in our hands
dye, acting our revenge; which determination we had the next morning put in
practice, had not I found out a strange way for our deliverance: for the
evening preceding that day, in which we resolved to perform our desperate
enterprise, as I was looking over our Fort, I took notice of certain wild
Vines, that grew upon the side of the Rocks, so thick, and in such abundance,
that I began to fancy it no very difficult thing, by their help, and our own
industry, to get down into the Plain. This imagination I instantly communicated
to Spartacus, and to the rest, who having viewed the place, were all of my
opinion; we therefore began to make Ladders, like those in Ships, for the Vines
being supple, of a great length, and strong, were almost as useful as Ropes,
and the Rocks not making one continued precipice, but in some places resembling
Scaffolds and stages, did so facilitate our attempt, that two hours before day,
we all safely descended on the Plain; my generous Master having led us the way,
which was always his practice, where there was any danger. Then as we were
going to advise with Castus, what way to take to recover the Mountain, my
Prince over-hearing it, came, and begged us to make use of no other guide but
him, and to take no other way, but that which led to the Roman Camp, where
Victory, as certain as it would be glorious, did attend us: In a word, he told
us so many arguments for embracing so happy an opportunity, that they preferred
the honor of the attempt before their own safety, and obeyed Spartacus, who
leading them some ten furlongs about, fell into Clodius Camp, and found them so
unprepared, (for they kept no Centuries, but toward the Advenues of our Fort,
having all Italy to friend besides) that we killed above 500 of them in their
Hutts, before they took the Alarm, which at last was so hot (not knowing from
whence so great an execution proceeded) that Clodius and all those that escaped
the fury of our Swords, were obliged to their Feet for their safeties, and left
us the quiet possession of their Camp, with all the Riches, Victuals, and Arms
in it. The report of this great success, was so suddenly dispersed, that in
less than ten days, above 1000, as well slaves, as discotented and poor Men,
came to offer their service to my Prince, who willingly received them, and gave
Arms to such as wanted any, out of those he had taken from the Praetor. But
Spartacus having no bank of Treasure to maintain such a confluence of People,
as every day came thronging under his Ensigns, and knowing, that to live upon
the spoil, was as dishonest as unpolitick, and would so scatter his Army, that
the Romans could not miss an occasion of destroying it, published, that if the
Country would send him in a competent proportion of Victuals and Money, they
should receive no prejudice, but if they neglected so favorable an offer,
whatsoever miseries they suffered by it, must be cast upon the score of their
obstinacy. This in some places prevailed, but in others it did not, those
enjoyed the effects of his clemency, and these resented the reward of their
wilfulness. But to confine my self to my engagement of running over briefly all
my Princes generous actions in this War, I will acquaint you, that the Romans,
after the defeat of Clodius, sent Varinus the Praetor with 800 Men against
Spartacus, and because his Army was to be formed out of several Garrisons,
which of necessity would take up some time, he sent Furius his Lieutenant, with
2000 Soldiers before him, to preserve the Country from our incursions, which
my Prince having intelligence of, drew out a thousand of his select Men, and
marched all night with them toward a Valley, which Furius was to pass through
next morning, and there, an hour before day, in two small Groves about a
furlong asunder, he lodged his party. We had not long continued in expectation
of our enemies, but we saw Furius in the head of his Army, marching in very
good order, which Spartacus soon broke, for discovering himself with six
hundred of his Soldiers, he gave the Romans, so resolute and unexpected a
charge, that at first he discomposed them. But Furius, who perceived how
unconsiderable our numbers were, soon rallied his men, and then gave us so
vigorous a repayment, that we found it high time to give the signal for
Canitius and Castus, with those four hundred Men that were yet in one of the
Groves for our reserve, which no sooner appeared, than the Enemy fled, not
knowing but that every Wood might have been so furnished. The Country being
very fit to follow the execution, there escaped not above 100 in all, of which
number, Furius was none, who scorning to owe his safety to his flight, thrust
himself into the midst of us, and there found that fate which Spartacus
endeavored to prevent; but the eagerness of his Soldiers was such, that he
could only oblige him in design, and not in action, yet after his death, he
gave him a Burial suitable to the esteem he had conceived of his Courage. This
defeat increased our Army much more than the Romans lost in it, and the Senate
no sooner heard of it, but they resolved by a powerful force, to pluck up this
War by the Roots, and not to send inconsiderable numbers against us, which did
but serve to increase our reputation, and eclipse their own.

In order to which, they gave Cossinius the command of 10000 Men, and joined
him in Commission with Varinus, who by this was recruited with more than Furius
had lost. Spartacus quickly found, that if these two Armies should join,
'twould be difficult, if not impossible, any longer to maintain a War, and
therefore was projecting some way to avoid this storm, but fancied none so
probable as by taking the field, which might furnish him with an occasion to
fight with them asunder. His Army then consisting of 8000 Men, he marched
directly toward Varinus, who lay encamped 60 Furlong from our Fort, in
expectation of his Colleague, who had then newly left Rome. My Prince having
faced his Camp, invited him out of it, and by many other ways endeavored to
provoke him to Battle, but when he perceived all was fruitless he entrencht
himself eight Furlongs from the Praetor, gave out, that his Men ran away daily,
and for four nights successively kept great Fires in his Camp, and permitted
none of his Soldiers to appear without, nor within his Trenches. The first
night having advertisement, that Cossinius was within a little days march of
Varinus, with as much silence as an Army could rise, he quit his Camp, leaving
some few to continue those accustomed Fires in it, and marched all night toward
Cossinus, whose Scouts being taken by some of ours, after a few threatenings,
confessed that their General was not then in his Camp, but lay at a small Village
not far distant from it, to make use of certain Baths which were there.
Spartacus immediately sent Castus with a commanded party of select Horse to
surprise him, and continued his march toward the Enemy, but Cossinius got the
Alarm time enough to recover to his Camp, which he was no sooner come into,
than our Army stormed it, and after a bloody resistance entered. There Cossinius
observing how my Prince pierced, and broke his resolutest Troops, had the
confidence to fight with him, which cost him his life. His fall was no sooner
divulged, but all his Army sought their security in their feet, having found
their Swords were unable to give it them; some two thousand escaped, the rest
were killed, and a few taken. The day by this time appeared, and showed our
Soldies, that the riches they had purchased by the victory, was as great as the
Honor. Having rested and refreshed themselves awhile, the next night we
returned to our own Camp, where we found how well Varinus had been deluded by
our Fires, and our Soldiers not showing themselves the five precedent days.
This, Sir (continued Simander) is so strange, that were it not as general a
known truth, I should not have the confidence to tell it you. The next morning
after our return, Spartacus sent five hundred prisoners (taken at Cossinius's
defeat) unto Varinus, and bid them tell him, though the Romans usage to him,
and their barbarous Commissions they gave their Generals of showing no Mercy,
deserved in justice, a proportionate return, yet he esteemed an ill action
fitter to be avoided than imitated, therefore presented him those Captives,
having only exacted an oath from them, of not bearing Arms against him for a
year. 'Twere hard to tell the several conjectures our Enemies had in their
Camp, when they perceived those five hundred unarmed Men march up to them, but
'twere far more difficult to describe their grief when they knew the cause of
it. The rage of this defeat, and the confidence Varinus had of not being
relieved, made him alter that cold resolution of protracting the War, and by
erecting a Scarlet Coat Armor over his Tent (which is the Romans signal of
Battle) gave us as much joy, as our success did afterward afford him
discontent. But his fury not having absolutely blinded his judgment, he drew
up his Army in so advantageous a place, that he might retire safely into his
Camp, if he found the Victory inclined to our side, which precaution he soon
made use of, and by it deferred his ruin for a few days, which afterward
happened near Salapia, a considerable Town in the East part of Italy, where the
success was so entire, that not above fifteen hundred escaped, in which number
Varinus was, having lost his Axes and Rods, the badges of his Pretorship, with
the Officers that carried then, to whom Spartacus soon restored them, and them
to their liberty; but our Army commanded them to tell the Senate, that their
General would not make use of the Regalia's, till he had the Empire too.
Amongst those Prisoners then taken, there was some young Men of Salapia, who
thinking to have a share in Varinus Victory, were (the day before his defeat)
come into his Army, and finding so different a fortune to that which they
expected, desired to speak with Sparta^us, where they told him, that Salapia
was without any Garrison, that the chiefest Citizens in it, were their Friends
and Kindred, and such with whom they had much power, which they would employ
for the reducing of it into his hands, if he would restore them their freedom,
and engage his faith that their Town and Townsmen should enjoy the same
Immunities and Privileges under him that they did under the Romans; in a word,
they so represented the terror the Salapians were in, and the interest they had
in them, that Spartacus granted un^o them whatsoever they desired, and
immediately marched directly thither. That which induced those Prisoners to
make that overture, was, that some of our Officers in their d^scourse, had not
only assured them, that the first design we should go upon, was to take in
their City, but that they themselves must expect the last rigor of War, if they
did not contribute their assistance in the reducing of it, which if they would
undertake, and perform, might not only be a singular advantage to Salapia, but
preserve their own lives, which were so justly forfeited to the Law of Arms.
These Men, through such like infusions, were so terrified, that partly out of
relation to themselves, and partly out of care of their Town, which (without
yielding) by the greatness of our Army (then indeed grown very considerable)
must become in few days a prey to the insolent Soldier, inclined them to that
motion, which was the cause of furnishing my Prince with an occasion of serving
two of the most virtuous Lovers that time did produce, and in obliging them, he
received a far higher satisfaction, than by taking of so important a place. By
this our Army having faced Salapia, half those young Men were permitted to try
their power, the other half remaining as Hostages for them, and truly they were
so successful in the attempt, having terrified the Salapians with the vastness
of our Forces (which impressions they were apt enough to receive by the bloody
defeat of Varinus the Praetor) that immediately they deputed some of the
chiefest Citizens to treat with my Prince, for the conditions of their
surrender, and had so far advanced the work, that every thing was on the point
of conclusion, when a Messenger from the Town desiring, and being admitted to
speak with the Deputies, whispered them something in the Ear, after which, they
all begged leave of Spartacus, to return for a while, there being in their
absence some tumults happened amongst their Salapians, which nothing but their
Presence could appease, which being granted, and they not a quarter of an hour
returned, but those young Men that were employed into Salapia, were sent back
into the Camp, all the Walls Manned, and bloody Colors hung up, of which so
sudden an alteration we could not imagine the cause, till those Prisoners told
us, that during the Treaty, a young Gentleman called Perolla, who under the
Romans had purchased much Glory, had by an Oration so persuaded the Salapians,
that they were resolved rather to hazard their ruin by resistance, than
purchase the avoiding of it by a submission; that the Citizens having taken up
that determination, would have detained them, lest Spartacus, incensed by their
inconstancy, might inflict the punishment of it on them: Against which, they
represented the injustice of the action, the certain death of their companions;
and how 'twould give one that had the Power, the Will to destroy Salapia; but
finding all their Reasons rejected, they went to Perolla, whose Gallantry, they
said, was as great as his Courage, and having acquainted him with the
conditions on which they were sent into Salapia, and their desires, he not
only highly commended their honesty, but gave strict order they should return
to the Camp, which no one durst oppose, all of them having trusted him for the
time being, with the absolute Command, We soon found by this relation, the
occasion of so sudden a change, and that Salapia must be purchased with as much
difficulty as a little before we were persuaded to have obtained it with ease.
But Spartacus having faced it, found himself bound in Honor to make them
repent the contemning of his Mercy, and therefore instantly securing all the
Avenues, he gave directions for many s^aling Ladders, Rolling Bridges, and
Faggots, to be forthwith provided: Then calling for all the Salapians, who were
fifty in number, he told them, That he was sorry their Citizens had deluded
him, but 'twas only in relation to themselves, since it would render their
destruction as just, as it was inevitable: that to conquer so considerable a
place, was more for his Honor, than to have it given him: That he had
endeavored to make them yield by fair means, because he preferred the saving
of Blood before the Glory of his Army: That for their own particulars, their
declining the temptations of their friends, and returning to his Camp, when
they could not but doubt his resentment was a strong proof of their Gallantry,
or of the high opinion they had of his; either of which causes were equally
obliging: that by the character they had given him of Perolla* he was more
ambitious to have him for a Friend than an Enemy, but would not desire that
happiness then, left it might deprive him of a certain Victory: That he so much
valued Virtue (though in his Enemies) that lest Perolla's might not be well
seconded, he gave them all (as well for his sake as for their own) their
liberty, and leave to employ it in his service, for the defense of Salapia,
which he assured them would be all little enough, against an Army on whom
Victory did as constantly as justly attend. The Salapians, who expected a quite
contrary entertainment, after many expressions of their joy and gratitude,
replied, That if upon their return, they could not persuade their Citizens to
yield unto so generous a Conqueror; that yet at least upon their Ramparts, they
would confirm the good opinion he had of their Courages, and either make his
Victory worthy that name, or his defeat the more excusable by their resistance.
Spartacus extremely pleased with this promise, assured them, that he would in
very few days summon them of their promise, and observe, if they would satisfy
this last engagement, as punctually as they had their first, which if they did,
he would confess in giving them their freedom, he had more obliged himself than
them. These young Men being come to Salapia, so magnified my Prince unto
Perolla, that he knew not whether the misfortune was greater, in having so much
Virtue (...) his Enemy, or the happiness in having so ample an occasion of
glory. Two days were past in light skirmishes, whilst our preparations for an
Assault were perfected: The third, an hour before 'twas light our Army
advanced, and every Division having received their Orders, began a furious
Storm, which was received with an equal Resolution: Six hours together the
business was disputed, without any apparent advantage on either side, and every
place filled with Horror and Blood, Death being given and received in a
thousand several ways: at last Canitius, who had the Command of all the Germans
in the Army, planted one of our Ensigns upon the Walls, but was so suddenly
repulst, that before my Prince could have time to commend his courage, he had
cause to pity the misfortune of it: Nine of our several Commanders had the same
fate that day, as well in their resolutions as misfortunes, and Spartacus
perceiving, that they at last fought, rather by Duty than Inclination, sounded
a Retreat, which was so readily obeyed, that the Enemy found, it rather
proceeded from apprehension than discipline, and therefore fell so briskly in
our Rear, that it had endangered all the Army, had not my Prince in Person with
500 of the resolutest Men, made head against them, and though he stopped the
execution, and at last made them retire, yet it was so leasurely, and in such
good order, that their Retreat appeared rather their Election than their
Necessity. Spartacus having doubled his Guards, and taken strict Order for the
rendering ineffectual of all Sallies, returned to his Tent more unsatisfied with
the repulse, than with the loss, where all those Officers, whose wound
permitted them, and who had that fatal day escaped Perolla's Sword, came to
justify themselves, professing that they were not more troubled at their
disgrace, than desirous the next morning to repair it, and manifest by their
Victory, that the suspension of it proceeded from their want of Fortune, not of
Courage, or by their death show whose Soldiers they were; That their affront
(by a joint concurrence, of all their observations) proceeded from Perolla, who
was ubiquitary, and knew no certain Post, but where there was the certain'st
danger, which he courted with an eagerness as great as his success. Many other
expressions they made, to vindicate the affront, and to show how willing they
were to repair it, which would be too tedious to relate, and to which my Prince
replied, that he was as much satisfied with the sense they had of their
misfortune, as troubled at the occasion of it, that according to their desires,
the next morning he would again storm the Town, and help them to vindicate
their Credits, or bear a share with them in their failer: and in pursuance of
that resolution, commanded them back to their several charges, with Orders, as
soon as the day dawned, that they should begin again the Storm, that the Enemy
(if overcome) might acknowledge by the not altering the Assailants, nor the
order of the Assault, that it was their Fortune only had suspended their
destructions, The Officers by many expressions having thanked Spartacus, for so
high a Compliment placed upon their Courages, were retiring, when there came in
news, that Granicus, with most of those others which we thought had been killed
by the Salapians, were coming to my Prince, who extremely surpised at the
accident, sent for them in; Granicus therefore, (with Sixscore of his
companions) immediately presented himself, and told him: after the Assault,
Sir, was ended, Perolla commanded all the Prisoners to be brought unto him, and
having learned, that I was of the most considerable quality amongst them,
addressed himself unto me, and spoke to this effect. That liberty which both you
and your companions have lost, by my fortune, I here again restore you, and for
your Ransom, I shall only desire you to tell the generous Spartacus, I am
exceedingly troubled that he has so much cause to look upon this action, as an
expression of Gratitude, and not of that Affection his Gallantry has created
me; and though his usage to the Salapians he sent me, expects this as a just
retribution, yet the high opinion I have of his Virtue, was no way an inferior
motive: tell him besides, that those, whose wounds will not permit them to go
off with you, shall receive an entertainment which shall speak the opinion I
have of their General, that their healths and Liberties shall be the same
thing, and that I almost think it a misfortune to defend my Country, since by
it I am necessitated to be his Enemy. This high Generosity had so powerful an
influence on my Prince, that had not his Honor been so deeply engaged, he had
raised the Siege, and would have thought it more Glorious to decline fighting
against so gallant and civil an Enemy, than to have conquered him; but that
Tyrant which binds us to follow other Men's opinions more than our own, forced
him to continue his former design of storming Salapia next morning, and I dare
truly affirm, the desire he had of taking so considerable a place, was more
prevalent with him, out of an expectation, that thereby he might evince himself
worthy Perolla's friendship, and find an occasion to oblige him, than any other
consideration whatsoever; which lest the fury of his Soldiers might prevent, he
assured those that could save the generous Perolla's life, should have a more
considerable reward than his Ransom. The day no sooner appeared, but Castus
began the Assault on the East side of the City, and Canitius with his Germans
on the West, where Spartacus himself was, who perceiving many of his Men
killed, and the rest extremely shaken, to avoid the precedent days fate, took
up his own Colors, and cried out; Those that love their Honor, or their
General, let them follow me, then marching a round pace thorough Canitius's Men
that were flying, he came against a cloud of Arrows to the foot of the Wall,
where erecting some Scaling-Ladders, he resolutely and successfully climbed up,
and after a bloody dispute, beat off the Defendants, and planted that Colors
he had in his hand upon the Rampire; I had the honor to be the nearest to him
in this action, where he did so many noble exploits, that Fortune must have
been as unjust, as they say she is unconstant, had she refused him this
Victory. No sooner had our Army perceived how easy a passage my Prince had
made, than above 6000 of them entered by that way, and without shedding any
more Blood, rendered themselves absolute Masters of the City; but whilst
Spartacus was taking order to preserve the Salapians, as much as in such an
occasion was possible, and that he had dispersed many of his Officers, and I
with them to do the like, as I was going through one of the fairest streets, I
saw a great confluence of Soldiers about a House, whose Structure sufficently
spoke the magnificence of the owner, and being come thither, I inquired what
was the cause of it, one of the Officers soon informed me, that a company of
young Gentlemen only, considerable for their resolutions, had made so generous
a defense, and so slighted all Quarter, that they were necessitated to make use
of numbers to suppress them, and that now at last they had killed all the
Defendants but one, who having gained a narrow Staircase, was yet making of it
good, with so much courage, that he deplored the destroying, as much as the
effects of it, and that he understood this generous man's name was Perolla. You
may easily imagine the hearing of that name, gave me an unexpressible desire to
save the Master of it, and having conjured the Officer to run and acquaint
Spartacus with it, I thrust my self into the crowd, and by many actions which
showed my concernment and haste, commanded them in Spartacus's name, to forbear
any further attempt against so generous an Enemy. This Order found a ready
obedience, as well out of the knowledge they had of the affection my dear
Master honored me with, as out of a desire to preserve Perolla, who they now
fought against, rather to show that an Army might kill him, than out of any
design, they had to do so. At last by the help of our Officers I came to the
place where the gallant Perolla stood, who appeared to me to be less weary with
conquering than our Soldiers were with assaulting him, and spite of that Blood
which endeavored to disfigure his Face, I perceived a Countenance so Spiritual
and so Lovely together, that I knew not which most to admire, but my wonder was
quickly raised to a higher pitch by the sight of a Lady, who possessed the
several Beauties of shape, stature, complexion, and features, in so
inaccessional a degree, that an affection for her could not so properly be
called Passion, as Reason. The contemplation of so many perfections had almost
made me forget the design I was come for, which fault I soon repaired, by
addressing my self to the generous Perolla, and telling him. The great
Spartacus (Sir) who cherishes Virtue wherever it is placed, has sent me hither
to preserve so great a possessor of it as you are, for he believes your
Gallantry is a stronger obligation on him to serve you, than your employing of
it against him, is to make him your Enemy. Since (replied Perolla) that is your
Generals Principle, the fair Izadora here is a worthy object to employ that
generosity on, which I believe you cannot doubt, when I assure you, that her
exterior parts are as far short of the Beauties of her Mind, as the Passion I
pay her is unworthy the Object: for her sake I can beg, though not for my own,
and will acknowledge you civility as great as your courages, if you will
promise me she shall receive an usage as proportionate to her merit, as you can
possibly pay her: this engagement will be more obliging far than my own
safety, and make that death which my sad fate now renders necessary, as full of
happiness as such a deprivation is capable of. As I was about to answer him, I
was hindered by a great noise, which turning about to discover the cause of, I
perceived it was my Prince, who with incredible haste was breaking through the
Crowd, and came time enough to see the perfect Izadora fling her self at her
Lovers feet, and tell him, Alas Perolla! can you talk of happiness in death,
and yet think of leaving me behind you? did you ever find any felicity in
separation, that you beg it even of your very Enemies? or have you so low an
opinion of my passion, as to think I can survive you? Ah Madam (said Perolla,
interrupting, and putting himself in her posture) if you will lessen my
trouble, give me rather marks of your disdain, than of your love? since the
vastness of that score now creates my sufferings, which are so great, they
cannot be increast but by new additions of your favor: Judge then, if it be
not time to dye, when my highest blessing, that of your Affection, proves my
torment. Then (replied Izadora) my condition will as much require death as
yours, for it is as impossible for me not to augment your sufferings whilst I
live, as it is to survive you, which since my sorrow will not permit, let my
Love anticipate the effects of it: this will be more proportionate to my vows,
and cut off the tortures of a lingering life, so Death, the enemy to other
passions, may prove the friend of ours, and conferr that union on us in the
other life, which our Fates and cruel Parents have denied us in this. Izadora
(said Perolla) flatter not my hopes with an union in the other World, the gods
which held me unworthy of you here, will have much more cause to continue that
belief, when instead of your mortality, they shall cloth you with the reward
of Virtue; alas, then you will be fitter for their adoration than mine. Can
there be (she replied) a felicity in the other World for Izadora, if she be
divided from Perolla? do not by such suggestions fright me into a hatred of
Elysium, which, if what you say be true, will lose its quality, and fancy not
the gods unjust, only to make us miserable: no Perolla, we have walked too
exactly in the paths of Virtue, to fear Death, and as an argument of this
truth, that minute which separates your Soul from the fair Mansion it now
inhabits, shall give mine freedom, for to dye, is a Blessing or a Curse, if the
first, I will not be denied it too, if the latter, I hope 'twill hinder your
despair, when you know I will involve my self in it. This noble dispute had
continued longer, had I not told Perolla, that Spartacus was come, who indeed
was so ravished with the Virtue of these Lovers, that his admiration made many
who knew him not, suspect that his suspense proceeded from his being as
absolutely vanquished by the Eyes of one of his Enemies, as his Sword had been
victorious over all the rest; But Parth^nissa was too deeply fixed to be
defaced, and her Beauty had got so absolu^e an Empire over Artabanes Heart,
that since her inconstancy could not destroy it, nothing else could have that
power. But the Lookers on, who took his Affection to Virtue, to be a Passion of
another quality, were not long in that error, for Izadora, who perceived
Perolla's great Heart could not make any desires to my Prince, esteemed it an
action fitter for her Sex to undertake, and addressing her self to him, put him
out of those raptures their gallantry only had created, by saying, Generous
Spartacus did not that Title assure me you will receive a greater contentment
in giving Perolla his Life, than he can resent by receiving it, and that I
furnish you with an occasion to oblige your self more than him, I should now
have been silent, and joyfully participate in his Fate, rather than be indebted
for his preservation to a less noble Enemy: but your Gallantry is such, that
the cause of his being conquered, takes away all resentment from the Effect.
Izadora had continued speaking, but that her gallant Lover interrupted her,
crying out, Oh Madam! Can you think Perolla will live after he has been so
unworthy and miserable, as to obtain your safety by his Prayers, whilst he had
a Sword to purchase it? add not so much to my misfortunes, as to make your
Affection the cause of all those Torments I must hereafter suffer, should I now
live; no Izadora, my death shall show, that nothing but the desire of your
safety could have induced me so long to survive my Honor. Finishing those
words, he had flung himself upon the point of his Sword had not my Prince
(guessing at what he meant) ran to him, and though it were time enough to
hinder his fatal determination, yet it could not prevent a slight wound which
manifested his sad intention. Izadora, on the other side, thinking Perolla had
been his own Executioner, resolved to bear him company, and with a courage
which disdained exclaiming against Fate, drew out a Poniard which she had
concealed for some such desperate exigency, and cried out, this stroke Perolla
shall prove more kind than you, and give us that union you would so cruelly
deprive me of: then lifting that fatal weapon, she had (doubtless) performed
what she spoke, but that by thrusting away her Hand, I made that wound light
upon her Arm, which she intended for her Heart, but having mist her aim, she
was going to double her stroke, had not I forced the Poniard from her. Whilst I
was thus employed Spartacus obtained an easy conquest over Perolla, who no
sooner heard his fair Mistress cruel determination, than the bare sound of her
death, banished all thoughts of his own, and having perceived the service I had
rendered him, he flung himself at her feet, and told her, I will live, Madam,
since this wretched life is so dear unto you, and on that score I shall cherish
it, as much as I should detest it upon any other: Judge Izadora then, how
precious your life is to me, since to continue it, I can be content to live in
infamy. Live, generous Perolla (said my Prince) and since the belief of your
being vanquished is the cause of your despair, banish that groundless doubt, for
you are so far from that condition, that you are the Conqueror, your Virtue has
made you invincible, nor was it fit the fair Izadora should derive her safety
from a less noble cause; I renounce all right to her preservation, and the
wonders which your Sword has hitherto acted, shall be increast by this addition
of remaining victorious in a Triumphant Army. Ah Sir, (replied Perolla) whilst
you endeavor to make me a Conqueror, you are doubly so, your civility acts now
what your courage did before, both which are so unresistable, that when I
consider who you are, I shall excuse my self in my misfortune, and since you
attribute miracles to my Sword, I will make it perform one, which is to yield
it self up. Perolla had satisfied this ceremony, had not Spartacus so
absolutely declined it, that all those which were present easily perceived, his
denial proceeded as much from his justice, as his civility. Whilst these two
great Persons were by a thousand embraces confirming that friendship which they
vowed to each other, Perolla unfortunately espied some Blood running out of the
fair Izadora's Arm: alas, how fatal was that object like to prove, his passion
made him act many extravagancies, which nothing but Love could render
legitimate: but when he remembered the cause of her wound, how soon was that
new created harmony dissolved? and having again found, that all his attempts
against his life were fruitless, he prostrated himself at his fair Mistresses
feet, and told her: Must I then, Madam? must I the^see that precious Blood shed
for my sake, and at the same time be rendered incapable of emptying all my
veins to bear it company, and expiate my crime? must you spill your Blood to
preserve my life, whilst I make use only of Prayers to preserve yours? Ah
Izadora! be merciful, and permit me by one stroke, to end the miseries which
these thoughts will still create. Alas (said Izadora) has your rage so much
blinded your Judgment, as to think, that what is the cause of this slight
hurt: if continued, will prove its reparation; rise, rise Perolla, and believe
me, if these few drops have either manifested my Passion, or saved your Life;
they are too gloriously spilt to be deplored, and if they create any
resentments in you, they should be of a contrary nature to those which now
appear. I must confess (continued Simander) that my memory does not contain all
the particular passages of so rare an entertainment, and therefore I will not
so much wrong such virtuous persons, as to cloth their conceptions and
expressions in any other language than their own; I will therefore in
expectation of your pardon for so high an omission, continue my discourse, by
acquainting you, that after a friendship was contracted, which was as perfect
as the friends themselves were, that Perolla's despair was absolutely
conquered, and that his, and his Izadora's wounds were dressed, my Prince invited
them to his Quarters, out of that Massacre and deluge of Blood, which his new
friend had made, and though his many wounds rendered the least motion, both
dangerous and painful, yet he thought the greatest torments would be in his
separation from the fair Izadora, and therefore having made his pain appear the
less, to make his happiness really the greater, he assured my Prince, that
without any inconveniency, he would wait upon her and him to those Lodgings he
had assigned her, whither as they were going, they might perceive some
barbarous Soldiers driving before them two Gentlemen, whose Age and Countenance
merited a different usage (though their past actions did not) and I dare avow,
though their sufferings were great, and that the manner in which they were
inflicted, was as sensible as the pain; yet they did bear them with much joy,
for each of them by the knowledge of his own usage, guessing at that of his
Enemies, found his satisfaction in his very torments. But they were no sooner
perceived by Izadora and Perolla, than both of them with many Tears, and
passionate actions, begged my Prince that their Irons might be taken off, which
was no sooner motion'd than granted, though those which kept them, alleged,
that they were the Men which had spilt most of their companions blood at the
assault: then my dear Master desired Perolla to acquaint him what high relation
could produce such rare demonstrations of affection, as he expret at their
captivity? to which he replied, Sir, I must acknowledge that Gentleman (showing
Blacius) to be the fair Izadora's Father, and the other, (showing Pacuvius) to
be mine, though truly they have retained nothing, but the name and the power of
Parents, they are those which we have reason to hate, and yet cannot; and
though they have stifled all the dictates of nature, and opposed the purest
flame that ever burned; yet we preserve out Duties to them so entire, that we
resent any affliction which befalls them, with a grief proportionable to their
joy, if the self-same accidents had arrived to us. Spartacus being informed of
their qualities, saluted them with much respect; but he perceived, as soon as
they had learned to whose intercession they owed that favor, that the means of
their deliverance suppressed the contentment of it. This action made him
extremely admire, what strange causes they were, which could have so unusual an
operation, and having found at last, that each of them relied upon the justice
of his cause, he desired to hear their difference, to which the Fathers
willingly consented, as being confident in their right, and having heard a true
character of my Prince's Justice, as on the other side, Izadora and Perolla
willingly submitted to it on the same grounds. The next morning then being
appointed for this Audience, my Prince having conducted our virtuous Lovers to
his own Quarters, which when he had surrendered them, and there (as a mark of
his confidence and friendship) acquainted Perolla with the word, he withdrew
himself to settle and secure his new Conquest, leaving them in as high an
admiration of his Gallantry, as he had conceived of theirs. The next day was
not many hours old, but he was informed by the messenger he had sent to
complement the generous Lovers, That they expected with much impatiency, the
Judge of their Felicity or Misery: to satisfy their longing, he waited
immediately on them, bringing with him their Fathers, where finding by the
Surgeons, that so long a disourse as their fortunes must amount unto, might
prejudice Perolla's health, they prevailed with Izadora to undertake the
Relation, which a general silence inviting her to perform, she began it in
these words.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK IV.
The Story of Izadora and Perolla.
I Must Sir, as a friend to Truth as well as to our Fathers inform you, That
their hatred is not a purchased but an hereditary one, and bears so ancient a
date, that the original cause of it as absolutely forgotten as the sad effects
it has produced are recent, that what was but passion or resentment in the
beginners of this fatal difference, has turned to nature in their Children,
that our Parents have inherited their predecessors Malice as well as their
Estates, and as if fortune had hitherto affoded instruments to nourish this sad
difference, in seven descents successively our Ancestors have always left heirs
male to perpetuate this quarrel, whereby many of our Families have sacrificed
their lives to the blind rage of the authors of them: but at last the gods
having given Pacuvius no other heir than the generous Perolla, and Blacius than
the unfortunate Izadora, all those which were concerned in these domestic
differences, began to make it their hopes as well as 'twas their prayers, that
by an union of us two, this ancient animosity might be extinguished; but alas,
the higher Powers it seems had otherwise decreed, for Blacius more troubled
that he wanted a Son to inherit his hatred than his estate, imagined (since my
Sex exempted me from those violent resentments which he held so necessary to
his blood) he ought to collect in himself all the resentments of those which
should have succeeded him, and act some design suitable to his hatred and
despair, that the effects of it might be always recent enough in Perolla's
Family, to supply the expiration of his own (Pardon me Sir, said Izadora,
addressing herself to her Father, if I speak those words which you have your
self so often reiterated.) And on the other side Pacuvius seeing but one man of
his Enemies alive, re^olv'd to be revenged on him in such away, that the manner
of his death should be as deplorable to his friends as the very extinction of
his Family. (I must beg your pardon to Sir, said Izadora, addressing herself to
Pacuvius) because you are the Father of my Perolla, though what I say your
professions as well as actions have endeavored abundantly to justify. These
Sir (continued Izadora, speaking to Spartacus) were the reasons and resolutions
of our Parents when Perolla and I were in an age as innocent as that we now are
in is miserable; and as a further evincement of their hatred, I have been often
told, that Blacius was angry with nature for having given me this little
Beauty, least it might tempt Perolla, and Pacuvius was the like at the
inevitable charms of his virtuous son, lest they should raise in me a Passion
which might create that union they so abundantly feared; therefore what
education they thought fit to give us was in private, in which if we made any
progress, Pacuvius and Blacius thought it as great an injury to have it
published as other Parents would to have had it concealed. Judge (Sir) on the
other side, if ever there could be a higher hatred than that which subverted
the dictates of Blood and Nature, (and on the other) if there could be a
greater affection than what conveted antipathy into sympathy. I must (before I
proceed any further) acquaint you, That though Salapia and Capua be near thirty
miles distant, yet Pacuvius has a vast Estate there as well as here, and as if
all things had contributed to nourish the distraction of our Families, Blacius
has the like there too, lest (as I believe) by being separated, their rage
might want that flame which the sight of each did inspire. To hinder me
therefore from the knowledge of Perolla's increasing excellencies, Pacuvius
sent him to Capuas, and removed thither himself shortly after; where whilst his
gallant Son was making a large proficiency in all those realities and ornaments
which have since made him the greatest glory of our Times; Hanniball, that
victorius Captain, who had made Spain his first Conquest for the Carthaginians,
undertook Italy should be the next, and having past such dangers, which to
believe, is almost as hard as to have overcome them, and suffered miseries to
invade the Romans, which no Nation else would have undergone, but to have
avoided them; he at last scaled the Walls of Italy (the Alps) which indeed was
a very strange thing, most men believing it a task as difficult to enter this
Country that way, as to subdue it when gotten in, and having with Fire and
Sword made ways where natures self had denied them, in four set Battles at
Ticinum, Trebia Thasimene, and Cannae, vanquished the Consuls Puicus Cornelius
Scipio, Sempronius Longus, Caius Flaminius, Terentius Varro, and Paulus
Aemilius, whose defeat invited the Attelanian, the Calatinians, the Samnites,
the Brutians, the Lucanians, and diverse other people of Italy, to submit to
that yoke they esteemed it impossible to resist; and had the great Captain
followed Maherball's (the General of his Horse) advice, and marched directly to
Rome, he had without all dispute possessed himself of that triumphant City, which
since has given Laws to those that might have imposed theirs on her, but having
mist his opportunity, and thereby the Romans having changed their fears into
nobler Passions, he applied himself wholly to the Conquest of Capua (the second
Rome) where Pacuvius's hatred to Blacius soon furnished Hanniball with an
opportunity proportionable to his desires: For my Father has been always so
inviolable a friend to the Romans, that he almost rejoiced at heir defeats,
since they furnished him with an occasion to j^stifie he was tied to them, not
to their posterity; and though Pacuvius were very much their friend, yet he was
much more his Revenges, which Passion was so predominant, that it made him act
things both his reason and interest condemned, and which no other consideration
could have seduced him to. To confirm this truth, when he found that Blacius
was unalterable to this Empire, and that their probable ruin did rather
confirm than shake him, he resolved under an appearance of securing himself and
Capua to ruin my Father, to which action he was the apter to incline by
Hanniball's Letters, which assured him, if by his power Capua were delivered
into his, the Citizens should find no alteration but the difference of their
Protectors, which small change should be recompensed sufficiently with many
Immunities the Rom^ns had denied them; and that for his own particular, he
would make him no positive offers, since that were to confine to certain
Articles the recompense of his merit, and put limits to those rewards which he
resolved should have none. I must do Pacuvius that right as to profess I
believe, though these glittering promises advanced the putting his design in
execution, yet his revenge was the only cause of it, which made him determine
rather to ruin his Country and Enemy together, than preserve both. Alas, What
miserable events has that blind fury produced? and, How has it darkened those
many other virtues which would else so clearly shine in our Fathers? The fair
Izadora could not speak these words without shedding some Tears, which did not
only abundantly manifest the goodness of her disposition, but as much proved
that grief it self when it dwelt in her face could not but relish of the place
in which it resided: but this disorder being vanquished, she thus continued.
Pacuvius had no sooner recev'd Hanniball's Letters than he assembled the
chiefest of Capua (where Blacius then was) and by too great an Eloquence for so
ill a subject, so represented the forlorn condition of the Romans, the
triumphant one of the Carthaginians, the advantages of accepting the Conquerors
offers, and the miseries of declining them; that at last the Capuans fears and
Hanniballs Armies advancing to besiege them, helping his destructive Oratory,
all the Citizens resolved to buy their safety by the loss of their Faiths, and
present their new Master with their Keys and Liberty: and though Blacius by a
world of arguments endeavored to divert so fatal a determination, yet all the
advantage he derived from it was, to manifest his affection to the Romans, and
to make it evident, that the Capuans submitting to the Carthagineans was an
action as opposite to reason as honesty. Magius also, my Fathers Brother
(betwixt whom there was always as great a difference in humors as nearness in
blood) in this design joined with Blacius, but to no effect, the Capuans having
shut their ears to all motions but those of becoming slaves to Hanniball; who,
being informed by Pacuvius, that Capua was at his devotion, made into it a
triumphant Entry, many thousands of people resorting thither, to behold that
Man in whom such virtue dwelt, and upon whom fortune so constantly attended,
that whilst his courage was subduing his Enemies in one place, his Fame
effected the like in another. But whilst these solemnities were performing,
Blacius withdrew himself into this city; more out of apprehention that his
death would be pleasing to Pacuvius than to decline sacrificing himself for the
Roman Empire: But Magius continued still at Capua, and his Counsels being told
to Hanniball by Perolla's Father, so exasperated him, that as a testimony of
his fury and power he demanded Magius of the Senate, whose fear clouding their
justice, delivered him up, and who immediately he caused to be executed in the
Marketplace. For this Death Hanniball's cruelty was not so much condemned as
Pacuvius'S, whose hatred to our blood was so exorbitant, that though Magius did
ever oppose Blacius, and was always opposed by him, yet the being my Fathers
Enemy was so prevalent with Pacuvius to save him, as being his Brother was to
condemn him: Thus by this sad tragedy the Capuans found sufficient cause to
repent, though not to repair their inconstancy. But now (Sir) I shall tell you
a passage which perhaps will be as much admired for the gallantry as the
rareness of it: Hanniball who indeed had contracted a real friendship with
Pacuvi^s, either as esteeming his interest in the Capuans necessary to confirm
and augment his Conquests, or his virtues worthy that honor, or both; but as a
mark of his esteem and trust, he lodged in his house without the ordinary
guards which attended his person: In the mean time Perolla, who always had a
high inclination to the people of Rome, and consequently detested his Fathers
actions; began to project the death of Hanniball, in which nothing made him
irresolute but the violating of the Laws of hospitality, and since the
consequence was of so generous a design; it will not be amiss to acquaint you
with some of his reasonings, before he elected it. What (said he to himself)
shall I kill the upholder and revenger of our blood? Shall his friendship to my
Father be the cause of his ruin? and, Shall he receive his death from those
with whom he trusts his life? Shall I, to revenge the Romans, stain my own
reputation with a Murder, and ruin my own Family? Who cannot 'scape being
sacrificed to the Carthagineans fury? Shall Rome owe her safety to a cause
which if she approved, rendr'd her unworthy of it? Shall thou kill a Conqueror,
whom the gods have freed from their own immediate punishment (Thunder) by
covering him with Laurel? Shall thou make away an Enemy. who in thus giving
thee the power to destroy him, makes it a crime to do it? besides he is one who
owes his Conquests only to his Courage and Conduct; and if the Roman Empire be
vanquished with those Arms, she deserves that Fate, which to oppose, were to
contradict the justice of the gods, and virtue it self: Ah no Perolla, leave
off the thoughts of such a design, than which nothing can be a greater Crime
but the performing it. He had certainly gone away, altered, though ^ot pleased
with these reasons, had not his good Genius inspired him with what you shall
now hear. It Is true, said he, Hanniball is the upholder and revenger of our
Family, and therefore the performance will be more glorious: What greater
obligation can I put upon the Romans than to ruin our Family, to maintain
their Empire? Had Magius been as much a friend as he was an enemy to our blood,
design might wear the name of revenge, and an action of public concernment
might be styled the effect of a particular hatred, so that all his favors
should rather invite than dissuade the attempt, which these circumstances will
prove rather an impartial justice than ingratitude. But remember Perolla, how
thy Countrymen branded with infamy Perpenna for having murdered Sertorius,
though an enemy to the Commonwealth, how much more will they detest thee for
destroying one whose too much virtue and success are his only crimes. But then
(he continued) Why may not I suppose they did but counterfeit, since States
have the same arts as particular persons, and it had been an unwise justice to
commend that which they could not sufficiently reward: This part of Perpenna's
fate I hope will attend my attempt, which is one invitaion more, for to perform
what any but the gods can reward is to sell gallantry, besides my case will be
nobler than his, for I cannot doubt the higher Powers so much as to deny him
the freedom of his Sword to defend his life, that if he fall, he may owe it to
my courage not my treacchery, and then i will expose my self unto his Army, since
to fly were to shun Martyrdom, and to outlive the fact, would show as if I
desired to enjoy that secuty, I purchase only for my Country. These and many
other arguments so fully confirmed Perolla, that he only attended an
opportunity to put his resolution in practice, and though his green age (being
then but 18 years old) might have made his change from this determination
appear rather a thing incident to youth than a want of Valor, yet he so much
adored virtue, that he could not be unconstant to whatsoever bore her
Character. After he had with incredible impatience expected an occasion,
Fortune seemed one night to furnish him with one, for having learned that
Hanniball had withdrawn himself into his Chamber for a few hours, to make a
dispatch to his friends at Carthage, and that all his followers were upon the
like employment to theirs; Perolla (who had always free access unto him) was
going to execute his design, but it seems the Fates would not let him by one
generous action hinder himself from performing many; for Pacuvius, who had some
intelligence then brought him, of a design the Capuans had to revenge Magius's
death, and to recover the freedom which that execution sufficiently showed they
had lost, was then coming to acquaint Hanniball with it, and in such a
conjuncture of time, that the Father and the generous Son met each other at his
Chamber door; where Pacuvius seeing Perolla armed, was struck with so great an
astonishment, that nothing could increase it but the knowledge of the cause,
which Perolla acquainted him with, in such ravishing terms, that his reason
though not his inclination was converted; and finding the happy operation which
his arguments produced, he began to conjure his Father, by all those motives he
esteemed most prevalent, that he would by some high performance regain the
Romans good opinion, which it seemed the gods invited him to perform by
offering him so favorable an opportunity to kill Hanniball; for (said he) the
action is good or ill, if the first, it has invitation enough in it self; if
the latter, the people of Rome cannot doubt your conversion, since to assure
them of it, you perform what is as contrary to your nature and practice, as
your former Crime in delivering up Capua was repugnant to their interest. I
wi^^ not (said Izadora) trouble your patience by telling how Perolla offered to
relinquish to his Father the glory of the attempt; nor all those other things
which you may imagine so rare a subject could furnish a judgment with that was
so, since this design by a seeming delay received an absolute suppression; for
Pacuvius, who found that his generous sons reasons and resolutions were not to
be vanquished, counterfeiting to be so himself, and promised him as soon as
that great Conqueror was out of his protection, he would join in the
enterprise; in the mean while he begged Perolla with tears and sighs to delay
the execution of his attempt, and not to violate the Laws of hospitaly, which
would be as great an offense unto the gods, as the performing it might be an
obligation to the Romans. These, and many such pressing motives vanquished my
dear friend, especially since the design was not suppressed but suspended, and
that a small deferring would take away the seeming aspersion of breach of
Trust, and so involve his Father in the execution, that he might thereby efface
his former injuries to the Romans. But Perolla was no sooner retired, than
Pacuvius went in to Hanniball, and informed him, that the Capuans were so
highly incenst at the death of Magius, that he befought his permission to leave
him his whole house, and that he would fill it with his Guards, lest the World
might lose its greatest glory, and he his best friend. At last Hanniball
consented to Pacuvius's request, who the next morning removed, and whose house
was immediately so thronged with Soldiers, that the impossibility of attempting
against that famous Captains life was as great as the destroying it had been
pleasing to Perolla, who finding how much his Father had abused him, resolved
in himself to go to the Romans, and by the gallantry of his Actions manifest,
that 'twas Pacuvius, and not Pacuvius's blood which was an enemy to their
Empire, with this further hope, that his fortune in the many accidents of War
might furnish him with an opportunity to assault and destroy that Life in the
fight of both Armies, which had been hitherto preserved by his Fathers Tears
and Dissimulation. And the Fates, who have been as much his friends in actions
of Glory, as his Enemies in those of Love, knowing what he was destined to
perform, was too great to delay any time, caused Pacuvius (who still
apprehended the discovery of his fiction, and the sad events it would
inevitably produce) to command his generous Son, to go into this Town, which
then had been freshly yielded to Hannibal by Pacuvius power, there to
countenance his friends; which injunction you may well conjecture was as
pleasing to Perolla, as his removal from Capua was to his Father. This journey
thus resolved, Pacuvius furnished his Son with a Train fit for one of the Blood
of Diomedes the Argian, who founded the City of Agrippa in the Brutians, from
whom he was lineally descended. After he left Capua, he lay in a Town called
Pettely, and the morning following, was wakened with an Alarm, that the
considerabl'st part of Hannibal's Army, under Himilco's Command, had surrounded
the Town, which had struck so great a terror in the Pettelines, that they had
deputed some of the Inhabitants, to Treat on conditions for a surrender: the
timerousness of those people did not so much perplex him, as he was pleased at
so large an occasion of Glory, he could not fancy that the design of yielding,
proceeded from fear, but want of a Chief, which might employ their courages to
the best advantage, and though his green Youth had till then exempted him from
the harass and noise of Arms, yet his Genius had ever so great a propensity to
War, that he then understood as much of the Theory, as since he has of the
Practique, and thought too, that his Courage and Aversion to Hannibal, would
supply the defect of his unexperience. Whist he was hastily putting on his
Clothes, he entertained himself with such thoughts, and was hardly ready when
he went toward the Gate, through which, he was told, the Deputies of the City
were to pass: where he was no sooner come, than he perceived them, accompanied
by many of their friends. That sight (as he often told me) inspired him with so
high a fury, that he commanded all those of his Retinue (which were above
twenty) to draw their Swords, and let none pass through that Port, without his
express Orders, then advancing himself toward the crowd, which accompanied
their Commissioners, he cried out to them; Whither run you, O degenerate
Pettelines? can you think that Slaves to the Carthegineaus is a more glorious
Title, than Friends to the Romans? can you so much despair of the gods
protection, as to act that your selves, than which their power cannot inflict a
greater misery? is a wretched life so pleasing, that to purchase it, you will
outlive the ruin of your Country, and which is worse, make your fears hasten
it? if Gallantry and Reason will not move you, let the example of Magius's
Blood do it, which was shed a Sacrifice to appease Hannibal, and since his rage
must be quenched by such oblations, it is more noble to let our veins be emptied
to defend our liberty, than to be a testimony of our having lost it, which is a
fate we shall too justly merit, if we do not oppose it. Many other motives he
laid open to them, with such a charming Eloquence and Action; that the
Pettelines resolved to stop their Commissioners, and to own their sufferings to
their Misfortunes, rather than their Fears. You will pardon me (Sir) said the
fair Izadora, if I do but briefly pass over the affairs of this memorable Siege
(though by it the Town become more famous the Governor than the Founder, who
was Philoctetes the Son of Pean, that kept the Arrows of Hercules, without
which the Prophet Calchas, declared Troy not be taken) since my Sex dispences
me from any knowledge in things of this nature, and because it serves but to
acquaint you with that Gallantry of which already you have (with all the World)
so just an opinion, I will therefore with your permission only tell you, that
after Himilco had received an absolute denial of Pettely from Perolla, a
thousand affronts by bloody Sallies, and that he had continued four Months of a
difficult Siege: he at last, plainly sent Hannibal word (then beleaguering of
Cassilinum) that unless he, and all his Army came to his relief, the Pettelines
were like to carry away too much Glory for those which were Enemies to
Carthage. This message made him observe the desire of him that sent it, as much
for the respect he paid so great a Soldier, as out of an opinion it would be no
small accession to his Glory, if he could take a City which Himilco (by his own
confession) esteemed too difficult an enterprise for him alone. Hannibal
therefore left Forces to block up Cassilinum, and came with the rest to
Pettely, where having viewed the place, and the resolute countenance and
posture of the Defendants (maugre his high Heart) he resolved before he came to
extremes, to practice mild ways, which if they took, would not only free him
from those just fears the gallantry of his Enemies had created, but augment his
reputation by his presence, reducing that which a great Army, and a greater
Coumander could not effect. In order to this resolve, he sent a Trumpet unto
Pettely, who after the due ceremonies of War, was admitted, and delivered
Perolla a summons, which contained these words.

HANNIBAL, General of the Carthagineans, to the valiant PEROLLA.
THe Friendship which I pay the Father, inclines me rather to pardon than
destroy the Son; but his speedy submission must give the rise to effect it. You
shall have honorable terms Perolla, to invite you from that ruin, your
resistance will cast upon you, and my Mercy shall give you better conditions
than your Sword can. Do not therefore by your obstinacy, force me to revenge
that Blood you have already spilt, which I am willing to pardon upon the same
score, that has made me rather elect, to make use of my Pen, than of my
victorious Arms.


This Letter, by the joint consent of all the Petelines, had this return.

PEROLLA, to the Great HANNIBAL, General of the Carthagineans.
PAcuvius were unworthy of so great a Conquerors Friendship, should any of his
Blood deliver up a place by Entreaty, which the Courage of the Defendants will
render invincible: No, generous Hannibal, I set so high a rate on your esteem,
that I will not derive it from another but my self; and therefore will owe it
to my Courage not Extraction. Thus much I acquaint you from my self; but now I
am commanded to tell you from my companions, That Roman Hearts and Swords, are
a better security, than any Affricans Mercy.


THis Answer for what concerned Perolla, though it had much of civility, yet it
had more of resolution; But Hannibal (the haughtiest of Men) was so accustomed
to conquer, that he esteemed a refusal as bad as a defeat, and being inspired
with a high rage at this denial, he gave so furious an asslault to Pettely,
that almost all courages, but that of Perolla's, might without shame have
yielded to it, but his in that defense did things so far transcending belief,
that to raise your faith to credit them, I must lessen their greatness, and
injure his valor, least you might believe, I do the like to Truth: In a word,
never more Lybia^ Blood in this Empire was so unsuccessfully spent, as there,
and never Glory was more nobly purchased, than in that fatal day (to the
Cartheginians) who lost, besides the hope of Conquest, 2000 of their best Men,
and twice as many by their wounds, were rendered unserviceable. Whilst these
things were acting, the Pettelines had sent two of their chiefest Citizens to
beg the Senates aid, whom they found, (as well by that they observed, as by
their own Declaration) in a posture, fitter to desire than send relief. This
proceeding of the Senate, as it was a great proof of their ingenuity, so it was
of their necessity, and therefore forced these Deputies to fling themselves at
their feet, and conjure them with all expressions of a real grief, to make them
messengers of more comfort, or else permit them to sacrifice their lives in
their sights, as being a more pleasing destiny, than to be testimonies of the
ruin of their City, which so fatal an answer, would render unavoidable. This
Gallantry was so prevalent with the Senate, that after (through a generous
sympathy) they had paid them back their Tears, they commanded the Deputies to
return to their Citizens and tell them, that what they had done already, had
been so obliging, that nothing could increase the score, but to save themselves
by a timely submission to the Conqueror, and thereby preserve those who had
showed so great a proportion of constancy and courage, that they were more
concerned in their safeties, than in their own. The two Commissioners at last,
to obey their Masters, came home through a world of danger with that return;
and truly this was a tenderness of the Romans, which they had manifested to
none of their subjects, for in all other cases they chose rather to lose their
Friends, than the reputation of their Arms, but in this they preferred the
former before the latter. But this was so far from inducing them to yield, that
by Perolla's persuasion they determined by a generous-resistance, or glorious
ruin, to merit so high a Care, and that which made them the more intent on
this, was, the Senates having acquainted them of their duty, which rendered
their further actions, an obligation to the Roman Empire. But Hannibal, who by
three bloody assaults, had learned, that Famine only could make him Lord of
Pettely, had given over all hopes of obtaining it by storm, and lay a while
blocking of it up, with as much quiet, as his disgraces would permit, and at
last wearied with the tedioussness of the Siege, left Himilco to strave them
out, and brought the best part of his Army, to renew the Siege of Cassilinum,
where Manituis a gallant Roman, commanded. Himilco, to obey his Generals
Orders, had in few weeks so straitn'd Pettely, that those in it did more justly
fear their ruin from within than without, but by the generous example of
Perolla they suffered with as much patience, as they acted with resolution; and
to say truth, I know not which was more meritorious, their active or their
passive parts. In this general Calamity there happened so rare an accident,
that though I exceedingly long to run through these bloody Relations, yet I
cannot pass by this memorable Adventure, without being as unjust as the
performers of it were gallant. The Famine in Pettely was so increased, that the
place was inevitably to fall into the Enemies hands, were not the want of
Victuals immediately redressed; and though, (in the beginning of the Siege)
they had sent away all their old People and Children, yet they retained so many
Women, that the feeding of them must of necessity hasten their ruin. This
inconvenience was never mentioned by Perolla, who bare too high a respect to
our Sex, to preserve those of his own, by exposing ours to the least hazard or
suffering* But a certain Lady (whose Virtue, Beauty, Extraction and Wealth,
rendr'd her the most considerable amongst the Pettelines) plainly perceived how
great an inconveniency Perolla's civility was like to produce. Amazora
therefore (for so she was called) having gotten a high and just value in that
City, resolved to employ it to some end, which might make her self as famous to
posterity, as her perfections merited. To effect this, she assembled the
chiefest Women of Pettely; to those which she thought Glory was more pleasing
than Life, she acquainted with her resolution of stealing out of the Town, and
exposing her self to the Swords of Hannibal's Soldiers, and thereby free the
City from the misery of Famine, or at least from their hastening it. To others,
which she believed, preferred their safety above all other considerations, she
represented the certain languishing death, they must unavoidably suffer by
their residence in Pettely, and the probability of avoiding that Fate, by
submitting to the Carthagineans, who could not be so merciless to a Sex which
the unreasonable creatures even by the Law of nature, Reverence, and Preserve.
In a word, she so fitted her persuasions to the several humors of those she
courted, and at last so fully vanquished their fears, and confirmed their
resolution, that two nights after (having corrupted a Sentinel, which was a
menial Servant of hers, for there being no Garrison, the Inhabitants did the
duty) and by his help (her House standing upon the Walls of the Town) about two
thousand Women (with Ropes and Baskets) got out of Pettely. The next morning
before day, a servant of Amazora's, brought this Letter to Perolla, who having
opened it, found it contained words to this purpose;

AMAZORA and the Women of Pettely, to the gallant PEROLLA, and his Valiant
Companions.
WE had been ill Proficients, and unworthy your protection, had not the daily
demonstrations of your Gallantryes created some in us, and though the too rigid
Laws of our Sex, forbid us to employ our resolutions in an Active, yet it
exempts us from a Passive Virtue. We are therefore gone to expose our selves to
the Carthagineans Swords, and had rather they should be employed for our
destructions, than be indebted for our lives, to those which are Enemies to
your and our Liberties. If contrary to our hopes and desires they save us, we
have eased you of a burden your civilities did not mention, and which
consequently had had an unfitting return any way but this. But if we are
sacrificed to their fury, let your courages (if they are capable of any
accession) be thereby so heightened, that whilst you celebrate our Deaths in
Tears, you necessitate your Enemies to do the like in Blood.


IT is not easy to imagine the high admiration which this Letter produced, and
it is as difficult to describe the sorrow, which suddenly ensued, as the
cruelty which was the cause of it, for as soon as the Sun had rendered visible
all objects within the reach of sight, Perolla and his companions perceived the
Fields strewed with the dead Bodies of those gallant Women, which the barbarous
Affricans had cruelly murdered. Judge (generous Spartacus) what a just fury
this unequalled impiety inspired Perolla, and the Pettelines with. But their
actions will better acquaint you with their resentments, than my expressions
can; For in that Sally (where they now were led on by Revenge, as well as
Honor, they killed above 1500 Lybians, and the execution had been far bloudier,
had not they spent the best part of their time in fetching off the Bodies of
Amazora, and those of best quality, whose Names had no cause to wander, if the
destruction of their murderers could hinder it. Never victory had less joy in
it, than this, and never Funeral was solemnized with more Tears, than that of
those admirable Women: and indeed, the Besieged's grief appeared so just, that
their Reason rather continued than suppressed them. But it is high time to lead
you out of so forlorn an entertainment, which I will do, by acquainting you,
that though Perolla now persuades me I possess his Heart entirely, yet he
cannot deny, but that I have only the reversion of it; neither would I pass by
(though the truth of my story obliged me not to it) the virtues of my Rival,
which indeed merit a particular Elogium, and were I capable of describing them
as they deserve, I know none that would have declined her Fate, to have had her
Glory. Her Fire was of so peculiar a quality, that when it had reduced her to
ashes, those very Relics retained heat enough to inflame him, and perhaps
there has been seldom heard of a love so strange in the Birth, in the Life, and
in Death. For it was created by an object that was dead, the Effect remained
when the Cause was taken away, and having no material sustenance to preserve it
self alive, it lived upon speculation, and to perfect the wonder, 'twas Izadora
destroyed it. But I tell you too much of the end, before I acquaint you of the
beginning, which fell out thus. Perolla returning from that famous Burial, one
of those Men which had been ordered to take an Inventory of Amazora's Goods,
and preserve them, presented him with a Letter he had found in her Closet, and
because the Superscription was TO THE Gallant PEROLLA.

He opened it, and found it contained these words;

IT IS not Amazora, but her death discovers she had a passion for you, had she
lived, the impossibility of disclosing it, had been as great, as perhaps the
obtaining of a reciprocal one: Do not then condemn a confidence I wash away
with my Blood, nor slight an Affection which is as perfect as the Object that
created it, neither am I only a friend to your Passion but your Glory, which I
am resolved to raise upon my own ruin, and the ruin of all those of my Sex
within this City: our deaths shall delay (if not hinder) yours, and give you
time enough to act such additional generous things, that those which are
acquainted with them, and with my flame shall excuse the latter by the
knowledge of the former. If all this can procure your esteem, I shall think my
destiny too noble to be deplored, and if for the life I loose, I may live in
your memory, I shall esteem it a more happy being, than that which the gods
have promised in the other world to those which have been virtuous in this.


HE had no sooner ended Reading, than he cried out, Yes, fair Amazora, I will
preserve you still in my memory, and were it not to obey your Commands, the
World should know, that your death is so far from delaying mine, that it has
but hastened it. Then folding his Arms one within another, he stood moveless as
a Statue for a while, raining from his Eyes, whole showers of Tears; but after
a world of confused thoughts had past through his fancy, he cried out again,
Would it had pleased the gods (fair Amazora) to have made you as concerned in
my happiness, as in my glory: Cruel Honor! was there no expedient to build thy
Trophies, but by the ruin of my Felicity? must the way to reach my Glory ruin
my contentment? Oh, too hard Fates: why did I not know my happiness whilst I
possessed it? and why am I acquainted with it when it is vanished? was I to be
blessed only to be cursed? must the knowledge of more joy than I could expect,
create more grief than I can endure? and must Amazora's passion for me be so
ordered, that the revealing of it must prove my Torment? whilst Izadora was
relating this sad reasoning, her generous Servant was so struck with sorrow,
that she, who sympathiz'd with him in all virtuous Resentments, was constrained
to break off her discourse, which the company perceiving, they did manifest by
a general silence from all things but sighs, how just an opinion they had of
their grief, and how highly they approved the cause of it. A little time being
so spent, and Izadora having wiped away her Tears, thus continued her Story. I
will not tell you all the melancholy expressions Perolla used, lest it might
infect you with a grief I would willingly exempt you from, I shall therefore
inform you only, that he contracted a Passion for her memory, as great as any
other could have had for her Beauty, and that (whilst the Siege continued)
twice a day he constantly watered her Urne with such abundant weepings, that
had those Tears been inwardly employed, they had doubtless extinguished his
Grief, his Flame, or his Life. At last, (gallant Spartacus) the Famine so
increast in Pettely, that 'twas impossible any longer to maintain the place,
and though Himilco offered him (and all those with him) conditions fit for
Soldiers, yet he scorned to stand indebted for his life, to those which had
taken away Amazora's, but rather elected to force his passage with his Sword,
or perish in the attempt: neither was this only his design, but that which he
infused into all the rest. That day being then come, the Town was on all
quarters set on fire, that the Carthagineans might neither use nor glory in
their Conquest, and Perolla at the head of 3000 Pettelines (which were all that
were left) furiously charged the Affricans, and by dint of Sword, forced his
passage, and to animate his Soldiers, he cried out, (nothing but) remember
Amazora and her followers. And truly I am persuaded, all the Eloquence the gods
ever bestowed on Man, could not have been more powerful, than were those few
words. 'Twas in that great action, Perolla did miracles, and I have been told,
the slaughter was so bloody, that all those gallant unfortunate Women, had each
of them one of their dead Murderers for a cover of their Graves, the Fight
happening in those very Fields where so horrid a Massacre had been committed.
On Perolla's side there fell 800. which number I believe he might have
lessened, had he stolen, and not made his retreat, but night coming, ended
their dispute, and my gallant friend, having rallied the relics of his
Forces, propounded, and persuaded them to force their passage into Cassilinum,
which was not above 200 Furlongs off, and which was besieged then by Hannibal.
This resolve being taken, the next night, by unfrequented ways, they began
their march, and the day following, toward the evening, beat up a Quarter of
the Carthagineans, and by the death of 700 Libyans, made a Triumphant entry
into the Town, presenting Manitius (the Governor and Friend to Perolla) both
with a Relief and a Victory, which so raised his dejected Soldiers, that they
brake off the Treaty of surrender they had almost concluded. 'Twas in this
memorable Siege that Perolla did such glorious things, that (as little as I am
concerned in affairs of that nature) they reached my Ears, and I must with
guilty blushes acknowledge, that the hatred I had to his Blood, made me look
upon those actions with Envy, which I should have considered with Admiration.
But after six months Siege, the same fate which attended him at Pettely,
followed him at Cassilinum, and though the Famine was extreme pressing, yet the
Romans, notwithstanding they were under the command of Marcellus (called for
his Courage, the Sword of the Roman Empire, by the Dictators going to Rome to
take new Auspices) yet he durst not hazard a battle for their preservation. The
Inhabitants and Soldiers of the Garrison (for all Perolla scorned it) finding
their sad condition, privately offered to surrender upon Quarter, which would
not so much as be listn'd unto by Hannibal, for their abrupt breaking off their
first Treaty, when the Relics of Perolla's Forces relieved them. At last,
though they received some Provisions which Marcellus in Barrels sent them
floating down the River Vulturnus, yet that stratagem being too soon
discovered, they were constrained to feed upon Mice, Rats, and such Roots as
they could dig out of their Counterscarfs and Meadows under their Walls, which
being perceived by the Carthagineans, he caused all those Fields to be plowed
up, but that was no sooner done, than Perolla and his Pettelines, by a Sally,
sowed Seed in their Enemies labor. Hannibal being told it, only spoke these
few words. Must then that which I design to strave the Romans with, prove their
Harvest? and immediately sent Manitius and Perolla Blanks, to write their
Conditions in, which they (being as invincible in Civility as Courage)
returned, and immediately came out without making any: His usage indeed was
generous, but he would not see Perolla, lest (as he said,) his Passion might
force him to that violence, which his Reason detested. Hannibal thus became
Master of Cassilinum, yet at his entry into it, he solemnly vowed, he was more
troubled to have Perolla for his Enemy, than pleased with his Victory. As for
the Garrison, they marched directly to the Dictators Army, where Pacuvius's Son
was received both by him (who was then returned) and by Marcellus, with an
entertainment which relisht nothing of the hatred they paid his Father. The
Senate too to gratify him, ordered that all his Soldiers, during their lives,
should have double pay, and though they needed such courages, yet they gave
them five years vacation, and for his own particular, they ordered his Statue
to be be erected in Preneste, which was the next considerable Town: but he with
a Modesty, great as his Merit, refused it himself, and had that Honor placed
upon Manitius, thereby declining the reward, increasing his Title to it.
Perolla having by such memorable exploits, run through his Prentiship in Arms,
was very desirous to wait upon his Father, who he was confident had buried his
disobedience in those generous Actions which had proceeded from it. Pacuvius
then lived in this City, (which was under the command of Hannibal) and because
his Sons Actions had been as fatal to the Carthagineans as advantageous to the
Romans, he resolved to perform that visit and duty with as much secrecy as was
possible, therefore he came late alone into the Town, lest a Retinue might give
some suspicion of his quality, and discover what he endeavored to conceal; but
as he crossed a Street that was not far from Blacius his House, he perceived, (by
the light of a couple of Torches which lay upon the ground, by the death of two
had carried them) a Gentleman, who with much courage opposed himself against
four that assaulted him, the inequality of the number, and the courage of the
Defendant, made Perolla (who never valued his life in the protection of the
oppressed) resolve to help him, that so highly needed it, and truly, had he
never so little longer delayed his assistance, he had been only obliging in
design, for by that time he was lighted from his Horse, and had drawn out his
Sword, one of the four Assailants had gotten the single Gentleman under him,
and was seeking out the defects of his Coat of Mail, to have taken away his
life; But Perolla by a powerful stroke, cleft the wretches Head in two, and
whilst his companions were amazed at so unexpected a relief, and so fatal a
blow, Perolla gave my Father (for it was he indeed) leave to get up, and then
presenting him with the Sword which he had lost by his fall, told him, Here
(Sir) the gods will defend your quarrel, which I judge is good, because your
enemies rely only on the number for their success: Blacius had no time to
make him any return of this civility, for the three Murderers having resigned
their admiration to take up their first resolution, fell so vigorously upon my
Father, and his generous Second, that had they not been under the protection of
Divinity, they had certainly miscarried: But Perolla, who had to deal with two
of the three, received some wounds, which yet were so far from endangering his
life, that they did but hasten the loss of theirs which had bestowed them on
him; for with a furious thrust, he dispatched the most importunate of them, and
(in a word) after he had once again saved and relieved Blacius, they made an
end of the other too. As soon as my Father found himself freed from his
enemies, he came to Perolla, and told him, Sir, that I am indebted to you for
my life, is not a greater truth, than that I shall never make any scruple to
lose it in your service, but lest my ignorance might (when occasion serves)
render me incapable of paying you that debt, I shall beg to be acquainted with
your name, that by my future gratitude you may be convinced, the obligations
you have laid upon one that was unknown to you, were not for all mis-plac'd,
Perolla, though he knew not my Father, yet not daring to discover himself,
replied. The service I have paid you, is so much the duty of one Gentleman to
another, that it merits not an acknowledgement; and to assure you, this is not
a Compliment but a Truth, I am resolved to conceal my Name, least by
acquainting you with it, you might imagine I expected some further return: then
desiring to know if he had any other Commands to impose on him, he began to
take his leave: but Blacius, who admired his Civility as much as Courage, could
not satisfy himself with such an answer, and therefore told him, I must rather
believe, that some secret business draws you hither, and that not knowing who I
am, you apprehend my privacy: if this be the true cause, I beseech you remove
it, for you could not think me worthy your defense, if after having saved my
life, you doubted I could disclose any thing which might be prejudicial to my
Protector. Perolla was about to reply, when (alas) on a sudden, the fresh
color in his Cheeks, began to wear Deaths Livery, his knees too to tremble,
and at last his Spirits failing, he fell (without speech or motion) at my
Fathers Feet, this sudden change made him suspect some private hurts were the
cause of it, he therefore opened his Doublet, and immediately discovered a Sea
of Blood, which issued from a large wound that had pierced his Body through and
through. My Father instantly, with what Linen he could tear, stopped the
bleeding as much as he could, but having in vain attempted to bring him from
the swound he was fallen into, was running to his own House, which (as I told
you) was not far off, to call for help, but he was not many paces in the way to
this Duty and Charity, when he heard one of the four Mutherers fetch a deep
groan: The passionate desire he had to learn from whom he had so narrowly
escaped, made him pluck off the Vizard of him that was yet alive (for I forgot
to tell you they were all disguised in Antic Clothes and Faces) who no sooner
received the benefit of the fresh Air, than he opened his Eyes, and gave some
small symptoms of life, which though they were false ones, yet he lived long
enough to beg my Fathers pardon, and to acquaint him, that Pacuvius had engaged
them by excessive rewards to undertake their crime. Blacius having received
this information, went instantly to his own house, brought some Servants with
him, and by their help, carried the generous Perolla home, whose wounds he
caused the Chirurgions to dress, before he would take any care of a slight one
he had received. In the mean time, the Alarm of my Fathers danger and return
was brought to my Chamber, as I was undressing my self; which I no sooner
heard, than I came running up, just as the Surgeons had by strong Cordials
brought Perolla to himself. My Father when I came in, led me to his Bedside,
and told me, if my life be any way considerable to you, you are indebted to
this Gentleman for it, who by the hazard of his own, has preserved mine. Sir (I
replied) I hope you have so just an opinion of my duty and affection, as to
think that question needs no answer; but as for this Gentleman's Gallantry, I
believe he will have no cause to repent it, if at least by the hazarding only
of one Life, he thinks himself sufficiently recompensed by acquiring those of a
whole Family. I shall renounce any of mine (said Blacius) that ever decline
what you have spoken, and for your particular, (addressing himself to me) I
command you to be as concerned in him, as if I were in his condition, for I
shall judge of your respect to me, by your care of my Friend. Then embracing
Perolla, he told him, some importunate affairs, Sir, draw me from you for a
while, for which I must beg your Pardon, but till my return, I have enjoined my
Daughter to supply my place. Madam, (said Perolla, interrupting the fair
Izadora) I shall, with your permission, acquaint the generous Spartacus what
happened, whilst I continued in your Fathers House, which will not only ease
you of some part of your Relation, but inform you of particulars, which, which
perhaps your Modesty might injure you by silencing. Spartacus having made her
the same request, and obtained her leave, Perolla thus continued. Your may
(Sir) justly wonder, that to those high civilities of the perfect Izadora and
her Father, she acquainted you with none of my returns, and truly, if she had,
she must have made them her self, for I was so ravished with her Beauty, that
all I then was capable of, was of admiring it: for though she was not then in
that advantageous dress which Rome so much commends, yet the habit she then had
on, was ordered with such a pleasing negligence, that no Art was able to equal
it, and if her Beauty had been of a nature which could admit of addition by
Clothes, those she then wore (one thought) would have increast hers. I must
ingeniously confess, that coming from Death into so much brightness I fancied
my self in those Plains, where our Learned Men make us believe we shall dwell
after this Life; and I dare boldly affirm, if we believed so much real felicity
there, as I then resented, that place would be better inhabited than it is. I
shall beseech you, said Izadora, (interrupting him, and speaking to Spartacus)
to remember the acknowledgement he makes of his judgment being troubled, that
what unmerited raptures he delivers of me, you may attribute them to their true
cause, and not to that unto which he ascribes them. Then addressing himself
unto Perolla (with a little smile) she told him, If the use you make of my
permission to tell part of our Adventures, be only thus to abuse your friend, I
shall immediately recall it, and rather elect to injure our Story by my
relation, than suffer those blushes which your partiality will still create.
Madam (said Spartacus) you are so far above flattery, that whilst your generous
Lover praises you all he can, you need apprehend nothing, but that he will come
short of Truth. To which Perolla answered, (with a look that spoke his doubts,
whether, what Spartacus had said, proceeded from his Justice, or a more
dangerous Cause) you have (Sir) in this, as fully declared my opinion, as if we
had but one Heart, and that too inspired with the same beauty, which is so
accomplished, that if Izadora will forgive me all faults which detract too much
from her, I shall not need her pardon for those of a contrary nature. Spartacus
by a little redness, testified the construction he made of Perolla's first
words, but the apprehension of being deceived in his opinion, and the
resolution he had taken up, of soon suppressing all suspicions of that quality,
made him continue silent, which invited Izadora's Servant to prosecute what he
had begun. Since (said he) my want of expressions for so transcendent an
object, and her commands do both bind me from giving you a character of that by
words, which your Eyes are better able to perform; I will only acquaint you,
That though I remained a while without speaking, yet it proceeded not from any
new fits of fainting, but from having all my faculties employed, to receive
those flames she then shot into me; and truly I found the fire so pleasing, and
so just, that I made not any excuse for introducing it in the room of that
Heart, I had till then preserved for the fair Amazora, the difference betwixt
them being so great, that could I have suspended my Election, I should have
concluded my Judgment, as dead as the first object of my Passion. To be brief,
never Lover made more haste to fruition, than I to divest my self of liberty;
and never Slave received his freedom with more joy than I resigned up mine. But
whilst I was in these first ecstasies, Izadora, who mis-interpreted my silence,
asked me whether I had a mind to take any rest, for if I had, she would
withdraw her self, Madam (I replied) if you have a mind I shall take any, I
must derive it from your Presence, and not from your Absence, since the latter
will be so far from giving me any ease, that it will divest me of all. Truly
Sir (she answered) the condition you are in, methinks, may well dispense with
civilities, and your wounds are too dangerous to neglect (out of a compliment)
any thing which may conduce to their recovery. If you mean (I replied) those
wounds I received in the Street, they are too inconsiderable to purchase their
ease by your absence: but if you intend those which are given me since I came
into this Chamber, I must then confess, I would decline nothing, which might
any way lessen their pain, or advance their recovery; but I find by experiment,
that their nature is to be least troublesome, when the fair Enemy that made
them, is visible. I had not ended speaking, when I perceived all Izadora's face
covered with blushes, and her Eyes armed with so majestic a Fire, that I
almost repented the disclosing of what I could not possibly have longer
silenced; but to disguise her disorder, she told me, I hope you have received
no wounds since you came into this place, if you have, I dare assure you they
were given without design. Alas Madam (I replied) I am then the more
unfortunate, and that which you apply for a lessening, is an increase of my
trouble, for my condition is so singular, that whereas in other cases, to hurt
without design, is hardly an offense, in mine the contrary, is the greatest
that can befall me. But yet I may find some satisfaction, since custom enjoins,
wheresoever any wounds are received, without an intention of giving them, that
the person which gave them as a mark of innocence, should endeavor their cure,
if it lies in the givers power; permit me then to beg this customary Trial of
the truth of your words, which is not called in question by me, but by my
happiness. I esteem (answered Izadora) the rule you speak of so just, that were
it I, which have hurt you, and that you show me the wound, and prove your
recovery in my power, I would oblige my self to be your Physician. Alas Madam
(I answered) the wound is in my Heart, and therefore not to be seen, but with
the eyes of faith, but if my assurance will not convince you of its reality,
the knowledge you have of your own Beauties, will doubtless effect it. I am
glad (replied Izadora) that your hurt being in a mortal place, you are yet so
well, which gives me some hope that the pain of your last wound, is rather in
imagination than reality: but if it be internal, as you allege, I dare not
undertake to be your Chyrurgeon, for to discover the place where you say your
wound is, I must make a greater, than I am confident I shall find there. Though
indeed, replies of this nature are not very pleasing in themselves, yet it was
no small satisfaction to me, for from them I flatteringly referred, if she had
a design of declining my Flame, I had spoken enough to acquaint her with it,
and consequently given her a rise to have mentioned her aversion from it, but
her imposing on my Words a meaning, which indeed they could not well bear, and
the troubling her self for their mis-construction, afforded me some hope, that
they were not absolutely unpardonable. gods! what ecstasies of joy did possess
me, whilst I had that belief? and how I blessed my wounds, that were the happy
cause of so pleasing (though imaginary) a Felicity? But (alas) this was only a
capriciousness of Fortune, who gave me a taste of Happiness, that the
subsequent fear might be the more intolerable: for the fair Izadora had forgot
to ask of Blacius my Name, which she acquainted me with, and which I looked
upon, as her desire of knowing it. This made me tell her, Madam, had you had
that curiosity whilst your Father was here, he could not have satisfied it:
some important causes tied me to a concealment of it, neither can your knowing
it, be any way advantageous to your service, could I imagine it were, did the
discovery bring more danger on me than cowards fancy, I would embrace them all
with raptures of joy; yet perhaps my life and sword may be more fortunate than
my name by proving capable of serving you, if they be, I shall esteem both of
them too gloriously employed: And truly (Madam) the little desire I had to be
known, or continue long in this Town made me not inquisitive of your Fathers,
but since I find my felicity or misery depends upon one that is of his Family,
I shall humbly beg to be acquainted with it, and esteem it a high obligation if
at least my curiosity may not prove prejudicial to him. Since (replied Izadora)
you assure me, that my informing you of it will oblige you, I am confident the
concealment cannot be of more consequence than the disclosure; and it is but
reason that you should know who is your debtor, his name is Blacius, How Madam
(I hastily replied) Blacius? the mortal Enemy of Pacuvius? Yes (said Izadora)
that Blacius is my Father, and he who you so lately obliged? and my name
Izadora. Ah Madam (I cried out, fetching a deep sigh) what is it that you have
told me? The fair Izadora and I were so perplexed, she at my exclaiming, and I
at her information, that for a long while we both continued in silence; which
at last she interrupted by desiring to know from whence my disorder proceeded,
Alas, Madam (I replied) The great friendship I have contracted with Perolla
(Pacuvius's son) is the cause of my trouble; how can I but deplore his
misfortune in having you for his enemy; where your continuing so will (I fear)
prove as great an injury to his felicity as I apprehend the contrary will be to
your extraction. If (said Izadora) you are so intimately acquainted with
Perolla, I beseech you inform me whether all those praises that are given him
proceed from justice or partiality, Truly Madam (I replied) the knowing of him
perfectly makes me unfit to resolve your question, for we were so much one, and
had both so much the same Soul, that I placed the self same judgment on his
actions which he himself did; and therefore you might as well hope to be
satisfied of Perolla from Perolla, as by enquiring any thing of him from me;
but this I dare affirm, that had he once the happiness I now have, he would
have too the same inclinations; and if my passion possessed him, after seeing so
much Beauty, it would be of contrary nature to what has been hitherto common to
his Family. You must excuse me (said Izadora) if I believe he would prefer his
duty before any other consideration, but I would not a little rejoice at the
contrary; for since his hatred to our Family is his crime, I would have his
love to one of it prove his punishment. Ah, Madam (I replied) are you then
determined to be cruel? Must Perolla have so hard a Fate, that because his
birth was unhappy, his life must be so too? Shall his misfortune in being
Pacuvius's son be esteemed his fault; and, shall a Sin he derives from his
Father be more prevalent to create your hatred, than the service he has paid
Blacius be to produce a contrary effect? My Passion in this discourse
transported me so far, that Izadora interrupted me by saying. The words which
you now speak (Sir) would induce me to believe that you are Perolla rather than
his friend. Yes Madam (I replied, casting down my Eyes, and trembling all over)
I do confess I am Perolla, and though at first I designed not to acquaint you
who I was, till my actions had in some degree qualified your aversion to my
blood; yet I find you have so transcendent an influence over me, that I could
no more conceal my Name than my Passion. This overture gives you power equal to
your desire of being revenged on our unfortunate Family. But remember (fair
Izadora) that it is cruelty not justice, to ruin one who is so far from
resisting that he yields to your mercy. Whilst I was making this declaration, I
could plainly read the trouble of her mind in her looks; sometimes methought
they inclined to mercy, and then instantly they appeared the contrary; at last
my suspense vanished by Izadora's saying, I could gladly wish I had continued
still in ignorance of your condition, since my knowledge of it reduces me
either to betray Blacius, or Perolla, by discovering or concealing him. Madam
(I replied) he keeping of my name secret is not of much importance, for if you
now receive my Flame I shall embrace all dangers, and care not who knows me
when I bear the glorious title of Izadora's Servant: and if you reject it,
'twill be an obligation to let your Father know who I am, since I may hope from
his resentments and hatred that cure my deplorable condition will so abundantly
want. Izadora (as she since assured me) was offended that I had the confidence
in so short a time to desire an acception of my affection^ that she answered me
briskly; Pacuvius's son, who is an enemy to our Family, must not here expect to
be cured of any other wounds than those he received in defending the chief of
it; and though your presumption merits my highest revenge, yet the
consideration of what you have done for Blacius. will make me preserve your
life in not disclosing who you are. She had no sooner done speaking, but she
rose up, and was going out of my Chamber, when I cried out to her, Stay, fair
Izadora, and see my life depends not on your silence, but on your approving my
passion, which though you have so cruelly rejected, yet you shall find I have
so much a higher concernment for all your interests than my own, that I will
wash away in my Blood my presumption and unfortunate extraction; and since you
have declared Perolla to be your Enemy, you shall perceive I will use him at
that rate. Izadora at these passionate expressions turned about again; but when
she saw me pulling off my plasters, and tearing my wounds, she ran to my
Bedside, and falling on her knees, with a throng of sighs and tears she begged
me not to be my own executioner; and if any words she had spoken were the
unfortunate cause of so fatal an effect, she would recall them.

What need I tell you more (generous Spartacus) than that my despair was the
way to my felicity, and that my design of killing my self preserved my life by
obtaining the fair Izadora's permission of making my addresses to her. But to
lessen this excess of joy, I suspected for a while, that my apprehension of
being unfortunate had like to have made me really so; and the way I had chosen
to end my misery had almost created it; for in my despair I had so increast the
danger of my wounds, by using them as I thought my condition then required,
that though the Chirurgions came hastily to bind them up, yet they could not
undertake for my life, till they saw what operation that dressing would have,
and to free me from all noise, that I might take a little sleep, Izadora was
desired to withdraw, which before she did, she came to my Bedside, and told me
softly, I hope what I have already done, has divested you of all thoughts of
violence on your life, if it has not, remember that you cannot make any
attempts against it; but I shall consider them as offered at mine. Madam (I
reply*d, kissing her hand with transports) what you have done, and what you
have spoken, shall make me cherish as much as even now I did detest it, and
since it is so glorious to merit your care, you cannot suspect it shall be
denied mine. She was not long gone out of my Chamber, when Blacius came home;
and coming to see me, he was informed my condition was such, that his visit
would rather prove^ trouble than a civility, which made him defer his design;
but he went directly to Izadora's Chamber, to learn the cause of my disorder;
for he was told she had not stirred out of mine since his going abroad; and
that no other had been witness of my actions. His fair daughter was somewhat
perplexed at the question; but she assured him, to the best of her observation,
it proceeded from a sudden distemper, wherein she told him the truth, and yet
concealed it from him. The next morning the Chirurgions found the wounds of my
Body (which held a strict sympathy with those of my Mind) so hopeful, that
Blacius was present when they were dressed, expressed an infinite satisfaction; and
indeed entertained me with such transcendent care and civility, that had I owed
my usage to his knowledge, and not to his ignorance of me, I had been in a
felicity worthy of envy. But his affairs calling him away, his place was
supplied by Izadora; who acquainted me, that those Murderers I had killed, had
been for certain hired by Pacuvius to make away Blacius, and that one of them
(as he lay weltring in his Blood) confessed it to him, which was the cause of his
going out that night so late, that the examinations might have been taken by
one of the Magistrates, but at their coming, the party was found dead. Ah Madam
(I replied) how I apprehend my Fathers attempts will be as cruel to his own son
as the performance would have proved to his Enemy, and that what he intended
for the destruction of Blacius will cause Perolla's; for it is but just, that
the daughter should right the Father on the Son of his mortallest Enemy,
especially since she has the power, and that Pacuvius's affection for me (as he
has often declared) is greater than that he has for himself and consequently to
afflict Perolla is the most sensible way of being revenged on his Father;
neither can I expect a better Fate, unless Izadora's Goodness be as great as my
Passion. I shall always (she said) know how to distinguish between the guilty
and the innocent; and therefore will not involve the Son in the Fathers Crime,
especially since the gallantry of the former hindered the acted sin of the
latter. Oh Madam (I answered) How great were my felicity would Blacius practice
the same goodness. You need not doubt (she replied) in this last action, where
your Blood testifies your innocence; but for his ancient hatred, I fear his
resentments. Alas (I cried out) I never have those thoughts but I tremble, and
would it might please the gods as the blood I have spent already has purchased
his esteem, so that the remainder were shed to continue it after his knowledge
of my condition. For I should think my death glorious, could it wipe away the
infelicity of my Birth, and count it a greater happiness to dye with the title
of your Families Friend, than to live in the contrary misfortune. The fair
Izadora perceiving how I afflicted my self with those sad impressions, told me,
What I have already done may in some sort repress your fears, neither is
despair pardonable but where impossibilities turn it into reason, a generous
courage as Perolla's should not antedate his troubles, for sometimes our
apprehensions make us miserable when our Fates design the contrary. Those (I
replied) which did flatter me would often publish I had a courage above
misfortunes, and I may justly say, in all those dangers I have yet undergone, I
never resented any thing of fear, but what disasters my hard Stars imposed on
me, I found my consolation and security in my resolution; yet in my present
condition, whether my fears proceed from some prescience of my ruin, or from a
diffidence of so great a felicity I know not, but this I am certain of that I
find something within, which never until now I entertained. I confess, (said
the fair Izadora) when I think upon Blacius's hatred to your Family, I have
some little tremblings which I can hardly suppress; but when I consider the
services you have paid him, and those eminent qualities you possess, I find no
other way for the questioning your content, than by doing the like, as well to
my Fathers judgment as gratitude, Madam, (I replied) I have nothing in me, nor
have nothing for him which might so much raise my ambition: but since you do
not only command me to silence my fears, but allege I have no cause to
continue them, I will obey you, since it is as impossible for me to err whilst
I do so, as not to err whilst I do not so. 'Twas with such pleasing discourses
as these that I past some days, and 'twas well for the torment of my wounds,
for no other charm had been of sufficient force to moderate their pain. At
last, Fortune began to cloud this little Sunshine, for Izadora understood from
a friend of hers, that a great disorder was in Pacuvius's house, by the arrival
of a servant of mine (whom I would not permit to come into Salapia with me, but
had ordered him to follow, lest I might be the likelier discovered.) This
servant assured my Father, that I was come before him alone into the Town, and
that crossing a street upon the break of day, he had found my Horse, and
observed much Blood had been there spilt, but as for his Master, he could learn
no news of him. This Lady was one which had free access into both our Families,
and having then received some high disgust in Pacuvius's, told this secret to
the fair Izadora, in expectation that it might come to Blacius's knowledge,
whose revenge she easily fancied would induce him to make it public, which
would at least have ruined me, if not my Father, for entertaining and
concealing me, but she knew not, that she told this news to one that was better
acqainted with the particulars of it than her self, and who was not a little
concerned in this unfortunate life. But Izadora, (after her departure) came,
and not only acquainted me with this intelligence, but advised me to make my
self known to Blacius, for since the business had already so much vent, if he
came to learn it any other way, it might be looked upon at a rate that would
extremely aggravate his former hatred. I must truly confess, had this advice
proceeded from any other, I should have found a strong opposal in my obedience;
but she had such an Ascendent over me, that in all her commands, how difficult
soever they were in themselves, I did not only find Reason, but Power to obey
them; and in this injunction of hers, I had no sooner taken up my resolution,
than I was furnished with an opportunity to put it in practice; For Blacius, who
was always present at the dressing of my wounds, was so sensible of the torment
I endured, that he could not retain some drops from stealing out of his Eyes,
and as soon as the Surgeons were gone, he embraced me, and said, If the gods
(generous stranger) would grant a power of transferring pain upon him that is
most desirous of it, you should quickly then resent none, but what your
goodness for my sufferings could produce. Were that privilege (I answered)
bestowed upon me, my condition would not be at all improved, for that rule
would continue the sufferings where they are already; neither could they be
removed as you desire, without doubling my trouble, by afflicting me in that
which I am more concerned in, than in my self. You are (replied Blacius) so
obliging, both in action and expression, that there is no way of increasing my
debt, but by acquainting how I may pay some part of it. When you speak (I
replied) of being indebted to me, you do certainly mean to my Desires, and not
my Actions, but because you are pleased to style the effects of my Duty,
Obligations, I will not oppose that belief, since to have raised it, is only
my ambition, but is besides, exceeding necessary toward the obtaining of a
request I have to make to you; a request of so strange a property, that the
denial of it once, will make me incapable of ever asking it again, and the
granting of it, will never let me stand in need of asking any other. If (said
Blacius with some impatiency) the granting this desire be in my power, why do
you not name it? since to confer on you a concession of this quality and
operation, will be a greater favor to the giver, than it can be to the
Receiver. It Is, Sir (I replied) that you would pardon my unhappy extraction,
and not esteem, that my fault, which is my misfortune. An Extraction ( Blacius
answered) which has produced so much gallantry, cannot be low or
inconsiderable, or if it be so in its self, your Virtue will change it into the
contrary, but (he continued) I cannot fancy why the granting of what you ask,
can work so powerful an effect, as even now you mentioned. Alas, Sir, (I
replied) you mistake my meaning, for I am born in a Family that is considerable
enough, both for Antiquity, Honor, and Wealth, and indeed, has no other effect
or unhappiness, but what is caused by your aversion to it: I fear, after this
Declaration, you can no longer doubt, but it is Pacuvius's I intend, whose
unfortunate Son I am. Is this (said Blacius, starting) to try how far my
gratitude can extend, or else is it a real truth? It Is the latter (I answered)
and though I apprehend by what I observe, that this discovery will prove my
ruin, yet I had rather derive it from my Extraction, which is a crime I could
not avoid, than by deluding you, which is a voluntary sin, and consequently
might justly authorize your hatred. Blacius having cast upon me a hundred
furious looks, at last told me; You are then Pacuvius's Son. Oh unjust Fates!
must I owe my life to a cause which makes me detest it? and must my misery be
so great, that to have died by the hands of murderers, hired by my enemy too,
had been a happiness? Is Life left me only to know, that not to have been
killed, was a misfortune? Then folding his Arms one within the other, he
fetched, (with great steps) four or five turns about the Chamber and on a
sudden, striking one of his Hands upon his Breast, he continued, No, no, I am
not so wretched as my Passion would persuade me, for Pacuvius design was not
only defeated, but was defeated by his Son: and Perolla by receiving wounds in
this Quarrel, wounds his Father, who cannot consider the means, why his ends
have failed, but the knowledge of the former will increase the misery of the
latter, neither can I justly complain, when my mortal'st Enemy, instead of a
pleasing revenge, embraces a double affliction: besides, after knowledge of
what Perolla has done, he must either hate or love him, if the former, the
intricacy is both admirable and obliging, for the self-same action makes the
Son preserve an Enemy, and loose a Friend, and the Father loose his revenge
upon his adversary, and his affection to his Son: If the latter, his being in a
place which forbids his visits and assistants, will be no small trouble, and
the doubts that I will take away Perolla's life will be Pacuvius's torment
whilst he imagines his Son is living, and the knowledge when he is not so, will
continue it after he is dead; and since he lives more in Perolla than in
himself, his unequalled treachery will justify my killing the most of him that
I can. After many such strange reasonings as these, he drew out a Poniard, and
came toward me, to act what he had determined: I must confess I was somewhat
startled at this proceeding, but when I considered the averseness of his nature
was such, that probably I could never obtain his consent of possessing his
excellent Daughter, I had no more the desire than the force to resist him, and
therefore, just as he came to the Bedside, I uncovered my self, and showing
him my naked Breast, I told him, Here (Sir) this is the place you aim at, and
therefore it shall not be defended by me, I am guilty, because you think me so,
and since I am so miserable as to be hated by you, that death which you
threaten me with, will be a justice as to your revenge, and a charity as to my
condition. That action and those few words produced a strange effect, for upon
a sudden his high disorders began to lessen, his Face to dispel those clouds
which darkn'd it; and at length fetching a sigh from the bottom of his Breast,
he declared some expressions to this sense: What, shall an intentional injury
from Pacuvius, be more prevalent with thee, than a real obligation from
Perolla? shall the First Fruits of that life which thou hold from his
generosity, be to take away his, which has given thee thine? shall he be
murdered, because he hindered thee from being so? and shall the residue of his
Blood be spilt by thee, when all he has already lost, was shed for thee?
besides, thou deriv'st the advantage thou have now over him from his
protection, for had it not been for that, thy death had taken from thee the
Will and the Power of Revenge: Yes (he continued, addressing himself to me, and
sheathing his Poniard) you shall live Perolla, not only free from any attempt
of mine, but securely also, from my acquainting Hannibal who you are, from
whose resentment you might expect as hard a destiny as from Blacius's, but the
services you have done the Romans, and me in particular, bind up my Hands.
There is (I replied) a third way of destroying me, as certain as those two you
have exempted me from, and that (Sir) is the denial of my first request, which
to dissuade you from, I may truly prosess, that all that blood hated you, was
spilt for you, for which I bless my fortune, that made me perform what was good
by losing that which is ill. All my new Blood I have bred up with such firm
inclinations for you, that had it derived its original from your self, it could
not be more at your devotion: I must acknowledge too the justice of the gods in
making me receive those wounds which Pacuvius intended for you, and to divert
and reclaim him from such criminal designs, I shall make it my constant
Prayers, that they may all have the fate which this had, and that by my
sufferings I might prevent all those that are intended you* Blacius at these
assurances, wholly banished those cruel looks, which made me so much suspect my
fate, and with an obliging accent, conjured me to tell him, what use I could
make of his condescending to my desire. I should then (I replied) by a
continual succession of services have some hopes to obtain your permission of
making my addresses to the fair Izadora. (This spoke unadvisedly, having
flattered my self into a belief, that in the temper Blacius was in, I might
procure some engagement which his generosity (though he should afterward
repent) would not permit him to recall: but alas! I soon found my expectation
deceived, for after this declaration, in an instant he armed himself again with
that severe countenance he so late had laid aside, and with a Tone, as cruel as
his words, he told me, Is Izadora then the object of your design? it is very
like indeed, I should present her to his Son that executed her Uncle, would
have murdered his Father, and who to satisfy a private malice has given up his
Country to the Enemies of it. These truly are obligations to court a Mistress
with. Sir (I replied, somewhat moved) you still reproach me with another
crime, if Magins was put to death to please Hannibal, I made use of it in
Pettely to raise him enemies: If Blacius life was attempted, I preserved it by
the hazard of my own: and if Capua was delivered up to the Carthagineans, I
became (to him that did it) from a Son, an Enemy, and so wedded my Countries
quarrel, that thereby Hannibal lost more Men, than perhaps the taking that
great City would have cost him. I must confess (replied Blacius) you have done
much for me, and for the Romans, and upon both those scores you have received
no unfruitful return, since for those services you did our Empire, I preserve
you (not without an eminent hazard) from the knowledge of the enemies of it:
and for what you have done my particular, I suspend those resentments which
your Fathers treachery highly invites me to execute, and because my debt to you
is a Life, (as I think nothing can be a sufficient payment, but an obligation
of the same nature) so after your receiving that satisfaction, I can be no
longer esteemed indebted to you. Sir, (I answered) if you will tie your self to
what your last words now professed, I shall as highly approve of your proceeding,
as of my own happiness, but your silencing of your own resentments, and the
concealing me from the Carthagineans is no preservation, unless you permit me
also to be a servant to the fair Izadora: That is the only means to save my
life, and without it, all the other you can mention, will be rather miseries
than favors: neither can a man say, that he preserves his Enemies life,
because he exempts him from the Sword or Poison, if at last he makes him
dyesome other way: what you have promised, only frees me from two ways of
ruin, to cast me into a third, that is more certain and painful than either:
No, no, Sir (I continued) if you banish me from Izadora, the highest effects of
yours or Hannibal's hatred will be pleasing, and cut me from those languishing
torments your refusal will create. I have already told you (said Blacius) that
you must not expect Izadora, who I will sooner marry to her Grave, than to any
enemy of your Family; but because you shall have no occasion of condemning me
of cruelty, I will truly state those obligations you pretend to have conferred
on me, and those I have really placed on you. I acknowledge you saved my life,
and `tis likely I derived that obligation from your ignorance, but I did
preserve yours after my knowledge of you; had you the invitations of oppressed
innocence to procure me your assistance; I had a just revenge to dissuade me
from pardoning you, and yet did it; The glory of your action was your reward,
but the mercy of mine, may probably prove my punishment: besides, what you did
for me, was no more favor than to draw me out of a danger, wherein you had
cast me, for I had not needed the assistance of one of your Family, had not the
treachery of the chief of it, been the occasion; so that you can never mention
the obligation you did me, without discovering your Fathers infamy. As you
saved me from murdering, so you hindr'd Pacuvius from being a murderer. You
preserved my life from being a sacrifice to violence, but by it you hindered
your Fathers from being one to Justice, and whilst you only defeated him of
his revenge, you exempted him both from the guilt and punishment of of it: so
that you have obliged Pacuvius more than me. And since you pleaded that
another crime ought not to be accounted yours; so your Virtues ought not to be
attributed to your Family, to which I am so irreconcilable an Enemy, that it
lies not in the power of any one of it, to reconcile me to it. No, young man
(he continued) after what I have done, you cannot condemn me of ingratitude,
without practicing your self, what you would blame in me. Sir (I replied)
though I believe I could answer all your objections, yet the means I must take
to clear those already mentioned, will create a greater than any I shall
confute, which is my disputing against you, but if all those arguments you use,
be to prove your denying me Izadora, is not an effect of your ingratitude, but
your justice, I will abundantly confess it, and declare, besides, if you fancy
otherwise, you do as great a wrong to me, as you do to my Felicity, in refusing
my passionate desires. I had no sooner ended those words, but that Blacius
calling the fair Izadora (who had been present at all this dispute, and in
whose face you might have known the several tempers of it) told her, I am glad
Perolla acknowledges my depriving him of his happiness is an action of Justice,
I hope then no man can condemn my revenge, when Justice concurs with my
inclination to confer it on me; I do therefore ( Izadora) conjure thee, by
whose wrongs his Family has done ours, by thy Uncle Magius Blood, which
Pacuvius sacrificed to his hatred, by thy Fathers life, which he would have
destroyed upon the same score, and by the glory of so sitting a revenge, scorn
his Flame, and let him find in thy hatred, the punishment of his Fathers to all
thy Family. At this cruel command the perfect Izadora became white as
innocence, and after her disorder was a little past, casting down her eyes to
the ground, she thus replied. Alas (Sir) your commands are come too late, for
before I knew who he was, I gave him so large at Empire over me, that it is
impossible to recall it; neither when I consider him bathed in blood for your
preservation, rejoicing at his wounds, because they hindered you from any that
were dangerous, losing his Father to preserve his Fathers enemy, and when you
assured me you would judge of my affection to you by that I should pay him, I
cannot repent what I have done, my friendship for Perolla, is derived from my
obedience to you, and my gratitude to him; who can then condemn a production
from such noble causes? beside, he has nothing that is enemy to us but his name,
his actions are not, for by them I enjoy a Father. Can you then have so low an
opinion of my resentments, as to believe any consideration can make me hate the
giver of so great a blessing? if then my affection for him be a sin, you will,
I hope, pardon it by the knowledge of what occasions it. I do therefore (Sir)
conjure you, by that precious life you owe his gallantry, by the Blood of
Magius, he has so generously revenged, by those services he has paid our
Empire, and by the glory you will purchase by vanquishing your Enemy (as you
term him) without revenge; permit Perolla to divest you of that prejudicate
opinion you have for all his Family, or to assume a confidence by his repeated
services, to remove that high aversion you have for his unfortunate extraction.
Though these words in themselves were strangely moving, yet they were delivered
with an action and tone so compassionate and ravishing, that no heart, which
had not been harder than cruelty it self, could have resisted them. But alas,
they were so far from producing any good effects, that Blacius with a look,
that had all things of horrid in it, told her, are you then so desirous to
displease me, that to effect it, you will become a friend to your Fathers
enemy, that you may become an enemy to him? will you ruin my happiness, to
create Perolla's? and will you show me the way to be revenged on his cruel
Family, and then hinder me from acting it? must that which deprives me of my
revenge, deprive me of my Daughter too? must the cause why I do not punish my
Enemy, be as great a misfortune to me, as that is which he avoids? and to
increase my trouble, must your affection and duty to me (which were my highest
felicity) be the occasion of my proportionate misery? Ah Izadora (he continued,
for I will no longer call you Daughter) will you then bestow your self upon
this Perolla, when even now he declared, that to be denied you was just? do you
love injustice so well, that in one action you will be unjust to Blacius, and
to his Enemies? and will you make such haste to pay a debt that is not due, by
declining one that is? Go barbarous Maid, unworthy of my Care (as well as
Blood) I will inflict on thee no greater punishment, than the granting thy
desires, for when thy reason, or his embraces, has banished or quenched thy
impious flame, thou will know and deplore thy sin, in preferring a Lover before
a Father. Go then, but for ever, and may thou never know what happiness is,
but avoid it. Finishing these words, he went out of the Chamber, and left us in
a perplexity, as great as his disorders; But before I could speak to the fair
cause of them, he returned again, and thus continued his discourse to his
excellent Daughter. No no, I have thought better on it, for to cross a desire,
though it be an ill one, is a revenge, and it is upon that score you shall never
see Perolla more, for whom, if you continue your passion, you shall find from
my justice (in separating you) as severe an affliction, as I can resent from
your want of Duty by your union. Do not think to divest me from this
determination, for all your Tears and Prayers, will be as fruitless for your
Lover, as mine to you were against him. (Then addressing himself to me, he
said) And thou (cruel stranger) which by saving my life, have made it my
torment, and for my unfortunate care in bringing thee here to heal thy wounds,
have created as much misery in my Family, as there had been joy in thine had
thy Father murdered me, remember as soon as my Surgeons tell thee thou art
fit to travel, that thou quit my House, for if thou stayest a minute longer, by
that quiet thou have robbed me of, I Will sacrifice thy life unto my just
resentments. Then thrusting the fair Izadora out before him, he went away in a
rage, almost equal to mine at that inhumane action. I will not tell you (said
Perolla to Spartacus) all those expressions my grief and anger extorted from
me, whose greatness you may in some sort guess, when I assure you I was so
blinded with rage, that I made many criminal designs against his Life, which
was so much an Enemy to mine, and had not my weakness hindered me, I had perhaps
attempted that, which if performed, had made me worthy of all those miseries
his hate has inflicted on me. But after this first heat was qualified, the
consideration that he was Izadora's Father, banished those criminal resolutions,
and struck me with so deep a grief, that my repentance had like to have proved
his revenge. But (to be brief) Strato (for so was my Servant called, that
followed me into Salapia) never left inquiring after me, till by his diligence,
he had gotten some suspicions, that 'twas I which had saved Blacius, and was
carried by him into his House; therefore to satisfy himself, by a considerable
Present, he obtained leave from one of my Surgeons, to attend him as his
servant, where when my wounds were next dressed, he discovered what he sought,
and himself to me. I was not a little over-joyed, by the finding out so
faithful a Servant, and having acquainted him with those several accidents
which had be fallen me since our ^eparation, I enjoined him to try if he could
possibly learn some way how I might see Izadora, or convey a Letter to her; but
though his industry left nothing unessay'd, yet it proved absolutely fruitless,
for Blacius had so faithful and strict a Watch about her, that 'twas impossible
to corrupt or deceive them. But to increase the misery I then groaned under,
Strato (one day) told me, Pacuvius had discovered where my retreat was, and how
I endangered my own Life to preserve his Enemies, with which he was so enraged,
that he commanded him to tell me as I had divested my self of all duty to him,
so he had done the like of all affection to me, and that if I had any relics
of respect for him, I should show it, by never coming into his sight again: he
further told me, that Pacuvius had once determined to acquaint Hannibal, how
Blacius concealed his Enemy, but that the fear of my ruin which would be
involved in Blacius's had restrained him. You may well believe, that this was
no small accession to my trouble, and truly I think had not I so great a
support as my belief of Izadora's affection and constancy, I had sunk under the
weight of my misfortunes. At last, through the great care Blacius Servants had
of me, whether it proceeded from his generosity, to hasten the regaining of
that health I had lost from him, or from his revenge to banish me the sooner
from being near Izadora: in spite of the indisposition of my mind, that fatal
day came, wherein the Chyrurgeons told me, I might undertake a journey without
any pain or danger, O how I cursed their skill that separated me from my
desires! and how much more I had valued their Ignorance than their Art. Before
I went away, I sent Strato to Blacius, to know if he would permit me to wait on
him, and make him those retributions which his care for my recovery merited;
but he sent me word, my abesence more than my presence, would better discharge
any debt I pretended to owe him, and that I could not more oblige him, than by
a sudden departure from that House, which I had flung into so many disorders. I
obeyed this cruel Message, and that night (for I durst not stir by day, lest I
might have been discovered) I quitted Blacius's House, neither did I visit
Pacuvius, who I was willing should see I would disobey him in nothing, since I
did it not in an injunction so opposite to my duty and inclination. I had not
retired an hour in a friends House, when I called Strato to me, and told him, I
was resolved before I left Salapia, to see the fair Izadora, which I fancied
could not be very difficult, since she lay (for the coolness of the Lodging, it
being then Summer) in a lower Chamber next the Garden. Strato, who considered
my safety above my satisfaction, earnestly (though vainly) dissuaded me from
it, therefore we went silently to the Garden door, which answered on a by-lane,
then having picked the lock, I got in, and was conducted by Strato to that
window, where he assured me Izadora lay, I commanded him then to return, and
give me warning, if he should discover any thing worthy my knowledge: he was no
sooner gone, but I walked softly to the place he directed me to, lest some
company might have been with her, but as the gods would have it, she was all
alone (having retired her self into her Closet which was joining to her
Chamber) there looking in, I discovered her by the light of a small Taper,
sitting on a Chair, leaning her Cheek upon one hand, and wiping her Tears off
with the other; I was amazed to ^ind her in such a posture, but suddenly my
wonder was turned into joy (at least as much as I was capable of, when she was
so drowned in sorrow) finding by her discourse, that I was the object of hers.
Alas (she said, accompanying her words with a heavy sigh) perhaps at this
instant that I only but deplore Perolla's absence, I may have cause to lament
his death, through Blacius's cruelty, by acting himself his revenge, or by
giving Ha^nibal the means to do it. Wretched Izadora! must the not knowing
whether thou art miserable make thy misery? and must thy doubts of being
unfortunate, render thee really so? No, no; I fear they are not only bare
suspicions make me thus unhappy, but that my eyes weep by Prophecy, what they
must shortly by Evidence.

I must confess, said Perolla, though it were a crime thus to entrench upon her
retirement, yet I found in that fin, a more obliging joy, than I could in the
reward of Virtue; and doubtless, I had longer continued my transgression, had I
not thought it a greater to leave her in a sadness I could so soon remove:
Therefore making a little noise, I told her, Madam, if your apprehensions for
Perolla be the blessed and sad cause of your Tears, you may now silence them,
since he is in a condition of apprehending nothing but your disdain. Never, to
my remembrance, did I see so strange a surprise as those words were to that
excellent Beauty to whom they were spoken, who, though she a long time nicely
considered me, yet could she not fancy I was Perolla, for her Father (to
destroy that friendship she honored me with) had given her so much cause to
despair for my life, that her sense could not convince her belief I was living;
but at length her disorder was so far suppressed, tht coming to the window she
asked me softly, whether I was really what I pretended to be? and if I were,
what made me so evidently endanger my life, and consequently hers? Madam (I
replied) I am the happy Perolla (that which I have heard since I came to this
place, makes me assume that Title) and I am come to know how you will dispose
of a life, which you are pleased to be so much concerned in. You live then,
gallant Perolla (she said) and Blacius, after all his threatenings, has
preserved your life. No Madam, I (answered) it is not Blacius, but Izadora which
has done it; that glorious confession she made him in my favor, was the
essential cause of it; all that Blacius did, was, that he killed me not, but
'twas his unequaled Daughter give me my life by giving me that which makes me
value it; and I should be more unworthy the gift, had the apprehension of any
danger hindered me from acknowledging at her feet, that as I hold it by her, so
I Will only preserve and employ it for her. If, said Izadora, you had given me
so large an Empire over you, before this visit, I should have enjoined you to
trust my justice, in believing your goodness, rather than thus hazard your
safety for the expressing of it. Madam (I replied) I should more endanger it by
going away without assuring you of this duty, than I do in the paying of it,
for that might have ruined me in your good opinion, which I more fear than all
that my Enemies can act against me. You are (she answered) so deeply fixed in
my esteem, that hardly any action of yours, much less one which hindered you
from danger, can prejudice you in it. But fair Izadora (I replied) may not your
Fathers hatred, my unfortunate extraction, and my own unworthiness, raise your
justice to the suppression of your present mercy, and the ruin of my Felicity?
Ah Perolla (she answered with a little blush) can you then suspect my
constancy? Silence I beseech you all such doubts, for you need not fear I will
commit a fault, in the which I shall find my punishment; neither can you
believe I will prefer any other before you, without doing as great a wrong to
my judgment as my happiness: but (she continued) may not I ( Perolla) suspect,
that Blacius's cruelty may induce you to withdraw your Passion from his
Daughter? and that your revenge may be more predominant than your affection?
Madam (I replied) I attest the gods, if my words have given you the least
doubt, that I feared you would prove inconstant, they did not express my
meaning: for if I have any suspicion, it is not of your Virtue, but of my
Felicity; and if I were jealous of your change, I am not so rude or partial to
my self, as to call that your inconstancy, which would be but your justice; but
if I had had any suspicions of that nature, what you have been pleased to say
would make me rather cherish than condem them, since they are the cause of my
receiving assurances of an affection, as far transcending my hope as my desert.
As to those doubts you mentioned of your Fathers hatred raising any resentments
in me; I attest the self-same powers I even now invoked, that as long as I am
blessed with your esteem, I can be capable neither of misfortune nor change; and
though I have lost Pacuvius and Blacius, yet when I consider what I have
thereby obtained, I shall never repent the purchase. We had certainly past the
night away in so pleasing a conversation, had not Izadora's Woman interrupted
it by knocking at the Closet-door, and telling her, That Blacius at his coming
home (for he was then abroad) would doubtless visit her, and if he found her up
at so unseasonable an hour, it might raise suspicions, which would hardly be
suppressed. This fatal summons I received with extreme reluctance; but Izadora,
who knew the truth of it, and who apprehended my discovery; told me, 'twas time
to retire, and having made me a thousand protestations of her constancy, she
strictly forbad me any such hazardous visits, enjoining me to go into the Roman
Army, and endeavor there to get friends strong enough to suppress her Fathers
aversion for me: Then having settled an address for our Letters, I kissed her fair
hands, and resigned the Office of my words unto my Tears, which only assured
her, how cruel I esteemed that separation. 'Twas in this sort, Sir, (continued
Perolla) that we contracted an affection, which has cost us so many miseries,
and which I never deplored, but only for that share the fair Izadora had in
them; and though at this sad farewell I had abundant cause to be highly
satisfied with her ambition'd friendship, yet I have always had a Genius so apt
to torment me, that I found my misfortune in my happiness, the knowledge of her
making my departure from her the more unsupportable.

Here Izadora (who feared that the Relation of her Servants Life might endanger
it) put a stop to it by remembering him, that by their contract he was to
acquaint Spartacus with no more than what had happened in her Fathers House.
Perolla with a look full of humility, acknowledged her care, and by his
silence, gave her a rise, thus to prosecute their History.

The end of the Fourth Book of the First Part.
PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK V.
I Cannot resemble the greatness of that grief I resented for Perolla's
departure to any thing more aptly than to my joy and fear before it; and though
Blaciu's fury could have inflicted no cruelty on him which I should not at
least equally have participated, yet I may justly profess my apprehensions for
him were more sensible than for my self, and that you may know they proceeded
as much from my Reason as Affection, my Father had removed his Lodgings to
those over mine, and had set such faithful and vigilant Sentinels about me,
that had not his then being abroad, and their unsual neglect both concurred for
Perolla's safety, he might have fallen into troubles, the thoughts of which has
a thousand times created mine; and he was no sooner retired than Blacius came
into my Chamber, where, with many expressions of gladness he celebrated his
Protectors remove, and enjoined me the like resentments for the same cause: but
though disobedience to Parents be a Crime, yet when I considered the occasion
of mine, I could not give it that Name; for I esteemed the object of my
affection so deserving, that I had no way so justly to merit my sufferings as
by not resolutely avowing so pure and meritorious a Friendship. But whilst I
was thus persecuted by the Enemy of our affections, Perolla was persecuting him
of our Empire. 'Twas he, who under Fabius and Marcellus recovered that
Cassilinum by assualt which was lost my Famine: 'Twas he, that during
Marcellus's sickness at Nola reconquer'd the Samnites, Lucalians, and
Appulians, by the loss of 25000 of the Rebels and Affricans: In a word, 'Twas
he performed such sublime Actions, that had I not known the Charms of his
person and conversation, I could not yet have resisted those of his Fame. The
Winter, which succeeded this active Summer, Hannibal made Salapia his
Headquarters, and though he had endeavored by a world of civilities to make a
friend of Blacius (who Perolla, intent only on those accidents which related to
his Amors had omitted to acquaint you, was invited and persuaded into this
Town by the Carthaginians, after it was his) yet the miseries of his Country,
and Magius's Blood were so recent in his memory, that none of Hanniballs
inticements could induce him to stifle his designs of revenge; in order to
which, he made use of the Carth^ginians offer, but yet lived under his Power,
only to destroy it. But the time of Fabius's Consulship being expired, the
Senate, to testify the value they placed upon his merit, elected his son to
succeed him, and the Father, either to manifest the goodness of their choice,
or to evince he believed whoever they esteemed fit to command in chief, he
thought himself not too good to serve under, procured a Commission from the
Senate, to be Lieutenant General to his own Son. It was worthy observation when
the Father came into the Camp, and the Son rode forth to meet him: Eleven of
the 12 Lictors, which carried Rods and Axes before the Consul, suffered him in
respect of his Age and Relations to pass by them on Horseback, which was
positively against the custom, and, which the Son perceiving, commanded the
last of his Lictors to note it; who, thereupon bad the old Fabius to alight,
and come to the Consul on foot, which he cheerfully did, and told him, 'Twas
not son my neglect but my design, to make trial whether you understood your
self to be what you are.

I have related (said Izadora to my Prince) a particular, which though it has
nothing of connection to our story; yet being in that time exceedingly
discoursed of, I hope 'twill procure your excuse. Spartacus having assured her
that she had committed no fault but in thinking she had committed one, begged
her to prosecute those Adventures wherein he took so much interest and
satisfaction. This young Fabius (she continued) was General of the Roman Army
when Blacius had brought a design of delivering Salapia and Hannibal into the
Senates Power, to so much perfection, that there wanted only as much time as
the acting it would take up; The day which preceded that night, in which this
Plot was to be executed, my Father, who had covertly drawn the Consul with some
Forces near this Town, sent a Confident of his to advertise him, that at any
hour he should appoint, he had so many Partisans at his devotion, as he could
secure for him either the Samnite or the Brutian Gate, and that he desired to
know which of them would be most commodious for his attempt.

This Agent returning about the dusk of the evening, unfortunately met with a
Commander of the Carthagineans, whose gate and habit was so resembling unto
Blacius's that blinded with that, belief, he took him aside, and told him, The
Consul would not fail at midnight, and that the Samnite Gate would be most
commodious. You may easily believe these words did as much surprise the
Carthaginian, as the knowledge of this miserable error did afterward him that
had committed it: But the Carthaginian had too long followed the trade of War,
not to conclude by what had been said what was to have been done; which made
him immediately seize upon the unfortunate Agent, and carry him to Hanniball;
who, by exquisite Torments, forced him to reveal the whole Conspiracy. This
discovery was as pleasing to Pacuvius (who then was present) as deplorable for
Blacius, who, with exceeding diligence, was by a strong Guard violently carried
into a Prison, which in the greatness of its horror had this of advantageous,
that it made Death a Comparative Good. Fabius for all sustained no loss but
that of his hopes, for though he were in Arms all night, yet by my Fathers
committal, the Signal not being given, (which was a lighted Torch our of a
Turret Window) he conceived the design had vent, and so leisurely a little
before day retreated to his Camp. But alas, I was no sooner informed of
Blacius's sad Fate, then I lamented him as dead, the knowledge of Hanniball's
vindicative Nature justifying that prophetical way of grieving: but after I had
moderated which those tears my Sex and Relation rendered unavoidable, and that
thereby my Reason was less hindered from acting, I resolved to write unto
Perolla, who I knew was in the Consuls Army. The Letter I sent by a trusty
Messenger, and was to this purpose.

IZADORA to the generous PEROLLA.
BLacius has lost his life for his zeal to the Romans, unless your power with
Fabius preserve it, by obtaining prisoners for his Ransom, or suspend his Death
by a high Message of making all the Affricans in his hands follow my Fathers
destiny. Do not now I beseech you consider Blacius as Perolla's Enemy, but as
Izadora's Father; and by a second protecting him create his affection, or else
so justify mine, that want of duty may appear virtue: and though his past
insensibility would render your revenge very just yet your saving him will
therefore render your Generosity more eminent.


Whilst with great impatience I expected a return of this Paper, Hannibal, to
make his revenge appear rather the effect of justice than of passion, proceeded
against Blacius in the ordinary forms of Law; by which he was condemned to lose
his Head, and to have his four Quarters fixed upon the Gates of Salapia, for a
future Terror to all others. O gods! when this fatal Sentence came to my
hearing, what did not I utter against Hannibal's Cruelty, and Blacius's ill
Fortune: But whilst I was in the midst of my despair, my Messenger returned
with this answer from my generous Friend,

PEROLLA to the fair IZADOR
BLacius, as he is a Friend to the Romans, cannot without a high Injustice
apprehend my not being his; But as he is Izador's Father he cannot without a
higher doubt of my exposing all that is most precious for him; and though his
severity has been somewhat great, yet his admirable Daughter by a contrary
extreme has so over-repair'd all his injuries, that the service I intend to
render him will relish as much of gratitude as obedience. Fabius, Madam, will
embrace your Fathers deliverance as he ought; and if his endeavors prove
unsuccessful, I will either free him from so sad a destiny, or my self from the
misery of seeing you deplore it.


Oh! How pleasing and forlorn at once was this Letter, I saw my Fathers
deliverance promised, but the way which conduced unto it was almost as great a
misfortune as it exempted me from: for I found I must hazard all my felicity in
attempting to save but a large part of it. Whilst I was thus perplexed, I was
informed that the Consul had sent a Trumpet to Hannibal, with an offer of all
his Libian Prisoners for the redemption of Blacius, and a deep protestation in
case he executed him, that he would give no Quarter to those he had already,
nor any others in the future. To the first of which, the Carthaginean replied,
That he valued the execution of Justice more than the Romans could the saving a
Traitor, and upon that score he would not pardon Blacius's life for a few
Prisoners, who being so merited to continue so: And as to his latter
threatening, he believed it was sent when he remembered not Cannes, Trebia,
Tissinum, and Thrassimene: and though Fabius by executing those he had then in
his power, would sooner free him from a trouble than give him any; yet he would
consider that action as 'twas intended, and vindicate himself at that rate. In
a word, he sent him a positive answer, That all the offers or threatenings of
the Romans, no not the saving his dear Brother Asdrubal's life (were it in
their power) should tie up his hands from so just and necessary a Revenge. I
was further acquainted, that Hanniball had given order before the Trumpet was
withdrawn, to have a Scaf^old erected in the Alarmplace, and had sworn by the
glory of Carthage, and his Fathers Memory, (Oaths which he held in greatest
veneration) That before two days were ended, Blacius should receive the reward
of his Infidelity. I might appear too impertinent, did I acquaint you what sad
operations this cruel Sentence produced in me: it shall suffice to tell you,
that my weeping in the apprehensions of my Fathers death had well-near caused
my own, and that I had shed so many antedated tears for it, that had the cruel
Hannibal seen them, they would doubtless have quenched his rage. But whilst I
abandoned my self to a grief, that was as just as great, the Night arrived
which was the Eve to that fatal Day; and as the horror of darkness is always
apt to raise in us dismal imaginations; I fancied the unfortunate Blacius all
pale and bloody coming to my Bedside, and after he had viewed me, with a look
which had almost reduced me to the condition he was in, he told me, Behold
Izadora, behold these several wounds (which he opened so wide, that his Soul,
had it yet inhabited his Body, might have come entire out of the least of them)
though they are full of torment, yet I have forced my self to travel from the
Elysium: where I have received the reward of my fidelity to the Romans, and of
my Martyrdom under Hanniball, to come and conjure thee by the duty thou owedst
me before I was a Ghost; by the joy I have left, and the pain I shall suffer
till thou grantest my request: now thou art at thy own dispose, never show thou
have that power by giving thy self to Perolla; but as thou art Heir to our
Blood, be so also to our generous resentments, and let him find that revenge in
thy beauty and disdain which he thought he had avoided by the extinction of our
Family: if thou grantest me this, the blessed Plains cannot afford me equal
satisfaction; but if thou deny'st it, all the felicity of that place will lose
its quality; and where others find their happiness, I shall torment. These
words methought were spoken with Eyes swelled with Tears, and with an accent so
moving, that in my life I never was in a higher perplexity: I began a thousand
times to condemn those learned Men which taught us, that the felicity of the
other life is so perfect an ecstasy of joy, that it needs no foyl to set it
off; and that they in it are no more sensible of any concern for us here than
we are capable of conceiving their felicity there; when alas to my cost I
found one there not only retained an unjust desire of Revenge, which poisoned
all other delights, but also prosecuted a virtue here which was to possess the
highest Empire there: and I esteemed it one great misfortune of the other
World, that those in it were confined to their happiness, but by having a
liberty of going from their own, they could thereby ruin, or at least
interrupt ours. Oh, How I did also inwardly exclaim against my Fathers Tyranny,
who pretended a power over me after that by death the Bond was canceled, that
that he would be so much an Enemy to my felicity, as to deprive me of mine he
would involve himself in the like Fate. But whilst I was preparing such an
answer for this imanary Ghost as might render my disobedience a justice, I was
diverted by a noise so confused and loud, that that death it seemed to threaten
had been rather to be elected than avoided, since therein I had been exempted
from hearing so much horror. After half an hours suspense and fear, a Servant
of my Fathers came into my Chamber with a lighted Torch, and to remove my
doubts, told me, he believed that 'twas some false alarm, which Hannibal had
given to try the readiness of his Soldiers; for there was no Enemy near enough
to give him a true one; and whilst he was fortifying this conjecture by some
other allegations, we heard a noise in the Garden; and suddenly after I
perceived a Gentlemen all armed and covered with blood coming toward me, and
leading another, whose hands were laden with Irons. As soon as the first was
come to my Beds-side, he kneeled down and told me, Your commands, Madam, have
not only given me the desire, but the power to serve you; and since my
hazarding a life that I fear is but indifferent, to you I have preserved one
that you highly value, I shall find in the action the Reward. Then rising and
turning toward the Prisouer, he continued, You are at liberty, Sir, and if I
had had the power to free you from your Chains as well as from your Prison, you
had long ere now been eased of that burden; but that office I must leave to
some happier hand, lest by my continuance here the joy of your freedom might be
extinguished by your knowledge of him that gave it you. Then faluting us with a
humility as great as his obligation, without staying for any answer, he went
out of the house the same way he came in; and left us in so deep an
astonishment, that for a long while we could not get out of it. The first thing
I perceived after my amazement vanished, was, that the fettered Prisoner was
Blacius; ah! How pleasing was that surprise? and how I detested my disorder,
which had so long suspended and separated me from my joy, which wrought so
powerfully on me, that forgetting the posture I was in, I flung my self out of
my Bed, and at my Fathers feet, by a thousand irregular actions testified the
greatness of my satisfaction; which the more I reflected on, the less cause I
found to suppress any effects which proceeded from or illustrated it; neither
can my amazement for the greatness and suddeness of this alteration be
attributed to the weakness of my Sex, since Blacius, whose courage had
out-brav'd many dangers, resented a resembling one: And 'twas a long while and
by many extravagancies that I withdrew him from his; which when I perceived
entirely vanished, I embraced his knees and cried out, You are then alive, Sir,
and the gods have heard my reiterated prayers and tears for your deliverance.
Yes, Izadora (he replied) I am once again at liberty, and doubtless owe that
blessing immediately to those powers to whom thou have address thy weepings;
for certainly those prodigies of valor acted for my relief were too much
transcending a humane strength: But alas (he continued, turning about, and
perceiving none in the Chamber but his unfortunate Daughter) What is become of
my Protector? He is gone Sir (I answered) and his departure has left as high a
testimony of his modesty here, as even now he did of his valor in the Prison.
His modesty (said Blacius) is as injurions as his courage was obliging; for in
acquainting me with a new Gallantry, he has deprived me of expressing my
gratitude for the old. If (I replied) he could but hear your resentments in his
favor, I am so well acquainted with his disposition, that I dare assure you he
would esteem not only too plentiful a reward for what he has already done, but
for those services he hopes to pay you in the future; but the apprehension he
had that the same fate which attended Perolla might wait on him, and that what
his valor did create, your knowledge of his condition might destroy, made him
so suddenly vanish, and rather elect to leave you a good opinion of him by not
knowing his Name, than hazard the contrary by a revealing of it.

I am then (he replied) still so unhappy, that to know, and not to know to whom
I am indebted for my life must prove an equal misfortune? No, no, Izadora (he
continued) I conjure you by all the gods, if you are acquainted with my
Deliverer, and would have me relish what he has given me, inform me who he is,
and where he resides, for rather than leave him so ill a character of my
resentments, I will repeat greater dangers than he has freed me from; and to
assure him of my Gratitude, I will undertake (it may be to perform) actions of
as transcendent a quality as those which created it: This I command you as a
duty, and this I beg of you as a charity; neither can you suspect in this
discovery the same destiny which attended Perolla, the difference of the action
justly silencing those apprehensions, For though it be true, that the ends are
the same, yet the ways are extremely different: Perolla perhaps was surpised
into his gallantry. This acted it with premeditation, that freed me only from
the hands of an apparent violence, but this from a seeming Justice: That did
but the duty of every man in suppressing Murderers, who are the destroyers of
humane Society; and who knows whether his seeing my distress did not put him in
mind of what his own might be as soon as my death had given those that were
acting it in the liberty and the power, and so, that which you term his giving
me life, might be in order to preserve his own; But this generous Stranger had
no motive to invite his assistance but his gallantry, which makes him attempt
an action, where the undertaking of it is as great a wonder as the performance,
and has thereby so bound me to gratitude, that I believe were it Perolla that
had thus obliged me, I should almost suppress my just resentments for his
Family, and that performance which gave me my life and liberty, might give him
my affection and friendship. Sir (I replied) Perolla's actions are of too high
a quality to need any commendations but what they carry in themselves, but were
not my duty more prevalent with me than truth, I should perhaps aver that your
comments can no more diminish their natural luster than mine can add unto it;
but since you are pleased to place so right an esteem upon this Strangers
services, and express as earnest a desire of knowing as of being grateful to
him, I will no longer conceal him: It Is Perolla, Sir, That same Perolla, whose
former obligations you have lessened but to increase the present; It Is he whose
gallantry, were it capable of being suppressed, had doubtless been so by your
ingratitude; (Pardon me if dare say what you did act:) But he from your cruelty
deduces arguments to convince you of his affection and friendship, by not
declining your preservation, when dangers as great as your hatred threatened
whosoever should attempt it: It Is then, that he with an unimitable virtue
exposes his own life to redeem yours, which by a sad experiment he knew was the
chiefest obstruction in his felicity. Give me leave Sir too, a little to repine
that you could fancy any other could undertake and act so much for you; and
certainly were not your judgment clouded with a prejudicated opinion of him,
the gallantry of the performance, and the modesty and humility of the
Performer, would have been a certainer information than my words that it was
Perolla; in whose behalf I beg you to practice (now you know him) what you
promised when you only knew his services; for all returns but that of your
affection and friendship will be as short of his merit as both those will
abundantly reward it. Blacius, when I had ended speaking, after having fetched
two or three turns about the room with an angry look, replied, I should have
^ooner known 'twas Perolla by the great rate you set upon his services than by
the services themselves; and if I placed a higher Character on them than they
merited, 'twas only to draw a confession from you, which I thought nothing else
could perform: My design has succeeded; and in those very expressions which you
intended should create my affection for your lover, I perceive the continuation
of yours to him, and in so high a disobedience to my commands, that that death
I am freed from, turns to a misfortune, and forces me to tell you, if you
persevere in this criminal passion, I shall embrace Hannibal's resentment
rather as a cure than a punishment. Alas Sir (I answered, exceedingly
surpised) Must then Perolla's saving your life, and my gratitude for it be
looked upon as Crimes? And must an obligation from an enemy, which should raise
the greatness of it, turn it to an offense? Since these are the constructions
you make of his actions, it is high time for him to despair: since it is as
impossible for him not to offend you (if obligations be an offense) as for you
with justice to give his performances that name. If what he has done for me
(said Blacius) be an obligation, from thence you may derive a proof of my
affection to you, which had rather endure the name of ungrateful, than by
giving you away free my self from that aspersion. But do not proceed in this
disputing against my resolutions, which may force me to hate what I desire to
love. You are too just (I replied) to hate without a cause, and it is on that
assurance I dare become Perolla's Advocate, since his fear of offending you
makes him decline being his own: do not then, Sir, employ that breath he has
preserved to destroy him that gave it you; his service merits an esteem, if not
a reward; and it may be, others will say you do as high an injustice in thus
using your Deliverer, as he did that put you in a condition to need his help.
To which Blacius told me, That Life which is now (I hope) out of Hannibal's
power, and which you say I owe Perolla's Affection to me, was rather an
argument of his own to himself; he knew the justice of those resentments I had
for his could not be silenced but by actions as great as those which created
them, and that whilst they continued, he could no more obtain my permission of
possessing you, than you without it; so that my deliverance being the best way
to that end, he performed it, and thereby no more obliged me than a Passenger
does the Commander of a Ship, by saving what could not perish without involving
him in the common ruin, so that his being a friend to himself only made him a
friend to me. Sir (I replied) he that saved your life once, and could not by
that obligation suppress your hatred, had no reason, by a repetition of that
favor, to expect a better return; so that his experience convincing him your
aversion was not to be taken away, he might have sufffer'd your life to have
been so by Hannibal, who had both the power and will to do it; especially, that
being the only obstacle to his desires, had not his affection to one of your
family inclined him upon that score to love all of it; This gallantry shows so
handsomely, that I hope 'twill invite yours to an imitation, especially too,
since by the effects of it you receive a benefit whose greatness cannot be
equaled, but by that injustice which makes you endeavor his ruin that
conferred it on you. He that by saving my life (said Blacius extremely moved)
found in that action a gratitude so extraordinary as to suppress a revenge
(where my power to perform it was not greater than the justice which invited me
to it) might reasonably hope that by a succession of services of that nature I
might in time be induced as well to silence my hatred as I had my revenge, so
that what you attribute to my Enemies gallantry, might be better ascribed to
his reason and judgment: My death too had been so far from freeing all his
obstructions, that it had but created greater, for I had so ordered it in my
Will, that if you had married him, you should have broke those Ties and
Conjurations which had rendered you unworthy of his Bed; or if his Passion had
attributed your want of duty to your Father, to be a higher argument of your
affection to your Lover, yet you should have brought him nothing but the bare
Izadora; for apprehending by what you have done, what you might do, I had (upon
so transcendent a violation of those commands, which I would have sealed with
my last breath) given to another all my estate, which I believe (whatever
advantageous and partial opinion you have of your self) makes Perolla as much
your Servant as your Beauty. If no one (I replied) had a greater value of me
than I have of my self, Perolla would soon have as low an opinion of me, as you
have of his Services; and truly when I consider the largeness of your Fortune,
and the little Title I have to any perfections which are capable of inviting so
transcendent a happiness as his Affection, I am apt enough to believe I derive
that felicity from the first of those motives; but on the other side, when I
reflect upon those sacred protestations he has made me, that his passion was
created, and is nourished by my Beauty and Virtue and from no secondary causes,
I am inclined to believe any thing, rather than that he dissembles; especially,
since in not crediting his vows, I cannot injure him more than I do my own
felicity. At this reply, Blacius could no longer suppress his Choler, but with
Eyes and Looks, which had terrified me in a Cause, less just than I now
defended, he told me, You are not then only contented to preserve a criminal
Flame in your Heart, but you must publish it too; and to raise your insolence
to an inaccessional height, you voluntarily acknowledge, that you find your
contentment in that which divests me of mine; but since by your disobedience
you will force me to use my paternal power, I will make you ever long not only
know, but practice your duty. Finishing these words, he went out of my Chamber,
and left me in as great a trouble at his rigor, as he could resent for my
constancy: I must confess, that my Affection made me say things which I should
have condemned upon any other score, and which after my resentment was a little
over, I endeavored to wash away with Tears: But no passions of Love or
Repentance were hardly more predominant in me, than those of Rage and Fury were
in Hannibal, who could not reflect upon the injury done his Authority and
Revenge, by forcing a Prison in his Headquarters, and taking thence his
capital Enemy, upon the Eve of the Execution, which Perolla had done by
surprise, and by the assistance of a few resolute friends he had in Salapia,
who were all disguised as well as he, without abandoning himself to an excess
of choler, which made him utter things unworthy his Place and Reputation:
neither for two days together could those which had most intimacy and power
with him, obtain of him to appear in public, or so much as to take sufficient
nourishment to preserve Nature; nor had his despair been so soon vanquished, had
not his Officers engaged themselves, not only to find out the Offenders, but
the Prisoner too, if he would publish a Proclamation, which might promise large
Rewards to those which should effect either; upon which the Carthaginians set
forth a Manifest of this Tenor.

HANNIBAL, General of the Carthaginians in EUROPE.
WEre not Ingratitude a crime of so high a quality, than nothing can be of a
higher than to pardon it, that same clemency which induced us heretofore, not
only to forgive Blacius, but restore him to his Estate, might have now again
extended it self to him: But our abovespecified Principle, and his unparalled
Treachery, makes him so unfit for a repetition of Mercy, that 'twould lose that
name, and turn to Injustice, were it conferred on him, who was not contented to
be guilty himself, but has so involved others in his offenses, that he has (in
having forced our Prisons by his Accomplices) as much violated the public
Justice, as his private Engagements. These great wrongs done to the
Carthaginian Empire through me their Minister, are well merited, if endured;
which to avoid, I hereby solemnly protest before the gods, by the Glory of
Carthage, and my dead Fathers memory, That whatsoever Person shall reveal where
the persidious Blacius is concealed, or who were the Contrivers, Ca^sers, or
Actors of his Liberty, shall have any one thing that the said party can desire,
and we can grant, and receive, besides some such other mark of our favor, that
all Men shall know, we are as much concerned in rewarding of Fidelity, as in
punishing the want of it.


I Know not whether the promise of so unlimited Rewards, or the Justice of the
gods (who would not let Blacius enjoy that liberty he had been so unthankful
for to the Bestower of it) was the cause of his discovery; but two days after
he had relisht the blessing of Freedom, he lost it again by a Squadron of
Soldiers, who violently breaking open the doors, went so directly to a secret
Vault, where he had concealed himself, that it manifested their search for him
proceeded from their knowledge, and not from their suspicions; from thence they
conveyed him bound in Irons (and with words as ill to be digested as their
usage) to Hannibal's own Lodgings, where a Guard of barbarous Affricans newly
come from Carthage, were set over him, who no more understood the Roman
Language, than what belonged to Humanity. For Hannibal, you may (in some sort)
guess at his joy by what his trouble had been; but for my part I was so drowned
in sorrow, that when you can imagine the highest operation of grief, I can
truly affirm mine did make that good. And indeed, when I considered my
unfortunate Father in the hands of those whose fury would not be quenched but
with with his Blood; and that Perolla's usage made me esteem it as high a sin
to engage him in any further attempt for Blacius's relief, as my ignorance
where he was, made it impossible to send to him; I found in my Judgment and
Duty, such strong arguments for sorrow, that I had no way better merited the
misfortune, than not to have deplored it in the sublimest degree.

In the mean while the cruel Carthaginian, to avoid all accidents, and to
hasten the satisfaction of his Revenge, caused my Father the next day, to be
brought with ignominious cruelty, to a Scaffold he had erected in the
Allarm-place, and as well to avoid those tumults which the Salapians affection
to Blacius might raise, as to satiate his Eyes with his Enemies Blood, he had
raised another Scaffold near the first, and there waited on by his Guards, be
intended to become a Spectator of that execution, of which he had been the
Judge. Whilst these things were performing in public, an ancient friend of
Blacius's came to visit me, and to give me that consolation my duty and
affection so abundantly wanted. After some discourses of a nature fit for the
subject, I was very inquisitive, whether the Revealer of my Fathers retirement
was not yet found out? To which he answered me, that though he had declined no
ways imaginable for that discovery; yet his endeavors had been fruitless, but
(he continued) though I cannot tell you the offender, yet I can (I am
confident) show you the cause of the offense, and thereupon pulled out the Copy
of that Proclamation, I even now acquaint you wit. Though my grief were of a
quality which hardly permitted my Eyes to do any thing but weep, yet (as the
gods would have it) I stopped a while their employment, to read that fatal
Proclamation, which as soon as I had ended, I reflected upon some words in it,
that I thought might prove of great advantage to me, and immediately after,
asked this charitable friend, whether he thought the execution were yet done?
To which he answered, he was confident it was not, for just then he came from
the place where it was to be performed (his ancient friendship rendering him
incapable of seeing such a Spectacle) where some of the assistants had told
him, the usual Ceremonies that are practiced in such Cases, would take up at
least an hour, which was not yet half expir^d. I received this assurance with
exceeding joy, and immediately conjured him him to conduct me to the cruel
Hannibal, who he had told me, was an assistant at Blacius Tragedy. The good old
man would have dissuaded me from seeing an object which would but augment my
grief, but I begged that favor of him with such earnest words and expressions,
that at last he yielded to me, but it was so long e're I could vanquish him,
that what he designed for a proof of his care, had like to have produced a
strange and contrary effect. For just as I came under the Scaffold, I perceived
my poor Father preparing himself for the fatal stroke with a courage which
rendered him unworthy of it; so sad a spectacle made me hasten to Hannibal's
seat, where at last I came, and with a countenance more suitable to my
resentment than condition, I presented my self unto him, and told him, Sir, I
beseech you, command a suspension of Blacius's death, till I have acquainted
you with some things, that may perhaps induce you to pardon him. The
Carthagineans, (who then considered nothing but my Sex and motion) with a look
as barbarous as his Country, replied, Woman, the offenses of that Traitor are
too transcendent to expect a pardon for any thing thou can reveal, thou may
well therefore spare thy self a labor which will proveal together fruitless,
Then turning about, he commanded some of his Guards to carry me down again. At
that cruel order I flung my self at his Feet, and embracing his Knees, I thus
continued; I am (Sir) come to invoke that justice which has hitherto made you
as famous as your success, and will not stir from this posture, till you assure
me, I shall not be denied it. Those few words I spoke so loud, and so
distinctly, that most of those Salapians which were near the Scaffold, heard
them, which putting them in hopes that it might be something that would conduce
to Blacius advantage, (whom I told you they extremely loved) they cried out to
Hannibal, Hear her, hear her, which voices (as is common in the crowd) were
seconded by those that neither understood the cause, nor the approvers of that
motion. The Carthaginians finding the City so pressing and unanimous, forbad
his Guards to meddle with me, who were already beginning to force my Hold, and
not only enjoined the suspension of the execution, till I had done speaking,
but told me, I might be as consident of his doing me right, as of Blacius's
death, than which nothing the Oracles did tell, could be more certain.

Sir (I continued) you will soon find how great a confidence I have of your
Justice, since my relyance on it, makes me offer my Life into your Power, who
am the unfortunate Daughter of this Blacius, that it seems has offended you in
such a degree, as nothing but his Blood can be your reparation; in pursuance of
which resolve you were pleased under sacred Oaths, when his Prison was forced
(and thereby your revenge frustrated) to publish, That whosoever would reveal
unto you who were the Contrivers, Causers, or Actors of his liberty, should
have granted any one thing the said party could ask that was in your power:
this Proclamation which I here present you is my witness, and the assurance you
are inviolate in your engagements, has brought me to discover unto you who is
the offender that has so exceedingly transgrest your Laws; but before I
disclose this secret, I must beg a reiteration of that assurance, which to
induce you to with the less reluctance, be pleased to receive mine, that the
same minute you confirm your first engagement, I will put into your power the
crimital person which procured my unfortunate Father his short liberty, so that
the same action which makes you satisfy your word, will give you the power to
satisfy your revenge too. All those which could hear my request, gave their
approbation to it by a loud shout, for they cared not upon whose ruins they
built Blacius's deliverance, and Hannibal, who was always as ambitious of Glory
as of Revenge, repeated and confirmed the Oaths and Promises of his
Proclamation, which being finished, I thus continued: Since by a generosity
which I ever expected from so great a Prince, you have silenced all those
doubts my own constant unhappiness, and not any suspicions of your Virtue, did
create, I shall boldly acquaint you, that your justice received that affront
from Izadora, and though my Sex exempted me from actions of that nature, yet by
my Prayers and Letters to a young Roman Gentleman, I raised that power which
cast you into so great disorders, and for the punishment of which you have made
such unlimited promises. Thus, Sir, I have satisfied my engagement, not only by
acquainting you who committed the offense, but by putting the offender into
your hands: And now I shall expect as punctual a performance from you. Then, as
I was beginning to make my request, the Carthaginian, who suspected by my
resolution, that it would be Blacius's Life (wherein he was not deceived)
suddenly started up, and with a furious look told me; If thou art so mad as to
beg thy Fathers Life for this discovery, in expectation afterward that thy Sex
will induce me to pity thee; know that thy Crime will make me pass by all
considerations, and raise a fury which by all the gods, nothing but thy
destruction will appease; this I acquaint thee with, that thou may owe thy
death to thy wilfulness, and not to my resentments, which I tell thee once more
will prove so severe, thou will soon repent thou ever did raise them; but if
thou will yet decline that request, thy Sex and Relations will invite me to
pardon what I know I ought to punish. Sir (I replied nothing terrified at these
threatenings) I desire not to be obliged to your Mercy, but your Justice,
neither can I lose my life more gloriously than for him that gave it me: My
duty in this case is most predominant, and I know nothing can make me more
worthy of death, than how to avoid it; therefore (Sir) I conjure you by those
gods you have invoked, by that Empire which derives its g^eate^t Glory from
your Virtue, and by that Father whose memory you (...) to reverence, were it
only for giving the world so great a (...). At the end of these words, I heard
a voice which stopped me from p^oceeding any farther, by saying, Hold, hold,
Izadcra, be not (...) to be gen^rous, not accuse your self of a fault, which if
it be one, I (by your own (...)) am only guilty of it. This voice (which I too
soon knew was Pcrolla's) made me turn about, where ^ immediately saw my
generous Friend breaking through Hannibals Guards that would have stopped him
(among whom he had staid awhile, where he had heard all that had past,) and
^linging himself ^t his Enemies feet, told him; Sir, You have bound your self
by obligations too strong to leave me any suspicion that you will not perform
your engagement to him that shall reveal who was Blacius's Deliverer; and
therefore I shall make no scruple to acknowledge that it was I, and the reward
that I expect for this discovery, is, that you will suppress all th^^e cruel
thoughts you have taken up against the fair Izadora, who through an excess of
duty condemns her self to free her Father. You that have been just, Sir, to
your Enemies, will not now I hope be the contrary to your self, especially when
the subject you are to employ your virtue on, merits adoration sooner than
Pardon, and whose only crime is her Charity. Instead then of so unfit a victim
to appease your fury, I offer that Perolla, who had at Capua deprived you of
life, if his Sword had proved the more fortunate, and had not his Fathers Tears
and Dissimulation preserved you: Who at Pettely raised his reputation by the
destruction of 10000 Affricans; who at Cassilinum made you send Blanks where
you had denied any conditions; Who by the destroying of 25000 of Allies and
Soldiers forced from you the Samnites, Lucanians, and Appulians; who took that
Cassilinum by storm, which you only won by Famine: in a word, I present you
that Perolla, who was not only content to offend you in all these particulars,
but came even into your Headquarters, and in the Center of your Army, broke
open your Prisons, killed your Guards, restored your Capital Enemy to his
freedom, and was now come to have stopped the progress of your revenge upon him,
by owning the action, and by tying you (unless you would violate your Faith) to
give me his life for the reward of this discovery, which I had too effected,
had not his generous Daughter by her own confession, necessitated me to employ
that Petition for her safety, which I had designed for her Fathers.

Gods! into what confusions did this resolute acknowledgement cast me into?
That death which I was prepared to suffer, appeared far more supportable than
this action of Perolla's, for it reduced me either to employ my request for my
Fathers, and so lose my friends Life; or if I preserved Perolla's, I must lose
Blacius's, and that which was an aggravation to this misery, was, that by what
was done already, I was necessitated to survive the loss of one of them, unless
I would prove my own executioner; Alas, how sad a conflict had I betwixt my
Duty and my Affection? Nature pleading for the one, and Gratitude for the
other. What, (said I to my self) will thou destroy thy Father to save his
Enemy? will thou not preserve that Life that gave thee thine? will thou satisfy
thy debts with thy Fathers Blood, and shall the ties of Friendship be more
prevalent than those of Nature? But on the other side, shall the name of Father
make thee act that which will render thee unworthy that relation? shall that
breath which even now Perolla gave thee, be employed to save another life by
the ruin of his? Unfortunate Izadora! have thou no way to perform thy duty but
by a murder? and have thou no no way to perform thy gratitude, but by a
Paricide? must the satisfaction of thy gratitude be the ruin of thy Father?
and must the satisfaction of thy duty be the loss of thy Friend? must to be
grateful and ungrateful prove an equal crime? and must the paying of one debt,
render thee incapable of paying the other? I take the gods to witness that I
would joyfully put an end to this fatal dispute but that of my life, and have
embraced that fate with a satisfaction equal to that of Martyrs, who know their
punishment, is but the way unto their Glory: but the time was so pressing, that
I was necessitated to spend what remained, not in complaints, but resolutions,
therefore I thus continued. Perolla came to preserve Blacius, though my
unfortunate duty made him change his design: and that generosity which once
made my Father to esteem his life his misfortune, because his Enemy conferred
it on him, though only by his courage, will make a repetition of that favor,
create a higher trouble in him, when the purchase of his safety, is his Enemies
voluntary death; his Virtue, doubtless, will make him decline an obligation,
where what makes him receive it, deprives him of all power to express his
resentments for it: It Is but just too, that that life which has so often
preserved Blacius's, should now be preserved by his; Yes, yes Izadora, let
Perolla find his safety from one of that Family, in which he has hitherto
found his misery; act now thy Fathers part, and upon the score of his Virtue
perform that for Perolla, whose effects may demonstrate their cause, and let
him find, now thou art in Blacius's room, that that cruelty thou did condemn
in him, thou will not practice for him, and in this one action show what thy
Fathers resentments should be, and what thine own are: Then when this debt is
discharged, satisfy thy own as generously, and by ending thy life with his that
gave it thee, convince him and the World, that as thou valu'st thy life short
of thy duty, which should thou any longer enjoy would bring that truth in
question, and make that relish of self-interest which is of a contrary quality.
But alas (I continued) how will Perolla resent this proceeding? he will allege,
that what thou termest Gratitude, is Cruelty, that the way thou take to save
his life, is the certainst means to lose it, and that instead of repairing
Blacius's injuries, thou art more injurious far than he. These, and a world of
such, thy Friend will object against thee, to which thou have no reply, but
that thy Fate having environed thee with excess of miseries, thou electest
those that to thy judgment are the least, and that thou had rather dye by
acting what may merit his esteem, than live in a contrary unhappiness. Whilst I
was thus debating, and had fixed upon this resolution, Perolla was all the while
conjuring Hannibal to observe his Promise, and to make him the object of his
Cruelty, so he made me that of his Justice, and in order to this told the
Carthaginians such reasons, that I apprehended nothing more than he would find
his destruction in his Eloquence, and so raise his enemies fury, that he would
sacrifice the violation of his Oaths and Faith to his revenge: In this fear I
interrupted him from proceeding by addressing my self in these terms to the
Carthaginian.

Sir, If I have been thus long silent, you will, I hope pardon it when you
know, that a dispute betwixt Gratitude and Nature was the occasion, in the end,
the first has been victorious, but to make it so, I was necessitated to act my
Fathers part, who I know is too generous to let Perolla suffer for him, when by
his own sufferings he may hinder his, and 'twere too much wrong to the
generosity of Perolla's action, not to let it instruct my Fathers to an
imitation of it. These words too fully informed my friend of my intentions, to
let him permit my proceedings any further, which he hindered by leaving
Hannibal, and by prostrating himself before me, where as soon as his disorder
would permit him, he cried out, Ah Madam, do not, I beseech you, by so unjust a
Victory, blemish your Virtue, nor make me so wretched, as to find my misery, in
that which perhaps you intend as an argument of your Affection, to preserve
your Fathers and your Life, nay your Fame too, are cause too glorious to
deplore any effects which may proceed from them: do not then envy me a death,
by which I shall always live, and by losing only an uncertain Being, obtain an
Eternal one. If I had not (I replied) taken up this resolution, that which you
do to suppress, would have created it, and in this fresh proof of your Virtue,
I find a greater invitaion to continue, than alter my intentions: Blacius would
live more miserable with such a debt, than he can dye by paying it, and I
cannot deplore his destiny which makes that Life (which even now was to be an
oblation only to Hannibals fury) to prove a sacrifice to Gratitude. If (said
Perolla) the payment of that Gratitude be addressed to me, I take all that is holy
to witness, I shall find in the design only a larger, and more pleasing
payment, than in the action: Alas Madam, consider too, I beseech you, what all
Mankind will say of you, they will (doubtless) condemn that Virtue which has
been hitherto their admiration, and that which you think will raise their
esteem, will absolutely suppress it; besides, if you proceed in your design,
'twill be so far from hindering, that it will but hasten my death; do not then,
I beseech you, force me through despair, to spill that blood, which now may be
shed for a Subject that out-weighs the loss. I shall find (I replied) in your
silence, a stronger inducement to obey you, than in your words, espicially if
they be of this nature, and for your apprehension of my prejudicing in this
action, that little Virtue I possess, I have fixed upon a resolve, shall still
preserve, if not increase it, and I have so ordered all things, that your last
Declaration is now my only trouble, which forces me to make use of that power
you have so often assured me I have over you, to beg, and if that be not
sufficient to command you by our passions, which have been as pure as great,
and by all other conjurations that are most powerful, whatsoever happens to me,
use no violence upon your self, nor leave this life till the gods do call you
to a better; this I implore with the more earnestness, because posterity shall
judge of your love by your obedience. Then without staying for his answer,
(whose quality I read in his amazement) I went to Hannibal, and having laid
open all the most pressing terms I could compose to illustrate the unworthiness
of a violated engagemeut, I conjured him as a recompense of what I had
revealed, to give Perolla his life and liberty; who having followed me, and
hearing my request, detesting to derive his safety from the cause he esteemed
in me, so unnatural, thus spoke to the Carthaginian. By a true confession (Sir)
how Blacius was relieved, I am confident you find no other had a hand in it but
I, at least Izadora had not, who was so far from either contriving or knowing
it, that when I presented him to her she was weeping him for dead, and admired
as much at his deliverance as he himself did. As for that Letter she alleadges,
which was the cause of his Liberty, I protest by all the gods, it commanded me
only to make use of the Consuls favor for Blacius's redemption, by offering
some Lybian prisoners, or for a suspension of his death, by threatening all
those he had to follow his destiny, so that she was no more the cause then the
effect of her Fathers freedom, neither can she pretend any title to the benefit
of your Proclamation, by discovering who was the Actor, for when I brought
Blacius to her, I was so covered with Armor, that she could not possibly know
me, and as an argument of this truth, she called me Roman, when as yet I never
saw Rome and had my birth in this City; therefore (Sir) none but I has any
interest in your manifest, which obliges you no less to preserve inviolate your
vows and promises, than to punish those which have offended you. Ah Sir (said
I, flinging my self at his feet) I hope you are too judicious not to
distinguish betwixt an accusation which proceeds from Generosity, and one which
proceeds from guilt, and consequently not to impute this of Perolla's, to one
of the first quality, but yet, lest you should want light to see so much
Virtue, I beseech you reflect upon whose Son he is, and you will find in his
extraction, cause to invite him, rather to destroy Blacius by the hazard of his
own life, than to save him by a certain loss of it. Yes (Sir) I blush in his
behalf to acknowledge that the little Beauty and Virtue which the gods have
given me, converted his inclinations, and made him cherish what he would
otherwise have destroyed, so that I am apparently the cause of that freedom,
which created your resentments: besides, I have a title to my request,
discovering who was the Actor; For as to that allegation, that I was weeping my
Fathers loss, when he presented him to me, I may truly answer, my affection had
as large a share in those Tears, as my Duty; for I could not reflect upon
Blacius danger and Perolla's courage, but it was impossible to retain them, and
though indeed, at his coming into my Chamber, he was covered with Arms and
Blood, yet his Gallantry discovered what his unkind Armor would have concealed,
and in his actions I found as great an assurance that it was Perolla, as I
could have had in seeing his Face; so that my calling him Roman, proceeded not
from my ignorance but fears; for I was informed after my Fathers rescue, such
strict Guards were placed about the City, that I apprehended my generous friend
was not gotten out of it, so that if by any misfortune he fell into your power,
I would not (by precisely acquainting you who he was) have given you so great
an accession to that hatred you had already contracted for him; besides, I
might aptly enough, call him a Roman, his inclinations and actions having
always been for that Empire. Thus (Sir) have I clearly demonstrated the
interest I have in your engagement, which gives me the confidence to conjure
you by these Tears, and by that word which you have hitherto so religiously
observed, give Perolla that Life and Liberty, he would so meritoriously have
lost, which is the Petition I humbly make for my discovery: neither can you
satisfy that request he has already made you, without yielding to mine too; for
that life he has begged, is so united to his, that it cannot admit of a
different Fate. To which Hannibal replied, Madam, Perolla may with reason be
credited, since it is not likely he would disclaim a Truth which would save his
life; and therefore as I have been just to him in granting his desires for you;
so permit me now to be just to my self, by sacrificing an offender, who is not
only contented to be so, but glories in it, and out-braves my Justice. Yes Sir
(said Perolla) since you have saved the fair Izadora: inflict on me all the
torments your Revenge and Fury can inspire you with, and I will embrace them
with more joy than they are imposed, nay, commend that justice which by my
sufferings, exempts the perfectest creature from enduring any. This generous
reply so incen'sd the barbarous Hannibal; that he commanded his Guards to bind
Perolla, and carry him to receive a death; whose torments might be as great as
his crime. The Guards at those barbarous Orders advanced to seize upon Perolla,
who perceiving their intentions, went half way to meet them, and holding out
his Arms, told them. Here, here Soldiers, obey your General; and bind up those
Arms which when they were at liberty were as much his fear, as now they are his
satisfaction, and which yet, (were I disposed to ^ell my life) might make him
tremble in the midst of you; but I will not impose that in which I find my
Glory. Those words he spoke with so furious a look, that though unarmed, and
environed with his Enemies, yet it struck such a damp into their Hearts, that
their trembling was the greatest proof they were alive. But Perolla instantly
disarming himself of all his fury, with an Humility great as my grief, kneeled
at my feet and told me, The gods shall be my witness (Madam) that the only
thing which made me cherish my life, was out of a hope that it might prove
serviceable to you, and now it is so fortunate, not only to save you, but
pardon me if I say so, to keep you too from a stain which might blemish all
your other Virtues, I resign it with more joy than I kept it; but yet I must
confess, when I reflect upon our separation, I find a strong aversion to it,
and am forced to run for my Consolation to the necessary causes of it. Must
then (I replied, interrupting him with a shower of Tears) must then the
unequalled Perolla have so hard a fate, that he finds his Consolation in the
destruction of my Felicity? unjust Heaven! who will ever adore friendship, when
it turns to be the ruin of him that possessed it in the highest perfection. Ah
Madam, said he, call me rather your Votary than your Friend, and then you need
not fear this President will prejudice Posterity, for Men sooner adore, than
decline a Deity, by the example of a Martyrdom. But Madam, you may convert my
trouble into my felicity, by permitting this voluntary death to preserve me
alive in your esteem, which will be a nobler existence, and render me an object
fitter for your Joy than Tears. You shall not only have my esteem (I replied)
but my company, since it is a greater misery to outlive the loss of so much
Virtue, than to dye with it. But Sir (said Izadora, speaking to Spartacus)
perhaps I make the relation only of these accidents as tedious and troublesome
to you, as they themselves were to us: but I will repair that fault, by
contracting the sequel of our Adventures. To which my Prince replied, Madam, if
I am in any trouble, it only proceeds from sympathizing in those disasters you
were fallen into, and the difficulties I find in your being delivered out of
them, of which I am so impatient, and concerned, that I shall beg you
henceforward to believe, that as long as you prosecute your Story, you will as
much oblige me, as by interrupting it you will do the contrary. Izadora, with
an action which testified her acknowledgement, thus continued her Relation. I
will obey you, Sir, and it may be in my following discourse, you will find that
our perplexities were cured by as strange an accident, as that which created
them: For Hannibal all this while continued in a deep silence, which I
attributed to his being a Judge, rather than a Lover; but the gods, who magnify
their power by producing great Effects from small Causes, made us find in this
poor Beauty, the redress of those disorders which it had occasioned; for at the
first, when I presented my self unto the Carthaginian, I was (as my condition
required) all veiled, and continued so, till Perolla's cruel Gallantry forced
me to uncover my Face, in which Hannibal fancied as many charms as it wanted,
and by the help of his own imagination, so abundantly supplied the unkindness
of nature to me, that in his wounds we found our remedy. And truly, for it to
vanquish any Heart was strange, but to captivate Hannibal's, who hated our Sex
as much as he did the Romans, and to divest him too, of his fury and revenge,
appeared so great a Miracle, that had not some visible effects been the witness
of that Truth, I had found in my imperfections, too many Arguments to have
doubted it; and without question, 'twas such Passion as his, that made Love be
painted blind; but many that stood by, and were not so engaged as I was,
observed at first, that which I no way suspected or perceived, till Hannibal,
who found Perolla was as much his Rival in Love as in Glory, after having laid
down all those motives he esteemed most prevalent to induce me rather to employ
my request for my Father, than my Friend, perceiving me so unshaken in my
resolves, and so pressing in my Tears, and Prayers, and guessing at my
disposition by his own, which hardened it self by opposition, at last when the
Guards were carrying away the generous Perolla, he told me; Madam, If I have
labored to prove you had no Title to my Proclamation, 'twas only to show you,
that you had a power over me from yourself, greater than you can derive from
thence, and that you may command upon the score of your Beauty, that which you
only beg by virtue of my manifest. Alas Sir (I replied) I am too well
acquainted with this unfortunate Beauty, to believe it can have so high an
influence on so great a Conqueror, pardon me then, if I dare tell you, I shall
be diffident of its power, unless I am convinced of it by a demonstration? If
you suspect (said he) that which carries its authority with it, and if you can
doubt that Truth which Hannibal's Captivity does witness; command me any other
trial, and you shall find in my obedience, how great a wrong you have done the
fair Izadora: So high a civility, I answered, merits a proportionate return,
and therefore I shall employ that power you give me, for your own advantage,
and only beg you to be just unto your vows, by giving Perolla his life, Madam,
(said Hannibal) though in saving him I shall preserve (by what I have observed)
as great an opposer of my Felicity, as of my Conquests: and thereby too, create
as many Enemies as Soldiers in my Army, yet I will observe your Orders. Yes
Madam, I give Perolla's life to your commands, and I give you Blacius's without
them, who for having bestowed so great a perfection on the World, merits rather
my esteem than revenge. My zeal to your service, stays not in that dull method
of only obeying what you command, it lays hold on that which it thinks is your
Will without the revealing it. I could not have the patience to let him
proceed, his Words and Actions were too generous to delay my acknowledgements
for them, which I expressed, prostrate at his feet, in the most moving and humble
manner I was capable of. I will not, Sir, said Izadora, trouble you with the
repetition of them, though they were so satisfactory to him, to whom they were
addressed, that as an acknowledgement of it, he went immediately himself, unbound
both Blacius and Perolla, and presented them to me, with an humility so far
beyond his practice, that the standers by admired as much, as I was pleased at
it. But to obscure this joy, some of Pacuvius's friends seeing the danger his
generous Son had been in, went to his House to inform him of it, (for he, out
of gallantry, would not be present at his Enemies death, though he had
Hannibal's example to authorize that action.) As soon as he had notice of it,
he went with so great haste to the place of Execution that those which saw it,
thought that his affection and not his hatred was the cause of it. The crowd
about the Scaffold was so great, that it was with much difficulty and with an
often repeating of his name (to which all paid a deep respect) that he got at
last to Hannibal, and it was just at that instant, that the Carthaginian had
unbound Perolla, and given him to me. Pacuvius was suddenly informed of all
that happened, which every one assured themselves, would render him a large
sharer in the general joy: but alas he soon put them out of that belief by thus
speaking to Hannibal. I were (Sir) unworthy the friendship of so great a
Conqueror did I value any relation above it; it is upon that principle that I
have detested Perolla, who hates as much your Person as your Glory, and if I
hitherto concealed that horrid attempt against you, which he himself has now
published, 'twas not Because he was my Son, but out of a belief that I might
convert him: for I knew, a courage which was capable in so green an age to
attempt so bold and high a design, which was more advantageous to you to be
gained, than destroyed; but since that valor, the gods have given him, has
been employed to ruin what it should have advanced, I am come to implore your
justice against one who is as much an Enemy to nature, as to Carthage; punish
him for intending your destruction, in a place where not to have sacrificed
himself for you, had been as great a sin. Yes (Sir) punish him for designing
your death, and punish me in him, not only for concealing, but likewise for
not revenging it, and let one execution repair both our crimes; you see,
generous H^nnibal, how I contemn my own interest, when yours comes in
competition with it, which I embrace with such a concern, that I had rather
extinguish my Family, than continue it, by leaving so great a stain upon your
Justice, and danger to your person, as the saving of Perolla will amount unto.
Besides Sir, shall that courage, which hitherto found nothing so easy as to
conquer, leave the blemish behind it of having been vanquished by the eyes only
of one of our enemies? shall the Romans derive their Triumph from a Sex which
never merited higher than your pity? (...) such a pleading Desire as Revenge,
and such a Virtue as Justice be suppressed by an unworthy passion, which like
madness, none believe they ever were possessed with when they are cured of it? Let
not (Sir) I beseech you the cause of your disorders be worse than the effects,
but by a generous Conquest over your self, show you are capable to vanquish all
obstacles, and let your enemies in that very action which they esteemed would
prove your shame, find an argument that you are invincible, so he that can
overcome H^nnibal, cannot but be thought to do the like to Rome, and all the
World. The Carthaginian, who knew no other cause of Pacuvius's hatred to his
Son, than what he had alleged, not only upon that account excused his passion,
and expressions, but replied, had I not already given Perolla's life to the
fair Izadora's commands, I now had bestowed it on Pacuius's generosity, and
find in what he alleges more cause to suppress, than to creat my Revenge; He
that could sacrifice the hopes of his posterity for my interest, had too much
misplaced his friendship, if for a return to it I would not silence a Revenge,
especially when the acting it will prove the destruction of so generous a
Family, in which my misfortune is the only fault of any one of it; for Perolla
wants not Virtue, but I the felicity to merit it, and though (he continued with
a smile) you upbraid me with being vanquished; yet I cannot but acknowledge I am
more pleased in this defeat, than with all my former victories; I have too,
this satisfaction, that I was never conquered but by a Sex which the gods
themselves could not resist, who, if they can, for their subjection, produce
thus much beauty, they carry their justification in the cause of their fault,
(if it be one) so that I commit none unless it be one to imitate those we
adore. I will not particularize all the dispute betwixt them, since it serves
but to acquaint you, that Hannibal remained unshaken in what he had done, and
then came to me, and told me; I should Madam, with the lives of Blacius and
Perolla, have given you too their liberties, were it not that the grant of the
first of these has been too great an exasperation to my Army, to increase it at
the same time by the last: I will therefore hope for your pardon, if I obey you
but by degrees, since otherwise I might hazard the losing of a power which is
not so dear to me upon any score, as out of a confidence it may serve you; yet
still for your sake, they shall have no other Prisons but their Lodgings, and
as soon as I have fashioned my Officers to approve of their liberty, I shall
restore it to them with as much joy as I have lost my own. Though this hard
Declaration (however moderated both by reasons and civilities) did extremely
perplex me, yet I only begged him to shorten their sufferings as much as might
be, and to perfect what he had so generously begun, for I durst not be too
earnest on so tender a subject, lest it might create his suspicions, that my
love as much as duty occasioned my solicitations. 'Twas in this sort,
(continued Izadora) that we were preserved, and truly when you consider all the
accidents of this Adventure, you will acknowledge it to be a strange one: For
that life I came to sacrifice to preserve Blacius's had been preserved by the
sacrificing of his, and where I thought to have found my death, I found my
safety, but by a way which made it odious to me: Perolla too, who came with the
same design, found the same fate, and that sympathy, which till then we both
gloried in, in that occasion was converted to our misfortune: what we singly
might have effected, we jointly destroyed; and my Father by having more friends
than one, found he had never a one, and which was more intricate, we both came
to lose our selves to save him, and we both saved our selves to lose him, and
yet we ruin our selves all three, for Perolla by begging my life and I his, we
leave Blacius to the execution, which made me resolve having so satisfied my
gratitude, to dye with my Father, as a vindication of my duty, and as my
generous friend has often since vowed unto me, he was determined to have born
me company: On the other side, Hannibal to be more certain of his revenge,
publishes a-Proclamation which debars him of it, and to end this miraculous day
with a greater wonder than any which had happened in it, Izadora's Beauty, by
ingendring as great a passion in the Carthaginians, as he had till then a
detestation for our Sex, dissolves all our fears, and makes us return in
triumph, where we thought never to have returned again. For Hannibal with all
his Guards, and with the acclamations of an infinite confluence of people
accompanied me to my Fathers House. But alas (Sir) as soon as Blacius was
informed how I had declined his deliverance to purchase Perolla's, and knowing
what I had done, but not what I had resolved to do, he contracted so violent
a^^atred against me, that doubtless I had in the effects of it, found my ruin,
had not the apprehension of offending Hannibal silenced his fury, who every day
gave me such fresh and high proofs of his passion, that had my felicity
depended on his affection, I had been then as happy, as since I have been
miserable. But in that which most of my Sex would have gloried, I found my
Affliction, for I had given too visible proofs of my affection to Perolla to
doubt the Carthaginean was ignorant of it, and consequently, I left my Fathers
unlikelihood of liberty in the loss of his Rivals, whose actions too soon
informed me, that his denying to give me Perolla's freedom, proceeded more from
his jealousy than any apprehension of distasting his Army, over which he had
so great an Ascendent, that though it were composed of sundry Nations, and that
they often endured miseries as great as their succesles, yet they never
mutiny'd, but thought their sufferings too meritoriously recompensed, if in
them their General might find his Glory, But Sir (continued the fair Izadora)
to satisfy my engagement and perhaps you in it, I will pass over all those
addresses which Hannibal made me, and only inform you, his Passion grew to such
a height, that he declined the Conquest of the World to conquer the unfortunate
Izadora; and that Glory which he had hitherto so exceedingly adored, he now as
much undervalu'd, delivering up the conduct of all Martial Affairs unto the
generous Maherbal; and those Days and Nights which he esteemed misemploy'd, if
not projecting some new Conquest, visiting and regulating his Troops, provoking
and improving their natural fierceness by Orations, and in performing all the
functions of an expert General, he now had the same opinion of, if not spent at
my feet; in which dejected posture he often vowed he took more satisfaction
than in his former Triumphs. But for my particular, I may justly profess, if I
derived any contentment from his expressions and submissions, 'twas only in
seeing by so strong an experiment, that my constancy was immovable; I say, so
strong an experiment, for Hannibal was a Prince capable to infuse a flame into
the coldest heart; for he had a look so spiritual and full of vivacity, that no
effeminate Beauty was comparable to it; his person and shape were nothing
dissonant to his Face (which had not then received the blemish of being
deprived of that Eye which soon after he lost in the Marshes of Ancona) his
fashion was majestic and without constraint, and he was endu'd with so
singular an Eloquence, that you would have thought him an Athenian sooner than
an Affrican, and rather bred up in those famous Schools than in a barbarous
Camp. And though Hannibal himself when he saw his fortune was expired, did
allege in open Senate when he pulled down Gisgo out of the Pulpit of Orations
for enveighing against a Peace then offered them by Scipio (whose succeeding
Conquests gave him the surname of Affrican) that he never knew any way but
force to suppress Offenders, yet in a subsequent Speech he unfolded such
pregnant arguments in so transcending expressions and method, that the Senate
soon perceived he wronged his Eloquence to excuse his Passion: His Fortune also
was proportionate to his other qualities, being, at four and twenty years old
after the death of Amilcar and Asdrubal his Father and Uncle elected: General
by the unanimous concurrence both of the S^nate and Army: His Conquests too
were as early as his preferment, and he never apprehended a defeat, for his
Victories had always so little of Fortune in them, that they could hardly
proveinconstant. But I fear (said Izadora) that by my confidence of undertaking
to give you this Character, I give you an ill one of him: I will therefore
conclude, that he had no fault but an unconfined ambition, which made him
embrace any means that conduced to his desires, and to conquer whatsoever
opposed him, he never scrupled to sacrifice his virtue to his ends. This truly
makes me believe, 'twas more upon the score of his wilfulness than his
judgment that he persever'd in his passion for me. But after a long time in
both our computations, he for his sufferings (as he termed them) and I for his
importunities, he came one evening to my Chamber as I had newly done reading a
Letter of Perolla's, which contained such passionate expression for our cruel
separation, that they infused into me a grief equal to his that writ them; the
impression thereof was so evident at his coming in, that he soon perceived it,
and after a melancholy silence, to show the interest he had in my sadness, he
at last begged me to pardon him if he presumed to enquire the cause of it. You
may easily Sir (I replied) find it out, when you remember that Blacius is yet a
prisoner. If that (he answered) be the occasion, I shall find my satisfaction
in your disorders, having power to redress them; and to confirm you in this
truth, from this instant I declare him free: But Madam (he continued)
interrupting that return I was about to make him for so transcendent an
obligation) may not I fear your Love has as great a share in your melancholy
as your Duty? That friendship (I replied) which I pay Perolla, is too pure to
be denied, and he has done so many things for the preservation of him to whom I
owe my duty, that without an offense to it, I may give him (as an
acknowledgement) a share in my sadness. Call you that Madam (said Hannibal) but
an acknowledgement, which made you on the Scaffold prefer his life before your
Fathers? I did not (I replied) prefer him, but Gratitude before my Father. Ah
Madam (he answered) take heed what you say, for if you so much undervalue
yourself, as to believe any services can deserve your Gratitude; you will
perhaps give me a title to that by Justice, which I never could expect but from
your Mercy: For Perolla when he saved Blacius the first time, knew not who he
was, and the second time did it to obey his Mistress, and offend his Enemy; But
I not only knew, that in preserving him I preserved my mortall'st Enemy; and
did it without any inducement, except a belief that it might be pleasing to
you, but also saved that Perolla too, for whom you would have sacrificed not
only your Father, but your self, and by which I found I cherisht my own
destruction: but my obedience was too perfect to stand upon Reason, or if it
did, it found nothing which more deserved that name than to obey you, Yes
Madam, I considered my destruction too glorious to deplore it, if thereby I
might settle your Contentment: Judge then (fair Izadora) if I have not cause to
say, that there is some desparity between our Services, and whether I may not
upon that belief expect, that you will at least commiserate the captivity of my
Mind as much as of his Body, who certainly is unworthy his felicity, if he can
find room to entertain a grief, having the highest preservative from it, the
blessing of your affection Sir (I replied) those obligations you have conferred
on me are of so transcendent a nature, that to think to define, is to injure
them; and if they have any defect, it proceeds only from their greatness, which
by a necessity of gratitude casts me into as high a misery as they took me out
of: Yes, generous Hanniball, I can truly say, that when I reflect upon your
obligations, and find not only a want of power, but of hope to make them of
proportionate return, I am struck with a melancholy equal to the joy I
resented when you conferred them on me; and perhaps I should not lie if I
professed that these thoughts are as large a cause of my sadness as any other.
Would to the Gods Madam (said he) that your will to oblige me were but equal to
your power, I could soon then exchange my fears for joys, in very contemplation
whereof I quickly lose my self: Yes, fair Izadora, those that gave you the
power to command, have given you too the power to reward, and I find should in
an Hymeneal Crown an bundant recompense for my services and sufferings; this
union should give the World Peace, or you the World, which is a far easier
Conquest than that of Izadora, whom I durst promise to make Empress of that by
Arms, which by virtue she has so just a title to; for if only if only to obey
the Carthagineans and to satisfy my own inclinati^ I have already so far
proceeded, she cannot doubt but to justify her choice, and merit the glorious
title of her Soldier, I would perform miracles almost as great as the cause of
them. Though the words of this Declaration were very confident, yet the
Declaration it self was not, for Hannibal, maugre his high Courage, was all the
while it lasted as pale as guilt, and made it with so great a trembling and
constraint, that he had as much of my pity, as of my anger; but after a little
silence, which rather showed my resentment than irresolution, I told him, My
apprehensions of being ungrateful, were now I perceive too well grounded, for
that you do me the honor to mention, is not in my power to grant; I know this
confession to a Prince less generous, might produce a contrary effect than I am
confident 'twill in you, from whom I have received such memorable obligations,
hat I had rather have your disesteem by acknowledging a Truth, than continue
your favor by a dissimulation which would render me unworthy of it: That Heart
which is below the great Hannibal, is so given to another, that were it
revocable, 'twere upon that score, if not on any other, unfit for your
acceptance; for I must be unconstant to be kind, and I know you have a greater
Passion for Virtue than for Beauty. Alas Madam (he eply'd) fetching a deep
sigh) Why did you make such haste to give your self away, knowing the influence
of your Eyes, which would create as many Servants as Beholders? Why did you
prove unjust to one of them, to be the like to all the rest? for to give all to
the happy Perolla is as great an injustice in one extreme, as to reserve none
for the residue of your Adorers is in the other. Sir (said I) you may easily
perceive the great distinction I place between your and Perolla's actions, for
by undertaking to reward his, I show at how low a rate I value them; and by
acknowledging that the impossibility of my satisfying what I owe you, is as
great as my desires to pay it; I acquaint you with the largeness of my
resentments, and do perhaps in my very ingratitude it self in some degree prove
grateful. Ah Madam (he answered) do not lessen your power to the increase of
your cruelty; nor render my services incapable of reward, by esteeming them
above any: No, fair Izadora, let me not find my ruin in that which was my
duty, and shall be my ambition, let not my performances like bubbles increase
to nothing. But at last Hannibal (who perceived that his replies did rather
confirm than lessen my constancy, and that he had unfortunately taken a time
which my melancholy made unfit for his addresses) told me; I should be too
partial to my self, Madam, did I expect to suppress one flame in you, and
create another any way but by perseverance; I will therefore no more importune
you with my Passion, nor make use of any other Orators than my services and
sufferings; neither shall I despair, but by their help to vanquish your
disdain, for I find in my very fear an ample cause of hope, since the
impressions of nature are as firm as those of our own acquisition, and Perolla
by his services and glory having vanquished your aversion to his blood, it gives
me a confidence by the same ways to produce as high effects, the disproportion
being at worst but equally great. I will go then Madam, and peform things of
such Virtue, that you shall be as unjust as I am miserable if you decline my
Passion, and the world shall see, if Perolla exceeds me in any thing it is in
happiness not in merit. Then without staying for any reply, he saluted me with
an humility as great as he would have persuaded me his Passion was, and went
directly to his own house, where immediately he gave orders to have the next
morning his Army ready to move, for he would act some exploit, which should
abundantly repair his unaccustomed idleness. This promise gave the generous
Maherbal as high a contentment as the Effects of it the contrary to the Romans;
but after he had distributed those orders which were necessary for hasting his
march, he began to reflect upon the impossibility of success in his passion, as
long as I had so just and advantageous an opinion of Perolla; he therefore
fancied, that if he could but create any suspicions in him of my con^tancy, it
might furnish him with a means to destroy his, whose perfections he esteemed
its fault, because it was his own misfortune. But after he had projected a
Million of ways to accomplish this design, he seemed none so probable as by
corrupting Oristes, a Salapian of quality, in whose house Perolla was a
Prisoner, and who by his exceeding civility, and the interest he took in all
his troubles, had gotten a great share in my generous Friend.

This Oristes, Hannibal sent for that Night, and having brought him into his
Cabinet, disclosed to him there his condition and desires, but in such pressing
words and actions, that he easily perceived how infinitely the Carthaginean was
concerned in the accomplishing of them; The Salapian, who had some weak
principles of virtue, did a long time resist both Hannibal's prayers and
rewards; yet in the end, that little generosity he had showed, served but to
aggravate his offense, for he was vanquished, and evidenced thereby he knew his
duty, but would not practice it, for he promised the Carthaginean not only to
undertake, but succeed in the design; which filled him with so much
satisfaction, that the effect of it were visible next morning when he past
under my Window: for out of gallantry he made his Army march through Salapia,
and in a military civility saluted me with all those victorious Ensigns, which
never before or since paid that homage to any but their General; and because
those triumphant Troops appeared that day by his expresscommands in all their
magnificence, I shall not think it impertinent to mention their orders and
numbers, which though it be a thing out of my Sex's element, yet I took so
particular notice of it then, that I am confident I shall in my relation abuse
nothing but your patience. The first division consisted of 8000 Numidian Horse,
led by the gallant Maherbal, whose Men was as full of virtue as courage, and
whose actions sufficiently justified their Phisiognomy: These Troops methought
relisht something of their Commander, and were generally so well Armed and
Horst, that they seemed rather going to a Triumph than a Battle. After these
Hannibal appeared environed by a thousand young Carthagineans, which he had
elected for his Guards, and followed by 4000 Foot, (all Affricans.) I must do
him the right to acknowledge, that he had so noble a fierceness in his Armor,
that though I had never seen him I should yet have taken him for the General;
and certainly he was no friend to his good Meene, when he showed himself out of
an Army. These Affricans resigned their places to Three and thirty great
Elephants (all that then were left) which had towers of Wood upon their Backs,
and so not only carried but fortified their Riders. After these followed 4000
Mules and Horses, the most of them laden with so many several Engines of
Battery, that I admired as much at the wickedness as at the ingenuity of Men,
which could find such several ways to destroy one another. These were no sooner
past but their appeared 10000 Guiles, 6000 Lygurians, and 4000 Grecians, all
lead by Commanders of their own Nations, and fighting under Carthaginean
Colors, more for Hannibal's Fame than his pay; These Squadrons had so warlike
and haughty a march, that it showed how eager and ambitious they were of
Battle. The last divisions consisted of 8000 Horse, 4000 of which were Men at
Arms, and all Gauls, led by the valiant Britogentrix, and the other 4000 were
Iberians, under the commands of Mircal and Barmocal, who brought up the Rear of
this great Army, which was composed almost of all Nations but those it was
going to conquer. I must confess, this sight made me excuse that haughtiness of
which Hannibal was esteemed guilty, for who could have been so much a
Philosopher, as not to be proud of having so many thousand gallant Men ready to
sacrifice themselves at his commnad? but my admiration as it was not greater
than my fear for the Romans, and that reflection at last lead me to a joy which
I shall not scruple to reveal, since if it proceeded from a want of courage, it
did not from a want of love: 'Twas Sir ( Izadora continued) occasioned at
Perolla's being a Prisoner; for I could not consider his valor and the endless
subjects it was to be employed against, but I found my satisfaction in that
which had been my trouble, and was more pleased that Hannibal had denied me his
liberty than I should have been in his obedience; for I could no more deplore
my generous Friends sufferings, since it procured his safety, than I could any
man's condition who took Physic but to be well. I must not omit to tell you,
that every common Soldier of this vast Body carried a branch of Laurel, their
confidence being so great, that they wore the reward of victory before they
obtained it. 'Twas with this Army that Hannibal marched first to Tarentum,
where though he found a vigorous resistance, yet the valor of the Defendants
served only to set off his own the better, for he carried it by storm, and in
that action performed so much of the Soldier as well as of the General, that he
derived his success as much from his courage as his conduct. I know (continued
Izadora) the Romans affirm that Nico and Philomenes betrayed that great City to
him, but I know too, that both of them being killed not long after in the
besieging of Capua, they sealed their innocence with their last breath, and
vowed that the Carthaginean civility in curing these wounds he had received in
being made their Prisoners, and the Romans ingratitude in terming their
misfortune their treachery, made them in revenge abandon the Eagles, and serve
under Hannibal's Ensigns, who though he had taken the Town, yet the Castle
which stood upon the point of the Harbor did resolutely defend it self: and
well it might, for the Carthagiginean having no Ships to hinder their relief,
every Easterly Wind the Grecians supplied it with Men and Victuals; but at
last, when all Hannibal's Engineers could not find a way to block it up, he
himself did; for having taken good store of Galleys, in the Key of Tarentum,
and not being able by Sea to bring them out of Harbor, because the Castle
commanded all the streights and passages, he caused the Galleys with an
admirable celerity and art to be put upon Carts, and so carried them by Land
into the Sea, and in that miraculous manner besieged them round, which the
Romans discerning, not long after yielded. I have told you (said Izadora) this
particular, since it never had a president, or an imitation, and because it
dejected the Senate more than the loss of a Battle, by finding they had to deal
with an Enemy whose industry perverted the very order of nature, making one
Element bear the burden and do the office of another. From thence he went into
Lucania, where i^ a bloody of Battle, he defeated Marcus Centineus, who
publishing aloud, that he loved the Senate and his Honor too well to bring
them news that his Army was lost, resolutely thrusting himself into the midst
of the Carthaginians, where he found upon the points of a thousand Swords the
cure of that days misfortune. From this fatal Field, he carried his victorious
Troops into Apulia, where by a stratagem too intricate and tedious to be
related he reduced Praetor Fabius's Army, from Twenty to Two thousand: But to
qualify these high successes he received advertisement that both the Consuls
were set down before Capua, and by the celerity of their approaches, had
already so straightened it, that unless he brought the place an immediate relief,
it would be past any. These pressing Letters made him carry the War into
Campania, where after he had a little refreshed himself, he offered the Consuls
Battle, who as readily accepted it, for the Roman Empire was then in too
desperate a sickness to try a desperate Cure. That day much of those fertile
Plains were moystned with Blood; and though Hannibal perfor^'d all the parts of
an excellent General, and of a valiant Soldier, yet it was darkness and not
victory which ended the dispute. The next morning as soon as it was light,
Hannibal again drew his Army in Battalia, but the Consuls, who had not (by the
precedent days loss) Men enough to keep the Field and Trenchestoo, contented
themselves to continue in the latter; so that thereby they made his fortune the
more admirable; for he was Conqueror without fighting, because he won the
Battle the day after it was fought. But after he had by many attempts
endeavored to relieve his Confederates, and found, that though he besieged the
Romans, yet that they did the like to the Capuans, the Consuls having both
victuall'd and fortified themselves sufficiently, he resolved to effect that by
diversion which he could not by force, and therefore past silently the River
Vulturnus, and crossing with wonderful expedition the Countries of the
Sidicinians, Artifanians, Cassinians and Fregellans, he in seven days presented
himself before the magnificent Walls of Rome, and had done it much sooner, had
not the Fregillans pulled down the Bridge at the River Lyris, and thereby much
retarded his march; and though this was merely a stratagem of War, yet he
attributed it to a gallantry of his Passion; for in a Letter he sent me, it
relisht more of Izadora's Soldier to take Rome than relieve Capua. It is not
difficult to believe that the Romans, who did fear to hear of Hannibal, did
much more so to see him at their Gates, especially being followed by a
triumphant Army; But for all his using such unimaginable diligence, the Senate
received secret advice of his designs. Never Rome was filled with so universal
a Terror as then, no not when the Gauls under the valiant Breunus, conquered
all of it but the Capitol, and when the Forum ran with streams of the Senates
and Patricians Blood. This great consternation had no influence upon any but
the people, the Senate still maintaining that gravity and courage which was
their nature as much as practice; but at the length the common fear was well
silenced by the arrival of Fulvius Flaccus (one of the Consuls that had
besieged Capua) who being sent for to defend Rome, was come almost as soon as
Hannibal, and brought with him 15000 of the select Legionaries, and a thousand
choice Men at Arms. That which gave him the happiness of coming so opportunely,
was, not only the timely intelligence was sent him, but also passing through
Countries that were his friends, he received none of those impediments which
the Carthaginean met with. The Senate sent the Carthaginian met with. The
Senate sent for one of the Consuls to please the People, and but for one, not
to please Hannibal, who might have too much gloried to have made them neglect
their Conquests for their safeties. The Consul Flaccus being informed, that the
next morning the enemy intended to storm Rome, resolved (with the permission of
the Senate) to make a Battle, Hannibal's only way to the assault, declaring
generously, that 'twas not fit the Empire of the World should fall like a
common City, but if the expiration of it were now arrived, 'twere requisite its
ruin should show its greatness, and that those which composed it should dye
with it. The day therefore no sooner began to appear, but the valiant Consul
drew out his Army, which with those he brought, and those Romans that
voluntarily came under his Ensigns, consisted of 50000 Men. Hannibal on the
other side about the same instant, drew his Soldiers out of their Camp, but he
admired when instead of seeing the Walls covered with his Enemies, he perceived
the Fields were so; but his wonder was soon converted into joy, to observe that
Rome would fall like her self, and that he should have to deal with those upon
even terms, who he had suspected would give him more trouble to join with, than
to conquer them; and to lose no time, he commanded the Trumpets, the Clairons,
and all the other Music of War, to give the signal of Battle, which no sooner
was heard, than both these great Bodies began to move with resolution worthy
their Quarrel, the one fighting to win the Empire of the World, and the other
to keep it. But just as they were about to begin that fatal Tragedy, the Sun
(which till then had shone very bright) began to hide it self, as perhaps
detesting to look upon so many intended Murders; the whole face of the Heaven
was in an instant obscured with a thick darkness; the Thunder did hideously
grumble; the winds made a noise, as if they had all broken loose out of their
Caves, and the Clouds melted so fast, that many thought the Lightnings had
dissolved them, and as many admired how so much fire could avoid quenching in
so much water: I cannot better describe the horror of this day, then by the
effects it produced, which were, that it constrained the Consul and Hannibal to
return with their Armies into their several Camps; for Flaccus too had pitched
his Tents in a great field some two furlongs from the Temple of Hercules, lest
Hannibals being before Rome should look like besieging it, which none could
truly say he did, whilst there was a Roman betwixt him and the City. But that
which afflicted Hannibal, as much as this miraculous separation, which he then
termed but a suspension of his victory, was an advertisement he received by his
Spies, that the Senate had not only since his coming sent certain Companies
with flying Ensigns to the recruit of their Legions in Spain, but also had sold
those very fields on which he Campt, at a higher rate, thau they were valued at
before his being possessed of them; In revenge whereof, he caused all the rich
Shops in the Forum, to be sold by a public Crier. But sir, (said Izadora)
that which made the precedent storm so absolutely a wonder, was, that as soon
as Flaccus and Hannibal were returned into their Camps, the day proved so very
fair, and the night too, that the Carthaginian was proud with a belief, that
the next visit of the Sun, would unavoidably decide his Fate; but therein also
he was deluded, for the succeeding day, was but a perfect repetition of the
preceding, as well for the Miracle, as for the separation of the two Armies,
only the Tyber was with those Cataracts of Rain, so exceedingly swelled, that
she overflowed her Banks, and had like to have revenged all the Romans losses
by the ruin of Hannibals Army; but he by a timely care removed his Tents to a
higher ground, and thereby avoided an Enemy, which he could not resist. I
remember, I have been told, that several private persons in Rome (for the
Senate detested to seem to derive any advantage, but from their Arms) performed
many sacrifices to the Nymphs and Nayades of Tyber for endeavoring their
revenge, and for making Hannibal fly out of his Camp, which never any Romans
thitherto had done.

I must now, generous Spartacus, acquaint you with a particular which few have
heard, and fewer have believed, in which last number, I perhaps include my
self; but yet I shall tell it you, since it is a part of that story you seem so
much concerned in: Blacius, (according to Hannibal's promise to me) being set
at liberty, and understanding of Hannibal's design upon Rome, and of the
continuance of his passion, commanded me to desire him, by the pressingst
conju^ations a Letter was capable of, to carry his Arms to any other place,
rather than to the destruction of that City, where I had my Birth, with this
hope, that if my Prayers were successful, it would free Rome from an imminent
ruin, and if they were not, 'twould prove a good rise to free me from his
addresses: for he abhorred an alliance with Hannibal, as highly as with Perolla
and detested the Enemy of his Country as much as of his Family. I immediately
obeyed Blacius, as much by inclination as by duty, and sent a post away with a
Letter to the Carthaginian, which because 'twas my own, I did not think it
worthy the remembering: my Express came to him in the midst of his fury for
these two unfortunate separations, and of his Resolves the next morning, if his
Soldiers could not march, they should swim to a Victory; but as soon as he had
read my Letter, he divested himself of all his rage, and gave immediate Orders
to have his Army the next day ready to march away, contenting himself (as he
gave it out) that he had made Rome tremble, and necessitated the gods to a
double miracle for her safety (that of the Inundations, and that of his not
taking her:) But yet to satisfy the Avarice and Sufferings of his Soldiers, he
led them the direct way to the Grove of Fero^^, where stood a Temple of
inestimable Riches, all which he exposed to their pillage, and from thence
returned me by my Messenger, this Answer to my Letter;

HANNIBAL to the fair IZADORA.
HE that has already sacrificed his revenge to your Commands, does the like now
with his Victory; I should have said with his Glory, did he not find more in
his obedience, than he could in his success. Would to the gods, fair Izadora,
you could but enjoy as high a contentment in the reception, as I do in the
payment of your Duty: I might then have some hopes that my Passion might not
prove eternally fruitless, and that he who ambitions nothing but this
satisfaction, might by incessant impressions of that quality and production,
invite you by an imitation, to reward what you cannot but approve.


AFter Hannibal's retreat from Rome, Flaccus returned to Capua to his Colleague
Appius Clodius, and the Capuans, who had endured miseries almost sufficient for
the punishment of their Rebel^ion observing the Consul, was not followed by the
Carthaginian Army, found it high time to think upon their securities; in order
whereunto they assembled the Senate, where after a serious debate, Vibius
(Uncle to Perolla) perceiving that the major part inclined to submit unto the
Roman Mercy, in an excellent Oration befought them, rather to dye by their own
hands, and so rob their Enemies of the Glory of full Conquest, by contributing
to their own ruin, and make Hannibal know by so noble a fall, that the
preserving of such generous friends, had been more worthy his Arms, than the
taking of that which he but attempted; that it was more resembling the ancient
splendour of Capua, to perform what might rather create the Romans admiration
than their pity, that for his own particular, he esteemed no Fate so bad, as to
make up a part of Claudius and Flaccus's Triumph, which was the best condition
they could expect by a surrender; therefore all those who were gallant enough
to expire with their liberty, he invited to go with him, and take their share
of a Cup, which should exempt them for ever from the cruelties and vicissitudes
of Fortune. After he had finished these words, he saluted the Senate with an
admirable constancy, and being followed by seven and twenty Senators, he went
directly home, where they all hasted to pledge that fatal health which he
began, having no fears in their deaths, but that the Romans should possess
Capua before they were acted. I have told you (said Izadora) this Tragedy, not
only because it was the discourse and admiration of the whole World, but also
because the chief Actor of it had so near a relation to my generous Friend, the
rest of the Senate immediately submitted to the Consuls, and found from
Flaccus, that death with ignominy, which they might have given themselves with
Glory. Hannibal to revenge his dead Friends, performed many great exploits in
the Countries of the Brutians and Lucanians, where he sacrificed to appease
their Manes above ten thousand Romans, and then the season being unfit for
action, he returned to this City, and in a Complement to me, declined a
Triumphant Entry, because the chiefest ornaments of it, were to have been
composed of the spoils of my Country.

When the faithful Symander was (to Callimachus) thus obeying his dear Masters
Commands, they both perceived him coming toward them, accompanied with one of
the Priests of Venus, who was come to advertise his Superior, that the
Sacrifices which are usually offered to appease the incensed Deity, and to
break the Oracles unaccustomed silence, only expected his presence to be
performed. He immediately obeyed the Summons, though he had much rather
employed his time in hearing of Symander, whose Relations so charmed him, that
it almost darkened his Piety; but that he might return the sooner to so
pleasing an entertainment, he took Artabanes by the hand, and led him to be an
assistant to those Ceremonies, which were unavoidably to be performed, before
he could learn his Fate,

PARTHENISSA.
THE FIRST PART.
BOOK VI.
THE Sacrifice being finished, and Callimachus having perfectly considered the
Prophetical parts of the Victims, assured all the Assistants, that the Deity
was well pleased with their Devotions, but that he could not as yet discover
any Maxim in Divination, which might afford a certainty, that within few days,
the Oracle should be restored to the liberty of speaking. Artabanes was
extremely troubled with this belief, and the better to entertain those thoughts
it created, he withdrew himself into a solitude which that morning he had
discovered, and which was indeed a place fit to cherish so deep a melancholy
as his: it was in a Valley all over-hung with lofty Trees, whose tops were so
interwoven by the help of Nature only, that they rather formed an obscurity
than a shade; it was watered too with many clear Fountains, whose sad murmur
seemed to bear our unfortunate Lover company, and to have a sense of his
miseries: but this forlorn retirement was so far from the Temple, that
Artabanes (whose natural strength was very much impaired by an internal grief
which by degrees consumed him) was constrained to make use of his Horse to
return thither, where he was no sooner come, then having tied him to a Tree, he
flung himself upon the grass, and after a serious reflection on his past
misfortunes, and present condition, he cried out, Great gods, do you take
delight in cruelty, that you enjoin me to live after a loss, which makes my
life my torment? or are you ignorant that it lies not in your power (in this
life) to repair the miseries you have cast upon me in it? if not one of these,
why did you command me to live, when I had almost found in my resolution my
cure? and enjoin me to receive my Fate from this Oracle, on which at the same
instant, you imposed an extraordinary silence; if you intended my ruin, why do
you bring your power in question by not effecting it, and if you designed my
felicity, why did you take Parthenissa to you? if you were resolved upon the
former, why did you bestow on me so great a Heart? and if you meant the latter,
why did you give me so great a Constancy? Shall I find Courage is as high a
Curse to me, as it is a Blessing to others? and shall I find in Virtue a
greater torment than ever you inflicted for the punishment of Vice? Great gods!
(he continued fetching a deep sigh) I have for all this obeyed you, when it was
against my reas^n, when it was against my inclination, and yet all the reward I
beg of you for so painful an obedience, is, that by a mark of your fury, I may
receive one of your Love: but if your Thunder be kept for the wicked, and not
the unfortunate, let your Oracle command me to dye, this hand (when you have
taken off the impiety) shall be the joyful Executioner of your sentence, and by
one generous blow send me to that union in the other World, which it seemed you
thought me unworthy of in this. Whilst Artabanes was in these expostulations,
Callimachus had led Symander into that Walk, in which he had begun his
relations, and where he desired him (with an impatience that manifested his
concernment) to prosecute them, which the faithful Servant willingly undertook,
and having begged Callimachus's pardon, for dwelling so long on a story, not
essential to his Princes, which yet he believed highly worth the relation, and
minded him, that he was interrupted at Hannibals return unto Salapia, and that
he always spoke the fair Izadora's words, thus continued her Adventures.

The continuance of Izadora's and Perolla's History.
YOU may be pleased (said Izadora to my Prince) to excuse me, if I have too
much particularized Hannibals success and actions, on which I should not have
so long insisted, had he not vowed to me, they were performed more upon the
score of Love than Glory, in which last he was ambitious to our Rival Perolla,
as much as Perolla had him in the first. I believe too, you have not forgot,
that when he did leave this City, he did not either his hopes or his passion,
the first of which was cherished by Oristes's undertaking and promises, who to
avoid being as false to Hannibal, as he had been to Virtue, entirely bent
himself to ruin the perfectest flame that ever any Lovers were capable of, and
knowing, that Vice, is never so powerful as when it assumes the habit of
Virtue, he resolved to take up the name, and (for a while too) the actions of a
friend, in which hypocrisy he was so successful, that he made Perolla his, as
sincerely as he was seemingly so to him; and truly he proved so excellent a
Conterfeit, that his misfortune had been as great if he had not reached his
ends, as his fault was in attaining them. In brief, he so engaged himself in
all my generous friends concerns, and so deeply sympathized in his joys, his
fears, and all his other passions, that it was only the work of time, to
disclose the fallacy: but at last, hearing of Hannibals return, and knowing
that delay in designs of Love and Glory, are equally intolerable, he began to
sow the seed of jealousy betwixt us, which he was confident would bring him so
plentiful a return; and indeed it was a great misfortune that the Carthaginian
had elected an instrument so perfect, both in dissimulation, and in wickedness;
for if the former had been less, his power to do ill had resembled it, and if
the latter had been so, his Will had been the like; but both concurring
together, was a danger whose greatness can hardly be equalled, but to the
goodness of those powers which hindered its effect. I told you, Sir, though
Oristes knew well, what Hannibals impatience would be, yet he declined his
attempt, till a good while after his return, not doubting but to satisfy him
for the delay, by the certainty of the advantage it would produce. In order to
this, the same night he entered Salapia, Oristes waited on him, of whom he
immediately inquired with an earnestness, which demonstrated an accession,
rather than a Diminution of his passion, what progress he had made toward the
settlement of his felicity: to which the false Agent replied, that as yet he
had been but preparing, what he shortly intended to act, and thereupon informed
him, how that he had got so great an interest in Perolla, that he doubted not
but to employ it for his certain ruin, if at least, Hannibal redoubled his
assiduity toward me, and whatsoever my usage were, that he would not only put
on a countenance which might relish of satisfaction, but cast out words, which
might make all the Salapians believe, and talk of the change, which when once
divulged, and none permitted to visit Perolla, but such as would credit, and
relate what they heard, he would so Husband that report, that if Perolla's
constancy were not his nature, it must inevitably be ruined. Hannibal
exceedingly approved of this advice, and so admirably acted his part, that not
only most of the Salapians believed I had a real passion for him, but also
Blacius did so. This great alteration soon flew like Lightning through the
City, and at last came to Perolla, whose amazement as it proceeded rather from
his finding so many were mistaken in me, than that he himself was so. But
Oristes who attributed his to the cause he desired, and not to the true one,
came one day to Perolla's Chamber, where after having with great vehemence,
protested to him an unequalled friendship, he conjured him by it, to cast off a
melancholy which would rather increase my Triumph, than make me repent my
crime; and that if he were so unfortunate as yet to have a passion for one
which was so unworthy of it, and desired to reclaim me, he should rather, than
constantly continue, seemingly divest himself of his Flame, and contemn me; for
Woman-like Kings were more concerned to subdue a Rebel, than to make a new
Conquest. I am sorry ( Perolla coldly replied) that I have an opportunity to
place so high a justice upon the fair Izadora's constancy, as not to suspect it
when Oristes does: But (he continued) is it possible, that a perfection more
apparent than this Calumny can be so unhappy as to be doubted by Men of
judgment and honesty? Ah! unjust Heaven, why did you establish the Throne of
Virtue in the Heart, and not in some conspicuous place, where to be virtuous,
and to be known so, had been the same thing? but perhaps the highest proof of
virtue is undisturbedly to endure the reproaches of Vice, and if goodness were
visible, our InInterests, and not our Inclinations might make us embrace it,
whereas when it has no witness but the possessor, it is a nobler invitation to
it. But Oristes, lest your should persevere in your crime, know, that constancy
is Izadora's nature as well as practice, and I having no Title to her
affection, but her goodness, I should be as foolish to doubt the foundation of
my felicity, as miserable if it failed. I wish (replied Oristes) Izadora had a
constancy worthy so noble a Flame, and if this be not the object of my belief,
it shall be at least of my Prayers. You speak (said Perolla) as if you had
still some doubts of her Passion for me. Would to the gods (he coldly replied,
folding his Arms, and casting down his eyes) that mine were but doubts: (and
then unfolding them, and looking up cheerfully again) but I am too blame (he
continued) to make you miserable before your time, and to let my words be so
unfortunate, as to acquaint you with what her actions will. Ah Oristes (Perolla
cried out) I conjure you by all the gods, inform me of your suspicions, and be
confident, if I receive any trouble from them, it can proceed only from the
knowledge that my friend has injured what he should admire; for in what
concerns my particular, I am as far from believing she can be criminal, as she
is from being so; No, no, Oristes, I beseech you, tell me your suspicions, that
I may remove them, and that for your good opinion of her, I may be obliged as
mch to your Reason, as your Faith; and the sooner to induce you to this; I must
tell you plainly, that to be my friend, and Izadora's Enemy is inconsistent.
The wicked Oristes perceived by these generous replies, that he had undertaken
a task as difficult, as dishonest, but knowing himself too far engaged to
retire, he told Perolla (with a deep sigh) I had rather renounce all things,
than the blessing of your friendship, and therefore what I thought to have
acquainted you with, as an effect of my care, I will silence as an argument of
my respect; but perhaps Izadora's flame for Hannibal may tell you a truth,
which the excess of your passion makes me decline to do: neither would I have
so much as mentioned this, did I not know, it is already as public as true,
and consequently that you have heard it. That I have heard it (said Perolla) is
not more certain, than that I do not believe it; but alas (he continued) is it
possible that Oristes does? If I did not apprehend (he replied) to offend you,
by acquainting you with my belief, I should inform you of it, and accompany it
with such pregnant reasons, as perhaps it might turn to be yours too. I conjure
you (said Perolla, hastily) to impart it to me, for I find, it is as impossible
to remove your jealousies, till I know them,, as 'twere for you to have any of
Izadora, if you knew her. I will then (said Oristes (tell you freely, that not
only I believe she has gas given her self to the Carthaginian, but also wonder
you do not: consider (I beseech you) that Inconstancy and Ambition are the
Hereditary Vices of her Sex; that you are a forlorn Prisoner, that your Rival
is a Triumphant Conqueror, which are two extremes that can hardly avoid
creating those two others in your Mistress: Reflect, I beseech you, upon the
difference between the imaginary Crown of Constancy, and the real one of
Empire; For though Hannibal be not born of a King, yet his Virtue makes him the
disturber of Kingdoms, which is a more glorious power, than any that can be
derived from Succession or Birth; Remember also that a Woman is more pleased
with the Power, than with the Merit of her Lover, the first being an advantage,
which she participates in, but the last, one, which he wholly ingrosses to
himself.

This (said Perolla, interrupting him) is the character of some of her Sex, but
it is not of Izadora, whose Reason as much as Nature, detests so black a crime;
I say, her Reason, for the cannot decline a Crown of Virtue for one of Gold,
but the reflection on the purchase, will deprive her of all the joy of it; and
though a Crown of Empire be more glittering than one of Constancy, yet the just
gods, by conferring many real advantages on the latter, have abundantly
repaired the seeming ones of the former; for the first being material, is
subject to the inconstancies of Fortune, but the last being a speculative
Blessing, is exempted from the power of that blind goddess: yes, doubtless, a
Crown of Constancy is the noblest, as well as safest, for it produces
Admiration, where the other does Envy. Alas (said Oristes) how ingenuous you
are to invent Arguments to cosen your self, and as if Izadora deluded you not
fast enongh, you contribute to her design. Take heed (replied Perolla) of what
you say, for I can hardly believe him virtuous, that thinks she is not. This
made Oristes perceive, that to destroy my generous Friends good opinion of me,
he must decline arguments, and employ demonstrations, which made him say,
Though I find I shall create your anger, by acquainting you with what I lately
discovered; yet I had rather hazard the losing of your friendship, by an action
which will render me worthy of it, than continue it by a silence which my own
Couscience will more severely punish, than you can. Yes, yes, Perolla, I am
determined since to cure your disease I must show you the deformity of it, to
instruct you with a truth, that had not my sight been a witness of, I should
never have credited; in a word; it is that with these Eyes I lately saw her give
such large proofs of her passion to Hannibal, that not only I suspect her
Constancy but her Virtue. At these barbarous words, all Perolla's temper
abandoned him, and in its room he entertained a rage so unresistable, that
forgetting all the formerties of friendship, he flung himself upon the false
Oristes, and having cast him at his feet, and there drawn out the wretches own
Poniard, he held it to his breast, and cried out to him, Traitor, that under
the habit of a friend, think to shroud thy self from the punishment of an
Enemy, and from a crime the Devils would tremble but to hear; know, that in
accusing Izadora's Virtue, thou have justified her, and by undertaking to make
her guilty, have proved thy self so: Do not think, that because I have lost my
Liberty, I have lost my Courage, nor that the apprehension of Hannibal's
resentments shall hinder me from acting mine; no, no, could he inflict on me
torments as great as those thou merit'st, I would endure them all, rather than
thy impiety should escape them unrevenged; for that Divine Justice, which has
made me from a Prisoner, a Judge, and have furnished me with Power as well as
Will to punish thee, would not have so armed my Hand, if it had not ordained,
thy death should appease that sacred Virtue, thy life has so highly injured.
Whilst Perolla wai thus speaking, the falfe Oristes lay as if he had already
received the reward of his infidelity; but when he perceived his resolution,
and that he was going to act it, he cried out, Hold, generous Perolla, and if I
beg this small suspension of Life, it is only to let you know, who it is you
destroy, it is your faithful'st Friend; and now I have told you that Truth, act
your resentments, for since you have withdrawn your friendship, they will be
rather effects of your goodness, than your revenge, and the gods who know my
innocence, are so just as to render that which makes my life my misfortune, the
cure of the latter, by the ending of the former. Though I know well (replied
Perolla) all thou now say, is but a continuation of thy wickedness, and that
these words are spoken, because thou have found I am sooner vanquished with
dissembling, than resistance, yet I give thee thy Life, not as a mercy but a
punishment, for the horror of having injured so fair an Innocence, will be a
greater torment, than that death from which I now exempt thee: Rise then (he
continued) and be gone, but if ever again thou present'st thy self before me,
thou will kindle a fire, which nothing but thy blood can extinguish. I will
obey you (said the perfiduous Oristes) in hope that by so painful an obedience,
you will discover a friendship and innocence, which your passion hinders you
now from seeing, and if by my sufferings I can show you your error, I shall
never deplore them. Then saluting Perolla with a great humility, he went from
him with a greater joy, 'having escaped a Death which he could not think he had
more strangely avoided, than he had justly deserved it. I know (said Izadora)
that 'twere but just to decline a while the prosecuting the rest of my Story,
to declaim upon this generous part of it; but I know too, Perolla's virtue
would be as much offended with such a gratitude, as I was pleased with the
cause of it. Perolla, who for so obliging a Civility esteemed it necessary to
make his fair Mistress a return, told her, If you had a design, Madam, to have
made this performance pass in the generous Spartacus opinion for an action of
Merit, you should not then have showed him the perfect Izadora; for in her
Beauty she carries her Justification, and to suspect that Vice can dwell in so
much brightness, is to be ignorant of its Nature, and to commit a folly as high
as Oristes wickedness. Izadora by a reply of the same quality, repaid her
Lovers Compliment, and thus reassumed her discourse.

As soon as the false Agent was gone from Perolla, he went and acquainted the
Carthaginian with his ill success, from whose rage he had like to have received
an usage as ill, as that which Perolla's Justice had near imposed on him, for
he had raised his expectation to such a height, that it made the fall the more
insupportable: but at last Hannibal perceiving that Oristes was unfortunate,
and not faulty, (at least as to him) he was contented to tell him, that he must
not expect his favor, till he had gained him mine; that it was too the
sensiblest way of obliging him, as well as of revenging that so fresh and high
affront: that their Interest being now joined, he would not despair, but that
he would project some new design for the obtaining of his desires, which if it
succeeded, should make him acknowledge, that whosoever made Hannibal happy,
could not doubt the being made so by him. Thereupon Oristes having first
assured him that no particular interest of his own could bring any accession to
that zeal, he had already for his satisfaction, and that he would employ all
his faculties to the settlement of it, withdrew himself to meditate on what he
determined to practice. But it is high time to inform you, that the
Carthaginian, (though he constantly visited me) had yet (in reliance on Oristes
promises) declined making any overtures of his passion, lest my replies might
have provoked him beyond his temper, and made him disclose a fallacy, which
with admirable patience and sagacity, he had so long continued; but now, seeing
those hopes were vanished, he resolved to renew his addresses, and to that end
came to see me, where finding me alone (which my humor and condition, made me
often elect) he, without any of those civilities which he usually practiced,
told me; That long silence, Madam, which your Commands have made me observe,
the violence of my Passion makes me break, which is arrived to such a height,
that it must now be the occasion of my Felicity or my Ruin, for it can admit
of nothing but extremes, and I must now become the object of your hate or of
your Love; the gods shall be my witnesses, that I have declined this
declaration, till necessity constrained me to it, and I believe you cannot
doubt, but it must be a strange violence, which forces me to what I apprehend
is a trouble to you; Yes, fair Izadora, I say, forces me unto it; for, in what
depended on my Will, when 'twas to acquaint you with my respect, I declined my
revenge, I declined my Ambition, two of the most pleasing passions, and not to
offend you, I elected to offend the gods, choosing to reward my Soldiers valors
with sacred things, rather than with the spoils of Rome. But in what relates to
my Flame, I am not master of my own motions, I have afflicted my self, not to
do the like to you, I have endeavored to establish your felicity, by ruining
my own, and I have represented to my self, that I ought not to have a higher
contentment than the settling of yours; but Madam, all my endeavors therein are
fruitless; for I find the passion of Love is most predominant, and that the
extinguishing of my flame is as impossible, as I believe the performing it
would be pleasing to you; but your Beauty that makes my crime, must be my
excuse, for it has charms to print a Passion, as well as Majesty to enjoin
Obedience. This (fair Izadora) is my condition, and it is at the last extremity,
and after all Essays, that I am come to implore your Affection, when I know I
should rather beg your pardon. I must confess (said Izadora) so violent a
beginning gave me strange apprehensions what the conclusion of this visit would
produce; but (lest my fears might increase his considence) I instantly replied;
If you have had any great conflicts with your self, for the settling of my
felicity, I believe those I have had for the acquainting you with my gratitude,
have not been inferior to them; but that same Will which forces you to a
perseverance in your affection, necessitates me to the like in mine; and since
by an experiment you find we have something within us, which is the god over
our inclinations, I hope you will pardon my not accepting your affection, upon
the same score that I excuse the continuation of yours. If (said Hannibal
extremely moved) our Wills were wholly created by our Fancies, which are the
most often depraved irregularities, there might be some appearance in what you
allege; but since amongst reasonable Creatures, reason commonly forms them, I
must look upon that which you do term a constraint resembling mine, rather as a
designed cruelty for my destruction; for if Perolla has purchased any glory, I
believe my stock is not less than his; if he have a high a passion for you,
mine is not inferior; if he have paid you any services, I have not been
deficient in those duties: and if he has received any gifts from nature,
perhaps I have not been unbeholding to her: therefore Madam, you cannot be so
unjust to use that argument, for the continuing of your flame, which I did for
your pardon for persevering in mine, the difference betwixt you and Perolla
being so vast, that none which is not as blind as Love, can imagine the same
effects have an equal cause.

I must acknowledge (said Izadora) I was so sensible of hearing him make his
own Elogy, so much too, to the prejudice of Perolla, that I had not apprehended
what I should have said for his justification, might have turned (through
Hannibals fury) to his prejudice, I had made him know how much (in truth, and
in my judgment) he was his own flatterer; but that consideration made me only
tell him, If either our Wills be formed by our Fancy or Reason, or composed of
both, I find in Perolla a greater subject for the continuance of my affection,
than you can do in me, for a perseverance in yours; it is not that I give him
any precedence over the great Hannibal, who it may be (had I known him first)
might have had that heart, which now it is impossible for any but Perolla to
possess; but the Stars have tied me to him, it is not in my power, nor in my
inclination, to change their influence: therefore, Sir, I conjure you, let your
generosity act what your judgment should, give me cause to admire what I am
unworthy to love, and consider it is something of divine to make others happy.
If (said the Carthaginian, with a Face all inflamed with fury) it be impossible
for Hannibal to possess your heart, I will render it as impossible for Perolla,
who shall find I have a power to make others miserable, if I my self am made
so; and since you esteem the possession of Izadora too great a felicity for me,
I must think it is so for any other; Your cruelty (Madam) constrains me to this
declaration, which whatsoever influence it has on me, it shall have the like on
Perolla: and if at last you reduce me to despair, I will accompany my ruin
with ones, whose loss you will deplore, as much as you would rejoice at mine,
Great gods! what a trembling did these barbarous threatenings put me into? they
were a thousand times fuller of horror, than if they had been made against my
own life, but amongst all those fears, the reflection on Hannibal's Power, and
Inclination, and consequently on Perolla's danger, armed me with such a
resolution, that had had I followed the dictates of it, I might have rendered
that rage a justice, which was a cruelty: but my good Genius gave me power to
suppress it, and finding the Tyrant was the fiercer by opposition, I replied,
The virtues of the great Hannibal are too well known unto me, to suspect, any
passions can be more predominate over him, than they: those humane frailties
can only do like clouds, hinder the Sun from shining,, but not extinguish his
light; it is his anger, and not he which threatens me. No, no, Madam (the
Carthaginian hastily replied, interrupting me) do not flatter your self, nor
me, in believing I am capable of milder resolutions, than I have acquainted you
with, and receive this as an unalterable Truth, that the same hour in which you
absolutely take away my hopes, I will Perolla's life. With those cruel words he
went out of the room, and left me alone to breath out those complaints, which I
disdained to utter in his presence, But, Sir, my astonishment at this
proceeeding, was far short of what it was raised unto, by that I am now going
to tell you. Some four or five days after, Hannibal came to visit me again,
where having found by oblique questions, that his assaults had rather
confirmed, than moved my resolutions, he immediately made me such submissive
r^^antations, for what was past, that I believed they were as real as humble;
then he assured me, that having always loved me above himself, he was come to
evidence that truth, by an undeniable experiment; that the respect he paid the
happy Perolla, as being the object of my love, was great than his aversion to
him, for being the obstructer of his; and since he thought no evincement of the
reality of those professions could be both so great and pleasing, as the
ruining of his own felicity, for the establishing of mine, he was determined to
settle it, at that rate, that his former threatenings were but as a last Essay,
and that having found our flames were too Divine to admit of extinction, he was
inviolably fixed to admire what he could not destroy; and to obtain a pardon for
those persecutions his passion, and not he had raised us, he would immediately
restore Perolla to his liberty, and employ all his authority with Blacius to
unite, what was a sin any longer to divide. At these generous words, I cast my
self at the Carthaginians feet, and by too many expressions for a repetition
acquainted him with my joy and acknowledgements. Immediately after he went to
Perolla, where in civilities of a resembling quality, he implored his
forgiveness, and begged him always when he considered his persecutions, that he
would too, consider the occasion of them, that so the reflection on the cause,
might apologize for the effect; he besought him further, to remember the
obligation was greater to lay down a passion for Izadora, than the injury was
to have assumed one: since having seen her, not to be his Rival, could not
prove a greater miracle, than having been it, ever to decline that name. After
some other expressions, and embraces, Hannibal assured Perolla, that as an
argument of his conversion, and that he had silenced (if not suppressed) his
passion from that instant he restored him to so perfect a liberty, that he
might either return to Rome, or continue in Salapia, My generous friend with an
equal proportion of wonder and joy, received these transcendent civilities from
the Carthaginian, and having made him some retributions proportionate to their
cause, he was invited by him to his own House, where by fresh accessions of the
like quality, he induced all the Salapians, not only to wonder at, but believe
the change. But (continued Izadora) least your astonishment should prove as
great at the hearing, as ours at the performance of these mutations, I must
acquaint you, that Hannibal was seemingly gallant, but to become the more
securely the contrary; and though he were a Prince, who in affairs of craft and
ingenuity, had hardly any equal, yea, his Genius had a greater propensity to
those stratagems, which were for the winning of a Battle, or a Kingdom, than a
Mistress; This Truth I believe you will not question by the sequel of this
discourse, which I must continue, by informing you, that the same night after
his fatal declaration which he made me, concerning Perolla, he sent for
Oristes, and having locked themselves up in his Closet, he informed him
particularly of what had past betwixt us, and conjured him to find out an
expedient for his relief, which if any longer delayed, would immediately prove
his destruction; To this his wicked Counselor replied, We have already (Sir)
by our attempts on Perolla, observed that his constancy finds in them rather
arguments of Triumph, than Suppression; we must therefore now assault
Izadora's, for it imports not whether you reach your desires by Perolla's
declining her; or by Izadora's deserting him; and I am confident, had not your
resentments forced you to threaten your Rivals life, I had found out a way
which would have made it his torment, and whose success could not have failed,
without the gods declaring themselves as much enemies to your Love, as they
have been friends to your Glory. 'Twas (he continued) that I would have had you
in your next visit to Izadora (in case you found your threatenings had not
produced the effects you desired) not only alter your words, but your looks,
and by a countenance altogether penitent, acquaint her, that you are resolved
to give her a testimony of your Passion, by suppressing the effects of it; that
since the only way to manifest how much you valued her contentment, is to
deprive your self of your own, you are come to divest your self of it, by
renouncing your hopes, and resigning them to Perolla, who you must acknowledge
is more worthy of the Felicity, by her esteeming him so; that since you could
not conquer her, you have vanquished your self, and that imitation in of her,
you valued him above your self.

It Is (said Oristes) with such professions as these I would infuse in her a
firm belief, that you would attempt against your own, rather than Perolla's
life, and the better to disguise the fallacy, I am absolutely of opinion, that
not only your words, but your actions speak your change, I mean by giving him
his liberty, and inviting him to continue near his Mistress; for I can assure
you, Blacius is so vigilant of his Daughter, that your Rival can derive no
advantage by his freedom, and so detests any alliance with Pacuvius's Blood,
that he had rather marry Izadora to her grave, than to Perolla; whose Father I
would have you send on some employment of so long a continuance, that in his
absence we may act our intention; having then by such pregnant testimonies of
your conversion, raised a belief in your Mistress, that you have no designs for
her, but to see her married to Perolla (which I would always press to Blacius,
and as his aversions for it increased, so should your solicitations) I would
then one night privately seize upon Perolla, and by bribing two or three
Physicians (amongst which, Blacius's should be one, who is my intimate
acquaintance, and whose aversion to all Pacuvius's Family, and affection to
Gold, will induce him to say any thing we shall put in his mouth) make them
give out, that he died of an Apoplexy, or some such sudden disease, and then
celebrate his Funeral with such mourning and pomp, that the World may believe
the reality of your Friendship is as great, as that of his Death. This being
artificially performed, you must a while mingle your Tears with Izadora's, as
for your common loss, and so steal into her affections, by sympathizing in her
friendship and her grief: For I cannot fancy, but if your Rival were removed,
all obstructins were so too, and the object of her flame being dead, she will
(since it is without injuring her Virtue or Felicity) bestow her self upon a
Conqueror, whose Fame only is able to dissolve the most frozen Breast. As for
Perolla (if this succeed) you may either send him to another World in earnest,
or after you are married, the more sensibly to revenge his having been so
dangerous a Rival, both in Love and Glory, permit him to continue in this; but
the first is the more secure, for his Presence may receive those Fires which
nothing extinguished but her belief, that his Life was so; and thus whilst you
possess Izadora, he may her Affection. That which induces me, not to have
Perolla killed, before you see the event of this design, is, lest if by a
miracle she should resent his loss to such an extremity, as it may prove her
own; you may have still your remedy in your power, and thereby be in no worse a
condition, than that which you are in at present. The malicious Oristes having
done speaking, Hennibal continued a while weighing the probability of this
design, and having at last absolutely approved it, he demanded (with much
impatiency) of Oristes, whether yet it might not be acted? To which his Agent
replied, that those menaces made against Perolla, would make that relish of
design, which should be esteemed the contrary, since all the hope of the Plot,
was the managing it with such dexterity, that Izadora should rather believe you
deplored, than acted her loss. I am (said the Carthaginian) perfectly convinced
of what you allege, but those threatenings I made against my Rivals life, were
spoken when I was in so visible a distemper, that I am confident she ascribes
them sooner to my choler, than design: neither were they positive, but
conditional, and therefore probably, all the prejudice they will bring, will be
only to me, and not to what you propose, for it will tie me to act my part with
more dissimulation, and protract the time of my sufferings. Thus (said Izadora)
Hannibal took up a design, whose beginning I have already informed you of, and
whose success was so proportionate to his desires, that not only Izadora, but
Perolla believed his conversion was as real, as 'twas well acted. And Blacius
(on the other side) so perfectly made good Oristes assurance to the
Carthaginian, that in half a year, (in which Perolla enjoyed his liberty, and
the privilege of living in Salapia) I could never have the happiness of
seeing, or the satisfaction of hearing from him, and when so intolerable a
separation made the effects of it visible in my humor, the artificious
Hannibal offered, and conjured me to make use of his power for our union, which
had formerly been employed for our separation, that what had injured, might
relieve us: But he too well knew, I had rather entrenched upon my Felicity than
Duty, and 'twas upon that confidence he had made me that overture. To
abbreviate my Relation I shall tell you, that all which Oristes advised, was
performed, and that which contributed to the better executing what related to
Perolla's sudden death, was, that Pacuvius and all his were removed to
Tarentum, and that Perolla (who only had Strato to wait on him) had employed
him to Rome about some private affairs. Oh gods! what my suffering was at that
fatal news you only know, but those effects of it which were visible, proved so
dangerous, that Blacius Physician was immediately sent for, to hinder my death
from accompanying Perola's: and that Traitor detesting my alliance with any of
Pacuvius's Family, and being corrupted by Hannibal's rewards, after he had
prescribed those things which he held needful for my condition, told me, That
he was apprehensive the Carthaginian had murdered my Friend, to build his own
felicity on his ruins; that Hannibal had rather counterfeited, than
extinguished his Flame, and therefore he would go and visit Perolla's Body,
which if it had received any violence, he would as certainly discover, as the
gods punish it. This proposition suited with my jealousies, and though the
knowledge of what he suspected, would have added to my grief (if at least it
had been capable of any accession) by a manifestation, that his Passion for me
was the occasion of his death, yet I embraced his motion, resolving if any
Symptoms should evince so black a Truth, that I would with one stroke revenge
his Murder, and with another follow him. The Physician some little time after
being returned, with many false Tears, protested, that Perolla's Body had not
the least mark of an unnatural death, and that he asked the gods forgiveness,
for having suspected so clear an Innocence as Hannibals. He then too began to
play the Physician of the Mind, and besought me not to afflict my self, since
'twas not Man that had sent Perolla to the gods, but that they themselves had
called him: But alas, my afflictions had too just an object ever to cease but
with my life, which every day so exceedingly impaired, that I was in hopes by a
speedy dissolution to make the end of torments in this world, to be the
beginning of joys in the other. In the mean time Hannibal celebrated Perolla's
Funerals, with so many counterfeit weepings, and with so much solemnity, that
all Salapia believed 'twas he, and not Pacuvius which had lost a Son. Two
months together, he was so far from consoling me by his visits, that by them he
increased my grief, which, though it redu^'d me to a condition fitter to create
his pity than his affection, yet the last had taken so deep a root, that no
diminution of my little Beauty could bring any to his passion, which indeed he
could no longer silence; therefore one evening he came to visit me, and though
I was fitter for a Priest than a Lover, yet he declared himself the latter, and
begged me with the perfect'st imporunities to receive and cherish a flame which
he had silenced, whilst he held it a crime; but now, that the higher Powers
contributed so much to reward its Purity, as to take him to them, which had
hindered me from justly receiving it, he flattered himself with a hope, that to
recompense his respect and passion, and to obey what the gods themselves had so
evidently approved, I would accept of a heart that yielded nothing in the zeal
of adoring me, to that of my last Servant and his Friend. I know he spoke many
things of this quality, which because I detested to hear, I cannot repeat; for
I so justly disrelisht this motion, that I had a strong conflict with my self,
to silence my resentments for it, but at length I told him, Ah (Sir) how can
you call your self Perolla's friend? and yet endeavor to disturb his Ashes?
and how can you have a Passion for one, who you have hopes to make unworthy
your affection, by conferring hers on you? No Sir, I beseech you let me follow
my resolution, which is, to dye Perolla's, since I could not live his; for my
heart (after such a loss) is not capable of any passion, but grief; or if it
be, that passion I had for his Virtues, I must now continue to his memory. To
which Hannibal answered, Will you then confer a Blessing upon one which is not
capable of it, to deny it to another, who is, and perhaps deserves it too? Ah
Madam, if it is your affection for Perilla, and not your hatred for Hannibal,
which produces this resolve, you will evince that truth sooner by granting,
than declining my request; for if in the other life we are not ignorant of what
is done in this, Perolla will be more satisfied to know by your giving your
self now to me, that he only hindered it hitherto, then by your refusing me
absolutely that felicity; since that may appear rather an effect of your
aversion for me, than your respect to him. I am, Sir, (I replied) of a contrary
opinion, for my passion and my resentments for his loss will be much more
legible in their taking from me the ambition of being the object of so great a
Conqueror's Love, and in abandoning, not only the pleasures of life, but the
desire of it too. I conjure you therefore by the quiet of Perolla, which you
endeavor to distu^b, torment me not by so fruitless a persecution, which if
you persevere in, 'twill induce me rather to suppress the respect I pay you,
than to create that affection you solicit, and for me to believe that Hannibal
(and not the god's) have taken away his Rival. It may be (continued Izadora)
you will believe so great a Prince merited a proportionate respect, but I must
acknowledge, that I was not in an humor to afford it him, neither do I believe
I could give him a worse opinion of me, by my replies, than he seemed to have
of me by his desires; but after by his looks he had expressed what his answer
would be, he told me, You think, Madam, to silence my passion with reproaches,
to avoid ingratitude by becoming unjust, and by accusing my innocence to
decline being a debtor to my Flame; but know, that your cruelty may induce me
to revenge what I cannot obtain; and though you have avoided any impressions of
my Love, some that you are concerned in, may not those of my resentments.
Tyrant (I replied) while Perolla was alive, I considered thy threatenings
because I feared them, but now the subject of my apprehensions is removed, I
desire them; for in becoming my Executioner, thou will be more kind, than in
continuing my Lover. Oh gods! ( Hannibal cried out, interrupting me) Why do you
give me so much Choler, and so much Love together? and why did you not give me
a heart capable of enduring injuries, when you give me a Mistress apt to confer
them on me: then immediately flinging himself on his knees by my Bedside (for
my weakness made me unable to receive his visits in another condition) he
continued, Madam, though my rage has made me sin, by menacing in a place where
I should only adore, yet do not so much mis-interpret my crime, as to think my
threatenings had you for their object; You, I say, for whose safety had I as
many Lives, as you have Beauties, I would sacrifice them all, rather than
employ one minute of them to a contrary thought: No, fair Izadora, if my
resentments at your cruelty, forced my Passion to what my Reason condemns,
believe me, 'twas only against Blacius, who for his injuries to you, as well as
Relations, appeared in my fury, the fittest object for it. Alas, Sir (I
replied, interrupting him) you are more cruel in your interpretation, than in
your threatenings, and are more injurious in having those designs against my
Father, then if against me: for if they were only intended against Izadora, if
my grief deceive me not, 'twill be so charitable, as to exempt me from them, or
if it does not, your resentments will prove an obligation, (for I consider
every thing at that rate, which hastens my union with Perolla) but if neither
my sorrow for my loss, nor your fury for your furitless passion, will prove my
cure, know that I will act it my self, and to punish my coldness for Hannibal,
and reward my flame for his Rival, I will untye my Soul from that Cley which
invirons it, and thereby also secure Blacius against your revenge, by rendering
the acting it an injustice. Thereupon turning from him, I fell so bitterly a
weeping, that though Hannibal made me a long answer to what I spoke, yet I did
not so much as listen to him, being wholly intent in summoning all those
thoughts which I fancyed would soonest make me perform, what I told the
Carthaginian I designed: and indeed those sad resentments finding a body
extremely weakened, and a mind as apt to receive their impressions, were in one
day so kind, as to give me the hopes of not living another; neither was this
only my conjecture, but the positive opinion of my Fathers Physician, who in a
trembling haste, acquainted Hannibal with it, and conjured him since by so
evidencing a demonstration, it was impossible to separate us, that he would
contribute to what he law he could not hinder.

I will not tell you all the Carthaginians disputes with himself, which could
not on so plentiful a subject but be excellent, let it be sufficient you learn,
that though the cause which was to create his pity, might as justly his revenge
(I mean, the sad extremity my Passion for his Rival, had reduced me to) yet he
got the victory over the latter, and generously told the Doctor: Come, let us
show Lzadora her Perolla, for I had rather lose my hopes, than the object of
them; but if this fresh experiment of my Passion, create none in her, it may
reduce me to act what I have but hitherto counterfeited. Thereupon, immediately
he sent the Captain of the Guards for Perolla (who had till then, been kept in
the Dungeon of a little Castle, some two miles from Salapia) who was no sooner
come (though it was very late) but the Carthaginian (who had access into
Blacius's house at his pleasure) came with him into my Chamber, where all those
that watched with me, were weeping a death, which according to their belief and
my desire, was not many hours distant: But all of them no sooner saw my
generous friend, whose Funerals had been solemnized above a quarter of a year
before, than with horrid skreeks they fled out of the room. Hannibal was not
displeased at their absence; and Perolla (who till then, thought he was drawn
out of a Prison to end his life) began now to fear a more transcend^nt
misfortune, for being ignorant of his own death, the sad posture he found my
Women in, and those strange extravagancies of theirs, made him attribute the
first to my death, and the last to their charity, for that horror they knew
would invade him, as his seeing me dead; which absolutely he was confirmed in,
by my not (at so great a clamor) looking out to discover or enquire the cause
of it; and he further believed, that his Tyrant had only brought him thither,
to show him so melancholy a Spectacle, as a Revenge for being his Rival both
in Love and Glory. But then on the other side, he could hardly believe the
Carthaginian durst show him so inraging an object, and trust him untied to act
his resentments. Whilst the poor Perolla was in this labyrinth, he was led out
of it by Hannibal's opening my Curtains a little, and telling me; See Madam, my
power, and my infelicity, that can perform miracles for others, and not for my
self, that can raise the dead to bring you to life, and perhaps my self to
death, that can do all things indeed, but what I most desire. Here fair Izadora
(he continued) drawing Perolla toward me, dry up your Tears, which else may
hinder you from seeing your happiness, and remember, he which to save your
life, has run so hazardous a course to his own, merits (at least) that you
never give your self to another, if you will not bestow your self on him. These
strange words, and the as strange noise which somewhat preceded them, made me
turn about to understand their meaning; but O gods! what was my surprise when I
saw Perolla in this world, who I was, making such haste to find out in the
other? truly 'twas so transcendent, that I fell into a deep swound, and thereby
those powers, which have ever took delight to afflict me, continued that
practice, for whilst I believed Perolla dead, they kept me alive, and now they
showed him me alive, they flung me into a seeming death, which too had like to
have caused a real one in my generous friend? Hannibal, whose concern for me
was not so great as his, permitted his care to be greater, who ran out to call
my Women to my assistance, and to whom he was constrained to make many oaths,
that it was really Perolla, and not his Ghost, before he could persuade them to
come in to me; but Callione, the chiefest of them, bo h in her extraction, and
my esteem, knew so well the interest I had in Perolla, that whilst others took
up their employment about me, she made him the object of hers; and was so
unhappily successful in it, that she brought him out of his fainting, before I
was recovered of mine, which raised in him so high despair, that had not all
those which were present, assured him, my disease and his were of the same
quality, and that only mine, meeting with a Body disabled by a deep sickness,
was the cause of its longer continuance, I believe he would have acted some
such violence on himself, as had made my recovery my highest misfortune; but at
length, about an hour after, by the help of strong Cordials, my swounding
abandoned me, and I no sooner opened my Eyes, than the first objects they saw,
were Hannibal and Perolla, who were both kneeling by my bedside, but the joy
of beholding the latter, made me niether consider nor care how much the
expressions of it would offend the form^^; to confirm this truth, I told the
other: Are the Gods then so just ( Perolla) as to reward by this sight, the
fidelity of my Eyes, which abhorred all objects but you, and which having lost
you, have endeavored to weep themselves out as useless things? or else is it
an illusion and a mockery of Fate, by making me, (in resenting the joy of your
Resurrection) the more exactly sensible of your real death? Tell me, I conjure
you, which of them it is? for if it be the latter, I will deceive her cruelty,
and convert what she intends for one, into a summons to follow you, which I
thank the gods, my weakness (for you supposed a real Death) makes me as able,
as my passion willing to perform.

Madam (he replied, kissing my hands) I am really alive, but it is only your joy
at it, which makes me esteem my being so a happiness; for how can I consider
the persecutions I have raised you, in being alive, and those afflictions I
have cast you into, in not being thought so by you, but I must be struck with a
grief as great as my flame, and perpetually deplore an experiment which
convinces me, that both my Life and my Death must be a trouble to you. All this
I heard Perolla speak, yet I was so overjoyed at his first words, which were an
assurance of what I only desired, that not answering his last, I raised my self
up the best I could, and embracing him that spoke them, I did that which on any
other occasion, and in that posture, I should not have performed; but the
subject of my satisfaction was so legitimate, that I could not suppress any
extravagancy it produced. It is true, Madam (said Perolla, interupting his fair
Mistress) your joy was obliging to Hannibal, as well as to me, for in your
acting (as he aftewards confessed to Cristes) he discovered Beauties which he
protested, sufficiently paid his Charity in preserving your life. Izadora at
these words, was all covered with blushes, and her servant perceiving it, (to
repair her disorder) told her; But Madam, as it was but just that Hannibal
should receive a reward for his cure, so it was as just, his Eyes should
receive the punishment of their presumption, which were both performed; for as
their seeing those perfections, effected the former, so his seeing the little
share he had in them, did the latter. Izadora (said Simander) was so confused
in the remembrance of these particulars, that without taking notice of
Perolla's words, she made haste to pass over the subject of them, by thus
re-assuming her relation. Hannibal was so enraged, that in my joy I had forgot
my gratitude to him, which furnished me with the cause of it, that rising up he
told me; Is then all the reward (Madam) you give my Love, but a demonstration
that you have given all yours to my Rival, and is your flame so great, that you
cannot conceal it, when the disclosure is both unwise and ungrateful? Ah
Izadora! how much do you rely on the power you have over me, when you care to
offend mine, by so sensible a provocation? These words drew me from that
employment, my excess of joy had engaged me in, and finding the Carthaginian
was as just in his reproaches, as I esteemed I was in what caused them, I
thought fit to tell him: You do place (Sir) a wrong construction on my actions,
since that which you term my ingratitude, is rather an effect of my confidence
in your Virtue; for did I think you a Tyrant, I would not add a Provocation to
the Power of your Revenge, but knowing you to be just, I dare even in your
presence, manifest a flame, whose virtue renders me confident, rather of your
protection, than resentments. Ah Madam, (said Hannibal) why do you make me
just, to make me miserable? and if what I have seen you act, be in reliance on
my Virtue, I beseech you ascribe none unto me, for mine will then be my
punishment, and make me rather implore the Gods, to take from me that little I
possess, than to let it thus torment me. We were in discourses of this quality,
when Blacius being informed of Hannibal's visit (and of Perolla's Resurrection)
came into my Chamber, where in terms as sharp as the remembrance of the
Carthaginian's power permitted him to use, he murmured at his bringing his
mortal Enemy into his House, and restoring his Daughter to a certainty of his
being alive: And though Hannibal represented, that that was the only way to
continue me so; yet my Father never lessened his repining, but added, that
since I was of so degenerate a disposition, he had rather have lost than
preserved me at so high a rate. Then he besought Hannibal to permit him to make
use of his paternal and domestic power over his Daughter, and in his own
House; which the Carthaginian granted, that we might be separated, and yet not
derive that misfortune from him; but though it was not immediately his act, yet
it was an effect of his permission, which I so resented, that seeing my Father
going to send out Perolla, with somewhat a less civility than I expected, I
made haste to tell him; Since, generous Perolla, I know not whether we shall
ever meet again, I esteem it fit to give you an assurance before such memorable
witnesses, that the gods shall be mine, I will never be any's but yours, that
nothing but death shall dissolve this engagement, and if yours happen before
mine, I will, by the help of my grief, or my resolution, immediately follow
you. Perolla at this profession, turned about (though Blacius was leading him
forth) and told me, And I Madam, do beseech the same god's, if ever I cherish
my life, but for your sake, if ever I decline my passion, or if ever I survive
your loss a minute, after I know it, to make me the object of their fury, and
to throw on me as many miseries, as they have bestowed perfections on the fair
Izadora.

This profession I made him, as well to reward his flame, asto take from
Blacius all the hopes of changing mine, as also to punish Hannibal for giving
my Father a power which he denied him in all things but to torment me; and
truly the Carthaginian was in such a rage at this just and mutual engagement,
that he commanded some of his Guards (which waited at the door) to take Perolla
and keep him as their lives, till his pleasure were known. Then coming to my
Bedside, he told me; I see, Madam, that you trample on the goodness of my
disposition, and that you believe, because I have not, that I dare not revenge
my self on my Rival; but know, if you persevere in that belief, I will convince
you of the contrary, by so bloody an experiment, that you will find I am
capable of as high a proportion of Revenge, as Love; and that by not rewarding
the latter, you will necessitate me to act the former. He had no sooner done
speaking, than without staying for a reply, he left me, and at Oristes
importunate entreaties, he committed Perolla to his charge, with horrid vows,
that he should answer for him with his life; To which condition, the Traitor
condescended; and having received his Charge, he brought him to his House,
lodged him in a Chamber with grated Windows, and placed at the coming in to it,
a strong Guard of Affricans, which Hannibal furnished him with, who, every day
visited me, and as his discourse, so his reception was; sometimes returning
with hopes, for I considered Perolla was in his power; sometimes without any,
lest he might think him his only obstacle, and so remove him. But I omitted to
tell you, that the certainty of my generous Friends being alive, made me court
as much my recovery, as formerly I had my death; and with my health, my little
(and unfortunate) beauty being returned, it increast so much the Carthaginians
fire, that under the pretense of the greatness of it, one evening he became so
indiscreet, that I was not capable any longer to dissemble, but gave him so
just and sharp a reprehension, that in the fury it produced, upon his return to
his own house, he sent for Oristes, and led him into his own Bedchamber, where
having shut the door, he acquainted that Traitor, that he was able no longer to
contain his resentments, and that he could not bear two such powerful Passions,
as Revenge, and Love. The false Oristes, readily laid hold of the motion, and
to satisfy his own revenge on Perolla, (whom he highly apprehended) so
husbanded Hannibal's fury, that he inclined him at last, really to make away
his Rival, concluding, that his respect had been too long his torment, that it
was but just to take away so considerable an Enemy, both to him and to
Carthage, and that if he could not thereby obtain his desires, yet he should
his revenge. This Resolve being assumed, Oristes, as he had procured Perolla's
death, so he offered himself to act it, and propounded for that performance, to
give him a lingering poison, which should be so slow in operation, that the
world should rather believe he dyed by his own melancholy, than by Hannibals
resentments. This the Carthaginian having approved, he and Oristes separated
themselves, the former to make some public dispatches, and the latter with a
design instantly to execute the result of that meeting. But the gods which
detested so dark a sin, prevented it by a way as strange, as was the intended
design it self; for the gallant Maharbal, General of the Carthaginian Horse,
who all the preceding night, had been putting things in a posture for the
Armies march, came to Hannibals house, the self-same evening and time in which
he was visiting me, where learning, that his General was in an employment,
which commonly was of no small continuance, and being somewhat sleepy, flung
himself upon Hannibals Bed, which was not strange, because of that great
familiarity that was always betwixt them, where he slept till the Carthaginians
and Oristes coming in, did wake him, and before that he had time to rise, they
had locked the door, and began this horrid consultation. Maharbal, whose Genius
was only inclined to War, detested the contrary humor in his General, which by
experiment he found, had been already so destructive to the Carthaginian
Commonwealth; This made him listen attentively, in hope to discover some of
those contrivances which Hannibal kept so private, and which by his knowledge
of them, might furnish him with a means to wean him from a passion he so much
undervalued and detested; but at length hearing so black a Resolve, he
determined to prevent what he condemned, but did not think the best way to
effect it, was to discover what he knew, which he believed, would rather make
his General ashamed, than penitent; therefore, as soon as he and Oristes were
gone, he himself retired to his own house, and not knowing how soon that
Traitor would execute his resolution, he immediately called for one of his own
Liveries, which being brought him, and having enjoined the bringer of it an
inviolable secrecy, he went immediately, (as his custom was) to visit Perolla,
being attended by twenty of his Domestics all in one Livery, (as is the
Carthaginian fashion,) where finding Perolla alone, he generously acquainted
him with his danger, and presenting him with his Livery, advised him to put it
on, and at his going out, to shuffle himself amongst his Servants, which none
of the Guards durst examine, or would suspect.

For this transcendent favor Perolla made him as many returns, as his
gratitude could inspire him withal, and the time permit; and indeed he was so
eloquent in his retributions, that not only Maharbal engaged himself to
acquaint me with his escape, but also to make Oristes receive from Hannibal
himself, the punishment of his Treachery and Wickedness, Immediately therefore,
(as soon as Perolla was dressed) Maharbal (whose servants attended him at the
door) went out of Perolla's Chamber, and amongst the rest, was lighted down by
him, who no sooner got out of Oristes house (who all this while was at a
Physicians, preparing his fatal poison) then with the help of the word Maharbal
gave him, he got too out of the Samnite Gate; and his generous deliverer, not
only by a visit next day, assured me of his escape, but also so incensed
Hannibal against Oristes at it, (whose jealousy of his connivance at his
flight, he so increased, by putting him in mind of his pressing importunities,
to have him his prisoner) that in the height of that rage, he gave order to
put Oristes to death, which he knowing was both unavoidable and just, as being
an effect of that contract which had past betwixt Hannibal and him, when
Perolla was committed to his charge, to disburden his Conscience, he sent me
privately in writing, a large relation of all those particulars which I was
ignorant of, and then received the stroke of death in his own Chamber, by his
Command, for whom he had so wickedly employed his life. 'Twas in this sort that
Perolla 'scap'd a treachery, which filled him with so legitimate and high a
resentment against him, which had at least allowed it, that from that time he
contracted an implacable aversion for him, and resolved the first Battle the
Romans fought, to tie himself so particularly to Hannibal, that nothing but his
own death should prevent his Rivals. In order to this determination, he went
directly to Marcellus, from whose active courage, he expected an earlier
opportunity to put his resolution in practice, than from Crispinus (his
Colleague;) I need not tell you the great satisfaction the gallant Marcellus
received at Perolla's arrival, you may in some degree imagine it by his saying,
he esteemed his single courage, and conduct, a greater re-inforcement to his
Army, than the addition of the best Roman Legion, and he was confident,
Hannibal valued it at no less a rate. After these Civilities, the Consul
offered him any preferment in his Army, and conjured him not to decline the
Command of General of his Horse, (which then was vacant by the death of Marcus
Aulius,) but my generous friend, who was more ambitious of revenge than
preferment, and who suspected that Office would confine him to a certain Duty,
and thereby frustrate his design upon Hannibal, absolutely declined Marcellus
offer, by assuring him, that he had better proportioned his ambition to his
desert, and consequently desired no greater honor, than to serve under him as a
Volunteer. The Consul was extremely grieved at this refusal, for he would
gladly have bound to him a person he justly admired; but yet he used Perolla
with the same respect, as if he had taken so considerable an employment; for in
all attempts, and in all counsels, he would do nothing without his advice and
assistance, and if in things of action he was abundantly satisfied with his
Courage, in those of Counsel he was no less with his Judgment. But Hannibal
(whose rage at Perolla's escape is fitter for imagination than description)
hearing that he had retired himself to Marcellus Army, immediately put his into
a posture to attempt the ruin of his public and particular Enemy, but before
he quitted Salapia, he came to visit me, and perceiving my joy in my face, it
inflamed his to such a degree, that for a good while his choler was unlegible
in any thing else; but at length he told me, Madam, I see with what
satisfaction you consider my trouble, and that my misery is the subject of your
contentment, but I hope my patience at it, will instruct yours, or at least
induce you not to condemn in another, what you practice your self; For know, I
am going to sacrifice a person which my Respect and your Tears hindered me
hitherto from performing, and which by his flight you think has escaped for
ever; but you shall find, if my ambition only inspired me with a resolution
that has near subverted the Roman Empire; my Revenge and my Passion will give
me strength enough to destroy a Subject of it, which being performed, I will
enjoy you legitimately, or if your perverseness decline that honor, I will
satisfy my Flame by an easier, though not so pleasing a way; and believe me,
did not your coldness render my Revenge a greater Passion than my Love, I would
suspend the former to satisfy the latter; besides, having taken you first from
Perolla, to kill him, would rather appear an obligation, than a punishment.
These words delivered with an accent as barbarous as themselves were, banished
all my patience, and made me tell him: Thou Monster (greater than thy Country
Africa did ever yet produce) know, that the same gods which preserved Perolla
from thy rage, when thou had the power to act it, will do the like now thou
have only the design: he never feared any thing of thee but thy Treachery, and
if thou make use but of thy own Arm to perform thy revenge, thou will sooner
furnish him with the means to effect his, than create my fear of thine. For my
particular be assured, that I will cast my self into the Arms of death, far
rather than into Hannibals; that I have as great a detestation for being thy
Wife, as thou have for Virtue, and that the same minute in which thou attempst
my chastity, if nothing else will preserve me, I will free my self from life,
to do the like from thee.

You shall see (the Carthaginian replied) that it is easier for Hannibal to act
than to threaten, and at his return he will make you know the greatness of his
Passion, by his resentments for your neglecting it. He left me, (saying these
words) and the same day Salapia, but in it, a select Garrison of Lybians,
rather to keep me than it. Their Commander was one of his trustiest Captains,
who he inviolably protested, should answer for me in torments and death. This
Tyrant was no sooner on his march, than some of my Servants having informed
Blacius I was fallen into such abundant weepings, that unless they were stopped,
they might extinguish my life; his goodness for a while suppressing his
aversion, he came to visit me, and being acquainted with those threatenings the
Carthaginian had made against my chastity* he only told me, that he would
prevent or not see my wrongs. I knew not what interpretation to give that
profession, till not long after, I heard one night a horrid noise in all the
streets, and the next morning saw them paved with the dead Carcasses of
Hannibals Garrison; my Father then coming again to see me, all hideous with
Blood, assured me, that Hannibal now might threaten, but had not the power to
act his impiety, and that he expected, since for my preservation he had
undertaken so great a hazard, that my duty would be resembling his care. I too
well knew those words related to my passion for Perolla, which since the
impossibility of declining, was as great as the injustice; I thought, that as
my silence was the best way of expres^ing my resentments for his affection, so
it was the civilest of assuring him of my legitimate obedience: I know not
whether he imputed it to my respect, or my wilfulness, for he went away without
speaking one word, which might be as pertinently attributed to his
satisfaction, as his a^ger. Four days after, the Senate sent a solemn Embassy
to him, to congratulate his success, and to furnish him with a Garrison to
secure it. Though this soon came to Hannibals knowledge, yet he was
necessitated by the Praetor Cneius Fulvius, besieging the City Herdonea, to
suspend a while his design upon Marcellus and Perolla; but to appease so many
Lybian Ghosts as were lost in Salapia; and perhaps, the loss of Izadora had
some share in that fury, he offered the unfortunate Praetor Battle, whose
courage being greater than his judgment, accepted it, and by that fault, was
rendered incapable of ever committing any other, being killed by Twelve of his
Tribunes, and the most of his Army. That unhappy Plain near Herdon^a, proved an
unfortunate Theater for the Fluvius's, two of them in one year, both Pretors,
and both Generals, received the same fat^ in the same place, by the
Carthaginian; who raised by this accession of Glory, marched directly to
Venusia, where Marcellus and Crispinus were joined, the better to oppose their
common Enemy. But because I have not undertaken Hannibal's but Perolla's Story,
I will pass over all those memorable accidents which happened that active
Summer, by telling you that Hannibal knowing Asdrabal his Brother (as well in
Glory as in Blood) had crossed France, and was coming to him with near 100000
men, as a Torrent to throw down all opposition, declined a Battle, though often
provoked to it by Marcellus, who being not ignorant of the danger of two such
Men and Armies joining, thought himself always too far from his Enemy, if not
fighting with him, resolved to remove his Camp to a Hill covered with Wood,
which lay betwixt his and Hannibals, and not suspecting his Fate, took
Crispinus (his fellow Consul) with him, 200 Hetrurian Horse, for their Guard,
and went to view the commodiousness of the place, where (alas) there lay in
ambush above 1500 Numidian Horse, who invironing those unfortunate Generals,
charged them with so much fury, that all those false or timorous Hetrurians,
fled, and left the two Consuls no hope, but by a glorious death, to justify how
unworthy they were of so private a one, and that Rome without losing a Battle,
might resent as high a grief, as such a loss could inspire. Perolla (as the
gods would have it) had been that night upon a Party, and was not returned when
the Consuls went to perform so fatal a curiosity; but he was no sooner come
into his Tent, than the Alarm of their danger was given by a timorous
Hetrurean, which Perolla understanding, took the first horse he met with, and
ran full speed to the Theater, where this Tragedy was acting, and where the
first object he saw was a Numidian Officer, that coming behind Marcellus, ran
that great Man through with his Lance; but though my generous friend could not
prevent, yet he revenged his Death, and by a furious blow sent that Affrican
into the other world, to see how great his Virtues were, whom he had so
treacherously killed in this.

Perolla having thus sacrificed his Generals Murderer to his Manes, he rescued
first the young Marcellus (his Son) and then perceiving that Crispinus was
pierced with two Darts, and thereby rendered incapable any longer to defend
himself, he abandoned his own Horse, and vaulting up behind the Consuls, upheld
his tottering Body with one Arm, and with the other forced his passage through
a hundred Numidian Swords, and brought him into the Roman Camp, where their
fears had so far clouded their judgments, that they only remembered, but did
not relieve their Consuls danger: Never Rome had at once a resembling
misfortune, and never was that Empire in worse condition to sustain it; and
though Hannibal was more satisfied at Marcellus death, than he could have been
at the cutting in pieces of the Roman Army without it, yet he was so generous
as to be content with the joy, without giving any open demonstration of it: For
he first wept the fall of so eminent a person, then in a military pomp burnt
his Body, and having put the Ashes in a Silver Urn, and on it a Crown of Gold,
he sent it in great state, with a condoling Letter, to the young Marcellus, and
executed some Numidians for offering (by the way) to rob Marcellus Relics of
a Crown, which his noble Life, and valiant Death so justly merited. Spartacus
was extremely satisfied to observe that Izadora's resentments did not silence
her justice, and that though she were an Enemy to Hannibal, yet that she was
not so to his Fame and Virtue. But (she continued) though Crispinus was
mortally wounded, yet his care for the public was as great, as if he had been
to live and enjoy the effects of it. As an evincement of this Truth, he sent
certain Spies into the Affrican Camp, to learn what advantage the Enemy
propounded to himself by his success: these performed their employment so
happily, that they brought the Consul word, that Hannibal having an
unextinguishable desire to be revenged on the Salapians, and having too, by the
possession of Marcellus Seal, which with his body remained in the Victors
power, found an expedient to effect it. He had sent false Letters with the true
Signet to Blacius, in the dead Consuls name, to let him know, that that night
he would come to Salapia, and commanded all the Garrison to be in Arms without
the Samnite Gate, for some exploit he intended to employ them in. Crispinus no
sooner received this intelligence, than he sent for Perolla to communicate it
to him, and knowing those concerns he had for the preservation of this place,
gave him Commission to command the Garrison, till Hannibal had lost the hopes
of taking it. Perolla declined it, because Blacius was Governor, but the Consul
told him, that it was not to entrench on my Fathers authority, but to
strengthen him in it; for he was confident, Hannibals assault would be so
vigorous, that Blacius could not but think so powerful an assistant, a blessing
rather than an affront, and that he was no true friend to Rome, if for a
temporary suspension of his power, he hazarded so important a place. Perolla
finding Crispinus was unalterable, took Horse, and with that speed which Love
and Revenge inspires, came to Salapia, where he soon found the truth of the
Consuls intelligence, and that all the Garrison were drawing out of the Samnite
Gate, which was the opposite one to that which Hannibal intended to enter at,
and though by his authority he might have hindered the Soldiers march, yet he
bore so great a respect to Blacius, that he declined it, and rather elected to
hazard the ruin of Salapia, by not stopping them, than prevent it by
intrenching on the seeming right my Father had, who (he was informed) was at
his own house, where he lighted, and coming in, found him with some of his
intimate friends (and his unfortunate Daughter) discoursing what might be the
subject of Marcellus design. But O gods! what was my astonishment at the sight
of Perolla? truly it was so transcending, that I observed neither Blacius's nor
his, but the latter being a little suppressed, he addressed himself to my Father,
acquainted him with the fatal news, the cause of his coming, and then presented
him his Commission, which whilst Blacius was viewing, Perolla and I were doing
the like to each other, for we durst not express our thoughts, but by our Eyes;
yet that silent language was as significant and legible, as Perolla's
Commission, which Blacius had no sooner read, than he whose it was, told him,
Sir, the Consul shall bear me witness, that I declined this Authority when
'twas offered me, and all Salapia shall do the like, now I have received it;
and if I expect to derive any advantage from it, it is only to show you, that I
esteem it a greater justice to obey than command you; thereupon, without
staying for Blacius's answer, in all our sights he tore his Commission in
pieces. I cannot tell you how great an influence this generosity had on all of
us: But my Father (who a good while balanced betwixt his natural aversion, and
present cause for suppressing it) told Perolla, your generosity is not only
greater than I could expect, but than I could desire from an Enemy, and you had
more obliged me, in using your Authority, than in thus declining it; but though
you esteem it just, that I should command in my own Government, yet since the
Consul does not, I am rather inclined to conform my self to his opinion than
yours.

Alas Sir ( Perolla replied) must I be still so miserable, as to bear a Name
which I have no title to? and which I detest; and will you attribute that to
your place, which I pay to you? No no, Sir, all the World shall be Salapia to
me, and the Senate cannot give you so absolute a power over me, as my
inclination does. You are more civil to me, (said Blacius) than the Consul is,
and I think it is my Fate to be obliged, where I desire it not, and to be
injured where I expect the contrary; but since you are resolved not to Command
in Chief, I will imitate your example; let us therefore divide our selves and
the Garrison, and each of us take his half of Salapia to defend. I had rather (
Perolla replied) be near your Person, that you might see with how little fear
(to preserve your life) I will expose mine own, which I take the gods to
witness, is not dearer to me upon any score, than out of a belief that it may
be serviceable to you. To convince you (said Blacius) that the tearing of your
Commission has not taken away its power, you shall (as an effect of it) choose
where, and how you will fight; but if my honor were not now engaged to defend
this place, the Romans should know, that the same instant in which they thought
me unfit to command Salapia, that I esteemed my self so, to live in it. If the
Romans, (answered Perolla) are so unjust to themselves, and you, as to think
you unworthy to govern, what you so generously have conquered, I shall think
them so of my service, and will embrace your interest with so just a passion,
that if the Senate send any to usurp upon your Valor's Conquest, I will oppose
every Roman, as if he were an Hannibal, and either preserve you in your
Command, or not live to see you out of it. Come (said Blacius, without seeming
to hear this last civility) let us go, and make Hannibal know, that at Salapia
he shall have as little progress in glory, as in love. Blacius had no sooner
said these words, than he went away, and Perolla (who durst not but accompany
him) was necessitated to signify his discontent for not daring to speak to me
by a deep sigh, which was the language too I expressed mine in; but as soon as my
Father was informed, that all the Garrison was without the Samnite Gate, and
that though Perolla had met them, yet he had so dangerously declined making use
of his authority, he turned about to a familiar friend of his, and told him
softly; I fear Pacuvius Son will force me to be an enemy to Virtue, if I prove
any longer so to him. I need not tell you all the preparatives that were made
to receive Hannibal, who about an hour before day, came to the Brutian Gate,
(which was Blacius and Perolla's Post) where the Forlorn-Hope of his Army,
consisting of six hundred Runnagate Romans, (the better to disguise the
business) were admitted int the Gate, and some three hundred Carthaginian Horse
after them, who were all no sooner entered, than the Percullis was let down,
and my Father with Perolla, breaking out of those Houses and Courts, they had
lodged themselves in, gave the Enemy so brisk and unexpected a charge, that
above half of them were cut in pieces, before the residue could put themselves
in a posture to dispute their own lives, or revenge their companions deaths. I
will not amuse my self to tell you the particulars of this action, it is
sufficient you know that Crastinus, who commanded the revolted Romans, knew his
crime was incapable of mercy, and therefore resolved to render his death famous
enough, to excuse the faults of his life: This made him conjure his Companions
so generously to dispute the business, as to make the Salapians never mention
their defeat, but in as many Tears, as if they themselves had died what they
were born. This Traitor acted without his Companions what he desired of them,
by killing with his own hand, five of the most considerable Salapians, and then
by assaulting Blacius, where Fortune seconding Crastinus despair, he had
certainly ended my Fathers life, had not Perolla preserved it by putting a
period to that Traitors; but yet Blacius received so deep a wound, that
fainting, he was carried by Perolla, and his other friends, unto his own house,
where, lest he might think the generous Perolla would take any advantage of
visiting me, (by his weakness) he immediately withdrew himself to the Brutian
Gate, and there found the Combat renewed by a Carthaginian Commander, who
performed exploits, as far above belief, as description: This Enemy Perolla had
the honor singly to fight with, for most of the Garrison were searching those
houses where any of Hannibals Soldiers had taken Sanctuary, and others took
upon them the same employment, that it might be thought the following execution
(and not their fear) hindered their assaulting so valiant an Enemy, who by this
time had so over-haras'd himself, that Perolla who had more inclination to
preserve, than destroy so admirable a valor, took occasion (by hearing a
division of Horse came trampling up the Street) to offer him Quarter; for he
thought his Enemy was too gallant to resign his liberty to a single Sword,
having still his own in his hand to dispute it; neither was he deceived in his
conjecture, for the other was so far from listening to a surrender, or being
terrified at that Troop, which was coming toward him, that he replied;
Whosoever thou art, that to give me a good opinion of thy civility, assurest
me, thou have an ill one of my courage; know, that I shall be more pleased to
receive death, than safety from my Enemies; and have more cause to be joyed,
than troubled at this assistance which is near thee, for I would not have
Maharbal cursed with so low a Fate as to fall by one Enemy, which the arrival of
so many, will I hope, prevent. Oh gods! (said Perolla, extremely surpised) are
you then the generous Maharbal? I am what I told thee (he replied) but lest my
being so ill-accompanied, might induce thee to suspect the contrary, or that by
naming my self thou should think I intend my preservation; I will by a
generous death, hinder thee from justly assuming that thought; but whilst those
I elect for my Executioners are coming, let me know (I be seech thee) who thou
art that giv'st me so advantageous a Title? Alas (Sir) said my generous friend,
my Name is much fitter to be concealed than known; it may wound you more than
my Sword has done, and perhaps I shall be less injurious in declining than
obeying your Commands; but yet, that you may learn 'twas my ignorance made my
offense, and that I persevere not willingly in the former, to continue the
latter; know I am called Perolla, that same Perolla, whom you so generously
revenged on the false Oristes, who would lose his life for you, as he ows it to
you, and who now thinks your preserving him a misfortune, since thereby he has
lift up his profane Arm against his generous Deliverer; but that you may see I
am unfortunate, and not ungrateful, Here, Sir (said Perolla, presenting him his
Sword) this cannot make reparation for what it has acted, but by becoming the
Sword of Justice, and by spilling some criminal Blood, for having shed so much
innocent. Mabarbal was as surpised at this Gallantry, as at the knowledge of
him that performed it; and being a Prince, as great in Virtue as in Title, and
as loath to be vanquished in civility, as fight, having passionately embraced
Perolla, and as absolutely declined his Present, told him, If I had been killed
as well as I am conquered by your Sword, and that you had known who 'twas you
destroyed, your injustice (yet) had been as great as your courage; For my
attempting to surprise a place for Hannibal, where your Izadora is, deserves
that Fate: But if you will credit to profession which my actions seem to
contradict, I do protest before those gods which punish perjury, that when I
could not obtain Hannibals permission to decline this attempt, I put my self at
the head of our first Troops, that if we had been victorious, I might have
conveyed your Mistress from his passion, or revenge, for both now seem so
equally powerful, that it is difficult to know which of them is the most. But it
seems, the gods would have Izadora derive her safety, only from him, from whom
she does her felicity, and I attest those Powers, that I am more pleased with
our defeat, than I could have been at our victory, and if I resent any trouble
at it, it is to be found in a posture, wherein I must be wholly bound to your
goodness, not to be concluded your Enemy as much as I am your Prisoner, which
is a Fate I willingly embrace, for I count it as little a dishonor to be
vanquished by Perolla, as it is a great one, to be so by any other.

I should be ( Perolla hastily replied, because those Horse were so near) as
much an Enemy to my contentment in believing you were so to me, as to Virtue,
did I accept of my Protector for my Prisoner; (No generous Maharbal) I assure
you you are free, and if you will be pleased to take off the Carthaginian, and
put on Roman Colors, till I have disposed of this Troop, you shall find I will
turn my promises into action, and that where I have any power, it shall be
still employed to evidence a gratitude, which cannot be greater than what
creates it. The Salapians were by this so near, that Maharbal wanted time to
answer this civility, and had scarce pulled off his own Scarf, and taken his
friends, before they were come up; Perolla immediately commanded them to follow
him out of the Brutian Gate, to discover whether any of the Enemy were yet
about the Walls, which they were no sooner out of, than he desired Maharbal in
civilities proportionate to the favor, to make use of that occasion to return
to the Carthaginian Army. Maharbal embraced the opportunity and him that gave
it him, to whom he said, I am sorry (generous Perolla) that I must receive an
obligation from you, which I must not publish, but be sure, though I am silent
I am not ungrateful, and that I shall remember what I dare not speak of, nor
hope to requite. That (said Perolla) which is the subject of your sorrow, is of
my contentment, since it lets you see I ambition no other glory in serving you,
than that of doing so. 'Twas in as many expressions of this quality, as the
time would permit, that Maharbal and Perolla took leave of one another, the
first immediately overtook the Carthaginian Army, which he discovered by the
help of the day, that then began to dawn, and the last seemed to have received
satisfaction in what he never doubted, returned into Salapia by the contrary
Port, to that through which he went out of it, and then not staying to dress so
much as some slight hurts, he received in the Combat, and from Maharbal, he
came to visit Blacius, where having given him an exact account of all things
but his own gallantry against his Enemies; and to his friend he desired to
receive his Commands, if he had any to impose on him, for he was determined
immediately to return to the Roman Camp, lest a longer stay might raise in him
a suspicion that he came for some other intent, than the honor of his service.
This fresh evincement of affection, wrought so powerfully on a heart which was
already ballancing, that it entirely dissipated that aversion, which till then
my Father had contracted for him; and to publish a change, which he thought too
just to be concealed, he told Perolla; You have made your Virtue too well
known, to let your professions need a demonstration to prove their truth; No,
generous Perolla, I do acknowledge you have vanquished me, and by such noble
Arms, that I am as well satisfied with my defeat, as you can be with your
victory; whose reward shall be Izadora, as soon as you get Pacuvius consent to
be hers; for whom I have upon your score, banished all my hatred, and whose
friendship I will meet with open Arms: go then and persuade him to confer it on
me, but before your departure, let your Izadora know of that conversion which
her Tears, and your Virtue have produced. Oh gods! who can tell those raptures
this declaration cast Perolla into? you may in some measure guess at their
greatness, when so excellent a wit found silence the best way of expressing
them; but though his Tongue was unimployed, yet he was not, for he flung
himself upon his knees by Blacius bedside, kissed, and washed his hands with
Tears of joy, and by a thousand such extravagancies, was more eloquent and
grateful, than he could possibly have been in words, which I believe you cannot
doubt, when I assure you that thereby he so moved my Father, that he answered
him in weepings of the same quality. I will not tell you those few expressions
Perolla made after his first irregularities were ended, for they were so
dis-joynted, that had not my Father been perfectly acquainted with his
excellent Judgment, he might have believed he had obliged a mad, and not a
grateful man. At last the Physicians pe^ceiving how ill an influence his
concernment and joy might have upon his distempered Body, desired Perolla to
take his leave, which he immediately did, and to whom my Father again repeated
his engaements, and having embraced him, and kissed his Cheek (a high mark of
friendship amongst the Romans) he commanded one of his Servants to conduct him
to my Chamber: when he was come to the door, he sent in, to know whether his
visit might not prove an offense? I must acknowledge I was infinitely surpised
at this Message, and that which contributed most unto it, was, that he which
delivered it, was one of my Fathers exactest observers of my actions: but he
perceiving my astonishment, and not willing any should suppress it but Perolla,
asked me (smiling) if I would permit him to come in. This indeed, made me
suspect his insolency (not his joy) was the cause of it, and that he was
employed by Blacius, to learn, whether during his weakness I would admit of
Perolla's visits, and in this belief I was upon the point of seeming to decline
what I so passionately desired, and of paying one dissimulation with another:
but at last Perolla's Messenger, who fancied the subject of my disorder, told
me, That since I was silent to his proposal, he would take it for my yielding
to it, and immediately brought him in, who soon prostrated himself on his
knees, and did nothing for a time but embrace mine: this brought a great
accession to my first astonishment, which yet was raised higher by his saying,
Madam, I shall hardly any more exclaim against Hannibal, since he has now more
obliged, than ever injured me, for he has furnished me with an occasion to
conquer an Enemy I much more apprehend than himself; yes Madam, Blacius has
been so generous as to consider my desires, as if they had been actions, for
the rewards he has given mine, are too disproportionate a return for any thing
else: I believe, Madam, you cannot doubt after this declaration, but it is you I
intend, a gift as far above my hopes, as merit. Thereupon he acquainted me with
all that my Father had promised him, and then continued;) But, fair Izadora,
may I not fear the knowledge you have of your self, and of Perolla, may induce
you to condemn his injustice, and my ambition, or that you created these hopes
in me, only out of a confidence, that it would never be in your power to
convert them into realities?

No, no (said I, interrupting him) be not injurious to your self, to be the
like unto me, for I nere gave you expectations out of an opinion that they
would never change that name; for believe me, my Fathers consent can only
render legitimate, not increase my flame, which was incapable of addition since
I knew you, and shall be of diminution while you are of inconstancy. Ah Madam
(he replied) why did not the gods, when they destined me this felicity, furnish
me with Virtue to deserve it? but since my defects are but indearings of my
joy, by making me derive my contentment from your inclinations (a nobler cause
than merit can be) I will silence my Complaints, and fix all my endeavors to
enthrone my self in a condition of being incapable of any desires, by being so
of any wants; Yes Madam, I will use such means to Pacuvius, that he shall not
deny his Honor and my Happiness, or if he does, the same minute in which
heprives me of my hope, I will him of his Son: for my condition admits of
nothing but extremes, and I am destined (since you have permitted it to my
ambition) by possessing Izadora to relish no misery, or by death, to feel none.
If (said I) this be your resolve, I shall think your obtaining Blacius consent
a misfortune, since thereby he has put in your Fathers power that hates, to
ruin you: Ah Perolla, you shall not leave me with such cruel and irrational
intentions: Pacuvius by denying your contentment, will declare himself your
Enemy, so that your destroying one which bears that Title, is rather to please,
than to be revenged on him: Will you punish Izadora for your Fathers Crime? and
will you make me miserable, because he makes himself unjust? No Perolla, rather
live, and show him by an undisturbed serenity, thatsince he has divested
himself of the nature of a Father, you have suspended the relations of a Son,
and till he assumes the former, that you can la^ aside the latter; for the gods
expect not we should pay obedience to the name of a Father, where he banishes
the relation and care of one, and from a preserver, becomes a destroyer of his
Son. I conjure you therefore, before our separation, promise me inviolably,
that whatsoever Pacuvius usage be, you dispose not without my consent, of a
life which cannot cease, but by Izadora's bearing it company, to whom you have
a thousand times given it, and from whom you cannot take it, without an equal
injustice to the highest that your Father is capable of; besides, I believe,
that Blacius (who now looks upon your Virtues and Actions, with an
unprejudicate opinion) will give that to them singly, which yet he seems to
desire, might be accompanied with Pacuvius's consent. Madam (said Perolla) if
the apprehensions of his cruelty, made me pretend to any right over a Life
which I have given you, and of which I again confirm the gift, I do acknowledge
it an usurpation, which you rather reward than punish, when you declare it is
yours, and that you have so transcendent a care of it: yes, fair Izadora, I
will obey your Commands with as much willingness as justice, and beg you to
believe, that whilst my life is dear unto you, it shall be so to me, and that I
will never undertake to dispose of it, as long as it bears the glorious Title
of yours. I know (continued Izadora) that had not Perolla's nature been of an
admirable temper, my Fathers former proceedings might have raised some
jealousies in him, that what he would have had taken for an effect of his
Gratitude, was one of his Malice, and that turning him over to Pacuvius's
consent, here moved his hopes to as great a distance as ever, and did it too to
make Perolla contract a higher hatred for his Father, by declining what his
very Enemy seemed to confer upon him; but his generosity was so perfect, that
he has often protested those imaginations were as little on his Heart as his
Tongue. To hasten to a conclusion, that morning, after I had informed Perolla
of all things which had arrived me since our separation, and of those barbarous
threatenings Hannibal made against my Honor (which inflamed him with an
unextinguishable revenge) he left me, and having again kissed my Fathers hands,
he returned to the Roman Camp, in expectation to obtain from the Consul a
Pardon for Pacuvius revolt, and an Order to enjoy his Estate in Salapia and
Capua, which might give his generous Son a safe, opportunity to implore his
consent. For he being then at Tarentum (a Garrison of the Enemies) he durst not
trust himself to Hannibal's and his Fathers resentments, but at his coming to
Crispinus, he found him on the point of yielding up the Ghost, which he did
some few hours after, having first writ to the Senate an ample and just Letter
in his praise, which did no little contribute to the immediate choosing of
Clodius Nero, Consul, who had married Pacuvius's Sister, the other Consul was
Marcus Livius, whom the People had formerly banished, and whose Service they now
implored, (a Fate common to ungrateful States and Princes,) who not learning
Gratitude rom Virtue, must be taught it from Necessity. The first thing which
Nero performed was an unfortunate justice to Porolla's Gallantry, which has
been the source of our second Miseries; for he so truly and so highly extolled
the whole series of his Nephews actions, and particularly that last, of
preserving Salapia, (which came to his knowledge by Fame, and not by the Actor)
that he procured a congratulatory Letter to him from the Senate, which was a
favor he declined for Blacius, though his wounds spoke his fidelity and
courage, which he would not permit his words to do, lest the world might
believe, he esteemed his Eloquence greater than his performances. This action
of the Consuls, whether it proceeded from his embracing the interest of his
Family, above that of the State, or the design he had thereby to break that new
contracted Friendship betwixt Perolla and Blacius, or his ignorance of the
latters generosity in that action, I cannot certainly determine; but this
(alas) I too well know, that my Father received such deep impressions of his
slighting, which his own friends persuaded him was an effect of Perolla's being
more ambitious of Glory, than of his Daughter, and which Pacuvius's on the
other side fomented and concurred in, to break an union, which their hereditary
malice made them detest, that Blacius, who was not so perfectly recovered of
his aversion for Perolla, as to be incapable of a relapse, immediately tore
from his Heart a Friendship, which began but to take root: for his spirit was
too high to preserve a good opinion for one, which both his Friends and his
Enemies acknowledged, was greedier of a little Fame, than of Justice, his
esteem or alliance. O gods! (said Izadora, raising her voice) could you find
out nothing but Perolla's virtue, to be the cause of Perolla's destruction? a
misery so much the greater, by how much since that provoked you, it was
impossible for him ever to do othewise. But Sir (she continued, addressing
still her discourse to Spartacus) Pardon (I beseech you) a digression, which
the sense of our succeeding misfortunes extorted from me, which began by
Blacius, commanding me to banish from my Heart a Flame that was not to be
extinguished, but with my life. That cruel Injunction had like to have effected
both, but I preserved the latter, because it was inseparable from the former,
and though I represented Perolla's innocence, as clear as it was, yet Blacius
passion had so clouded his judgment, that like a false Optic, it represented
all objects to be of the same color of the Glass which was looked through; and
indeed I derived nothing from my attempts, but the raising of his hatred for
me, instead of suppressing his for Perolla; whose trouble I judged by my own,
and therefore was almost as much perplexed to let him know my Fathers change, as
I was at it: at length I determined by my silence, to preserve him as long (as
might be) from the knowledge of his misfortunes, in expectation that some
favorable accident might intervene, which would restore Blacius to his
justice, and so Perolla might avoid knowing he had been unfortunate, till he
were so no longer; but (alas) out of an apprehension of creating his trouble, I
continued it, for by not letting him know my Fathers suspicions, I denied him
the means of suppressing them; and Blacius not ascribing his silence to his
ignorance of his displeasure, but to a contrary cause, so confirmed himself in
his jealousies, that the aversion they produced, has been ever since
unremoveable.

But in this proceeding I could not be more faulty to Perolla, than I was
obliging to Rome, which by his continuing ignorant of what was past, received a
benefit from his Valor, that perhaps it had failed of, had I acquainted him
with his misfortunes; for I believe they would have necessitated him to have
made use of all that courage to struggle with him, which ignoring he employed
against Hannibal; for 'twas he that under Nero drove him from the Salentines,
and Apulians, into the Country of the Brutians; 'twas he which was the chief
Actor in those famous exploits at Grumentum, and Venusia; and 'twas he that
rendered it impossible for Hannibal to march any further than Canusium, to join
with his Brother Asdrubal, who having left the Government of Spain to his
Brother Mago, and Asdrubal the son of Gesco, had already crossed the Perenean
Mountains, all Gaul, and the Alps, and had with a powerful recruit of
Lygurians laid siege to Placentia: The Consuls on this intelligence, drew lots
who should oppose this Torrent, and it fell to Livius, who with near 50000
Horse and Foot, went to meet so redoubted an Enemy. Asdrubal informed of it,
raises his siege, to shorten the Consuls march; who having thereby relieved his
Friends, was very wary how he dealt with his Enemies; and though he left Rome
to take possession of his Command, he told the great Fabius, (who advised him
to protract the War) that he was resolved to fight the very first day, being
impatient till he recoverd his honor by a Victory; or by seeing the ruin of
his unjust Countrymen, satisfy himself with the joy of a great (though not of
an honest) Revenge; yet his intention was better than his words, for at a place
of advantage, called Scaena-Gallica, near the River of Metaurus, he pitched his
Camp, and by winning the Pass, hindered Asdrubal's progress, who by Letters
advertised his Brother of it, that then lay on the Banks of Aufidus, near the
same Plain of Cannes, (in which he had won his highest glory) and that in few
days he would storm the Roman Generals Camp, rather than not join with him;
but these being intercepted by Nero's Scouts, that Consul, by the advice of
Perolla to relieve Livius's danger, took 6000 select Foot, and 1000 Horse, and
having left the charge of his Army (which Camp'd within 10 Furlongs of
Hannibals) to Veturius Philo (his Lieutenant General;) in six days, by tedious
Marches, and with exceeding secrecy, he came to his Colleague, and was received
into his Camp by night, without enlarging it, or any loud demonstrations of
joy; where, in a Council of War, it was resolved next day to give Asdrubal
Battle, which Livius (though provoked unto) had thitherto declined: The next
morning therefore, a purple Coat was hung up over Livius's Pavilion, and
Perolla, the better to delude Asdrubal, desired the General that a Trumpet
might sound in Nero's quarters, as well as in Portius the Pretors, to make the
Enemy believe, that either Hannibal was defeated by the Consuls being joined,
or that it was done in policy to supply the defects of their numbers; the first
(if credited) would invite them immediately to a Battle, which (next to a
Victory) was most in their desires. This was much approved, and readily
practiced, and Asdrubal, who was perfectly acquainted with the Roman
Discipline, was extremely surprised at it; but yet attributing it to the
latter, and perceiving (by the Signal) the Consuls resolution, he joyfully drew
his Army in Battalia, but then perceiving Livius's numbers to be increast, and
that some of his Enemies Horses looked as if they had performed a long march,
(this being an accident above his expectation) he esteemed it rather a policy,
than a dishonor, to defer an Engagement, till he could discover the truth of
that mystery; and in order to this, spent that day in slight skirmishes, and by
night retreated with all his Army toward the River of Metaurus, from which the
succeeding Battle took its name: but he was followed by Nero and Perolla with
all the Roman Cavalry, and so vigorously pressed, that he resolved next morning
to decide the difference by a pitched Battle, lest if he gained any advantage
by retiring, it might be said a Victory was forced upon, and not obtained by
him; and if he were defeated, that at least he dyed like Amilcar's Son, and
Hannibal's Brother. The day no sooner dawned (which was the last that so many
thousands were to see) than those two great Bodies, which consisted of about
150000 effective men, were drawn up in a posture to determine all disputes: The
Carthaginian having the advantage of number, and the Roman of resolution, which
was sufficiently ^vinc'd by their Enemies attending the Battle by necessity,
and not election. Asdrubal placed his Gauls (in whom he least relied) in the
Left Wing, upon a Hill of impossible access; in the Right, were his Spaniards,
and Africans, and himself at the Head of them; his Lygurians formed the Battle,
and his Elephants he bestowed in the Front of his several Divisions. The Right
Wing of the Roman Army was led by Nero, (who was accompanied by Perolla, that
commanded those Thousand Horse his Uncle had brought with him) the Left by
Livius, and the Battle by Porticus. You cannot doubt the dispute was bloody, if
either you reflect upon the courage of the Soldiers, the resolution and conduct
of the Commanders, or the glory and advantages which were to attend the
Conquerors.

Livius found a generous resistance from the Africans and Spaniards; Porticus
from the Lygurians; but Nero and Perolla found more difficulty to come to
fight, than I believe they would after it, have found in obtaining a Victory;
but whilst they were disputing against a Precipice, the scaling of which was
not much less difficult, than to scale the Clouds, the last of them perceiving
what disorder Livius and Porticus were in, besought Nero to leave those Gauls
to a security which Nature, and not their Courages had placed them in; and who
by the strange height they were upon, were as incapable of doing, as receiving
harm, and that he would go to relieve the Consul and the Praetor. Nero soon
found the justness of this motion, and imagining by the Precipice the Gauls
were upon, that Asdrubal had placed them there, rather to amuse, than oppose
him, yielded to his Nephews request, and leaving some 3000 Foot and Horse to
keep the Gauls at gaze, followed him with all the rest; but Perolla, with
admirable celerity, having fetched a compass behind all the Roman Army, fell
upon the Right Flank of the Carthaginian so opportunely, that 'twas when Livius
was brought to the last exigency, and so vigorously, that by it he courted
Victory so handsomely, that though she were declaring for Carthage, yet he won
her absolutely for Rome. The execution after the rout was excessive bloody, the
Romans remembering how freely the Africans had opened their veins, were not
ungrateful in their return. The Gauls too, found they had been more securely
fortified by nature, than by 80000 of their companions; and though the Roman
Swords were almost dulled with blood before they came to them, yet they 'scapt
not absolutely that days Fate; but that which brought a large accession to the
honor of this success, was the noble Asdrubal's fall, who perceiving his glory
fled, resolved his life should accompany it, and seeking some gallant Enemy to
end his, he found none which gave greater marks of that title than Perolla;
'twas therefore upon his Sword he resolved to receive it, and 'twas upon his
Sword indeed that he found it. I know (continued Izadora) that some allege he
had his death from many an Enemy, and not from a single one, but I know withal
that that report had its rise from Perolla's modesty, who learning afterward,
how great a virtue he had killed, rather deplored, than gloried in the Action.
This Battle of Metaurus equaled that of Cannes, for in it were left 56000 upon
the place, 5400 taken Prisoners, and 4000 Captive Romans released. But if in a
Relation which my Sex renders me ignorant in, I have failed in the former, I
have not in the truth, for my concern in Perolla made me exactly learn it;
neither would I have so particularly informed you of it, had it not so great a
connection to my generous Friends Story, that in declining it, I must have
injured his Adventures, as much as his Glory.

The day after this famous Battle, Nero and Perolla marched toward their Camp,
observing the same silence and diligence in their return to it, that they had
in their leaving of it, for they served Hannibal, as we were informed you did
Varinus; and though he were a Captain as celebrated for his Policy, as his
Conquests, yet in this expedition he never discovered any light of Nero's march
nor success, till he sent two Numidian Prisoners to acquaint him with it; and
lest that Testimony might not be authentic, he flung his Brothers (the gallant
Asdrubals) head over his Trenches: which Barbarism Perolla so much resented,
that not being able to hinder it, he abandoned his Uncle, to manifest he
detested the Action; and indeed it was the blacker, because Hannibal had
always given the bodies of his dead Enemies a Sepulture, and usage
proportionate to their qualities and virtue whilst they were alive. Yes (Sir)
Perolla was so justly transported at this inhumanity, that though the Consuls
in their Triumph for this Victory, besought him (who they acknowledged, under
the Gods, obtained it) to bear a share in his own Acquisitions; yet he
absolutely declined it, protesting that he was more ashamed at the use they had
made of their Victory, than pleased at the glory of it; and that he declined
participating in their Triumph, lest it might be thought he did the like in
their Crime. After this generosity he came to Salapia, where he vowed, had not
the Consuls cruelty (for Livius approved of what Nero had done to Asdrubal's
Head) rendered it an injustice to have shared in their glorious entry into
Rome; yet he had rather have declined the honor of it, than purchased it at
the price of a longer absence. I must confess, I never, till that time, thought
it was possible for Perolla's visits to become my misfortune, but my hard Fate
then rendered his so; and I believe my disclosing to him that which I could no
longer conceal, was the more sensible by his being unprepared to receive the
stroke, and by his belief that his new accession of glory, would have rendered
his company the more acceptable to Blacius. Alas! I cannot tell you his
extravagancies at so fatal and unexpected an intelligence, but I remember they
were so exorbitant, that I suspended awhile the reflection on my own griefs,
that I might the more justly deplore his. Blacius, being ignorant of his being
with me, came to visit me, when my generous Friends resentments were in their
highest operation; and though my Father, upon so unlookt for an Accident, would
have retired, yet Perolla hindered him, by casting himself on his knees, and
embracing of Blacius's. His sorrows for awhile were silent, which was no small
proof of their vastness and reality; but when they got a passage, they were so
eloquent, that had he been guilty, he had done enough to obtain his pardon; and
being innocent, he did enough to evince he was so. Yet (alas!) my Father had so
exquisitely fortified his heart against all assaults of this quality, that what
should have vanquished him, turned to a testimony of his cruelty.

In brief, Perolla observing that Blacius relisht no reasons for his innocence,
resolved to convince him of it by a demonstration, and in the rage and grief of
so unexpected a misery, he rose up, and with eyes (in which death were
evidently painted) he cried out, Farewell fair Izadora, I will go expect you in
another world, for I see it is impossible to possess you in this; and since
there is nothing but the loss of this unfortunate life, which can either
appease your Fathers hatred, or clear my innocence, I am determined at that
rate to satisfy both. At the end of these fatal words, he drew out his Sword,
and turning the Pomel to the ground, he had cast his Body upon the point of it,
had not I struck the Hilt away time enough to prevent it; and he not suspecting
anything of that nature, by falling all along, gave me time to take up his
Sword before he rose, and to protest that if he abjured not all designs of so
black a nature, I would immediately make use of that Weapon for my own
destruction, which he had designed for his. It Was thus I preserved a Virtue so
pure, that if the higher Powe^s do not reward it in this world, it is certainly
because they reserve their recompense for a place where all things are of a
resembling quality; and because I so saved Perolla's life, Blacius considered
that which was an evincement of his integrity, as a premeditated design to
palliate and disguise his guilt; and though his words did not declare what I
tell you, yet his actions did, for he instantly commanded my generous Friend to
abandon his house, or he would act what I had prevented. Perolla, at this cruel
and barbarous command, cried out, O Gods! why do you render sufferings so
necessary to my condition, and make me incapable to bear them? (then turning to
me, he continued) But, Madam, if you are not of your Fathers opinion, as well
as of his blood, I shall contemn as much his threatenings, as he does my
affection and alliance; and shall find in the virtue of one of the Family,
charms enough to defend me from he cruelties of all the rest.

Alas! (I replied, interrupting him) ar^ we come to that again, of making fresh
assurances of constancy? And will you so highly injure the merit of my passion,
as to render it as much an effect of my promise, as my inclination? Ah Perolla,
be not so cruel, as to think my Fathers change is contagious, nor divest me of
the consolation I have had in my past sufferings, that they were undergone with
resolution and patience enough, to suppress all jealousies in you, that I was
capable of sinking in the future under any burden of that nature. O Madam, (he
replied) why do you so infinitely injure my intentions? for my asking that
question, was not to resolve my doubts, but to hear my joy repeated; neither
can you condemn my imploring so strong a Preservative, when you see what
misfortunes I am to struggle with. Blacius, who perceived what our
entertainment was, having repeated his threatenings to Perolla, commanded me
immediately to leave him; which, before I obeyed, I told Perolla, since your
question proceeds from that cause, I shall as willingly satisfy it, as I
should have been troubled to have done so on any other account; Know then, that
if my Passion for you be a Preservative against your miseries, you shall be for
ever incapable of any; for your desires can give you so large a possession in
my heart, as my affection does; and this justice is so far from being
susceptible of change, that the Gods, while they give me life and reason, are
not able to alter it. My Father, at this assurance, thrust me out of the Room,
but he to whom it was addressed, observing he could not have time enough to make
me in words a retribution of my engagement, by lifting up his eyes and hands to
those Powers I had mentioned, sufficiently confirmed me that his resolutions
and flame were resembling unto mine. But (alas!) my love for Perolla, had not
that power he ascribed unto it; for though I had given him pregnant testimonies
of the greatness and reality of it, yet Blacius's cruelty had so fatal an
influence on him, which cast him into so dangerous and long a sickness, that
for above half a year he was unable to leave his Chamber. I must acknowledge,
during that time, I was obliged to my Fathers rigor; for 'twas by the
strictness of his watches, that I was preserved from knowing so sensible a
misfortune. But at last he recovered, and with his health assumed a resolution,
that he would act such gallant things, as all the Roman Empire should make his
particular satisfaction, or death, a public concernment, but his design was a
while suspended; for after the Battle of Metaurus, the Plague so violently
raged both in the Roman and Carthaginian Armies, that we hardly knew who
commanded the former; and the General of the latter spent that whole Summer
near the Temple of Juno Lucinia, in erecting a magnificent Altar, with a large
Title of all his Actions in Punick and Greek Characters. But the same year was
not unactive in Spain, where Publius Cornelius Scipio (who justly acquired by
his glorious Victories in Africa, the Surname of African) beat Asdrubal, the
son of Gesgo, out of the Continent, into the Isle of Gades, where he pillaged
all things as well sacred as profane, and then retired to Carthage.

The Conqueror, after having delivered up his Province to those the Romans had
appointed his Successors, returned to Rome, where he made suit for the honor
of Triumph; this was denied him, having never been granted to a Proconsul,
except to such as had received that dignity after a Consulship, as it were by
prorogation, which (continued Izadora) in my opinion, was some injustice, and
evinced, the Reward was not to the Merit, but the Title. But to repair this
Repulse, Scipio and Publius Crassus were chosen Consuls; the last being High
Priest of the Romans, was confined, by the quality of his office, to a near
residence to Rome; but the first begged the Senate to permit him to carry the
War to the Gates of Carthage, which was the most probable expedient to draw
Hannibal out of Italy. This motion had more reason in it, than success; for
some that were envious, and others that were fearful, opposed it: yet at last
he obtained Sicily for his Province, with liberty (if he thought fit) to
transport the War into Asrick. Perolla, a Friend to the fame and virtue of this
great Man, put himself under his Ensigns, and partly by stratagem, but more
largely by his Valor, took the inexpugnable Town of Locry, with the two famous
Cittadels, as it were in Hannibal's sight. Scipio highly extolled his Courage
and Conduct in this performance, and pressingly invited him to his African
journey, which to the wonder of all the Empire he was admirably provided for,
though he had received neither encouragement by words nor actions from the
Senate. Perolla (whose Love and Revenge confined him to Italy) declined
Scipio's request, but with inviolable protestations, that if his success drew
Hannibal (on whose ruin he was unchangeably bent) into Africa, he would not
fail there to offer the Consul his Sword and Life. Scipio with this assurance
set Sail for Africa, and Perolla returned to Rome, where in open Senate he
received ample expressions of their Gratitude for the Blood he had lost, and
the Victories he had won for their Empire; neither was he long out of a
probability of obliging them at a resembling rate: For Mago, a true son of
Amilcars, having received orders from Carthage, to abandon the Isle of Gades,
and money to raise an Army of Gauls and Ligurians, to help his Brother in
Italy, first whipped and crucified the Gadentine Magistrates, for holding a
secret Correspondency with the Romans; and then taking an eternal leave of
Spain, by his industry and wealth raised so vast an Army of those two Nations,
that the Senate began to tremble, and some to move that Scipio might be
recalled, which in such an exigency had been performed, if his Successes in
Africa had not been more prevalent for him, than his Friends in Rome. But
though his Actions were of a peculiar quality and merit, yet having already so
much usurpt upon your patience, and having only undertaken our own Story, I
will pass by Scipio's. Madam, (said my Prince, interrupting her) if I durst in
any thing have the confidence to instruct my desires at so uncivil a rate as
the lengthening of your trouble, it should be in his Story; for though the Fame
of that great man has in generals diffused itself over the whole world, yet I
must confess, I have only heard of his glory, but not of those particular
Trophies which composed and formed it. Sir (replied Izadora) since you seem to
decline the being informed of his generous Adventures, only out of a belief
that the telling them may prove my trouble, I would by experiment convince you,
nothing can bear that name, or have that operation with me, which proves a
satisfaction to the gallant Spariacus; but that I believe the Relation will be
more exact by Perolla's making it, than by mine, whose willingness to obey you,
I dare answer for by my own, since the sympathy betwixt us has been so great
and constant, that I always knew his heart by mine. My Prince (continued
Symander) by his silence, seemed to impose that task on the generous Lover, who
observing it, and having by a handsome expression acknowledged the advantageous
character Izadora had given Spartacus of his heart, by comparing it to hers,
and protested that he undertook the Story to ease her, and not to improve it:
In these terms continued Scipio's Adventures, and ended his own.

PARTHENISSA, A ROMANCE.

THE SECOND PART.

PARTHENISSA.
THE SECOND PART.
BOOK I.
PVblius Cornelius Scipio, after his subduing of Spain, went with two
Quinquereme Galleys privately into Africa, to Syphax that great Numidian King,
who being a Neighbor to his new, and to his intended Conquests, he Courted to
declare for the Romans, whose Victories were so recent, that though at the same
instant Asdrubal was sent from Carthage to solicit his friendship for their
Empire, yet he at last declared for the Roman, and protested to their General,
that upon his arrival there, he would join Interest and Armies with him. Scipio
on this assurance being chosen Consul, hastens into Africa; but as he was in
Sicily, ready for his intended Expedition, he receives Ambassadors from Syphax,
which informed him, though not in positive terms, yet obliquely of his change.
The Consul not only kept this disaster secret, lest if it had been divulged,
the Senate, and his Soldiers fears, might have put a period to his Voyage
before it began, but gave out that Syphax had sent purposely to accelerate his
Landing, and to acquaint him, if he protracted the time, he was so intent upon
the War, that he would upon his own score begin it. With this joyful
Declaration, the Roman Army set Sail from Lilibeum: But while they are crossing
the Mediterranean Sea, it will not be amiss to tell you the cause of this
barbarous Kings inconstancy. The same Asdrubal, to whom lately he had refused
his friendship, had a Daughter of such excellent beauty, that Syphax (who was
not unapt to receive the flames of Love) so abundantly admitted those which the
fair Sophonisba's eyes inspired, that it made him not only abandon his Faith,
but his Interest too; and to purchase her (for she was bought) he offered to
decline the Romans, and declare himself Carthaginian. This motion on so
emergent a necessity was greedily embraced, and Sophonisba delivered up a
Sacrifice for the public advantage. For it is certain, the Numidian King had
nothing considerable but his Crown; and she by that fatal Marriage declined
Massanissa, to whom she was contracted; a Prince of so much virtue, and so
perfectly bles^ with the gifts of Nature, that I may truly say Sophonisba's
preferment was her ruin. This Massanissa, was the Son of Gala, (Surnamed the
Good) King of the Massesily; and though he were very young, yet by his great
courage and wisdom he recovered his Fathers Kingdom, (involved in a dangerous
and intricate Rebellion) and by ways which made all the world acknowledge him
as worthy of it, as by his Title. His next care was to secure his Right, (both
by Succession and Conquest:) To effect which, and for the satisfying his
inclination, he made his Addresses to the fair Sophonisba, whose Father (
Asdrubal) had so large an interest in Carthage, that whosoever obtained his
Alliance, might be said thereby to be Allied to that Empire. The Title of a
Queen, and the Felicity of such a Husband, so pleased the Father and the
Daughter, that the Marriage was as soon agreed upon as motion'd; and the more
to endear it to the Carthaginians, it was resolved that a Contract should be
perfected, but before the consummation of the Nuptials, Massanissa should go in
person with an Army into Spain, under his designed Father-in-law, which the
young Prince (more troubled to abandon his Mistress, than his Kingdom)
performed, and in that Expedition acted things of so transcendent virtue, that
Carthage judged his Merit, without his Title, worthy the admirable Sophonisba;
but Asdrubal having undertaken that fatal Expedition, (being himself no
excellent Captain) met with disasters and oppositions, which would have
rendered his being otherwise of no great advantage; for he began to move
presently after the famous Battle of Metaurus, in which I may say Spain was
conquered in Italy, for there all the Spanish Hostages were taken, that
Asdrubal the Son of Amilcar had brought with him out of that Country, and by
which he kept that Wa^like Nation in more awe, than by his Garrisons or Army.
This success, made the Spaniards consider the Romans as the Rising Sun, and
consequently adore the, so that his Levying an Army, proved more advantageous
to his Enemies, than his Friends; for every day they abandoned his Ensigns in
whole Troops, and put themselves under Scipio's, who was a General, that in
Courage, Patience, and Conduct, was hardly to be equaled. In a word, in one
Summer Asdrubal lost all Spain, and Massanissa (perhaps glad of any subject
which might return him to Sophonisba) joyfully abandoned a great Kingdom to his
Enemies, as hoping in her embraces to lose all thoughts of misfortune; but he
too soon found his error, for in his absence Syphax (as I told you) had seen
Sophonisba, and so passionately admired her, that upon his promise to the
Carthaginians not only of relinquishing Scipio, (who was preparing to invade
their Country) but to bring them an Army of 100000 Men; they made of a
particular Alliance, a public Concernment, and in spite of Asdrubal and
Massanissa, (who was as much his Rivals Superior in Virtue, as he was his in
Power) gave that barbarous King the fair Sophonisba; and Syphax no sooner was
in possession of his felicity, than proportioning Massanissa's resentments by
the greatness of his loss, resolved to take from him the power of acting them.
This particular Malice he made pass at Carthage for an Act of public Security,
it being a folly (as great as the injustice) to trust an offended Enemy with a
Kingdom; therefore the Senate not only approved of their new Allies design, but
furnished him with additional Forces, to expel the unfortunate Massanissa out
of his Country, which Syphax soon effected, his Rivals virtue yielding to his
numbers: But though Massanissa lost his Crown, yet did he not either his
Courage or Judgment; the first was too great to sit down with such an affront
to his Passion, and his Right; and the latter lead him to offer his service to
Scipio, who having found how considerable an Enemy he had been, doubted not but
he would prove a resembling Friend: wherein he was not deceived; for the Consul
having acquainted him from Lilibeum, (where he shipped his Army) that he would
Land at the Promontory of Apollo, he found Massanissa there with a gallant Body
of Horse ready to join with him. Their first Action was to cut off 500 Horse,
sent out of Carthage, to interrupt the Romans descent, which Massanissa
performed as an earnest of his future Services. The next was against Hanno, a
young Carthaginian Gentleman, of as little experience as years, who with 4000
select Horse, lay at a Town of importance, called Salera. This hasty Commander
Massanissa (by braving him at his very Gates) tolled out into an Ambush, then
cut him (with his small Army) in pieces, and in the heat of the pursuit,
entered the Town, with some few Run-aways, which presently he became Master of.
This shows that Scipio gained by the loss of Syphax, for by his defection, he
sent him a friend, whose gallantry was more considerable than the others
Forces. From Salera they marched to besiege Vtica, a place considerable for its
strength and situation, but much more for the virtue of the Defenders, which
indeed was such, that though it were the first Town attempted, yet it was the
last taken; and the Consul would have given his hopes of winning it, to avoid
the disgrace he apprehended of having sat down before it; but Syphax and
Asdrubal (whom the Carthaginians had made their General) by approaching with
two Armies, which consisted of near 80000 Foot, and 13000 Horse, gave him an
honorable pretense of abandoning Vtica, which he readily embraced, but the
Winter was so far advanced, that the three Generals did nothing in it, but
fortify their several Camps, which were not seven miles assunder; that of the
Romans being excellently provided for, by the providence and liberality of
Massanissa, who Reigned in his Subjects, though not over them: but the Spring
being come, Scipio, who believed the natural inconstancy of the Affricans, the
tediousness of a winter Camp, the hazard of a War, whose Prologue had been
unsuccessful, and perhaps the society of a Wife, might be plentiful motives to
induce Syphax to decline Carthage, by sitting a Neuter, sent Ambassadors to him
for that effect, with hope, that if they succeeded not, yet at least the Treaty
would draw him into a jealousy with his new friends. The Numidian King
received the Ambassadors with a magnificence that evinced they were not
unwelcome, and sent them back to Scipio with this motion: That if the Romans
would return out of Afric, the Carthaginians should do the like out of
Europe. But the Consul received a more pleasing and advantageous intelligence
than this, though brought by the same persons, which was, that both the
Carthaginian and Numidian Camp were so ill intrencht, and their Hutts covered
with such combustible stuff, that it were a thing of as much ease, as glory, to
end the War in one night; in brief, Scipio held on the Treaty till such time as
he had perfectly instructed himself in the truth of this information, and the
facility of performing it, both which being convinced of, one morning he
commanded his Ambassadors to return, and sent Syphax and Asdrubal word, that
'twas in vain any longer to continue the Treaty, since he found all his Army
unanimously bent to make them yield to their Mercy, or their Swords; This
message blasted the two Generals like Lightning, for they had so fed themselves
with the assurance of Peace, that the loss of that hope appeared as great a
misfortune to them, as if they had lost a certainty; but at last making Virtue
of Necessity, they consol'd one another with mutual assurances, that as Scipio
followed the steps of Marcus Atilius, so he would his Fate; but the same night,
the Romans, who built their confidence upon a firmer foundation than Hope and
Prophecies divided their Army, one half Massanissa and Lelius, the General of
their Horse commanded; these were sent against Syphax's Camp, to whom
Massanissa was an Enemy by the two most enflaming provocations, of a successful
Rival, both in Love and Empire; the other, Scipio himself led; The first had
orders to assault the Numidians, who lay a Mile behind the Carthaginians, lest
if Asdrubal's Camp were first on fire, it might be thought a design, and not a
mischance. Massanissa and Lelius marched two hours before the Consul, and
before day, so exactly executed their instructions, that all Syphax's Camp was
in a general Flame in the sight of Asdrubal's, who attributing it to some
disaster (for they could not fancy the Romans would attempt the remotest, and
so engage themselves between two Armies) ran without Arms or Order, to the
relief of their friends; but their Charity was their ruin, for the Roman Horse
of Scipio's Division, cut off all those which ran out of the Camp, and the
Legions assaulting those in it, soon kindled as great fire there, as that they
were deploring, and going to extinguish. The confusion, horror, and execution
was transcendent, and though in both places the flame diffused it self above
four miles, yet it is thought there was blood enough spilt to have quenched it;
for there we killed and destroyed (what by the Flame, what by the Sword) above
80000, and about 8000 were taken prisoners; 2000 Foot, and 500 Horse were all
the serviceable Forces that escaped, in which number were the two unfortunate
Generals, Never did Afric receive a resembling misfortune, neither did all
their Hannibal's Victories inspire them with a joy proportionate to the
vastness of their grief, and astonishment for this loss. But in this high
Misery, the Barcinian Faction showed a spirit unworthy of it, and not only
absolutely opposed the sending for Hannibal out of Italy; (which they said
would be a greater victory to the Romans, than that they had so lately won) but
undertook in few days (if one of their Family might be General) to raise an
Army, that at least should not be killed like Sacrifices (without resistance)
that perhaps, might make the Romans acknowledge a succession of victories, was
as well the way to Carthage as to Rome, and that none must present themselves
before her Walls, but they must be laden with Laurels as much as Arms. This
motion joy'd, and confounded the Senate; but the result of their dispute was,
that not to discontent the Barcinian faction, lest they might lose Hannibal,
they resolved not to recall him; and not to discontent Asdrubal lest they might
lose Syphax, they gave Asdrubal again the Command of the Affrican War, sent
Sophonisba as Embassadress from her Country, to her Husband, to implore him
not to abandon them, when their condition rendered his friendship an action of
Charity, as well as ^nterest; and besought the Barcinian Princes, by joining
their power and affections with Asdrubal, to manifest, that they loved the
Commonwealth more than they hated their Enemy. In brief, Syphax vanquished with
the abundant Prayers and Tears of the fair Sophonisba, and the Barcinians moved
with the entreaties and danger of Carthage, so well improved the time, that in
30 days, they raised 30000 Men for Asdrubal, who resolving to repair or repeat
his disgrace, marched directly toward Vtica, which Scipio, (more intent to
vindicate his Honor, than increase his Conquest) had again besieged, which the
second time he was necessitated to leave, and in a bloody Battle, overcame
Syphax and his Father-in-law, as absolutely by Courage, as he had formerly by
Policy; the last flying to Carthage, and the other (followed soon after by his
Queen) into his own Kingdom. The Consul to husband this victory better than the
former, resolved himself to attempt Carthage, (the Rome of Afric sent a
select number to continue the Siege of Vtica, and enjoined Massanissa, with all
his Numidians, and some of the Romans under Lelius, to prosecute Syphax. Scipio
with his Division, took many Towns by his Name, and by his Arms, and at last
presented himself before that stately City, which had so long been a dangerous
Rival unto his: Tunis, a great Town in the prospect of Carthage, he took by
Assault; but as he was going to try his fortune upon her Neighbor and Mistress,
he was forced to alter his design, by the Carthaginians sending out their Fleet
to destroy his, that lay illmann'd before Vtica. By hasty marches therefore he
came thither, and so well animated his Soldiers, and secured his Galleys, that
his Enemies only returned to Carthage with six of his Ships, where their
Triumph was much greater than their Victory. In the mean while Massanissa,
carried by the wings of Love, Empire, and Revenge, came with his Army into
Numidia, where the Masesilii, who had never been but his Subjects, now
publicly declared themselves so, and joining their Arms to their Prince's,
marched resolutely against Syphax, who with 50000 Foot, and 10000 Horse, was
coming to dispute his Queen and his Kingdom: Massanissa and Lelius joyfully
accepted the Battle, especially the first, who thought the ways to Empire, and
fruition, were but the same. Syphax taught his Men to fight in the Roman order,
but not being able to give them Roman Hearts, he lost his Army and his Liberty,
to those that practiced the former, and possessed the latter. Massanissa justly
pleased with this purchase, and being one who knew as well how to prosecute, as
win a Victory, desired Lelius to follow to Cirta, the Metropolis of Numidia,
whether he went before with all the Horse, and his great Prisoner: The Citizens
upon the Conqueror's approach (who perhaps, hated the King, as much as an
unsuccessful Cause) opened their Gates, where the first object that saluted his
Eyes, was the fair Sophonisba, not as a Tryumphant Mistress, but an imploring
Prisoner: Massanissa, who considered her, and not her condition, alighting from
his Horse, and imitating her posture, desired her to believe, her Empire was as
great where he commanded, as where Syphax did, and begged her, if she doubted
so perfect a Truth, to evince it by some Commands. She told him, that her
inconstancy made her as little merit as desire obligations from him, that had
she not thought it a crime to have destroyed her self, by any thing, but by the
sentence of his offended Love, she had, by becoming her own Executioner,
punished her inconstancy and misfortune (the former being the latter) and not
lived to be so public a spectacle of Fortune's mutability; that since he was
pleased to pardon a sin that was its own punishment, she besought him, till her
repentance for her fault, had created in him desires of affection, or the
greatness of it, desires of Revenge, that he would preserve her from the Romans
power. Her Youth and admirable Beauty, made so deep an impression in
Massanissa's heart; that not only he granted her request, but pardoned her past
inconstancy, and to take from the Romans all hopes of such a Prisoner, he
seemingly, or really at that instant married her.

But Lelius upon his arrival, was in so great a fury, that he had like to have
been the destruction of the Nuptials, by being the destroyer of the Bride; but
Massanissa knew so well how to humble himself before that proud Roman, and to
represent, that she had always been his Wife, though married to Syphax; that he
was content to suspend all things, till they returned to the Consul, which
(after the settling that great Kingdom) they soon did; There was no common joy
in the Roman Camp at the arrival of so great a friend a Conqueror, and so great
an Enemy a Prisoner; the first having by Scipio received in public a just and
ample commendation, and acknowledgement for his transcendent obligations on
this Empire; the last was strictly examined, what had induced him to embrace
the Carthaginian Quarrel, having so professedly engaged himself in the Roman;
to which he resolutely answered, 'twas the charms of his Wife, which truth he
was confident e're long, a resembling operation on Massanissa, would abundantly
confirm. Whether Syphax spoke this really, or in revenge, I cannot tell, but
his assertion had so powerful an influence on the Consul: that taking
Massanissa aside, he told him ingenuously, the Romans had an undeniable Title
to Sophonisba's Life, whom he considered as the efficient cause of these Wars,
and therefore conjured him, not to ruin the reward of so great services, by
committing as great a Crime, which his detention of his new Wife, did, and
would appear, in his, and the Senates judgment. Massanissa blushed and wept,
but finally begged some time to work on his inclination, to submit unto his
duty; this civil request had the desired return, and Massanissa being retired
into his Tent, spent an hour in an Agony, whose torments nothing but an
unfortunate Lover is capable to imagine: but at length, after a serious
reflection, that by denying her, he should deliver both himself and Sophonisba,
into the Roman hands, and perhaps believing, if she had a real passion for him,
that her own Fate would be the less bitter, by his not being involved in it,
and if she had not, the loss was the more tolerable; he determined to preserve
her in his memory, that he could not in his embraces, and sending for an
exquisite poison, he commanded one of his Domestics to present it from him to
Sophonisba, as the only way he had left to keep his word, and her from the
Romans. The fair Queen undauntedly taking the fatal Cup, bid the Messenger to
tell his Lord, that to manifest, nothing which came from him was unwelcome, she
would receive from him the present of her Fate; which having drank, she further
enjoined him to beg Massanissa, that if the actions of her life, had impaired
her in his first affection; that the resoluteness of her death, might restore
it to its former luster, and that she might live in, though not with him: then
casting her self upon her Bed, an eternal darkness soon closed up the fairest
Lights which ever shined in Afric, to which barbarous Country I had not
confined my similitude, had the fair Sophonisba been as constant in her Love,
as in her Death. This Tragedy, and the sad influence it had on Massanissa, no
sooner reached the Consuls knowledge, than he sent for him, and having drawn all
his Army in Battalia, in their sight, to repair the having taken from him
Syphax's Wife, he gave him Syphax's Kingdom, saluted him by the name of King,
presented him with a Crown of Gold, and by large Elogies on his noble actions,
dried up his Tears. This truly was the best Cordial, and those clouds of grief,
by so admirable a Sunshine of prosperity, were soon dissipated, and he with
the Romans marched to the Siege of Carthage, from whence, they having heard of
Syphax's defeat, instead of sending armed Troops to meet them, they sent out
old Hanno with the Princes of his Faction, who prostrating themselves on the
ground, not only kissed Scipio's feet, but the feet of those that sat in Counsel
with him, to whom they acknowledged they had unjustly broken the Peace betwixt
Rome and Carthage, which they besought might continue as a monument of their
mercy, and in a resembling series of baseness, begged Peace on terms, though as
low as those Spirits that implored it. Scipio, who knew Rome to be poor, though
victorious, and Carthage rich, though subdued, willing to relieve the
necessities of the former, by the abundance of the latter, and perhaps, fearful
that despair might make them continue the War longer than his Consulship, and
so his victories might prove but the foundation of another Glory; or else
believing so prostrate an Enemy unworthy his Sword, or esteeming it more
generous to be known a Conqueror by the confession, than the ruin of his
Enemies, granted them Peace, but upon terms, as long as their submission, and
permitted them to send unto the Roman Senate for their Ratification. In the
mean time, Mago had raised so considerable an Army of Gauls, and Lygurians,
that the Romans apprehended he would kindle as great a flame in Italy, as
Scipio had in Afric. They therefore sent against him Marcus Cornelius, the
Pro-Consul, and Quintilius Vartus, one of their Pretors, with whom I associated
my self. In short, Mago and the Roman Army, met in the Country of the
Insubtians, where was fought a Battle, of as much variety and resolution, as
any since Rome or Carthage were founded: twice the Romans, and twice their
Enemies were embracing Victory, but at length Quintilius, and I, having rallied
the relics of our scattered Horse, and Mago of his, we resolutely advanced to
determine this bloody dispute; Hannibal's Brother, who suspected his Men needed
some high encouragement, advanced about an hundred paces before them, and
invited the Pro-Consul by a single Combat, to show they were as prodigal of
their own Blood, as of their Soldiers. He not being present, and the Praetor
(perhaps) more concerned in the public Safety, than in his particular Honor,
declining it, (with his permission) I galloped up to Mago, told him, the
Pro-Consul was on an employment which rendered him incapable of hearing, and
consequently answering his Challenge, and that therefore I was come (naming my
self) to supply his place, that so generous an invitation might not fall to the
ground. As soon as Mago heard the Name of Perolla, his Eyes were all inflamed,
and he was so transported with Passion, he had scarce the patience to tell me,
that had he known of my being in the Roman Army, he had addressed his words to me
sooner than to the Pro-Consul, and that the time was now come, I must answer
for Asdrubals blood, or shed more of it: then not giving me the leisure of a
reply, we began a Combat of so peculiar a quality, that it produced a
resembling effect, for both Armies were so concerned in the dispute of their
Combatants, that forgetting their own, as if it had been by mutual consent,
they became spectators of their Fates, which they thought would be legible in
that of their Champions. But why do I so long protract my relation? let it
suffice I tell you, that though Mago's Virtue relished of his Family, yet his
success was Carthaginian, for I having received a wound on my Bridle-hand, gave
my Enemy so large an one in his Thigh, that he fell from his Horse, and had
there lost his life, had not I thought it more handsome to give, than take it.
At this Victory, the Romans gave so loud a shout, that most of the Gauls and
Lygurians were hardly able to abide it, much less their victorious Arms; but
the Battle had so long continued, that the approach of night hindered the
Conquerors from making any considerable advantage by winning it, and the
vanquished during the obscurity, made so long a march with their wounded
General, that in two days after they came into Lyguria, where he received the
sad Commands of Carthage, without delay to return thither, and rather employ
his Blood to preserve his own Country, than to Conquer his Enemies. This fatal
Summons he obeyed in part, but his wound opened so large a way for his Soul,
that it flew out at that passage, as he was as far as Sardinia in his return.
This loss, the Carthaginians resented at a higher rate, than that Battle which
was the cause of it: To contract my discourse, I will pass over those
Civilities, not only the Pro-Consul and the Praetor, but also the whole Roman
Senate made me to let you know, that those low submissions Carthage had made
Scipio (which indeed were too humble to be real) were only to protract the
time, till those two famous Sons of Amilcar were come out of Italy for their
deliverance; the fate of the youngest, and his Army, Sir, I have already told
you, that of Hannibal I am now going to relate, and it shall be in as little a
Volume, as I can possibly contract so much Truth, and Business in. I will
therefore in pursuance of this assurance, pass by all his actions, since that
famous Battle of Metaurus, and therein be no Enemy to his Glory, which would be
more obscured by saying he did little, than that he did nothing, and come to
his receiving from Carthage the Orders for his return; which though they were
the same, had been sent his great Brother, yet he did not consider them with so
Philosophical a temper; for whereas Mago at their reception, obeyed them, with
an absolute resignation; Hannibal by a thousand extravagancies expressed his
rage, and discontent; but after his fury, gave him leave to speak, he cried out
to his Officers, yet at least this is plain dealing, and more handsome to let
their Commands, than their not supplying my necessities recall me; besides, (he
continued) Rome nor Scipio cannot now glory, they have sent Hannibal out of
Italy, no, it is Hanno and his Faction, who not able any other way to effect the
destruction of the Barcinians, act it by that of Carthage. But this great
Captain, whose providence extended over all events, had in readiness a Fleet
for so sad a Navigation, in which he embarked his Army, but all such Italians
as were not willing to follow his fortune, nor able to fly his Power and Fury,
and had taken sanctuary in that sacred one of Juno Lucinia, he forced from
thence, and by putting them to several ignominious deaths, did that for them,
which they merited of their Country: After so bloody a Sacrifice to the Manes
of those friends he had left behind, he took Ship himself, more troubled at his
abandoning Italy, than at the cause of it, cursing both the gods and his own
stupidity, that after the Battle of Cannes, he had not led his Army all hot and
bloody to the Walls of Rome. But whilist he is at Sea, it will not be amiss to
let you know, what is done on Land. The Carthaginian Ambassadors sent to Rome
to ratify that Peace made with Scipio, appeared so ignorant in what they were
sent to conclude, and so uncertain in their desires, and answers, that the
Senate easily discovered their hearts, and found what there presented to be
their simplicity, was their treachery: whereupon that great Assembly returned
them back to Scipio, by Lelius, who had been sent to Rome with Syphax. Lelius
in a swift Gally, accompanied with his false Ambassadors, soon came to the
Roman standing Camp, where he learnt that the Carthaginians having certainly
heard of that great Army (following too the famous Name of Hannibal) which was
coming out of Italy, ashamed of their tame submission, and that they had
despaired of their fate, whilst so feared a General was to dispute it, and
coming powerfully to their deliverance, had not only broke the Treaty, but by
Asdrubal their Admiral had taken 200 Ships sent from Sicily to relieve the
Roman Camp, they being by extremity of weather, cast into the Bay of Carthage;
and that Scipio having sent Ambassadors to complain of so barbarous a
violation, contrary to the Laws of Nations, they had like to have been
murdered, declaring their Ambassy; but having strangely escaped that
misfortune, returning by Sea to the Consul, who then encamped not far from the
River Bagradas, they were encountered by the same Asdrubal, who lay behind a
Promontory to intercept them, which doubtless he had performed, had not the
Ambassadors in a swift Quinquereme-Gally, avoided his stemming, and run ashore
to some Roman Companies, which were sent for their rescue, where though they
saved themselves, yet they lost many of their attendants and followers, which
A^rican proceeding had so incensed the Consul, that he was gone to vindicate it
with his Army, which now breathed nothing but blood and fury. Lelius, surpised
at this strange and true information, went to Scipio, who he found acting a
Revenge proportionate to the greatness of those Crimes that made it just: but
the Carthaginian Ambassadors he left in the Roman Camp, which then was
commanded by Bebius, one of those that had so narrowly escaped in his late
Embassy; and though by Lelius he begged the Consul by the death of the
Carthaginian Ambassadors, to let his Enemies know, and suffer for their fault;
yet the generous Scipio commanded him not only to spare their Lives, but
immediately to give them their liberty: For he esteemed it a nobler way so to
reprove their sin, than to imitate it. This great Conquest over himself, was
but a Prophecy of that over his Enemies, which now was not far off; for their
great Hannibal, about this time, landed at Leptis, an hundred miles from
Carthage, which he did, to refresh his men after their Navigation, and to get
some additional Forces, especially of Horse, in which he was most defective.
Tycheus, and Mezetullus, two African Princes, brought him 3000, with which
reinforcement, having received positive orders from Carthage, without
protraction, to determine their destiny by Battle, he marched directly to Zama,
not far from the place where the Consul lay, from whence he sent out Spies, to
discover the Romans countenance and strength; some of them being taken, were
brought to Scipio, who, instead of crucitying them, (which was then the general
practice) commanded an Officer to carry them about the Camp, and punctually to
show them whatever they desired: this done, he sent them back to their General,
who admired at the bravery of his Enemy, and concluded his Army was deficient
in nothing, since he was so ready to show the posture it was in. Hannibal
immediately after, (but I cannot tell from which of those two causes it
proceeded) sent to desire a Parley with Scipio, who assured him shortly to
satisfy his request. The next day after Massanissa (who upon that false Peace
was sent into his own Kingdom) came to the Camp, at the Consuls reiterated
requests, with 4000 Horse, and 6000 Foot, and the same day I arrived there, to
satisfy my Engagement and Revenge. Those additional Forces gave the Consul so
great a certainty of Victory, that the next morning with all his Army he
removed to Nadagara, where mindful of his Engagement to Hannibal, he sent him
word he was then ready to discharge it. The time and place was immediately
appointed, and those two great Men went out of their Camps to meet one another,
each of them with 1000 Horse for their Guard; and I being desirous to see my
Rival, had the command of Scipio's. No sooner were they come to a convenient
distance, then all the rest making a stand, the two Generals advanced, and for
a while did nothing but view one another with mutual admiration, perhaps to
find out where that virtue lay, which had rendered them so equally famous over
all the world. At length, Hannibal saluting Scipio, first told him, It had been
(generous Enemy) more advantageous both for Carthage and Rome, if they had
confined their Ambitions within the shores of A^rick and Italy, since the
Kingdoms of Spain and Sicily, about which our Fathers and we have so
obstinately contended, are not a sufficient recompense for that blood and
treasure they have exhausted; but though things past are irrevocable, yet they
may instruct us for the future, and induce us (by a serious reflection on those
dangers we have exposed our own Countries unto, to conquer others) to believe
it necessary and just, rather with safety to possess our own, than run a hazard
of that, for an uncertainty of more: To this temper, my experience of the
World, and of Fortune, has reduced me: But I apprehend thy youth and heat will
decline these thoughts, till thou have learned them in the same School; but,
methinks, thou may, by my example, be informed of a truth, which if now
unregarded, thou may '^t learn at a more troublesome rate: For I am that
Hannibal, which, after many bloody Battles, brought my victorious Arms to the
walls of Rome, and now behold here I come to offer Peace unto thee, that thou
may not do the like to Carthage. Consider too the Fate of Marcus Atilius,
who, for declining so advantageous an overture, received a ruin from the gods,
which perhaps attends all those that delight in shedding humane blood: Can
thou be content Scipio that Spain, Sicily, Sardinia, and whatever other Islands
lie between Africa and Italy, be eternally abandoned by the Carthaginians? It Is
a glorious bargain for the Romans; and for our parts, our future quiet shall be
our satisfaction; and the contentment which from thence we shall derive, will
be an abundant obligation to tie us faith^ully to observe the Peace that gives
it: But if thou esteemest all this too little, reflect (I beseech thee) how
great a hazard thou undergoest, for the obtaining of a little more than thou
may enjoy without any. It Is now in thy power to make thy Fate, but if thou
stayest till to morrow Night, the gods will make it for thee; let us therefore
conclude on this universal blessing, and reproach me not the late treachery of
some false-hearted Citizens of ours; it is Hannibal that now desires Peace,
which he would never do, did he not find it expedient for his Country, and
knowing it so, he will always maintain it, as he did the War he began, 'till
the gods and Men did envy him. (To which Scipio replied) 'Twas not (generous
Hannibal) the ambition of Rome which made them take up Arms, but the defense of
the Memertines, and Saguntines, their Confederates; which action of theirs, the
gods, by the issue of the War, have, and will declare was just: For the
mutability of Fortune, I am not ignorant of it, the condition which thou once
did reduce Rome unto, and that which I have since Carthage, does sufficiently
evince it, and therefore I would as willingly give Peace, as thou des^^est it,
if it were upon terms which might convince the world, it is the Roman
magnanimity, and not the Roman fear, that grants it; but by what thou offerest,
thou only give what their Swords have given them already; and whereas I
expected, that in recompense of thy Citizens perfidiousness, thou would
enlarge the Articles of their late violated Peace, thou do exceedingly
contract them, and thereby would have them gainers by their treachery. No,
Hannibal, those that will have Rome their friend, must not do actions unworthy
of that end; and if the Carthaginians break an Agreement, as soon as they see a
probability of building their Fortune, by the ruin of their Faith, they do
thereby instruct the Romans, to reduce them to a condition of not being able to
violate a Peace before they grant them one. But (continued Scipio) all this I
speak to Carthage, and not to Hannibal, to whose desires I will give, what I
will deny my own judgment, and that is Peace, provided that my first
Concessions be the Articles of it, and that an equal satisfaction be made for
those injuries we have sustained by their Infidelity. I am not come ( Hannibal
replied) to cheapen a Peace, I come to offer what I esteem just; and as I have
done it at first word, so I will not recede from my first overture; if thou
esteemest it unreasonable, the god of Battles must be our Judge. It Is to him
then ( Scipio briskly replied) I refer our difference, who, I believe, thou will find more untractable than I am; for he cannot be a god, if he favor an
Army which comes more laden with In^idelity than Arms; and from whom Victory
will fly, lest she be thought as blind as Fortune. Then the Consul, laying by
his serious looks, told the Carthaginian smiling, But if at my return to my
Army, every one be as well satisfied with this conclusion, as a Gentleman that
commands those Horse (pointing to his Guards) I shall find as general a joy at
the assurance of a Battle, as at the possession of a Victory; and if every
Soldier had his resolution and design, Hannibal would not avoid his particular
Fate, whatever the Gods determined of the public. Who is this, said the
Carthaginian, that is so great an Enemy to Peace, and to Hannibal? It Is Perolla
(said the Consul) Oh Gods (the A^rican replied) what strange accident makes him
abandon his Izadora? But may I not (generous Scipio) by your favor, be
satisfied from his own mouth? Yes (said the Consul) I will send him to you, but
first I must exactan engagement from you, and then the like from him, that
whatever your discourses be, you shall pass no farther. I do ( Hannibal
answered) faithfully promise it; for since I am certain in so short a time, to
have so many thousand witnesses of my revenge, I would not confine the sight of
it to so few. This confidence (said Scipio) I will leave Perolla to answer, who
immediately shall meet you: then taking leave of Hannibal, he told him,
Remember Carthage pulls down her own destiny, by decliming a Peace, which she
implored with tears; and when I ask no other satisfaction for their treachery,
but to restore what they took from us by it. Remember (said the Carthaginian)
'twas Citizens not Soldiers which begged made, and broke the Peace, and it is
Hannibal you have now to deal with, who intending to keep his bargain, will
make it accordingly, and has offered you what before next Sun does set, you
will repent you have declined. The Consul would not hear this reply, but came
immediately where I waited for him, and there told me the public transactions,
and my Rivals desire, which he gave me leave to satisfy, but first engaged me
to the same conditions Hannibal had submitted unto; which having faithfully
promised, I gallopt to the place where he attended me, and where truly I was
received by that great man, with a civility and countenance which had nothing
of an Enemy and Rival; I salu^ed him with an high respect, and with an humility
proportionable to the difference of our qualities; but I could not suspend that
just hatred I had contracted against his barbarous usage, to a perfection
greater than that sin; which the seeing him so infinitely increast, that had I
not remembered my engagement to Scipio, I had then either ended our
differences, or my life; but whilst I was in those thoughts, they were
interrupted, by Hannibals telling me, Is then ( Perolla) your Hate greater than
your Love, that you abandon your Mistress, to prosecute your Rival? Or has that
high justice of Izadora's, which esteemed Hannibal unworthy of her, taken up
the same belief of you? Sir (I replied) that affection which I confess is an
injustice for the fair Izadora to confer on any man, forces me to seek out the
high interrupter of it, which yet is no argument that my desire of revenge is
greater than my flame; for the cause being always more noble than the effect,
my passion, which makes me endeavor to vindicate the object of it, cannot be
esteemed less great, than that which it forces me unto: neither could I by any
one action render my self more unworthy the beatitude of Izadora's Love, than
in not declining my joys, to revenge her wrongs; which to effect, I will fling
my self into dangers, as high as those pleasures I have lately abandon^d. Ah
young man (said Hannibal) thou art as little sensible of, as worthy thy
felicity: Can thou possess Izadora's Love, and think of any thing besides?
Were I in thy blessed condition, nor Revenge, Empire, or Glory, should one minute
separate me from a felicity which I could not render my self more unworthy of,
than by abandoning: nay, I would quarrel with any thought which should
interpose, much more remove me from it: but since thou ^ast left all to follow
thy Revenge, if thou have the courage to act it, to morrow I Will present thee
the occasion. Oh Gods! I cried out, if I have the courage to act it? Alas! he
that did not want it to vindicate an injured Empire, will not certainly, when
it is to right a perfection as far above an Empire, as she is any thing else
that is mortal. Yes, Hannibal, thou shall find, a heart that is filled with so
divine an image, cannot be capable of so low a sin as Fear; but on the
contrary, 'twill inspire me with resolution enough to seek thee out, even in
the center of thy Troops. I will (said Hannibal) spare thee that pains, thou
shall find me at the head of them, where I will more handsomely punish those
miseries thy better stars have cast upon me, and by thy death, before 200000
witnesses, evince, thou had more Fortune than Merit in thy Love; and by
destroying the object of Izadora's flame, punish her ingratitude to mine. Do
but (I replied) assault my life in so generous a way, I will excuse thy attempt
upon it by Oristes, and never implore a greater certainty for the punishment of
thy Crimes, than to have thee defend them with thy Sword. The apprehension I
had (continued Perolla) that my passion might transport me beyond my promise,
made me (after having again summoned Hannibal of his engagement) gallop away to
the Consul, who I found (by an excess of civility) was become the Captain of my
Guards, as I had been of his; he made me too, that generous Compliment: and
after I had by an humility resembling the cause of it, expressed my gratitude, I
informed him (as we were returning to the Camp) what had past betwixt my Rival
and me, whilst he was doing so great an injury to his quality. As soon as we
were come within sight of it, Massanissa, Lelius, and all the most considerable
Officers, came to meet Scipio, who told them with a look which relisht of
Victory, that the Carthaginians would force the Romans to become their Lords;
and by denying them a part of their Empire, give them a title to the whole,
which the next Sun should absolutely decide. The Numidian King, and all the
rest, were exceedingly satisfied with this News; for they were confident, their
Swords would give them more, than the Carthaginians. The day therefore no
sooner appeared, than the large Plains of Nadagara were covered with Soldiers,
from which place the ensuing Battle took its name, though many (but ignorantly)
termed it that of Zama; and though I had the honor to have been in most of the
signal actions of my time, yet there were none of them to beequal'd with this,
whether you reflect upon the Generals, the Armies, or the dispute, which in
effect was to decide the quarrel betwixt Rome and Carthage. Scipio divided his
Horse in two wings, the right Massanissa had with his Numidians, under whom I
elected to serve, because their manner of Fight gave me a greater probability
of meeting with Hannibal, though the Consul offered me the command of the
flying Regiment, which consisted of 1000 Roman and Sicilian Gentlemen; the left
Lelius commanded, which was composed of the Italian Cavalry: The first Maniples
were the Hastati, the next the Principes, the third the Triarii, who were
mutually seconds to each other, and only in this the Consul differed from the
usual Roman Discipline; for he placed not the Maniples of his Principes,
opposite to the Intervals betwixt the Hastati, that so (as was usual) they
might fall back between the Principes, but placed them directly one behind the
other, as it were in File, which was of singular advantage; for those Elephants
that charged the Romans, finding a free passage through the Intervals, never
broke upon the Soldiers, which it seemed was rather their constraint, than
their choice. The Consul having thus drawn up his Army, made them this short
Speech: If Glory, Revenge, and the Empire of the world, are capable (generous
Companions) to bring any accession to your Valors, in this Battle, as in their
center they all meet, you safeties too are included in it, for in this
barbarous Climate you have no retreat; so that were there any Cowards amongst
you, they must find their security in their hands, not in their feet: For my
own particular, I bless the Gods that have made it my Fate, to be after this
day incapable of misery, for Death or Victory equally secures me from it; and
this Battle ended, you may quietly possess the fruits of it, since if your
Swords conquer this Nation, your Fame will all the others. Remember your
Enemies last action in Italy, was the violating of Sanctuaries, and their first
in Africa was the violating of Peace: so that their Crimes weigh down their
Arms; and by destroying them, you sacrifice as well to the Gods, as to your
Revenge. Let us then begin the Charge, and let it be vigorous enough, to make
them acknowledge, that their sin was not capable of transcending their
punishment; that by flying from that Peace which we granted them, they have as
much injured their interest, as their honesty; and force the Survivors to shed
as many tears for having declined honesty; and force the Survivors to shed as
many tears for having declined our mercy, as they did to obtain it. Hannibal
too was not unimploy'd, for he knew this day was to perfect, or ruin his
glory. His Elephants (which were above Fourscore) he placed in the Front of his
Battalions, behind these was his Vanguard (all Mercenaries) and composed of
Lygurians, Gauls, Baleares and Moors, his Battle then followed, consisting of
Carthaginians, and other Africans, more concerned in the quarrel, but not so
valiant maintainers of it. To these were added 4000 Macedonians, under the
command of Sopater their Captain, lately sent him by Philip, King of that
Warlike people. More than a Furlong behind these last Divisions, came his
Rearguard, consisting of those brave Soldiers which had served him in his
Italian Wars, in whose virtue only he was confident of victory. His right wing
of Horse (all Carthaginians) was led by Mircall, and Barmocall (for the
generous Maharball was dead.) Two famous Captains, Tycheus and Mezetullus,
commanded the left, which was formed of Numidians. Hannibal having thus ordered
the Fate of Carthage, endeavored by few, but powerful words, to elevate and
increase his Soldiers courages; to the Mercenaries he promised rewards, as
great as the quarrel that Battle was to decide. To the Carthaginians, perpetual
slavery and chains, if by death or victory, they did not avoid those
misfortunes. But to his old Army, he put them in mind of all that Glory they
had won, when their Courages effected greater wonders, than would be necessary
that day: It Is not (he continued) your General alone that now incites your
Valors, it is Carthage, liberty, glory, your wives, children, and friends, that
speak by my mouth; they will think you valued Italy above all these, if you had
courage to conquer that, and want it to preserve them: no, generous Companions,
show the Senate, by the defeat of these Romans, what you had done to all the
rest, had your Supplies been equal to your Merit; and convince them by so noble
an Argument, of your virtue, and of their neglect of it. Then turning toward
our Army, he told them, Observe whether these numbers equal those at Cannes,
Trebia, Tecinum, or Thracimene; alas! these are so far from opposing you, that
their ruin will hardly bring any accession to your Glories. Remember this
Scipio's Father was the first Captain we beat in Europe, let his Son be the
first we beat in Africa, make your Successes run in a blood, his Soldiers will
contribute to this design; for they are the Sons of those Cowards you have so
often vanquished, that you have entailed fear upon their Posterity.

No sooner had Hannibal done speaking, then he commanded his Numidian Horse to
begin the Battle, whereunto they were invited by a Thousand Trumpets, Clairons,
and other Warlike Music: The Elephants too were commanded to Charge the
Romans, but those irrational Creatures seemed to reprove the Carthaginians with
their violation of Faith; for the greatest part of them turned head, and
extremely disordered their own left wing; Massanissa so well improved so
unexpected an advantage, that he perfected what they had but begun. The rest of
the Elephants (which were faithful to their own side) made a horrid execution
on the Roman Velites, whom they Chased through the Intervals of the Maniples;
yet did the Battalions no prejudice, by that excellent prevention of the
Consuls, which I formerly mentioned: but diverse of those moving Castles being
at length much wounded, turned head, and ran furiously upon their own right
wing, and thereby gave Lelius the same advantage which they had presented
Massanissa, and which he as well improved as the Numidian King. In the mean
time the Battalions of Foot of either Army advanced, with a slow and confident
march, till they came within shot, but then giving a shout which made the
Neighboring hills to tremble, they ran against each other with a fury worthy
their dispute; at first, the barbarous strength of the Mercenaries prevailed
over the Roman virtue, but at length the Roman discipline, and resolution,
wrought its accustomed effect; for the Principes by sustaining the Hastati,
relieved their fear, and disorder; but as soon as the Mercenaries retreated,
the new-raised Africans had not the courage to second them, which the other
sattributing as much to their treachery, as fear, began to fly; but not being
able to run away but through the Intervals of the A^ricans, those either to
punish, or hinder their Cowardice, would not permit them that way of safety. On
the other side, the Gauls, and Lygurians, by not being seconded, and by then
being opposed, thought themselves betrayed; and esteeming it a more pleasing
Revenge to destroy their false Friends, than their valiant Enemies, made use of
those Arms against the Carthaginians, which they had taken up for them; which
disorder the Romans soon ended, by involving both Parties almost in a general
ruin. I have (said Perolla) the more insisted on this part of the Battle, to
vindicate the justice of the Gods: for these Forces were those only which had
broke their Faith, and Peace; and they only were those against whom Fortune so
visibly fought, that the Romans were convinced Victory was on their side,
because Justice was; and indeed they acted their success with so much ease,
that it appeared the work of the gods, and not of men. But all this while
Hannibal with his Italian Army stood firm, and charged his Pikes and Lances
against those Cowards which sought their safety in their feet, so that they
were necessitated to seek their deliverance in that, by which they had
thitherto found it. Scipio perceiving those gallant Troops, with as little fear
in their looks, as hearts, Hannibal too at the head of them, and the ground
over which he was to march, slippery with blood, and encumbered with dead
carcasses, was in a great apprehension, whether marching such an obstructed
way, his Battalions might not be disordered before he came, where he was
confident they would most stand in need of their discipline and virtue; but
after a short debate with himself, (for he was blessed with an excellent presence
of mind) not to lose the victorious heat his Soldiers were in, he commanded the
Hastati to wade slowly through that Sea of blood, and (as I may say) as soon as
they were Landed, to draw up all in Front, and if Hannibal offered to assault
them before the Principes, and the Triarii were come up, immediately to retreat
into that purple flood they had made, where the Carthaginians might share the
inconveniences of the ground, and where the dead Africans would assume the
quarrel of the gods, and hinder the living. But these directions, though they
abundantly manifested the Consuls Soldiery, yet there was no use of them; for
Hannibal either disdaining all advantages from those dead, that when living had
afforded him none, the better to set off the virtue of his old Army, or the
distance being too great to advance and charge the Hastati, before their
companions came, made that great man decline it, and so Scipio had time to draw
his Principes and Triarii on the right and left Flank of his Hastati; which was
no sooner effected, than he immediately advanced to charge an Army, who never
saw any defeats but those they had given the Romans, and where he was so
entertained, that it made the precedent fight against the Mercenaries, and
Africans, appear not worthy that name; for the Romans, encouraged with their
numbers and success, and their Enemies inflamed with the loss of their
companions, the hazard of their Empire, and perhaps with the glory of having
the general safety left to their Swords, so mutually filled all places with
blood and horror, that I may truly say, the World was well disputed, and
Victory was so equally and generously courted, that she knew not which side to
elect; whereby you may in some sort conjecture, what hazard the Roman Empire
was reduced unto, by the too violent pursuit of Massanissa and Lelius, which I
may truly say, I first discovered, and first made them sensible of; for whilst
we were following those whose low resistance made them unworthy our Arms, we
abandoned those, whose resolutions merited our assistance, and whose condition
needed it. Massanissa and Lelius were so far from condemning my confidence,
that they acknowledged their fault, and after the Battle, confessed unto the
Consul, that he derived his relief from my care, (this I tell you, not to
acquaint you with my virtue, but to show you how secure they were in their
own.) I will omit (generous Spartacus) informing you, how that day I killed two
A^rican Captains, that naming themselves Hannibal, by deluding me into a false
Revenge, deluded themselves into a real death.

It is time to return to Scipio, who, perhaps, we have too long abandoned in
our Story, as well as in the Battle; that great man, at our arrival with all
our Horse, was upon the point of losing a Victory, by our having prosecuted one
too far. To be brief, our return was most happy, and in a needful time; for the
Carthaginian had so well continued his practice, that he had left Forces enough
to prosecute his dawning success, and drew a considerable Body (as well for
their number, as virtue) to oppose Massanissa and Lelius; and that which made
this little Army the more formidable, was, that Hannibal himself lead them: the
gallantry of the charge was proportionate to the Soldiers and Generals, and we
were no sooner mingled, then I sought him amongst the press, who had promised
to be found at the head of his Troops; but I was soon relieved from that
employment, by a voice which I heard often repeat my name, I ran with excessive
joy to the place where I was called, in hope that it might be Hannibal; I soon
found 'twas no third counterfeit, as well by that majestic grace he had under
his arms, as by the fury of his blows, which I imagined could not be inspired
but from Revenge and Jealousy.

Our Javelins working no effect (mine glancing upon his shield, flew between
his right Arm and his Body, and his past hissing by my ears) we soon made use
of our Swords, and were so equally animated, that our rage for awhile hindered
the actings of it; but not to hold you long in a Combat which did not last so,
after we had almost cut in pieces those Armors, whose goodness we mutually
cursed, and that we had by light wounds drawn of each others blood, Hannibal who
apprehended, that by playing too much the part of a Soldier, he should as much
neglect that of the General, determined by a powerful reverse to end both the
dispute, and his life, that was the cause of it; but what he designed for that
effect, might have had a contrary one, for the blow was so vigorous, that by
chance lighting upon a piece of my Helmet, it broke the Sword that struck it,
and left nothing in Hannibal's hand but the Hilt: Though a piece of the Sword
gave me a deep wound in my left shoulder, yet I no sooner saw my Enemy (...)
than my Anger was so too; but the object of it perceiving his misfortune, was
so far from being terrified with it, that observing I declined prosecuting my
advantage, he told me, Why do thou not ( Perolla) embrace an opportunity
which Fortune has offered thee, since thou can never expect an advantage over
me, but on such a score? Those words moved me a little, but not so much as his
condition; so that laying aside Izadora's wrongs, my Countries, and my own, I
replied, It Is not ( Hannibal) from Fortune, but from Justice, that I will
derive my Revenge; for since I undertake to vindicate an injured Innocence, I
must make use of no ways, but those as virtuous as the Subject of my quarrel:
Thy attempt on my life by Oristes, when I could make no resistance, I condemned
and therefore will not practice a resembling Crime; since to imitate so low a
sin, were rather to authorize, than punish it: Go then, and at our next meeting
get a better Cause, as well as Sword; for if the first be the same, the latter
will be the like. H^nnibal made me some Reply, which by the tone I imagined was
very civil, but I gallopt away from him, ending those words, (lest he might
conjecture I obliged him, to make him my Friend, and lest some Romans might
have made a more fatal use of my advantage) and joined my self with Massanissa,
who had performed miracles that day, which (in a word) concluded with an entire
defeat of the Carthaginians, 22000 being left dead upon the place, and almost
half as many Prisoners taken. Scipio in the midst of his Troops, (upon Lelius
and the Numidian Kings information) came and embraced me with transports which
were too great either to be related, or believed, and then asked me, whether I
had met with my own and our Empires greatest Enemy? I told him I had, and
exchanged some blows with him, but that we were soon separated. This I
acknowledged, but durst not acquaint him with the en^^^e truth, lest he might
have esteemed that an offense to Rome, which I was certain was not one to
Gallantry; and on the other side, Hannibal, either not to own his misfortune,
or out of an apprehension, that the discovering of his safety, might endanger
him that gave it, ever kept it private, which was the cause that so great a
truth was not a public one. In this great Battle of Nadagara, or (as some
called it) of Zama, was determined the fate of Carthage, though Hannibal
avoided that days ruin, having performed all the virtues of a General and
Soldier; and where to speak the truth, 'twas (as he said) more the gods, than
the Romans, that won it, for his two wings of Horse were routed by his own
Elephants; and had he been blessed with their return, as Scipio was with
Massanissa and Lelius's, he had probably prosecuted that advantage over the
Consul, which their arrival forced from him; Many who knew his temper, admired,
and asked him, why he outlived that loss? to which he replied, That the Romans
might not too-much glory in it, for to destroy Carthage and Hannibal in one
day, would have made them proud with more justice, than they could be condemned
for being so; that to deprive his Country of himself, was to do more against
them than Scipio had, who might lay too heavy a Peace upon Carthage, if they
had lost Hannibal and their Army; that it would have made his Countries
condition appear more desperate than it was, if he had lost the courage of not
seeing it, and that perhaps, the pride of Carthage might be her ruin, in not
making a Peace, when the gods had abandoned her, which he knew she would
embrace, when Hannibal himself advised her to it. These reasons were as true as
lo^ty, and to evince they were not excuses but realities, he went to Cart^age
with a celerity that manifested his concernment, which place he had not seen
from his Childhood, and where he was received according to his Virtue, not
Success. There he besought them to leave off their Tryumphs, since the gods had
left off giving them the occasions; and that immediately they would conclude a
Peace with Scipio, and so preserve something by a capitulation, lest they lost
all by declining one. A Senator called Gesco, who thought it a manifestation of
Courage indeed, to show some, in a season when Hannibal had lost it, began to
incite the Senate to a new War, by the example of Rome, who had lost her
Empire, had she lost her resolution, and that they wanted only a Roman success,
by wanting a Roman Magnanimity. But Hannibal enraged to hear those discourse of
War, who were as ignorant of, as unfit for so dangerous a profession; and were
only like Trumpeters, that set Men by the Ears by their breath, but never fight
themselves, arose from his Seat, and pulled down Gesco out of his; which the
Senate resenting, Hannibal (as the fair Izadora has told you) so excellently
excused himself by his zeal for his Countries safety, and so Pathetically
declaimed upon the making of a Peace, that he obtained an excuse for the
former, and invited them to embrace the latter; This was the cause that the
Consul sailing toward Carthage, was met by a Gally laden with Carthaginian
Ambassadors, who bearing up with the Admiral, and using the gesture of
Suppliants, were commanded to wait for an answer at Tunis, where the Consul
arrived (after having braved the proudest City of the world with his Fleet) and
where he was advertised that Vermina, the Son of Syphax was advancing toward
Carthage, with a good body of Horse, either to bring the fate of that City to a
new Trial, and Field, or protract her ruin, by flinging himself within her
Walls. This Allarm the Consul received as the means of an infallible accession
to his Glory; and because he had employed Lelius to Rome, with the news of his
Victory, and that Massanissa in the gaining of it, had received some wounds,
which might have rendered his march against Vermina, more dangerous than the
Combat, Scipio sent for me, and though I believe he elected me, because of
those two great Men's being incapable of then acting; yet with a flattering
Complement he assured me, his choice was the effect of his judgment, and not
his necessity, that he commanded me to go against this Numidian Prince, who by
his largest intelligence, was not above 8000; that he had selected me 4000
choice Horse for this Expedition, suplying the defects of their numbers, by the
Gallantry which composed them, and that he gave me so few, that my courage
might be the more conspicuous. I will not tell you in what words I clothed my
Gratitude, I rather was covetous to express it by my actions, which the sooner
to perform, I went to the Rendezvous, where I found my little Army ready to
march: I would not loose that good disposition they were in, but having assured
them, I was as conscious of the Consuls injustice in putting me at their head,
as any of them could be, and that I knew them so perfectly, that I would make
less scruple to Serve under, than Command over them: I immediately sent out my
Forlorn-Hope, which had not marched Ten miles, e're they returned me word, that
they had discovered the Enemy, which could not be less than 15000 Horse. I told
the Messenger, that sure they had seen with multiplying Eyes, but yet the
greater the number was, the greater the Glory, and then desired my Body to
continue their march a Foot-pace, and with twenty Horse I galloped to the place
where my Advertizers were, where again they confirmed their first intelligence,
but Vermina had so covered his Army, that I could not possibly satisfy my
curiosity, by my Eyes, without beating in a Body of 500 Numidians, which I
elected with my 250, and performed. The fruits of that little success, was the
discovery of our Enemies Army, which I found, was rather contracted, than
multiplied by my first Intelligences, this had startled me, but that I
perceived in my little Troop, an augmentation of Courage, by that of Danger,
and in them I found the pattern of the residue, to whom I retreated all the way
in view of the Enemy, that pressed us in all things well, but in success. By that
time we came in sight of our Body, the Sun was set, and Vermina perceiving so
many Horse, took them for the Van of the Consuls Army, (that too, which
fortified his belief, was, his own strength, and Scipio's care of
Intelligence:) in this faith he makes a stand, and judging of the Cause of it,
I resolved, whilst he was in so terrifying a belief to improve it to the best
advantage, in order to which I sent a Soldier of mine, (as if he had fled from
me) to let Vermina know, that Hannibal was defeated, and shut up within the
Walls of Carthage, and that all the Roman Army was ready to make him a
companion of his Fortune, as well as of his Cause; this advertisement was given
just as I fell on, which was an hour before day, for I would not give it him
sooner, lest he might have retired, and had the benefit of the whole night to
favor his retreat; I sent also advertisement to Scipio, of what I had
discovered, and that he might think 'twas my Duty, and not my Fear produced it,
before I had any return or additional Forces, I began the Battle. The
obscurity, the news of Hannibal's defeat, and the belief, that we were all the
victorious Roman Army, excellently contributed to our advantage, though the
Numidians so resolutely disputed the difference, that above 14300 found their
Graves, where they thought to have found their success, but Vermina himself was
none of that number; my loss was about 900, and I received a slight hurt in the
self same place that Hannibals Sword had made one, which was in effect, but
opening a little wider, that which was not yet well closed up, and
consolidated. But the Allarm of the Numidian strength no sooner came to the
Consul (who was then visiting Massanissa) than that valiant Prince, who merited
a Kingdom from Rome, though he had had no Title to one, caused himself to be
led to his Horse, and though Scipio earnestly dissuaded him from so dangerous a
Gallantry, yet with all the rest of the Roman Cavalry, and some Foot, he
advanced to my assistance. I know not whether their appearance was any
advantage to my little Army, (for they came in sight as soon as we could see)
but I am sure their actions were not, for they saw us Conquerors asson as they
perceived us: and their generous Commander, to give those entirely the glory
that had won it, would not so much as permit his Soldiers to follow the
Execution, or to share in that spoil, which had been purchased at the expense
of our Blood. Indeed the Pillage was great, and their civility too which had
got it, for they brought me a proportion, that might have as much satisfied my
avarice, as the cause of their being so liberal, did my honor; and though I
accepted their Present, it was only to deny them nothing, for immediately I had
it all divided amongst those Soldiers, whose wounds disenabled them to seize
upon what they had purchased by them; This just distribution wrought so
powerfully on all the rest, that they thought I had only performed that action,
to show them what they had omitted, and in that belief, they made amongst
themselves new Collections, of as great a value as the former, which they
begged me passionately to accept, for (as they alleged) 'twas unjust I should
divest my self of what was my due, to repair their fault; This Gallantry from
common Men was extraordinary, and if I have insisted so long upon it, 'twas to
acquaint you with theirs, not my own. To conclude this business, I declined the
repetition of their Civility, and though it were in terms, as obliging as I was
capable of, yet I found to have left them rich, was to have injured them.
Massanissa, after we had ended the Execution, came to embrace me, and to be
civil, he was so unjust as to protest, that though Rome had made him a King,
and Scipio gave him the Crown, yet 'twas I (by Vermina's defeat) that had given
him the Kingdom. I did not answer this Complement, lest he might believe I was
so vain as to think I had a Title to it. I cannot tell you (generous
Spartacus,) all the Tryumphs an^ Joys at the Armies return, since alas, I was
torn from them by a storm, greater than the reception the Consul prepared for
us; for as I was within two miles of the Roman Camp, a Stranger (having drawn
me aside as I was riding with the Numidian King) told me, if I were at leisure
to hear him, he had something of high concernment for me from Izadora, who had
expressly sent him. That fair Name surpised me, and made me use the Ambassador
from such a perfection, with Civilities, that manifested the respect I paid
her: after a thousand embraces I told him, Yes my dear Friend if you come from
the fair Izadora, I am not only at leisure to hear you, but to desert all the
Glory of the Earth for that of obeying her Commands. You will (said the
Messenger) somewhat confounded with those Civilities, at the head of the Army)
receive them in this Paper, which I took with a transcendent greediness and
devotion, and having opened it, found it contained these words:

IZADORA to PEROLLA.
BLacius will give me to Flamminius, but I will give my self to Perolla, or to
Death, if the former will have me, he must return suddenly, or he will find I
am in the possession of the latter, lose no time then (generous Friend) since
the least dealy will leave you nothing to love of Izadora, but her Memory and
her Constancy.


No no (I cried out) fair Izadora (having twice read this Letter) I will lose
no time, but go and relieve you from your Fathers Tyranny, or by my death,
remove the cause of it; then turning to the Messenger, I told him, come (my
Friend) I am ready to obey you, and Izadora's Commands, and the gods knowing
the justice of my obedience, will doubtless contribute to so necessary a duty.
Sir (he replied) methink, as yet they do not favor your desires, for they have
tied you to celebrate a Triumph, and confined you to Afric, by an opposite
wind. Alas (said I, interrupting him) how ill thou understandest me, to believe
that Triumphs or the Empire of the World, can one minute suspend my serving the
fair Izadora: Nor those, nor the Winds shall stop me a moment; I Will force the
Sea to be my Friend or Ruin, by perishing, in attempting of my Duty. Let us go
then; (replied Izadora's Servant) That Gally which transported me, is now at
Tunis, and expects but our return; she has a gallant Ginge, and nothing but a
storm great enough to swallow us, shall hinder our arrival in Italy. Thou
rejoycest me (I replied) for the best fortune next to our intended Harbor, is a
wrack: go then and prepare all things, that we may set to Sea within this hour,
for before that time be expired, I Will be aboard. The faithful Messenger without
reply, galloped away, and in an instant, in a cloud of Dust we lost sight of
him. But my Passion for her that merited a higher, was so great, that till the
fair Izadora's Servant was gone, I took no notice that Massanissa and all the
Army had made a stand, whilst I was receiving so fatal an intelligence; to
repair their rudeness (which nothing could excuse but the cause of it) I rid up
to the Numidian King, besought him, and who had known the effects of Love, from
the fair Sophonisba's Eyes, to pardon those which proceeded from a resembling
perfection. That generous Prince, at the name of Sophonisba looked pale, and
sighed, and then told me, he was sadly skilful enough in the operation of
Beauty, not only to excuse what it produced, but was bound by his knowledge of
those effects, to offer all his assistance to them; and therefore he begged me
to make use of five excellent Galleys of his, which lay ready behind the
Promontory of Carthage, well manned, both for the Oar and the Sword; that if
Blacius continued his Tyranny, I might have wherewithal to disingage Izadora
from it, and that I should find a plentiful Sanctuary in his Kingdom, which was
at my devotion, by my having reduced it to his. This transcendent Civility I
declined, with all the submission I was capable of, and assured him, that it
was by more humble Arms than those he had so generously offered me, that I
would vanquish Izadora's Father; but since by what he had mentioned, he gave me
the confidence to implore something of him, I would make use of those humble
Prayers, to beseech him to Apologize for me to the Consul, for my i^stant
departure, since an hours delay might be the Eternal ruin of a Virtue, greater
than ever yet had shined on earth; that my crime was the more extenuated by my
resigning those Forces he trusted me with, to the great Massanissa's care, and
after they had obeyed his Commands. That virtuous Prince undertook what I
implored, and bid me not doubt but Scipio would listen to all excuses of Love
from him, but to those which concerned himself: he spoke these last words in
high disorders, which the Consuls sad Commands concerning the fair Sophonisba
had created. From Massanissa I went to make my excuse to those Troops I had
commanded, who expressed as much sadness for the cause of my departure, as for my
abandoning them. Some of them were so gallant, as to offer me their Swords and
Lives, (which they might dispose of, being all Volunteers.) I would not make
use of so obliging a proffer, but having declined it upon the same score I had
Massanissa's, I immediately took leave, and only followed by Strato, I soon
lost sight of the Army, and recovered Tunis, where I found my Gally had weighed
Anchor, and stayed upon her Oars for my arrival. As soon as I came aboard, I
animated the Slaves by Gifts, and Promises of excessive rewards, and in the joy
of those hopes, they cheerfully began the voyage; but we had not crossed half the
Sea, which separates Carthage from Naples, when a ^urious Northern wind began
to whistle so hollow, and so loud, that though it raised a storm of it self,
yet we knew it was but the forerunner of a greater, which soon followed, with
such extremity, that the Mariners, and Slaves, were as much troubled as the
Sea, and as deaf to all my Prayers, of continuing their Navigation, as the
Wind. But at length, finding the Pilot had put the Gally before the Wind, and
was steering for Tunis, I ran to him, and presenting my Sword to his Breast, I
vowed by many horrid Oaths, that if he did not change his Course, whatever
become of the Gally, he should immediately receive his Fate. That which too
increast the horror, was an Eclipse of the Moon, which those Superstitious
ignorant Souls, attributed to a divine forewarning of their wrack, and not to a
natural Cause; but I had (whilst study was my employment) so great propensity
to Astronomy, and made some such progress in it, that I knew perfectly the
cause and duration of Eclipses, and having by a former calculation found out
how long this would continue, what with my threatenings, what with my
engagements to them, that if the Moon did not recover her former Luster (which
I said she had only lost, in horror, and detestation of their fear) within
three hours, I would be content to return with them: I made the trembling Pilot
tack about, and the gods of the Wind, and Sea, with the Queen of Love, who
sprung from that Element, so favored my resolution (which had for end, the
relieving of a Beauty as fair as she, and which presented her more votaries
than all the residue of her Sex) that after the Moon within the time limited,
had assumed her former light, by a friendly South Wind, we safely arrived in
two days at Naples; where leaving Izadora's Servant, next night I came Post to
this City, but in disguise, lest the rumor of my arrival might prejudice the
intention of it. Immediately after I lighted, I went toward Blacius's House, to
learn by what intelligence I could get, how to form my resolutions; and though
there was no light in the streets, but what the Lamps of the Shops and Windows
did afford, yet as I was passing by that House Pacuvi^s used to dwell in; I
heard a Gentleman that stood at the door, tell his Companion, either I am
infinitely mistaken, or that is Perolla which is going by; the other being of his
opinion, they immediately followed, and overtook me, and so confidently called
me by my name, that I could not well deny it; neither indeed would I at any
time have denied it to them for they were two of those intimate Friends, which
had helped me to force Hannibal's Prisons, when Blacius was in them. I was as
much astonished at the weakness of my disguise, as to find my friends without
any, in a place where Blacius commanded, but they silenced that wonder by a
greater; their assurance that my Father was too in Salapia; That the Senate,
(after Hannibals abandoning Italy) had sent him a Pardon for his Estate and
Life, and were so generous, as to attribute that favor to those services (they
said) his Son had done their Empire: That the Garrison of Salapia was disbanded,
and things were in the same posture they had been in, before the Carthaginian
crossed the Alps. All this I heard with astonishment, but being incapable of any
concern, but my greatest, I conjured my Friends to preserve me unknown, to
provide me a private Lodging in one of their Houses, and to permit me awhile to
prosecute an intended design. All this (but the last) they promised, and
seeming to know the scope of that, they begged me passionately to be sharers
(and serve me) in it: this I as passionately declined, and having taken a hasty
leave of them, I went alone directly to Blaciu's House, which finding open,
(guided by my Ear) I came into a large room, almost filled with company, that
then were Dancing a Ball, and where the crowd of Lookers on was so thick, that
for a good while I could not come to see those particulars that composed it;
but as soon as I did, the first object I saw, was Izadora, dressed in all the
shinings of a Bride, and with a Face as full of content, as 'twas of Charms.
Judge (Sir) continued Perolla, speaking to my Prince) what a perplexity this
sight did cast me into, but after the first disorders of it was lessened,
imagining what I knew to be a reality, was an illusion, I inquired of a
Gentleman that stood by me, what was the occasion of so celebrated a meeting:
He (without considering any thing but my Clothes) answered me briskly; of what
Country art thou Friend, that art ignorant of it? I told him I was one that
dwelt not far off, and that passing along the Street, having heard excellent
Music, I had permitted my Ear to guide me, and was come to hear it, but
finding some things that pleased my Eyes as well, I was desirous to satisfy
them too, and by his favor to learn their Names that did it. Since thou art a
Stranger indeed (he replied) I will, to the best of my knowledge, inform thy
curiosity, as soon as thou acquaintest me with it. I would then (said I) beseech
you to tell me, who that Gentleman is which goes so richly dressed, and that
becomes his Clothes so well? It Is (he replied) Flaminius, who is this night to
possess that Beauty (pointing at Izadora) which cannot be greater than his
merit. Oh gods (said Perolla, interupting himself) you only know my disorders
at so fatal an intelligence, but lest the Gentleman should, the better to
conceal them, I begged him to let me know that Beauties Name? It Is Izadora (he
replied) I have heard (said I) that Izadora, (if this be the same) was so
engaged to Pacuvius's Son, both by Inclination and Services, that he only
should have married her. 'Twas, the Gentleman answered, generally believed so,
and I am sure her Father has been sufficiently obliged to him, to make the gift
of his Daughter the evincement of his Gratitude; but either her Inconstancy, or
Blacius's hatred, is the cause of these Nuptials, though for my part, I
attribute them to the former, for methinks her Face is too full of joy, to
believe her Heart is possessed with a contrary passion; yet believe me, Friend
(he continued) this Marriage will end in Tears, for I know Perolla's courage
too well, to be ignorant of what his resentments will be in such an affront,
and therefore I could gladly wish the gallant Flaminius had placed his Passion
on an object, as fit for that honor in all things, as this is in Beauty. I
could not hear these sad words, without some sighs stealing from my Breast,
which he that caused them, observing, asked me the occasion. I told him coldly,
'twas to find that the god's bestowed the blessing of Beauty, without that of
Constancy, which was in effect to lay snares for Men's destruction; but to take
him off from considering me, and to learn whether there were any suspicions, or
belief of my being in Salapia, I besought him to tell me where Parolla was, for
I could not but think it strange, if her were a Man of Courage, that he did not
employ his, to vindicate such a wrong Alas (he replied) the poor Gentleman I
believe, is so happy, as to be ignorant of his misfortune: He is now in
A^frick, where he has obtained within these few days, a great Victory against
Vermina (the Son of Syphax) who it seems, is successor to his Fathers
misfortunes, and consequently not to his Kingdom: this I was even now told by a
Gentleman that came from the Roman Camp before Perolla was returned unto it,
who I believe when he hears Izadora's Inconstancy, will curse his Fate, that he
did not find his Death, where he found his Victory; but I am still of opinion,
that he which takes Perolla's Mirtles, whilst he is gathering Laurel, will
shortly find them turned to Cyprus, unless the forsaken Lover will esteem
Flaminius possessing a Woman of as much Inconstancy, as Beauty, a sufficient
punishment: I cannot tell you the disorders I was in at these strange
discourses, but I can perfectly tell you, that had not he which made them, been
more intent in considering the company, than to whom they were addressed, he had
certainly discovered me; but as I was about to retire to form my resolutions,
(which I could not do whilst I saw Izadora, and Flaminius,) I heard a fresh
Consort of Music, which presently ushered in a Youth in a Saffron Coat, a
Crown of Roses on his Head, and an unlighted Torch of Pine in his Hand. This I
knew was a representation of Hymen, who is the Deity of our Italian Nuptials,
and his appearing made me soon learn, that the intended Marriage was suddenly
to be consummated. I withdrew my self in the horror of such a sight, and having
observed, Callione (Izadora's Confident) was not amongst the other Ladies,
being perfectly knowing in the passages of Blacius House, I stole up to her
Chamber, to be informed of my destiny; for though I saw her fair Mistress (as
it were) in my Rivals Arms and Embraces, yet I attributed my misery to all
Causes, rather than to her Infidelity; which if by a miracle I should learn
from Callione, she was capable of, I was determined to change the Marriage into
a Funeral, by killing the Bridegroom first, and then his Murderer at Izadora's
feet. But Madam (continued Perolla, with an humble gesture, and accent) though
I have as often begged and obtained your pardon for this Crime, as I have
mentioned it, yet I must still continue that practice; for to think 'twas in
the power of a miracle for you to be one, in any thing but Perfection, is a sin
greater than all things, but the Mercy which has forgiven it: In confidence
that you have so again, which I implore with an humility as transcendent as my
offense, I will prosecute my Relation, which was so necessarily interrupted at
my going to Callione's Chamber, where finding the Door shut, but not locked, I
gently opened it, and looking in, perceived there was no Light in the Chamber,
but that there was some in a Closset contiguous to it; thither I softly went
and looking through a Crevice of the Door, I saw Callione leaning upon the
Table, with a Bole before* her, over which she wept Tears enough to have filled
it: so high a melancholy in a House where nothing (any where else) was visible
but joy, extremely surpised me; but I was much more when I heard her say to
her self; What Callione, can thou then be faithful to Izadora, when thy
Fidelity is a Crime? and when she makes use of thy affection for so fatal an
end, as to become her Murderer? No, no, Perolla doubtless will be more
satisfied to find her in the Arms of Flamminius, than in those of Death;
especially since her being the former, was her misfortune, not her design: He
will too console himself in the knowledge of my Treachery, and pardon it, since
'twas to preserve, what his delay only ruined: but (alas, she continued, after
a small silence) thou speak Callione, as if hind'ring her Fate in this
Nuptial Bole, would hinder it till the hand of Age imposed it: No, she that has
resolution enough to receive Poison into her Breast, will not want it to plant
a Poniard there, when the first has failed: What will thou do then, unfortunate
Callione? to obey thy Mistress is to become her Executioner, and not to do it,
is to make her become her own, after the gods too (by a Holy tie) has left her
no disposal of her self, and thereby must act her murder, by almost as high a
Sin; she must dye too, Flamminius's and not Perolla's, and must detest thee as
much as she will Life. Oh gods ( Callione continued) you that have brought me
into this Labyrinth, lead me out of it, and do not destroy a perfection, which
suppresses Atheism, for nothing can create, but must be more perfect than what
it creates, and to be more perfect than Izadora, is to be without doubt a
Deity. The fair Calliones's Tears for a while, interrupted her words, but the
confu^ion they wrought in me (I attest, the same gods she invoked) was so
great, that I was in hope, what betwixt that and grief, I should never more
have been capable of any: but those that form our Destinies, made not mine so
favorable, for they rendered my Heart stronger than my Misery, and by that
time they had perfectly restored me my Senses, I heard Callione thus assume her
discourse. Yes fair Izadora, I will obey your Commands, the Nuptial Cup shall
be poisoned, but you shall not take it, for I will go and acquaint Blacius with
your resolves, who shall hinder them in such way, that you will attribute his
care, rather to his doubts, than knowledge; perhaps your despair may more work
on him, than your Tears have done, and when he finds you elect Death before
Flamminius, he may let Perolla supply his place. No Callione (I replied,
knocking at the door) Perolla knows the gods, and Izadora too well, to believe
the former have ordained me the latter; if I am come, it is to contribute to,
not interrupt the Marriage. Yes, yes, I am resolved to give Izadora up all her
vows, they have been too much her torment, for me to continue their possession;
but if she be too generous to receive them by a resignation, I will present
them to her by my death. Callione hearing my voice, (after a little trembling,)
opened the Door, and her Eyes had no sooner confirmed the Intelligence of her
Ears, than she cried out; Is it you indeed Perolla, alas, what Tears has your
absence cost us? you cannot guess them, but by the joy of your return, which
revives my hopes, for the gods are not so cruel to send you to be a spectator,
but a reliever of our Miseries. Thereupon, after some other discourses of this
quality, to satisfy my entreaties, she told me; That Flamminius, a Roman
Gentleman, who had no fault, but too transcendent a Passion for Izadora, had
seen her one day in the Temple, where from adoring an invisible Deity, he
adored a mortal of as much perfection; and being as great in the Riches of
Fortune, as of Nature, had by some Senators (expressly come from Rome)
propounded his alliance to Blacius, who meeting in him all things worthy it,
and your absence contributing a favorable opportunity, greedily embraced the
motion, and Flamminius began his addresses, with so charming a Grace, and
Humility, that nothing transcended both, but Izadora's Constancy, which is not
to be extinguished, but with her Life. I cannot tell you how diligent she was
to discover an imperfection in her Servant, that might have rendered her
declining him, an action of as much reason to her Father, as it was to her:
it is too much you know, that though she had you for her pattern, I tell you,
said Perolla, her flattering expression, yet she could find no fault in him,
but that in which he resembl'd you most; I mean the greatness, and
unmoveableness of his Love; in this misfortune, to declare the good opinion she
had of his Virtue, and to be convinced of the reality of it by an experiment,
one day she freely acquainted him with all your Loves, and how fully he might
be satisfied of the fixtness of her Passion, since he could not remove it; that
therefore she implored him to render that an effect of his Generosity, which
else would be one of her Constancy; and that he would turn his Love into
Friendship, since she was as ambitious of that, as incapable of the other.
These words so moved the generous Flamminius, that his Blood ran all to
preserve the seat of Life, his Eyes were fixed in his Head, his Tongue was
moveless, and suddenly he fell so at Izador's feet, who in a fright, ran out,
and called me in to her assistance; both ours proved so powerful, that after a
quarter of an hour, Flamminius came to himself, and having immediately begged
Izadora's Pardon for the incivility of his indisposition, he only told her;
That either He or Death would obey her Commands; and then retired to his
Lodging, where, what reasons he raised against his Passion, I am ignorant of,
though not of the strange effects they produced, for two or three days after,
he came to visit Izadora, where he was hardly known, and where constantly
afterward, if she were alone, he never mentioned any thing of his Passion, but
would only look fix'dly upon her, fold his Arms, and groan, and say he was not
yet Conqueror. But if Blacius were there, he would court Izadora with a
countenance as full of joy, as his heart was empty of it, and if he admired at
Flamminius pining away, he protested 'twas an inward disease, but not one of
the mind, nor of Izadora's neglect. This was his practice for twenty days, the
Night of the last, he came again to visit Izadora, and in Sighs, and some
Tears, implored his Pardon for his Passion, Importunities, and so long
disobedience; and protested that he would shortly so vindicate her, on himself,
that she should acknowledge her Interests, and satisfaction, were much dearer
to him, than his own. Flamminius after those assurances without any more words,
immediately withdrew himself, and the next intelligence we had of him, was,
that he kept his Bed, of a disease, whose nature the Physicians were as
ignorant of, as of the cure; and that though Blacius, by many reiterated, and
passionate conjurations, begged again to know, whether Izadora's coldness were
not the efficient cause of his sickness, yet he could never receive any other
answer, but that she was not, at least if the gods imposed not that affliction
on him, for so aspiring a Passion. Six days Flamminius Fever was so violent,
that he despaired not the Seventh (which in that disease was the first critical
day) but to be able to obey Izadora. Therefore calling to him a Page of his,
who was his Confident, he commanded him to bring him some Paper, on which,
(though with much difficulty) he writes these few lines;

FLAMMINIVS to the fair IZADORA.
HE that loved, where he should have but adored, to repair his Sin, from your
Lover, makes himself your Martyr. Let your resentments, (fair Izadora) dye with
the object of them, and be so merciful as to believe, I find more satisfaction
in Death, since it is the effect of my obedience, than I can in life, having
lost the hopes of what my ambition desired, and your justice denied me.


THis Letter being sealed, he commanded the faithful Youth, by all the
strictest ties he could invent, to deliver it with his own hands, and without
any witness, to her to whom it was addressed; For if Blacius, or any other,
discovered what it contained, he should spend those few hours he had to live,
inso much despair, and horror, that those torments would almost equal Izadora's
hate. Judge ( Perolla) if ever Gallantry was raised to a greater height, than
to have so particular a care for the preservation of one's own destruction, and
whether you have not cause to glory in possesing a Beauty, which could produce
such rare effects, and in a Constancy that was not moved with them; at least,
no further than Pity could extend. I answered (continued Perolla) Callione's
words only with a deep sigh, that the reflection of having been cursed with one
Rival, too full of Power, and another too full of Virtue, drew from me, which
made her thus continue. But though the circumspection of the Master, and the
Servant was great yet it was fruitless, for having delivered Izadora the
Letter, as privately as he was directed, Blacius, who always suspected
Flamminius denials, proceeded rather from his goodness, than his Truth, and who
observed an admirable vigilance over Izadoras actions, was no sooner advertised
of the Pages coming to his House, than he stole to his Daughters Chamber, who
had scarcely read her Lovers fatal generosity, but she fell a deploring it with
Tears, and in so great disorders, that in the height of them, Blacius
surpised her with the cause in her hands, which he violently snatched from
hers, and having perused it, contracted so transcendent a rage for her to whom
it was sent, that his Poniard was twice out to have quenched it in her Blood;
but perhaps, believing to kill her, would be rather an obligation, than a
revenge, he resolved as the most sensible one he could invent, to carry her to
Flamminius, and force her to give him some such pregnant evincements of her
conversion, that he should not doubt it; and which, if afterward she broke,
might render her as unworthy his Affections, as Resentments. Blacius being thus
fixed, commanded a Chariot to be made ready, in which he took Izadora with him
to Flamminius's, to whom he commanded her to be askind, as she had been cruel,
or as he merited; which if she declin d, he protested by Oaths (that to be
repeated would give one horror, much more to have broken them) that if he could
hire no murderers to destroy you, he would do it with his own hand, and that
then he would force her to marry Flamminius, or Diana's Nunnery. The fear (as
she vowed to me) she had for you, the pity of Flamminius sufferings, and
virtue, and the duty to a Father, made her more incline to obedience than her
own safety, which the gods by the condition they had reduced her to, had
rendered the least of her cares. As soon as they were come into Flamminius's
Chamber, the poor Gentleman seeing Blacius with Izadora, began to exclaim
against the Fates cruelty, and not hers, that had given him no obstacle but
want of health, to enjoy a Felicity as transcendent as her Beauty, This
discourse the generous Lover held, for he was ignorant that Blacius knew the
cause of his danger, his Page not daring to acquaint him with it, lest what was
his misfortune, might have been esteemed his fault; but he was soon put out of
that Faith by Blacius, showing him his own Letter. Oh gods! who can tell you
those sad words Flamminius uttered at that discovery (they were such, that I as
much admired, as commended Izadoras Constancy not to have been shaken by them.
But her Father who had solemnly sworn, that nothing but Flamminius's recovery,
should convince him of his Daughters change, withdrew himself to a window, lest
the dying Lover might attribute Izadora's kindness, to his presence, and not
her conversion. Flamminius perceiving 'twas with design, instead of employing
so kind an opportunity, to implore his Mercy, in receiving, and cherishing so
pure, and bright a flame, made use of it only to invoke her pardon, that the
assurance he had sent of his obedience, had proved so unfortunate a Duty, and
then protested (with Eyes and Hands, elevated to Heaven) that if her justice
would not invite her to believe, he intended not to make use of Blacius
authority, her reason should be convinced of it, by the demonstration of his
death; and lest that might be considered as her act, he would by a Letter, and
before witnesses, seal with his last breath, 'twas not her disdain that
produced so sad an effect, but the joy of her alteration, meeting with a Body
too much weakn'd, to receive so transcendent a blessing. This new, and perhaps
unexpected Gallantry, more troubled Izadora, than had he made use of that
power, Blacius was so willing to furnish him with; for she found it far more
difficult to oppose Virtue, than persecution; and indeed her perplexity was
such, that for a while she answered him in nothing but weepings; which the
generous Flamminius observing, and perhaps fancying the cause of her disorders,
begged her to believe he was more sensible at her Tears, than she could be for
their subject; that all he said, or hoped for, was but to obtain a pardon for
what his Passion, and Misfortune had cast upon her; that she would not so much
contribute to his Torment, as to manifest she was sensible of it; nor to his
Recovery, as showing him a Beauty, which was capable of greater miracles. This
discourse confounded Izadora, on the one side to destroy so perfect a Virtue,
and on the other, to preserve so dangerous a Ryval for Perolla, was a strange
perplexity: besides, to give him hopes, was to cast herself into as great a
danger as she exempted him from; and to make him despair, was, (by Blacius's
vows) against your Life) to involve you in a resembling misfortune; but at
length, considering that he had virtue enough, to give her a confidence that by
it, he might in time suppress his Passion; or if that which was so strong in
all other occasions, should prove so weak in this, that yet her, and your
condition would be but as desperate, as without that Essay, she resolved to
save a life, that the gods (but by Izadora) had not the power to preserve. In
this relation she told Flamminius (blushing, and trembling) I will pardon you
all things, so to dye, be not one of them. O Madam (hereply'd) are my Crimes so
great, that you deny me too that way of avoiding farther punishments? No (said
Izadora) your Virtues are so, that I can better suffer your passion, than your
ruin. I could not but sigh at those words (said Perolla) but Callione did not,
or would not hear me. Ah Madam (she continued, Flamminius replied) do not you
think me past recovery, and in that faith, do like Physicians to Patients,
which are so, permit them any thing? or may not I fear I owe this preservation
to your duty, not your mercy? But I carry my fears too far, and make them
perhaps as injurious, as my hopes, which have no greater ambition, than to have
the Divine Izadora for the object of their adoration, and that she will promise
me, in the same moment she forbids me that felicity, I may (as by her Commands)
end my life with what gives the relish to it? This (said Izadora, hastily, and
in disorder) I promise you. And this promise (said Flamminius, kissing her
hand) I do more joyfully receive, than that health and life it will restore me
to, Izadora gave Flamminius that engagement, because it was nothing conclusive
to your prejudice, and because Blacius (who was impatient to learn the event of
their discourse) was coming toward them, who might have forced his fair
Daughter to a more binding one, or to as great a danger by her declining it. To
shorten my relation, Blacius, though he had many protestations from Flamminius,
that his Truth, and not his compliance, published that Izadora (as far above
his hopes, as merit) had made him happy, and that his health should be
suddenly a visible effect, and evincement of what he professed; yet upon his
return, he confined Izadora to her Chamber, till by Flamminius recovery, he was
convinced of his Daughters obedience, which yet he durst not manifest to be his
intention before Flamminius, who he knew would revenge any Tyranny upon
himself, that was imposed on his Mistress, But upon his first visit, which was
not long after (so powerful a charm were Izadora's words) she was restored to
that freedom, her Servant never knew she had lost; but it was upon condition,
that she should receive Flamminius addresses, and the same minute she
manifested any aversion for them, to be one of the vestal Nuns of Diana, which
you know is a society, that admits of no return to the world, to any that are
once engaged in it. If it had not been for Perolla, this threatening had lost
that quality, and the penance had invited her to the Sin: but she knew to be
in the World, and not his, was as inconsistent with her inclination, as Vows;
and that the way was easier for him to follow her to Elysium, than to the
Nunnery; but yet the hope she had in his Fortune, and Courage, made her look,
as at a distance, though as at a certainty upon the latter, and dispatch an
express to acquaint him with her resolution, if his arrival prevented it not.
But whether Blacius has heard of this messenger, or whether his apprehension,
that your now accession of Glory, (which came to his knowledge last night by a
Spy he kept about you) would make the Senate consider your particular, as a
public Concernment, accelerated the Nuptials, I cannot tell; but this I can,
that there was no intentions of them so suddenly, and that Flamminius had never
the confidence to ask Izadora's consent, but contents himself with not learning
her aversion for them, and in observing in her countenance, a joy, which has
not only deluded him, but all those that have considered it; but alas, it was
but the better to palliate her fatal resolution; which is in the Nuptial Bole
that is offered to Venus, to drown her life; or else, perhaps she does not
counterfeit: but her exterior satisfaction proceeds from an eternal one, that
she dies a Martyr for Perolla, and for Constancy, which I hope his arrival will
prevent, and convert our fears into nobler passions. For my part, I shall not
tell you, either the Office Izadora imposed on me, or the resolution I formed
on it; since I am confident you have heard both. Yes (said I) fair Callione) I
have, and you must practice neither; I will act a part, that will exempt you
from acting any. Then lifting up my Eyes and Hands, I thank' the gods for
having communicated so much Divinity to a Creature, and implored them to direct
my actions, for her satisfaction, though to my own ruin. This short
ejaculation finished, I begged Callione, that I might have the felicity to see
(and talk one minute with) Izadora, which she promised, and was no further on
her way toward the satisfying her engagement, than her Closet door, but
Izadora came into the Chamber, waited on by Flamminius, Great gods! what
tremblings did that sight cast me into, which I saw through the crevice of the
door? I was once going to have made him no more my Rival, or to have been his
no longer; but the presence of Izadora (and Flamminius virtue) tied up my Arm;
neither though my reason had not suppressed my disorders, had I enjoyed the
opportunity of acting my despair: for the cause of it, immediately withdrew
himself, with so much Grace and Humility, that I exclaimed against Fate, which
had rendered my being his Friend and Izadora's Servant inconsistent. Flamminius
was no sooner gone, than she having shut the Chamber door, told her Confident;
Now Callione, I perceive the gods are determined to furnish me by Perolla's
absence with what shall evince, that my passion for him, is as perfect, as
unfortunate; I must dye ( Callione) and (beseech the gods to make me as
unfortunate in the other World, as I have been in this, if I resent any trouble
for my Death, but what I apprehend it may create in him; and that by this one
argument of my Flame, I am rendered for ever incapable of giving him any other;
but it may be the cause of my death, may extinguish, or lessen the effects of
it. On the contrary, Madam ( Callione replied) 'twill augment them, not only by
the loss of the highest perfection that ever was, but by his knowledge that
that loss was his, and for him. Let us speak no more of it (said Izadora) my
resolution is too just, and too settled, to be removed; for, either 'twill make
him love my memory, or follow me; and in this one performance, I satisfy my
Duty, and my Love: the first being cancelled by the hand of death, the last by
going to a place where the object of mine may be assured to find and possess
me; and I have stolen this minute to let him know so much under my hand. For thy
particular ( Callione) the trust I have imposed on thee, is of a quality which
manifests the greatness of it, and this is all I have to enjoin thee, that thou will deliver my last desires to Perolla's hands, and that thou will, with as
much resolution, see me take the Poison, as I will drink it. Come Madam (said
Callione) I cannot believe Miracles are ceased, since I see your constancy:
retire yourself into this Closet, where you may deliver me your Commands, with
more secrecy, which I beseech you to believe I shall faithfully obey, though I
would not any of them with so much passion, as that of pledging you. Alas
Callione (said Izadora) thou have no griefs, which death alone can ease. I
shall have (Madam (she replied) when yours are cured by that remedy. At the end
of these words, the fair Izadora opened the Closet Door, and perceiving a Man
there, for my disguise hindered her from knowing me) she cried out, oh
Callione, thou have betrayed, thou have betrayed me, but death has more doors
than one, and I will try them all, but I will find a passage. No Madam (said
Callione, perceiving her error) your suspicions wrong me more, than you believe
my treachery does you: It Is Perolla you see, and unless my presenting him unto
you be a treachery, I am guilty of none. Izadora at that assurance, considered
me more attentively, and then continued; oh gods, it is not Perolla, but his
Ghost which comes to invite me to a place, where Merit and Love have no
Enemies, and where a virtuous and a happy Flame are the same thing. No, fair
Izadora (I replied, prostrating my self at her Feet, (for till then my
distempers were too violent to let me speak) I am Perolla, not his Ghost, and
am come to implore your continuance in this life, not to invite you to another;
the gods will not so much tempt us to doubt their providence, as to decline
rewarding your Virtue, on the same Theater, where it has so conspicuously
shined: for that were to make Sin Reason Callione (Madam) has told me such a
story of Flamminius, that you must be the unjustest Woman in the World, if you
make me not the miserablest Man: and that hatred of your Fathers, which I
thought was the gods cruelty; I now find was their care, since it has reserved
you to a blessing, which nothing can transcend, but my misfortune which builds
it. I had continued this discourse, had not Izadora interrupted it first, by
going two steps back, and then by saying; This is sure Perolla's Ghost, not he:
for nothing but a Spirit, divested of Flesh, could entertain so high a
Philosophy; but can you esteem Flamminius Virtues great, that never but
hazarded his life to please his Mistress, when at the same instant you make
yours your misery, to reward your Rival? his performance carried its ease with
it, but Perolla's it is torment; had I been cursed with any doubts of your
transcending him; this action had cleared them, and what you intend for the
disclosing of his Virtues, do but the better manifest your own: neither can you
think, but that his embracing your Offer, will render him unworthy of it; for
the receiving a resigned up Mistress, is like losing a life for a Friend, where
that act which makes the obligation, imposes an impossibility of gratitude. Ah
Madam (said I, interrupting her) he that could dye to please Izadora, merits to
live for her. Observe (she replied) the justice of the Gods, which furnishes me
with Arguments out of your own Mouth; for you will acknowledge, to live in
Torment is a greater unhappiness, than death, and since you assure me by
becoming Flamminius's, I must make the first of those your Fate, must not a
higher Martyrdom, have a proportionate reward? will you make Izadora
unfortunate, because the gods have made Flamminius generous? and will you give
away what you have given yourself to? have you not rewarded a gallant
intention, by a gallanter? and have you nothing to pay Izadora's debts with,
but Izadora herself? Alas Madam (I replied) they are my debts, as well as
yours, and I beseech you, judge of the value I place upon those that obl^ge
you, when I submit to such a payment. Great gods! (said Izadora, ^^fting up her
hands) what have I committed, that Perolla against Reason, against my Tears,
and against my Prayers, will part with me? cruel Perolla (she continued) fixing
her Eyes upon me, after a short silence and weeping, you shall but extend your
power over your self; you can but deny Izadora to be yours, and recall those
vows you have made her: you cannot make her cancel hers, which were to be yours
or Deaths; the first you willingly exempt her from, and the last she therefore
as willingly elects. When she had done speaking, she came again to the place
where I kneeled, and after having wet my Face with her Tears, she dried her
Eyes, and with a look as cold, as temperate, and as far above misfortune, as
she was unworthy any, she told me: farewell Perolla, farewell for ever, but
before I execute what your cruelty, and my religion renders necessary, I will
satisfy you, and Flamminius by my Nuptials; and after in that Bole, (pointing
to the poison) or in as certain a remedy, if that be denied me, I will satisfy
my duty to the gods. At the finishing of these words she left me, as if Life
had done so, but observing her Fatal resolution, and that to be just to my
Rival, was to be unjust and cruel to Izadora, before she was gone out of the
Chamber, I cried out to her, Stay, Stay, (fair Izadora) your Life is dearer
unto me than Justice, Gratitude, or all other considerations; and upon better
thoughts, I have placed too high a value upon Flamminius's performances, that
could think they merited Izadora for their reward, who can find none worthy of
her, but he that she raises to that height, by her esteeming him so; and since
she has created Perolla to, not found him in that blessed condition, let her
impose what Commands she will on the work of her creation, he will either act
them, or not survive his impotency, and disobedience. All that I have (said
Izadora returning) to enjoin you, is, that you leave no means un-essay'd (I
will not so much wrong you, as to limit them no further than honor shall
direct) to free me from Flamminius, and if those fail, to give me leave to do
it. Farewell Perolla, though I dare embrace death, yet I dare not stay to see
the event of your designs. Izadora was no sooner gone, than I begged Callione
to let me know, whether there were a private room, in which I might by her
favor entertain Flamminius without witnesses, whose virtue she had given me so
large a Carracter of, that I despaired not to persuade him to abandon a
blessing, he could not purchase, but by as great a Tyranny. I believe (said
Callione) I might bring him into the lower Hall, which is kept empty for the
celebrating the Nuptials; but allow I did, and that his Flame prove greater
than his Virtue? Ah Callione (I replied) do not do the latter so much wrong,
nor me, as to ask what my resentments will be, at so high an injustice. I will
not (said Callione) do my innocence so much, for if I know your intentions,
perhaps I might not contribute toward them, but being ignorant what they are,
I may serve you without a Sin: Go then Perolla into the great room, paved with
Marble, whereas certainly I will send him, as that my Prayers shall attend you.
Her going away immediately, left me no time to answer, and that little I had
left, was too precious to be misimployed: I therefore stole down to the place I
was assigned, where I had not long continued, but Flamminius came alone unto
me; I besought him first to permit me to lock the doo^, for my intelligence was
to be without witnesses, or interruption. This he consented to, and this being
performed I took off my disguise, and told him; The gods shall bear me witness,
generous Flamminius, that I almost esteem my not unfruitful Passion to Izadora
a misfortune, since I fear it may deny me a friendship, which is a blessing
next to hers I should be most ambitious of, and most cherish; For you have been
my Rival in so handsome a way, that I must acknowledge her declining, the giving
you yet a more advantageous Name, is as great a demonstration of her
partiality, as of my happiness; I have too, been so bold, as to tell her this
truth in your behalf, and some things more as hard to be credited, as perhaps
they were to be spoken. Yes Flamminius, I have been your Advocate against my
self, and have passionately pleaded your Cause, with hope of success, though I
know I could not obtain it, but by my eternal ruin; neither should I now have
altered that practice, were not Izadora's Life the cause of it, who more
constant to her Vows than her Felicity, prefers Perolla, or Death before
Flamminius; so that the latter cannot attempt to be her Husband, but he will
necessitate her to be her own Executioner, and by so fatal a perseverance, not
only extinguish the fairest light that ever shined, but make your self so
guilty to your self, that should Izadora want friends to revenge your cruelty,
your Conscience would assume that part, and act it with as much certainty, as
horror. There is glory Flamminius as well as Reason in declining one Blessing,
for a greater, and of two evils you choose the least, when you elect your own
ruin, before Izadora's; neither should I ever have had the confidence to beg
this of you, had I not begged more for you, and were I only to receive the
fruit of your Virtue, I would never have implored it: For Blacius being as
constant in his Hate, as I am in my Love, I shall remove no obstacle by
removing my Rival; but remain at as great a distance from my happiness, though
you decline possessing it, as I shall be if you act the contrary. I will not
tell you (Sir) what were Flamminius astonishments, both at learning who I was,
and my requests; for they were indeed of a quality fitter to be imagined than
related: but his answer (after a little silence) was this. Though I only know
Perolla by report, yet I believe him such as he is described, but had I been as
ignorant of his actions, as his Person, I must have concluded them both
excellent (I tell you said Perolla) true, though not the truth) since they had
charms sufficient to captivate Izadora, who having her own perfections to try
others by, evinces his to be great, since they were esteemed so by her. This
faith (when I first saw Izadora) made me esteem my engaging my self in her
service, and becoming your Rival, an action of as little justice, as hope: but
that Beauty which is the cause of my Flame, must be the Apology of it, which
would need none to any but Perolla; and lest he might believe the distance
betwixt him and Blacius, did create my expectations of a nearness betwixt his
admirable Daughter, and me, I declined all Arms to conquer her with, but those
you made use of, and would be obliged to Blacius for nothing, but his wishes,
and the opportunity of making my addresses. What their successes have been by
the mercy of her to whom they were paid, is visible in this nights
preparations, and in Izadora: neither by her commands, nor by her looks
opposing them. So that though I should credit Perolla in all things as an
Oracle, yet I must look upon what he now alleges, as proceeding sooner from
his Despair, than Truth, and believe since art in Love, is rather a Virtue,
than a Crime, that he considering of it in that quality, does make use of it to
destroy what Izadora's Mercy and Duty, have elected to conferr on Flamminius,
to the prejudice (perhaps) of her inclination, and of her Reason. If (I
replied) I am troubled at your not believing me, it is only by knowing what
prejudice it may involve Izadora in; to whom you have hitherto been so civil,
that I am upon that score incapable of resenting any thing from you, as an
injury to me, which does not absolutely prove one to her, and if there be any
Art in speaking Truth, what I have alleged, is abundantly replenished with it,
for by Izadora (an oath I hold in too much veneration to violate) what I have
told you is a real truth, and, is only in design, to preserve you from a sin,
the very thought whereof does make me tremble. You must pardon me Perolla (said
Flamminius, interrupting me) if I cannot raise my Faith so far above my reason.
Alas (I replied) I must of necessity be obliged only to your Faith, for your
doubts are of so sad a nature, that if reason and demonstration only must
remove them, the very performance which does it, will render you incapable of
making any advantage by their suppression, and the knowledge of your mistake.
No Perolla (said Flamminius) I have not been so rude an admirer of Izadora, as
not before now to have convinced her, that I prefer my obedience before my
death, and when to manifest that reality, I had almost made use of a
demonstration, I would not again return to life, (left her enjoining me, it
might have proceeded from her Duty, or her present pity) till she had
faithfully engaged her self, to permit my death, when she would no longer my
Passion; so that having given her the power, when she has the will to be free
from my Flame, I cannot consider you now, but as your own, and not Izador's
Agent. Alas Flamminius (I answered) that which you build upon the Cause of your
Confidence, will be of our Misery, and her ruin; for the engagement Izadora
gave you, the invitation to which was your virtue, with the condition you were
in, when she gave it you, and her fear of what you may do, by what you have
done, makes her elect her own Death, rather than avoid it by yours; so that
what you chose to evince your respect by, turns to a Tyranny; but let her
generosity instruct yours, and remember it can be but virtuous to imitate
Izadora. You make me (said Flamminius) happy whether I do, or do not credit
you: for if the latter by my choice, there is nothing since I spoke with you
that troubles me, and con-sequently I am in joys of hopes, till those of
fruition converts them into greater: and if the former, I must be convinced
that Izadora loves Flamminius better than her self; but yet (he continued) were
I assured so fatal a proof, must certify that Truth, I should be less
unfortunate in her hate, than her esteem; besides (he continued preparing
himself to leave me) Izadora knowing her death, will be so far from preventing,
that it will but accellerate mine. I must again ( Perolla) beg your pardon, for
not crediting your vows, which you may grant with the less reluctance, since my
unbelief is with reason and against my self. Then (I replied) staying him, and
drawing my Poniard, which was all the Arms I had then about me, you must either
oblige me so much, as not to let me live to see you restored to a better
opinion of me by so black an Experiment, or you must not live to be Izadora's
death; which, were I not certain your intended Nuptials would prove, I had
rather make use of my hand against my self, than Flamminius. Since (said he,
unsheathing his Poniard, which was a Weapon all Gentlemen constantly wore in
those times) you will force me to dispute Izadora by my Arms, as well as by my
Services, I make no question but to prove as successful in the first, as I have
been in the last. We had no more words after those, but ran furiously at each
other; my thrust was more fortunate than Flamminius's, for though his entered
my right side, yet meeting with a Rib, and glauncing on it, it gave me but a
large flesh wound, whereas mine past through and through his body, a little
above his heart; and our Weapons being not long, we were constrained to close,
in which I had the fortune to fling him down, and disarm him; but perceiving by
the great Spring of blood which issued from his wound, that I had at least for
awhile hindered his Marriage, presenting him his Poniard, I implored his
forgiveness for what I had done, begged him to be satisfied by my being able to
have success against him, that I had the better cause; and besought him not to
implore that life I gave him, and Izadora had preserved, for his ruin, and for
mine: since he would hereafter know how near she was to sacrifice her own for
his, and that I would ever be of a resembling resolution. Flamminius made me
some answer which I could not hear, for having effected my design, (though in
the most unfortunate way) I thought it high time to retire, lest a longer
continuance in so dangerous a place, might rob me of the fruits of my Victory.
I was but newly gone out of the Room, when (occasioned by the curiosity of some
that had listened at the door whilst we were fighting) I heard all the house
in an alarm, and was scarce half way out of it, but that I found my self in a
narrow Entry assaulted by four with Swords, who cried out, Kill, Kill, the
Murderer of Flamminius; one of those was so hot in his fury, that running at
me, he stumbled, and fell at my feet, and by his fall choking up the passage,
I had time to take away his Sword, with which for awhile I retreated safe
against the rest; but as soon as I was come into a more spacious place, not
only the other three came all upon me, but most of that crowd which were
invited to this Marriage, and Blacius at the head of them: so that I had
certainly there received my Fate, had not those two Friends I formerly
specified, with Strato, relieved me; who suspecting my design, had continued
about the house ready to answer all alarms; and this they did so vigorously,
that having worsted some that opposed their entrance, they joined me in my
greatest danger, and crying out, Courage Perolla, by their voices, and their
performances, had restored me mine, though I had lost it. The name of Perolla,
made Blacius discover what my disguise had concealed; and the affront, but more
the Actor of it, so transported him, that striking at me with all his force,
and I defending his blow with my Poniard, his Sword fell out of his hand, which
snatching up, I presented it him by the hilt, and begged him not to employ his
Arms against a life, that I was perpetually ready to sacrifice for his service.
Blacius was so extremely surpised at the loss of his Sword, and at the manner
of his recovering it, that I had time to leave him in his astonishment: But I
owed it to the Valor of the Gentleman with whom I had that discourse at my
first coming into the Room where the Ball was dancing, who learning by the
public noise that I was Perolla, and pardoning my attempt on Flamminius, as to
my resentments, did preserve my life, by cutting off another Gentleman's hand
that was coming behind me to have taken it away, whilst I was restoring
Blacius his Arms. With this generous additional assistance, I recovered the
Street-gate, where I found by the care of my two Friends so powerful a recruit,
that had my revenge been my design, I might as easily have acted, as desired
it; and indeed I found a greater difficulty to suppress the fury of those
Swords which were drawn in my quarrel, than I believe I should, to have been
victorious by them. To be brief, I retired to a private and secure Sanctuary,
though most of us received so many wounds, that their being not dangerous, made
us acknowledge a high Providence.

Whilst we were thus disputing our difference, Izadora, though she were but a
hearer of it, was (as she has assured me) in far greater fears, than any that
were Actors in it; but being told that Flamminius was killed, she ran with
Callione where he lay, and where she wept so many tears, that he almost mistook
her Pity, for her Love; but Blacius being (after our retreat) come thither
also, caused Flamminius to be carried into the next Chamber, and as soon as the
Chyrurgions had searched, and bound up his wound, the impatient Father asked
him, Whether his Daughter had any share in this Tragedy? Ah Sir (said
Flamminius) be not so cruel to truth and to me, as to suspect her guilty of
such a Crime; for had she intentions of that nature, she needed not employ any
to kill me, since she knows, she has not only the power to act it herself, but
by the honor of dying by her commands, she has wherewithal abundantly to
recompense my death. No Sir, he that has reduced me to this condition, is some
Stranger, and Friend to Perolla, who believing him too much injured by the loss
of Izadora, has so civilly endeavored to revenge his absent Friend, that I can
no more complain of his resentments, than I should at the loss of so much
blood, had it been in Izadora's service; for after he had by courage (and not
surprise) disarmed me, and that I had given him no slight hurt, when the latter
provoked him to revenge, and the former gave him power to execute it, he
restored me my Poniard, and for that gift, only besought me to excuse those
resentments his Friends interest had created, and so left me. Take heed
Flamminius (said Blacius) lest you make me question what you said of Izadora's
innocence, by seeming to be ignorant of Perolla's guilt, when that he wounded
you, is so known a truth, that there are as many Witnesses of it, as People in
this house.

It may be (said Flamminius) that it was Perolla, but you cannot therefore
conclude that I must know 'twas he; for if it were, his disguise might have
deceived one that had been better acquainted with him than I have the honor to
be; besides Sir, 'twould have been too much in me, had I thought it had been my
Rival, to have given so large a character of his performances before my
Mistress.

Well (replied Blacius) the certainty that it is Perolla cannot be greater,
than that he shall never have Izadora, who I will think innocent, because you
do, and who upon your recovery, shall be the reward of your passion, and your
wounds. Blacius immediately after went away, and Izadora to satisfy her
Father, and her goodness, continued with Flamminius, whose gallantry she
admired, as much as she esteemed herself unfortunate, in being incapable of
rewarding it. But he (as soon as Blacius was retired) somewhat touched with my
carriage to him, but much more with what I had told him concerning Izadora's
design upon herself, besought her, to permit him the honor of entertaining her
without Witnesses, which she granted; and the Chamber being emptied, Flamminius
told her particularly all that had past betwixt us, magnified my actions in
terms as flattering as handsome, and then conjured Izadora with passionate and
moving words, to acquaint him ingenuously, Whether all I had delivered was
true? but she (more perplexed at this question, than she would have been to
drink the fatal Bole) for a good while did nothing but fix her eyes upon him,
and cried out, Oh gods! Flamminius, Oh gods! Flamminius, What is it you ask me?
And at length answered him only in a shower of tears, which drew another from
him, and words so distracted, yet so significant, that Izadora found, Rhetoric
did not wholly consist in well speaking, or in talking sense. But Flamminius's
disorder being somewhat mitigated, he continued, I perceive (fair Izadora) that
your apprehensions I should destroy my life, when you do my hopes, hinders you
from letting your words acknowledge, what your tears have done, but I beseech
you believe, that I shall be more tormented in continuing your misery, than in
knowing my own; that I shall consider my affliction as my joy, if it can build
yours; and if by the learning my own misfortunes, I may put a period to
Izadora's, she will more oblige me by building her Happiness on the ruin of
mine, than if she continued my hopes, by her sufferings. Alas! (said Izadora)
what shall I answer? for your virtue is such, that it makes mine my pain; and
that constancy which I still gloried in, is now a subject as fit for my tears,
as satisfaction. Oh gods! she continued after a short silence, why do you make
virtue so offensive to virtue? why do you make Flamminius's virtue of such a
quality, that I am troubled to profess mine? And why do you render perseverance
in good, a torment as great, as the fault in declining it? Alas! Flamminius,
press me not to tell you what I elected to shun by death, and guess at the
nature of what I am to speak, by what I would have performed to avoid it; let
it suffice, you having tied me to approve of your passion, or your death, and
that since my preingagement hindered me from cherishing the former, to preserve
you from the latter, I was willing, and am resolved to exchange our destines.
Great gods! ( Flamminius cried out) why did you teach me what retributions I
ought to make so high a perfection, and so long delayed giving me the power to
perform them; then turning to the excellency he had mentioned, he continued,
Fair Izadora, you have not only taught me what to practice, but given me the
power to act it: Yes, I am now ready to lose my hopes, without my life, and the
joys of having served you in a way that you can no more hereafter doubt of,
than reward my passion, will recompense my loss, and preserve a life which must
be my contentment, since it has established yours, and is esteemed by you. But
why do I lengthen my discourse? It Is sufficient you learn (generous Spartacus)
that the great Flamminius made a resignation of all his passions for Izadora,
but those of being serviceable to her, and became as perfect a Friend, as he
had been a Lover. This admirable change both he and Izadora acquainted me with,
by a servant of his, to whom she had told my retreat.

To draw to a conclusion, during Flamminius's weakness, he so perfectly acted
the Lover before Blacius, and so perfectly the Friend, when he was absent, that
Izadora was convinced (by so painful a part) he was as much concerned in
procuring her for me, as formerly he had been in doing it for himself; but when
his health was so much returned, that he could no longer cloud the fallacy, we
were all in new disorders: For Blacius, who was still confident of Izadora's
constancy to me, and who suspected what she designed to attempt for her own
deliverance, would be as soon as Flamminius was recovered, so strictly kept his
Daughter, that she was then absolutely confined to her chamber, whose windows
were grated with Iron, and whose doors were justified by a Guard. Flamminius,
in this exigency, to manifest his conversion, and to make himself incapable of
a relapse, advised us by speedy Marriage to exempt our selves from the power
both of Blacius, and of Fortune; which course if we would elect, he was
confident in some short time to furnish us with the means to practice. This
both my Passion and Reason infinitely approved, and by Callione, with whom I
had in disguise some private meetings in the Temple, I besought Izadora to be
of my opinion, and made use of those very Arguments to her, that she had to me,
when I was in the blessed condition of Blacius's esteem, and apprehended the
contrary from Pacuvius; but that scrupulous Virtue resolved it as great a sin
against her duty, to marry Perolla without her Fathers consent, as it was
against her Vows, to Marry any other; and though the generous Flamminius
represented, that when he could no longer conceal his change from Blacius, she
must expect to be deprived of his assistance; which if not made use of, whilst
he had the opportunity of paying it, might probably alter her confinement, into
a perpetual Prison; or by her Fathers presenting her a new Husband, necessitate
her to act what she had but designed: yet all he could extort from Izadora, (in
my favor) was, that she would contribute to any thing which might secure her
from her Fathers violence, so the place of her future Sanctuary were of such a
quality, that she might be confident her Honor would no more suffer in Report,
than in Act: this unalterable Decree cast us into new difficulties; and before
we could imagine any way of suppressing them, Flamminius was so perfectly
recovered, that Blacius published within two days the Nuptial, which had been
interrupted, should be consummated. This Alarm (which I received from
Callione,) by that just and high character I had of my late Rival, had no
further operation on me, than the fears of what advantages we might lose by his
banishment from Blacius, who permitted no creature but Flamminius, and
Callione, to see Izadora; and who kept a Guard as strong, as faithful to him,
at the door of his House, as at the door of her Chamber; but when my hope had
resigned itself to despair, he that to create my joys, had ruined his own, was
not content only to leave Izadora to me, but to help her to me; in prosecution
of which gallantry, the day before the intended Marriage (for 'twas so long
deferred, either that he found not out the invention sooner, or else to endear
it) by that free access he had into Izadora's Chamber, he came to visit her,
with a Countenance as full of satisfaction, as if he, not another, had been to
enjoy the fruits of his industry; and there informed her, that he had seen, and
consequently adored her, coming to Salapia to visit an Aunt of his, who was
chief of Diana's Vestals, whom that morning he had acquainted with all his
Story, and whom he had persuaded, to repair what his Civility to her had
caused, to receive her into that Nunnery, without those oaths which they really
admitted must necessarily take, and thereby, by deluding Blacius's belief,
frustrate his hopes of forcing her return into the world, 'till she might make
it her election, and not constraint. I cannot express with what joy and
acknowledgment Izadora received this News, both which were increast by
Flamminius, assuring her, that before the Night was many hours old, he would
conduct her safely to her retirement; and toward the effecting it, presented
her with a water of so excellent a quality, that its nourture was Iron; this
strange Liquor he applied to the Bars of the Windows, in little Channels of
Wax, which did its operation so powerfully, and silently; that late at Night
when he repeated his Visit, he found a breach in the Window, large enough for
Izadora and Callione to get out at, which they did by a Ladder of Silk he had
purposely brought. They were no sooner descended into the Garden, upon which
the Window answered, than by the ordinary way (to delude the Guards at her
door) he went thither himself, and by picking the Lock, they got into a retired
street, where by Flamminius's appointment I attended them. I cannot tell you
what were my expressions of joy, and gratitude to my Mistress, and my Rival;
nor what Prayers, and Reasons, I used to invite her rather to a Temple, than a
Nunnery, and to embrace the opportunity of an union, when the gods presented us
so favorable an one: that to decline it, was not to rely on, but tempt their
Provicence. It Is too much you know, that all was fruitles, and that we
conducted Izadora to her living Grave. Who can repeat Blacius's amazement, when
next morning, instead of finding his Daughter preparing herself to be a Bride,
he only found a Letter on the Table, of what forlorn courses his rigor had
forced her to; but though his surprise, and astonishment, had been as high as
fancy could reach, yet it could not transcend Izadora's and mine, when
discoursing together, we were advertised that one of Apollo's Priests desired
to speak with us, who being admitted, we found `twas Flamminius which had taken
that Holy O^der, and who told us, That having lost the hopes of this world, he
would no longer livein it; that having been a servant to Izadora, he could not
go less, losing that servitude, than become one to the gods, that he was the
more fitted for their service, by having practiced under their perfectest
resembler; and at last so passionately begged a pardon for having so much
endangered Izadora's safety, as to have brought it to an equal Fight, (though
his Victory had been both his and her ruin) and so admirable declam'd upon a
speculative and recluse life, that we could not more absolutely excuse what he
had done against us, than admire what he had done for us; which had it not been
of a quality that had placed us above the thoughtsof any other felicity,
Izadora had esteemed a real Nunnery, and I the taking of Flamminius's habit a
blessing. But what he had performed, rendered fruitless what he had spoken; and
his actions were more eloquent, than his words. When this great man had spent
about an hour with us, he took his eternal leave, with a look asserene as his
thought, and with words as heavenly as his profession; we both accompanied him,
as far as we durst, and then casting our selves at his feet, we implored him,
by his Prayers, to preserve us in that condition, as his Virtue had placed us
in; which having faithfully promised to endeavor, he returned to that holy
Society, of which he was the greatest glory, and the noblest portion. After our
tears were something lessened for so sad a separation, because I had but that
day allowed me by Flamminius's Aunt to entertain Izadora in, (which too, was a
favor above example) I employed the small time that was left, to implore her
permission (now that she was in an inviolable Sanctuary, and my Visits thither
prohibited) to return to Scipio, and Massanissa, by whose favors (upon the
knowledge of my condition) I made no doubt but to procure the Senate to enjoin
Blacius to permit our Nuptials; which course was sufficiently justifiable,
since we sought to make use of Power, but to oppose Tyranny; and to obtain that
from Authority, which was denied to Reason: that since the severe Laws of the
Society she was in, permitted me not to see or speak with her, during her
residence there, my absence in Asrick or Italy was the same; and by my
continuance about Salapia, I might induce Blacius to suspect she was a
conditional, not an absolute Vestal, and increase his hatred, by increasing his
jealousy. These reasons (and my engagement of a sudden return) obtained her
consent for my journey, which I began the next morning, having first sent a
friend to beg Pacuvius's permission to pay him the duty of a Son; who returned
me word, that he knew of none which bore that name, but that if ever Perolla
appeared before him, he should esteem it the highest injury he had ever done
him. The grief of this message, was not much inferior to the satisfaction of
having freed Izadora from so great a hazard, and the having settled her in as
great a security. But I must acknowledge (Sir, continued Perolla, speaking to
my Prince) in this Voyage my heart and my tongue were strangers; for though
what I have specified were the pretense of it, yet the design was to prosecute
Hannibal, whose wrongs to Izadora and me, though they were as hard to be
revenged as pardoned, yet I could not but undertake the former, not being able
to grant him the latter, and I esteemed the Siege of Carthage would furnish me
with an occasion. But as I was going to Capua to take ship for Africa, I met
Scipio returned from thence; he Landed at Lillibeum in Sicily, from whence all
the way to Rome he was met, with merited and triumphant Songs and Trophies.
That great man having pardoned my uncivil departure, upon the knowledge of the
cause, told me the particular conditions Carthage had submitted unto, without a
Siege, (which are too long to be specified) and which were in substance, they
had acknowledged themselves vanquished, in such a way, that the very proofs
they had given of that confession, tied them perpetually to continue so. He
informed me also, as a testimony of their believing themselves as justly, as
absolutely conquered, that a Senator asking them by what gods they would swear
to keep the Peace? He was answered by Asdrubal, Even by the very same gods we
have found so severe to those that violate it.

After I had awhile congratulated a Success which none could doubt, that were
not ignorant of Scipio's quarrel and virtue, and after I had begged his
assistance in converting Blacius, I took leave of him, and learning that
Hannibal was about Carthage, at Scipio's departure thence, I rowed down the
River Vulturnus that night, next morning set Sail for Africa, and in three
days arrived where I thought my Enemy was; but I found that but six days
before, he had embarked himself for Asia, and had elected the Court of King
Antiochus for his retreat: Thither I directed my journey, resolving to
prosecute him with as little intermission, as he had Izadora's virtue; but the
gods were so much enemies to my design, that what by tedious sickness, what by
the crossness of the winds, I arrived not there, 'till there was nothing left
of the Carthaginian, but his fame; he himself being gone to Prusia's King of
Bithinia, after he had lost the Battle of Magnesia at Sea, by the Cowardice of
Apolonius his Colleague; who flying away, left all the Right Wing of the
Enemies Fleet entire, to fall upon the Carthaginians Squadron that was much
shattered in obtaining a Victory over the Rhodians which composed the Left: But
this misfortune was termed a Crime by Antiochus's Courtiers, who apprehended
Hannibals knowledge in War, would soon, if once manifested to their King,
discover their ignorance in it. I cannot omit telling you a passage which
perhaps you may esteem worthy the digression, when Antiochus was at Ephesus,
and Hannibal with him, the Romans, amongst many other Ambassadors they sent to
that great King, elected Scipio for one, who discoursing familiarly with the
Carthaginian, desired to know of him, who he esteemed the noblest General of
all others? Hannibal answered, first he thought Alexander King of Macedon the
chiefest; next to him, Pyrrhus King of Epire; and thirdly, Hannibal. Scipio
(smiling) asked him, What would thou say Hannibal, if thou had vanquished
me. Truly (said he) then I would have been the chiefest my self. This Reply was
the handsomest Compliment I have heard, for without counting Scipio amongst the
greatest, he inclusively acknowledged him so.

To conclude our Story, I will not tell you all Hannibals Actions under
Prusias, in his Wars against Eumenes King of Pergamus, it is enough you know
wheresoever I followed him, I found him (by his Military virtue) a General, and
at last (through a thousand troubles and dangers) I came to Libissa, the Town
of his Residence, where the next morning I intended to endeavor the finishing
of that Combat in Asia, which was but begun in Asrick; and that which gave me
the hopes of effecting it with less pain, was, that by a new contracted
jealousy of Prusias's, he lived then but as a private person. The day no
sooner appeared, than I went to Hannibals house, but alas I found all his
Domestics weeping over his dead body, and inquiring from one of the
principallest of them, the occasion of that disaster; he told me, That Titus
Quintus Flamminius, a Roman Ambassador to Prusias, having seen Hannibal in his
Court, was so incensed at that object, by the remembrance of those miseries his
Valor had involved the Roman Empire in, that he never left soliciting the
barbarous King, to revenge their sufferings on the Actor of them, 'till he had
obtained an order to have him delivered into his hands; which the generous
Hannibal informed of, to prevent falling into a Romans power, had that night
tempered an exact Poison, and hearing Prusias's Guards forcing his Lodgings,
cried out, Come, let us end our own misery, and the Roman fears, and then drank
of the fatal Cup, which has afforded him that ease, which none that know him,
and Virtue, can participate of, till they are in his condition; but (said the
sad servant) I beseech you (Sir) observe in this example, how much the present
Romans do degenerate from their Ancestors; those preserved their conquering
Enemy from Poison, and these induce a King, contrary to the Laws of
Hospitality, and Faith, to betray his Guest. Hannibals servant could speak no
more for weeping; and though I was sorry any but Perolla should revenge
Izadora, yet I was satisfied that the gods (by making him become his own
Executioner) evinced, his Crimes were great by their punishment, and declared
their justice to be so too, in forcing him that had been her Enemy, to become
his own, and her Revenger. The next day this great Captain was buried, and my
anger dying with the cause of it, I esteemed it a duty to attend his body to
the Tomb, which had no other Inscription, but HERE LIES HANNIBAL, and indeed
was not capable of a greater. This Solemnity performed, I began to return into
Italy, from whence my Revenge had too long detained me, but the misfortunes I
endured, and the obstructions I met with were such, that I arrived not in this
City, 'till the very day the Inhabitants of it sent to treat with the generous
Spartacus, which to do byfear, and not by necessity, I esteemed so low a thing,
that making my self known, I made their duty so to them, which was to oppose
their captivity in a way, that if afterward it proved their destiny, yet at
least it would be esteemed their misfortune, and not their crime. The first day
our success was proportionate to our desires, and the next, where Canitius
stormed, I had the fortune to oppose, and worst him; but whilst a fresh Alarm
drew me, though not the Guard, from that Post, by your unresistable Sword, you
made a passage for your Army, as easy for them, as glorious for your self; But
I thank the gods ( Perolla continued) that I was called away, for perhaps my
sacrilegious Arm might have been employed against a Virtue, which to have
fought against, or resisted, would have more troubled me, than to be vanquished
by it, and which to know, is so great a felicity, that I count my defeat an
easy purchase of it. The news of you possessing that quarter of the Town, no
sooner came to me in this, than not knowing to what insolency the Soldiers
hea^, authorized by a successful As^ault, might raise them to, abandoning all
other cares but those for Izadora, I ran to the Religious House she was in, and
carried her from thence to Pacuvius's, there to preserve her Honor, or not
live to see it violated; where all those friends I had about me, were lost in
so generous a defense, and where (when my resistance was no longer useful) I
derived that from my Enemies virtue, which the gods denied my endeavors, and my
sword.

'T was thus (said) Symander to Callimmachus) that Perolla finished his Story,
on which, if I have too long insisted, 'twas to publish what were a sin to
conceal. It remains now to acquaint you, what period had our Lovers sufferings,
in which my Prince so justly sympathiz'd, that he had doubtless made use of his
power to settle them in their joys, had he not first esteemed it requisite to
hear what their fathers could object, which having invited them to, P^cuvius
addressed his discourse unto him in these terms.

If I thought your justice were not as great as your conquests, I might
apprehend, after Izadora's Story, that you would not have the patience to hear
my defense, but look upon that as an evincement of my being as highly guilty of
cruelty, as I am confident by that time I have ended speaking, you will think
me free from it; for I will make it evident, that all those Actions which she
alleges, proceed from his inclinations to her, and to virtue, are only
testimonies of his hatred to his father. His high generosity, and a desire of
freeing his Country, was, to kill Hannibal, my greatest friend, which was far
worse than to have murdered me, my death had ended all miseries with it; but
to survive such a friend, was to endure a torment, which none but he that
resented it, can believe; or if I thought death a greater contentment than
life, by that Action he reduced me to the sad extremity of being my own
Executioner; but that which was worse than all this, he designed to murder
that great Conqueror in my own house, where he would have no Guards but my
Fidelity; which to have violated, had been a breach of Trust, and Hospitality,
two of the most sacred Ties, and all this under a pretense of serving the
Romans, who had they not scorned to owe their safety to a sin that had rendered
them unworthy of it, night certainly have found spirits of a temper apt enough
to sacrifice themselves, to have preserved the Public; but the high esteem
they yet pay Fabritius's memory, for not permitting one of Pyrrhus's own
Subjects, upon (as it were) the eve of their ruin, to poison him, does
sufficiently demonstrate, they had rather hazard their Empire, than their
Reputation; and certainly if they thought it gallantry in Fabritius, not to
purchase their safeties, by only permitting an ill Act in an Epyrote, which he
had no interest in, but what his knowledge of it gave him, how much would they
then condemn a Roman, when their State was not near in so great a hazard, so
that that which he would have appear an obligation to his Country, would have
been really a sin against it, and his family: But besides, who knows, if after
having done the Fact, he would not have fled, (for I can hardly believe, he
that would act a treacherous design, would expose his life to justify he
intended it for a generous one) and so have lest me a sa^rifi^e to the fury of
Hannibal's Soldiers.

The next proof of his Affection to me, was to preserve my greatest enemies
Life, when I might by so favorable an adventure have purchased that Death,
which I would a thousand times have bought by my own, had not higher
considerations, placed limits to my just revenge. He pretends indeed, that he
comes to see me, but the event justifies, it is to preserve Blacius; he is
laden with wounds for the defense of Izadora's Father, and spends that blood
for his preservation, which could not have been more generously spilt, than for
his destruction; in a word, he employs that Life I gave him, to preserve his,
that he knew, made mine my greatest torment; and as if all those were not
sufficient wrongs, he makes his House his Sanctuary, and thereby excludes me,
and his friends, from affording him any demonstrations of our care; but that I
look upon as an argument of his guilt, which was of a quality, to make him
esteem himself safer with his Enemies, than with me. But his most unpardonable
crime was, to become a Slave to one of that Family, whose greatest ambition
should have been, to have made all of them his; nay, Courts her with Sighs and
Tears, to accept his Liberty, and by a thousand such unworthy submissions
endeavors to make me question his Mothers Faith, which I should have done, did
I not know one of the greatest vices, is to suspect she hadany; for in a long
succession of years, there were none legitimate of our Line till the degenerate
Perolla, but with their milk, sucked a hatred for that of Blacius's; but he had
no sooner gotten his health, and lost his liberty, but more joyful of the last
than of the first, he quits Salapia, without paying me the duty of a visit,
which was the pretense of his coming thither, and his impiety not being yet
come to the height of attempting my Life with his own hand, he endeavors it
obliquely, by taking up Arms for the Romans, against the Carthaginians, in
whose party I was so engaged, that he could not prosecute their overthrow and
effect it, without involving me in their ruin; and when the great Hannibal,
had justly censured Blacius to death, for his pactice with the Romans, Perolla
(that I might not suspect the first service he did him, was by accident, but
design) engages all such of his friends as he could seduce, and with them,
employs his Sword, and Life, to redeem my greatest enemies; in which attempt,
as you have heard, he had a success proportionate to his desires; and after
that Blacius was found out, and brought to the Scaffold, there to receive the
punishment of his offenses, lest I might yet doubt he loved his Enemies, as
much as he hated his Father, he voluntarily embraces Death, to justify that
Truth. Judge (Sir) if ever there were a higher injury than this, and if by it,
my hatred be not as just, as great, for in this one action, he destroys that
Life, he knew (maugre all his ingratitude) I yet loved best, to preserve his,
whom I hated most; but he was preserved from death by Izadora's Tears; Izadora
I say, one of Blacius Family, which had he had any generosity, he should rather
have suffered, than owed his deliverance to such a Deliverer; For my part, the
cause of his safety, took away all my joys for the effect, and made me
celebrate his preservation in Tears: but though Hannibal pardoned his life, yet
he kept him in prison, where he had still retained him, had not the generous
Maharbal given him his liberty, which he had no sooner obtained, than he
employes it by bearing Arms under the Romans) for his destruction that gave it
him; but perhaps he will say, he redeemed that fault by giving Maharbal his
life; to which I answer, that was no satisfaction for the old Crime; but the
acting of a new one, for he was only treacherous to his friends, to repair his
ingratitude to his Enemies, and thereby committed one sin, to act another; he
makes the public, pay for his particular fault, and redeems his own
unworthiness, by depriving the party he served, of so considerable a prisoner;
besides, what happened was but an accident, but his taking up Arms was a
design. Thus you see, those actions he most glories in, being diligently
inquired into, are found contrary to what they appeared, and if his best
performances are crimes, what are then his others? He was an earnest persecutor
of Hannibal, (my greatest friend) while he continued in Italy, all my
persuasions, and Prayers, not being able to hinder him so much, as from acting
against him in his person; and as if the knowledge of the affection I paid
that great General, were a sufficient cause to creat Perolla's hatred for him,
he left his own Country, and his Izadora too, to prosecute him under Scipio in
Africa, and at that famous Battle at Zama, a thousand times ventured his own
life, to deprive Hannibal of his; and though he alleges that he preserved him,
when he might have acted his destruction; yet I shall beseech you to consider,
he is but his own Witness, and whether it be likely he would have neglected
that opportunity, had it been offered, which he has since sought out over all
the world, and never declined, whilst there was any possibility of finding it,
He was not only content to injure me in my Friend, but does it too in my Enemy:
and that I might not doubt his perseverance in his former courses, by stealing
away Izadora (in which Sin every accessory is a principal) he violates both
Humane and Divine Laws, and rather elects the committing of so high a crime,
than that I should want testimonies of so proportionate a Truth; ^y, by his own
confession, would have Married her, and joined those two Bloods together, that
never till then were united, but when they ran from Wounds, and mingled on the
ground, and would thereby have tied my Hand from revenge, or for^'d me to act
it, thorough my only Son. Lastly, and that I hope will not prove in your
judgment inferior to any, when your victorious Arms had struck such a terror
into our Citizens, that we were going to present you our Keys, and Liberties,
he, by his unfortunate persuasion, and example, made them take up Arms, and
for^'d you to purchase your Victory by Blood, reduced his Country and Friends,
to a fatal subjection, or death, or to owe to their Deliverance to a Mercy,
they have so highly offended, that they are unworthy of it; but if you execute
the rigor of War upon us, and that your Justice involves Perolla in the
public Fate, I shall then find my happiness in my destruction, and more
commend Fortune in revenging me upon him, than be displeased at her, for my own
and Salapia's ruin. Spartacus and all the assistants, were infinitely
surpised at so strange a reasoning, and request: But my Prince put a silence
to the general murmur, by inviting Blacius to speak, who thus obeyed him.

I attest the gods (said he, lifting his Eyes and his Hands to the place of
their residence) that from the time Perolla preserved my life, it has been my
misfortune; for if ever since, I derived any joy from this Woman, (pointing at
Izadora) 'twas only learning by my own sufferings, in her want of Duty, what
Pacuvius's were in his Sons immitating her crime; but because she has told her
own story with so much Art, that it may induce you to consider my resentments,
as an injustice, I shall briefly give you a true Comment upon it; I confess she
had my Command to cherish, and esteem him that preserved my life; but she had
it not to give those retributions to Perolla: That ignorance, which (I believe)
procured my safety, procured that injunction; I found him my Friend, when I
gave him my affection, but she knew him my Enemy, when she gave him hers,
Observe too, I beseech you, how confident this young man was of having it; when
the argument he used to make her declare that Truth, was only, if she avowed it
not, he would kill her Fathers Enemy; that which was a just motive to silence
her Flame, was his inducement to invite her to disclose it; in which one action
she doubly injured me, in not only being content to save my mortal'st Enemy,
when too, she contributed nothing to his ruin, but the performing of her Duty,
but also in making the purchase of that safety, the loss of my only Child; she
obeyed me, whilst she knew I was ignorant of what I did, and disobeyed me, when
she ignor'd not what I enjoined, but that also the injunction was just;
besides, after I had preserved Perolla's life, when I had both Power and
Justice, to extinguish it, by her receiving his prohibited visits, and by
making a contract of passions with him, she thereby endeavors to induce me to
detest Charity, by converting the effects of Mine, into so sensible a gief; and
when for my successful endeavors and duty to the Roman Empire, I became
Hanniba'ls prisoner, she invites an assistance for my Liberty, which I had
declared in her hearing was a greater misfortune than that execution I was
menaced with; whereby she did offend either my professions or me; the first, by
not crediting them, or the last, in acting against them, if she believed their
Truth; nay, she acknowledged she was apprehensive of losing her happiness, in
attempting to preserve a part, intending her Lover by the former, and her
Father by the latter, thereby becoming so impious, as before Perolla was her
Husband, to give him a precedence, only due unto that relation: She is so
earnest to disoblige me, that she impudently confessed, she put her self in the
highest perplexity she was capable of, to involve me in a resembling one. When
I was got out of prison, in the hurry of that change, she endeavors to extort
a declaration from me, that in a settled temper of mind, she knew my judgment
would deny; gives Perolla unjust praises, to make me give him an unjust reward,
and would render that an act of Friendship for me, which was but one of
Friendship to himself, as you may be pleased to remember I then largely
evinced; but when the second time I was taken, whether it proceeded from their
revenge, or my own misfortune, I will not positively determine; Alas (Sir) how
ungrateful was her carriage? she says that she came to preserve my life, but
her actions say, 'twas to preserve Perolla's and when her Fathers, and her
Loverslife, came in competition, she gave up the first a Sacrifice, to preserve
the last from being one; neither can she allege this impious proceeding, was
an effect of a precipitate election upon a sudden emergency; for after she had
published her Love was the god over her Duty, Hannibal (startled at a
Declaration which was even a Monster in Nature) gave her, not only leisure to
reflect on her crime, but power to recall it; yet she, to demonstrate that the
murdering her Father, was a premeditated design, and not a hasty choice,
perseveres in, and repeats her impiety, when he that was to receive the
advantage of it condemned, and detested it: which action of Virtue, her
depraved reason makes a confirmative argument for her continuing in her vice,
This (Sir) which I allege, would be, I believe, the reasoning of a stranger,
which has any, but now I beseech you, let us take her own sense upon this way
of proceeding; she first alleged, that I had not been grateful enough to
Perolla's Virtue, and that now she was to act my part, she would make him know
what his performances were, and what my gratitude should have been by her
Retributions. To this I answer, that besides my former saving his life, after
his Father treacherously endeavored to take away mine, the condition I then
was in, sufficiently confirmed my Gratitude; for the same Proclamation which
gave her a rise to save my life, by her declaring who 'twas that fore'd the
Prison for my deliverance, gave me the same power, (for no one was excluded by
the manifest) which my Gratitude made me decline, and rather elect to lose my
own life, than secure it by hazarding my preservers; (for I was confident the
Guards were too strict to have admitted his going out of Salapia) and though as
in this action I evinced, that I preferred my Gratitude, before my life, so I
did too, too, that I preferred death, before any alliance with Pacuvius's
Blood; yet she persever'd in a passion, which tended to that, or a more
unlegitimate end; Hernext allegation is as vain as the first; for to justify
she murdered me with a good intention, she designs to murder her self, as if
one crime could expiate another, or as if having killed one of the Family, the
destroying of the residue, were a sufficient reparation; No, Sir, she loves
Pacuvius's Blood so much, that she has a hatred to her own, for being the
object of his, and so weds his resentments, that she executes her Father,
herself, and consequently all her family, to act them; but my enemy wasmore
merciful than my Daughter, for I received that life from Hannibal, which
Izadora denied me, and though those Crimes (her Constancy in a forbidden Flame,
and her seeking Death, because of a supposed loss which she knew, was my
satisfaction) might have induced me to consider her sufferings, as an immediate
justice of the gods, for her want of duty; yet as soon as Hannibal threatened
to be their instrument in it, I not only hazarded my Life and Fortune to
prevent it, but also embraced her satisfaction with so much concern, that
rather than continue her languishings, I intended to set a period to them by
giving her to Perolla; which I had effected, had not he at the same time I was
acting his felicity, been robbing me of my Glory; for though he attributed his
immediate leaving of Salapia after Hannibal's repulse, to a design of
suppressing any jealousy his continuance in it might create, yet I was
perfectly informed, 'twas his Ambition not his Respect, that caused it; and his
speedy return to the Camp, was only to ingross an honor to himself, which in a
good proportion was built with my Blood; neither did his long abstaining from
justifying himself to me, proceed (as his Mistress said) from his ignorance of
my resentments, but from his being conscious of the justice of them; (And
though she magnifies Pacuvius's Sons gallantry, in crediting my Change, I must
only his Reason, since in that only, by what I had already done, he might well
credit any thing I should do. But after that, by Perolla's new affront, I had
altered my resolutions, by esteeming him unworthy of my Alliance, that esteemed
me unworthy of justice, and after that, by my former concessions, I had
manifested to her, my present resentments were effects of my Reason, and not of
aversion for her Lover, yet she was so far from sympathizing with me in my
legitimate resolves, that when I presented her Flamminius, who wanted nothing
but the being of Pacuvius Family, she was notonly content to decline the
Husband I approved, but elected one I justly abhorred; and when his being more
intent, in Afric on her Revenge, than his Love, which might have something
lessened hers, had like to have rendered her disobedience without excuse, she
determines to abandon her Father, and the World, rather than a negligent Lover;
and was satisfied with no way of being relieved from her Distress, unless she
increases her own Crime, by making Perolla act another; nay, so much abhorrs
any thing from her Fathers recommendation, that Flamminius coming to her upon
that score, she will rather hazard her Lovers Blood, than spare his. To
conclude, that her impiety might be incapable of any accession, and to resemble
her Servant as perfectly in Sin, as in Affection, she (like him) by stealing
away, violates all Divine and Humane Laws; and her not being Married, which she
alleges to qualify her Crime, is an aggravation of it, for flying from her
Father to her Husband, had been only an offense in giving Perolla that Title,
but flying from her Father to her Lover, she must be more obliged to Men's
Charities, than to her actions, if they have not thereby as bad a Character of
her Chastity, as I of her Duty. These (Sir) said Blacius, are my reasonings,
and as I believe they are not much dissonant from Truth, which gives me a
confidence, that if your justice be proportionable to your power, you will
right an injured Father; but if her Sex moves you to pity, Perolla's I hope
will not; your punishment of him will obliquely repair my wrongs, for either
his death will be the occasion of hers, or if she revive him, her torment, or
her cure, will be my satisfaction. This discourse did but increase that wonder
Pacuvius had given a being unto; And my Prince was preparing himself to declaim
upon a Theme, which would have furnished reasons to a Judgment as ill, as his
was excellent, when he was diverted by a noise, and suddenly perceived the
occasion of it, was the coming in of Granius, Furiles, and some other Officers
of his Army, that presented him with two Salapians, whose very sight almost
deprived Pacuvius, and Blacius, both of theirs, and of their Lives: Spartacus
observed it, and so did our generous Lovers, but being ignorant of the cause,
they expected with much patience to learn it, which they soon did, by one of
the Salapians, addressing himself to Spartacus, in these words. Sir, we are
come to beg Justice of you, for you, These two Gentlemen (pointing at Pacuvius
and Blacius) whose guilt is as much in their Faces, as in their Hearts,
observing in the Assault, that my Companion and I, employed our Lives somewhat
prodigally for the defense of our City, inferred from thence, that we would
hazard them, to be revenged on the Conqueror of it; and in this Faith came
severally to us, and by assurances of excessive rewards, hired us by our
treachery, to destroy what we could not by our Swords. This office we accepted;
were seemingly wicked, but to be really the contrary; and undertook to kill
you, that we might preserve you; for we apprehended our declining their
overture, might have induced them to invite some others to embrace it, where
the greatness of the reward, might have covered the greatness of the crime;
besides (Sir) for us to have undertook such a design, had been a Sin against
Gratitude, as well as Honor; for we are two of those that received our
Liberties, when we expected our Deaths, and if we employed those Lives against
you, which we received from you, 'twas not only by your permission, but by your
command; and since to obey you, we durst draw our Swords against you, you
cannot suspect we will decline any other obedience. The Salapian had no sooner
done speaking, than Blacius first, and afterward Pacuvius, acknowledged by
their words,, what their tremblings and disorders had confessed; and though they
severally alleged, that the ignorance they then were in, of my Prince's
virtue, and their knowledge, that in him only consisted the Life and Soul of
his Army, had induced them to that revenge, yet all the Assistants (but the
generous Lovers) were so enraged at them, for their Tyranny to their Children,
and their intended treachery treachery to so mild a Conqueror, that there was
nothing heard in that great Assembly but Cries, that Spartacus should revenge
himself, that he should extirpate such Monsters out of the World, and pay with
their Lives, those Crosses which they had given to Izadora and Perolla.

Granicus too, and the other Officers that came with him, informed Spartacus,
that they had been already condemned by a Court-Marshal upon that Article, That
whosoever endeavored the death of the General, should receive his own, for his
punishment, so that he had nothing to do, but to give the Law its course, which
in that case to oppose, was not to be merciful, but unjust. All this while the
generous Lovers were so confounded, that had not their innocence been known,
their disorders and trouble, had been taken for their Guilt; but my Prince
having whispered something privately to Euriles, he went to Izadora, and her
generous Servant begged them to excuse an execution which Blacius and Pacuvius
merited, had it been only for their cruelty to them, that in their deaths they
might read the justice of the gods, by rendering their vices, (which had been
the cause of their own troubles) the occasion of their Parents punishment, and
of their own quiet; that since for him to be just, would make them happy, he
hoped they would pardon a revenge, which he inflicted as much upon their score,
as his own. Then my Prince bid Euriles carry away the Delinquents, to receive
the censure had been giventhem. At that sad command, both Izadora and Perolla
cast themselves at Spartacus Feet, which having a while washed with their
Tears, they begged him either to alter his sentence, or permit them to
participate in it; that if the death of their Fathers must be the only way to
their union; they would be content with the being eternally denied it, rather
than purchase it at that rate; that they should be more miserable in the loss
of their Parents, than in their cruelty: and lastly, they protested by
inviolable Oaths, if they suffered; they would perpetually banish themselves
from each others company, and either by grief or resolution, suddenly follow
them. Then rising up from my Prince, they prostrated themselves at their
Fathers Feet, where they again reiterated those engagements, and in such
passionate terms, and moving actions implored their pardons for those
disobediences their Lovers, (not they) had committed, and which they would
suddenly repair, by embracing a resembling destiny to theirs, that my Prince
could not abstain from crying out, Tyrants, are you so much fortified against
Virtue, that so powerful an assault, must remain fruitless? can Fathers see
that without pity, which Strangers cannot? can Nature be insensible against the
attempts of Nature? Whilst Spartacus was speaking many things of this quality,
Izadora and her generous Servant had by their weepings so laid their Fathers
rage, as showers do storms, that those Clouds of hatred, which had so long
hindered Reason, and Nature from shining, began by little and little to
dispell, and they were no sooner absolutely vanished, than Blacius first went
to Perolla, and Pacuvius afterward to Izadora, and in more Tears, than Words,
acknowledged their repentance, and conversion, and when their several passions
permitted them to speak, they joyfully commanded them to consider their
sentence; but as a tribute to the Law of Nature, and War, and that they should
in the joys of their union, extinguish all the sorrow their Deaths could
inspire, which they protested was not so great a trouble to them, as that they
had so long, and cruelly hindered it.

I am, I confess (continued Symander) unable to tell you Spartacus's raptures
at this change; he first ran to the Fathers, embracing them, pardoned them, and
gave them as many thanks for their conversion, as if he had been to enjoy the
effect of it; then he went to our generous Lovers, told them, that his private
Commands to Euriles were much different from his public ones, that he seemed
to be cruel, but to make their Fathers just; that he was glad an attempt
against his life, had settled the Felicity of theirs which he would have gladly
bought by the attempts, having been turned into an execution. I should lose my
self, did I acquaint you with Perolla's and Izadora's ecstasies, with Pacuvius
and Blacius's embracings, their beging mutual Pardons for a hate, which then
was converted into as great a friendship, and with all their gratitudes to
Spartacus. To finish their Adventures, it is sufficient I tell you all things
changed their Faces, and those passions of Hatred, Fear, and Revenge, resigned
their places unto Love, Friendship, and Kindness, and as soon as those wounds
Perolla had received from the Sword; permitted him to heal those he had
received from Love, he was put in possession of his Izadora, which was a
felicity so far above needing a foyl to set it off, that his past troubles and
crosses were not considered, but forgot; And lest you should think I have the
two Salapians, or Spartacus, I will tell you, that the former had abundant
cause given them of satisfaction, and the latters Adventures I will now resume,
where I broke them off.

PARTHENISSA.
THE SECOND PART.
BOOK II.
AFter my Prince had seen the Solemnities performed of so perfect an Union,
wherein he omitted nothing which might testify his satisfaction at it; That the
Salapians might for ever remember, and be sharers in the joy; Spartacus
assembled the chiefest of them together, and in terms as obliging as the action
it self, informed them: That least they might allege Perolla's Courage drew
them into their misfortunes he protested, the just esteem he had of it, and of
his virtue, made him restore them to their former freedom; That for his sake,
and the fair Izadora's, he would immediately withdraw his Army from their City,
which should never approach it again but for their preservation, for which he
would at any time relinquish his own designs, and repeat as great dangers to
defend, as he had done to take it. This generous declaration (as they all
professed) afforded them a satisfaction, far transcending the grief they
resented, for that loss, which gave my dear Master the power of thus obliging
them; and to publish their gratitude, as well as contentment, they deputed
immediately from the body of the People, certain select Citizens to the
generous Lovers, where after an Oration (too tedious to be remembr'd,) they
concluded, that since their own sufferings, had been the cause of their
Felicity, they were so far from deploring them, that they would willingly
undergo greater, if they might produce a resembling effect. These Ceremonies
were no sooner finished, than Spartacus went to take his leave of Perolla and
Izadora, the last of which (in both their Names) conjured him to acquaint them
who he was, for they could not fancy, so sublime a virtue had a
disproportionable extraction. Alas Madam (said my Prince, extremely surpised)
what is it that you ask of me? then after some deep sighs (which the reflection
on his miseries forced from him) he continued; I take the gods for witnesses,
(fair Izadora) did not an inviolable Vow tie me to a concealment of myself, I
would have satisfied your curiosity, as soon as I had known it, but all that I
dare inform you of, is, That I had my birth in As^a; that I am born a Prince of
the greatest blood of the World; that an infelicity in Love has not made me
abandon my Country only, but my hopes, and forces me to languish in as high
torments, as you are now in joys. These sad words, and the remembrance of the
cause which produced them, struck Spartacus with so black a melancholy, that
it proved contagious, and communicated it self to the fair Izadora, and her
generous servant, who judging what those misfortunes must be which could have
so powerful an ascendent, over so admirable a courage and judgment, immediately
converted those Prayers which they had used for the learning of his Adventures,
for his Pardon in having desired a knowledge of them. After that Perolla in
civility and sympathy, had awhile continued in silence, he at last interrupted
it, by saying to Spartacus, Generous Prince (for I should have given your
Virtue that Title, had I yet been ignorant of your Birth) since you are
resolved that we shall only know you by the felicities you have placed us in,
permit me to offer you that life you have preserved, and made me relish;
perhaps it may serve you, and help to build for you, what you have perfected in
me; I know the fair Izadora will dispense with my absence, when she considers
the cause of it, and will be as much satisfied with my Gratitude, as with my
Company. This I implore (continued Perolla) as the only means to let you know
my resentments, whose greatness you cannot suspect, since I beg even to forsake
Izadora, to acquaint you with them.

This offer (said Spartacus, embracing Perolla) is far more obliging, than if
it were acted; for I know no way which could render me more unworthy of it,
than the accepting it: Neither could I embrace so generous a motion, without
being as much an enemy to my own happiness, as to yours; for the only
consolation in my misfortunes is, that they have put a period to yours, and by
your abandoning the excellent Izadora, that also would be revisht from me. I
should never finish my relation, did I acquaint you with all those noble tears
and expressions which were shed, and spoken, at my Princes departure; but, in a
word, to describe the strange operation it had, not only Pacuvius and Blacius,
but all the Salapians were unconsolable, and so justly admired his Virtues,
that they almost accounted it a misfortune to return to their former liberty,
since the being deprived of his company, was the rate of that purchase. At last
all the divisions and Squadrons of my Princes Army marched out of the City,
rather like Friends than Conquerors, and received at the Gates so liberal a
Largess, that they had as much reason to be satisfied with the Salapians, as
the Salapians had to be so with them: All the Nobility and Gentry, accompanied
him two Miles on his march, where they made him so many fresh Retributions for
his Civilities, that he found his Sword had not been the only thing which had
Conquered them. 'T was at this last farewell that Spartacus having taken his
leave of all the rest, reiterated his Vows of perpetual Friendship to Perolla,
whose grief was of a nature not to be expressed by any thing, so well as silence.
But alas those Glories and Triumphs lost that name, or at least their operation
with my Prince, he languisht in the midst of Prosperity, and had been more
obliged to Fortune, if she had presented him with Death, instead of Laurels.
All that day, and the next following, he continued in so silent a melancholy,
that those which knew not the Cause, admired at the Effect; but at last
finding, that Time did rather improve, than diminish it, I took the confidence
to conjure him by what he had so lately heard, to banish his despair, that his
Love could not be more improbable o^ success than Perolla's had been, and that
I was confident the gods had showed him so miraculous an example, to raise and
fortify his Faith. No, no, Symander, (said my Prince) the gods are resolved
never to let me see the joys of fruition, but in others, they will give me the
power to create all men's felicities but my own; and to speak truth, they have
so far ruined me, that it is as little in their Power now, as Wills to restore
me; for Parthenissa is fallen into a Crime which admits no cure, and her loving
me again, would but render her more unworthy of my love, for she cannot now be
kind, but by a new vice: Had the cruel gods been pleased to have raised me but
as great Crosses as Perolla's, I might have strugled with, and perhaps overcome
them as well as he, and should never have repined at my Afflictions, could I
have propounded a possibility of ending them; but at the same instant that they
made me wretched, they made me incapable of being otherwise, and gave me no
hopes in my torments, but that their greatness would prove their ^ure; whereas
when they made Blacius hate Perolla, they made Izadora have a Passion for him;
when they brought him to be executed, he received his life from Izadora's love;
the cause of his preservation, being more pleasing than the preservation: and
when they made Ha^^ibal his Enemy, they made Izadora's constancy his Friend,
and gave it power to triumph over all obstacles; so that all his miseries were
but demonstrations, and endearings of his happiness, he had never
impossibilities to wrestle against: For if the Carthaginian, and Blacius, were
destroyed or converted, he had always Izadora's Heart, and Arms, ready to
receive him; so that his obstructions (unlike mine) were in the way, and not in
the end. 'Twas with a thousand such Reasons as these, that he answered mine;
and indeed they were uttered with such violence, that finding my arguing would
rather inflame, than lessen his grief, I determined to choose a ^itter season
for my design. The night which succeeded this day, as soon as the Army was
Campt, and the Guards placed, Spartacus (who longed to be in his designed
solitude) sent for all his chief Officers, and spoke to them to this effect.

Since (my generous Companions) we took up Arms only for our safeties, and to
repair our wrongs; and since the gods have contributed toward, and perfected
our designs, it is high time to think of laying them down: But before we put
this resolution in practice, let us face Rome, and show her by so bold an
Action, that what we intend to perform, is our election, not our necessity;
from thence, if their fears will not give us new occasions of glory, let us
march directly to the Alps, which having crossed, every man may return into his
own Country, and I make no doubt, but passing thus through the heart of Italy,
I shall load you with as much wealth, as glory. I must acknowledge (said
Symander) that he extended himself eloquently, and largely upon this subject;
but because I have so long dwelt on Izadora's Story, I am resolved to repair
that fault, by cutting off all things that are not absolutely essential in my
Princes. This motion found its wished effect, for his Army were as desirous to
secure what they had gotten, as my Prince was to be a Hermit; and truly he so
doted on recluseness, and upon any thing which nourisht his melancholy, that he
would have preferred a Cell, before a Throne, and often told me, that since the
gods would not afford him a Crown of Myrtles, he would never wear one of Laurel.

In brief, the Senate having advice that we took the direct way toward Rome,
sent Gellius and Lentulus (both their Consuls) to meet us, as to the most
dangerous War they could employ them in; and the whole people of Rome, by a
thousand Sacrifices, and public Humiliations, acknowledged a fear, the justice
of which, was soon made evident by an entire loss of their Armies, which in a
pitched Field we absolutely defeated; but this Victory was bought, rather than
won by Spartacus: For he purchased it by the loss of all the Germans in his
Army, who, in a bravery, having quitted that Post my Prince had assigned them,
found their destruction in their disobedience, and their punishment in their
fault: Canitius, who command ed them, came covered with wounds, and vowed to
Spartacus, that thouigh he had been a sharer in their Sufferings, he was not in
their Crime; whcch Protestation my generous Master accepted; as his excuse. But
this suc^ess hindered us from viewing Rome, though we might have done it in a
ar nobler posture than at the first time, being now more laden with success,
than we had been with chains. But my Prince, who designed to face those stately
walls only, because 'twas dangerous, now declined it, because 'twas safe; and
thought what he intended for a Gallantry, would look (after the Consuls defeat)
like an insulting; we therefore left Rome on our left hand, and marched without
any opposition, into that Gaul which extends its self along the famous River
Poe, so celebrated by the Roman Poets, under the name of Eridanus. Cassius the
Praetor, and Governor there, thought with a select Army of 10000 Men, and by the
advantages, and straights of the Country, to interrupt our passage, but he
found by the loss of his Army, that Resolution, and Conduct, can overcome all
obstacles; he had not the misfortune only to outlive his loss, but to carry the
news of it himself to the Senate, who were so highly troubled at these
successive disasters, that immediately as a punishment of the Consuls faults,
or misfortunes, they recalled them, and gave the ordering of the War to Marcus
Crassius, (one of those that composed the first and greatest Triumvirate) and
raised so vast an Army for him, that the same of it coming to my Princes
knowledge, it kindled that fire of glory in him, which had been so long
covered, and made him lead back his victorious Troops toward this new General,
lest if ever he were discovered, the world might think his abandoning Italy,
proceeded from the noise of those Forces, and not from a premeditated intent.
Crassus, attended by all the Gallantry of the Roman Empire, joyfully understood
that Spartacus was saving him the trouble of a march, and the less to harrass
his Army, expected my Princes approach in the fertile Plains of Romania.

To be short, the night before the designed Battle, Crassus sent Memmius (his
Lieutenant General) with two select Legions, to lie in Ambush on the Left Flank
of our Army, and strictly commanded him, That upon no provocation, he should
discover himself, till both Bodies were joined, But my Prince, who is the
vigilantest Captain living, and of whom no advantage is to be gotten, but what
is given by Fate, sent two Soldiers in the habits of Italian women, to a height
which was unsecure for our Scouts, and which looked into the Roman Camp, where
under a pretense of Sacrificing for the safety of their Army, they became the
Intelligencers of ours, and soon advertised Spartacus of this stratagem; but
before he could engage them, they had recovered a fastness, where 'twas
impossible to make use of force, but yet next morning before the Battle was
ready to begin, he gave Mummius so seeming an advantage, that thereby he
himself gained a real one, and by so sad an Argument as the cutting in pieces
of 8000 Romans, made both the Lieutenant, and his General, of an opinion that
he was invincible. Those that fled, were again received by Crassus, and having
cast away their Arms to save their Lives, he furnished them with new ones, but
first made them give security, that they should keep them better than they had
the former, and then revived that strict Discipline of Decimation, where every
tenth Runaway was executed in the sight of the whole Army; so that 500 ran to
receive from their Friends that Death with shame, which with less pain, and
with Honor, they might have had from their Enemies. But for Mummius, his
rebuke was so just and sharp, that he withdrew himself from the Camp, and by a
lingering Death justified, that whosoever in War undertakes an Attempt without
Order, must either make Victory his Apology, or render himself incapable of
making any other. This Breakfast hindered the Feast, for Crassus perceiving a
pannick terror in all his Soldiers, would not expose those to our Swords, whose
fears had already half conquered them, but was so much more a Friend to his
Country, than his Ambition, that he advised the Senate to send for Pompey
back, and rather endeavor to preserve, than increase their Empire. Three days
successively, my generous Prince presented the Romans Battle, and the fourth
day, as he was going to take up his late design of marching over the Alps, and
afterward of confining himself eternally, in their greatest horrors he
received a solemn Embassy from those Sicilians which had cast off the Roman
yoke, wherein they protested, That his Fame, and not their Necessity, made them
choose him their Prince; That though the latter was pressing, yet the former
was the only motive of their Election; That he could not employ his Arms more
gloriously, nor more charitably, than for their defense; That the only hope
that his Courage would protect them, inflamed theirs: But if they were suppressed
before he came, they would sell their ruin so dearly, that he should not be
ashamed to acknowledge them his; and that they would all take up that
consolation at their Deaths, that they died Subjects to the great Spartac^s.

The Sicilian Deputies accompanied their Oration with so many tears, that my
generous Master, though he declined the Title of their Prince, yet he did not
that of their Friend; and having composed a considerable Body of Men, as well
for their Numbers, as their Resolutions, he Convoyed them with all his Army to
the Fare of Messina, and from thence sent them over into Sicily, where they
renewed the War with such success, as at length that fertile Island was upon
the point of changing their old Lords. The daily intelligence of our Companions
Victories, and of the wealth which attended them, so fixed all our Army upon
participating of both, that they unanimously begged Spartacus to finish their
labors, by settling them in so delicious a Country, who willingly yielded to
their requests, perceiving that Crassus absolutely declined a Battle, and that
now he might with Honor profecute his old design, having no Enemies that durst
oppose him, and having given his Soldiers for their Reward one of the
pleasantest Kingdoms in the world.

Consider, I beseech you, how deep a root his Melancholy had, when Triumphs,
nor the empire of Rome (which he might almost as easily have possessed, as
desired) could neither tear it up, or so much as shake it; and truly, to the
best of my observation, I never perceived him pleased but in dangers, and never
so much troubled, as when he had avoided them; which I attributed to the height
of his grief, whose torment was so great a burden, that he would even have
joy'd if Death itself had eased him of it. But to effect this determination,
understanding that Menas rid with a good Fleet in that small Channel which
separates Italy from Sicily, he employed an Express to him, who by large
promises and gifts, received an assurance from him, That if my Prince would
march with his Army into a Pen-insule of the Reggians, where there was good
quarters for his Army, and a good Road for his Fleet, he would not fail within
ten days, there to receive and obey his commands. Immediately the Messenger
returned with this dispatch, and soon after Spartacus moved with his Army to
the place assigned, where, after twice ten days expectation, instead of
discovering a Fleet, we only perceived a single Gally, which having cast
Anchor, Manned a small Skiff, and sent a Gentleman on shore, attended only by
two Slaves, who informing the Guards that he desired to speak with Spartacus,
was immediately conducted to his Tent, where he soon found it was that Gallipus
who had made Pompey so just a character of him, that it had like to have
procured his liberty. My Prince remembering it, used him with exceeding
civility, and the first compliments being past, Galippus thus spoke to him;
Sir, I am employed by Menas to acquaint you, that as he was weighing Anchor for
this Island, we perceived a Sail to the Windward of us, and having immediately
sent a swift Brigantine to bring us an account of her, they both came to the
Fleet, where Domitius, one of Pompey's greatest Favorites, presented my
Admiral with a Letter from the General, (all written with his own hand) which
was to conjure him, as ever he valued his friendship, that laying all other
designs apart, he would immediately come to him with his Navy to Dyrrhachium,
where then he was, and where he would expect him, being newly returned from the
Asian War, and from the defeat of Mithridates. This Letter (continued
Gallippus) was accompanied with such earnest and reiterated desires, from the
valiant Domitius, that at last Menas, who fancied the business could not be but
of exceeding consequence, since Pompey thought fit to make him the Messenger,
and not being above 18 hours Sail, and the Wind suddenly veering about to the
Southwest, which was as opposite for our Sailing this way as fair for Greece,
yielded to his request, and in two nights and a day, having crossed the Adriatic
Gulf which separates that Country from Italy, cast Anchor at Dyrrachium,
where my Admiral and I waited upon the great Pompey, who first showed us
Letters from the Senate, (occasioned by the apprehensions Crassus had of your
Army) which recalled him out of A^ia, to finish the Bondmens War, (for that was
(said Symander) the appellation the Romans gave it:) Then Pompey further told
him, That being informed by a ship which accidentally came from Messina, that
Spartacus had contracted with him to transport him into Sicily, he had sent for
him purposely to hinder it, and to desire him, as he valued the title of being
esteemed a friend to Rome, not to transport those Slaves from the Romans
revenge, and his glory, but as Italy had been the Scene of their Rebellion, so
to let it be of their Ruin. Pompey joined with those words so many other
pressing motives, and persuasions, that Menas desired that nights respite to
form his resolution, which was readily yielded unto. I confess Sir, (said
Gallippus) that the fear I had of my Admirals yielding, (for whosoever
considers whether he shall do ill, has already done it) made me take the
confidence (after we were retired) to tell him, That he ought to prefer the
being a Friend to Virtue, above the being one to the People of Rome; That the
way he took, made him unworthy of the end; and that to deserve that title
without possessing it, was nobler than to possess it without deserving it. I
know ( Menas hastily replied) all thou say is true, but can thou wonder
Gallippus that a Genius which has triumphed over Europe, A^rick, and Asia,
should now vanquish Menas? No, no, all things yielding to that great man, makes
it no shame for me to imitate them. In a word, seeing I could not make him
continue your Friend, I made him vow he would not be your Enemy. The next
morning Pompey having repeated his charms, obtained from my Admiral an
assurance not to serve you, on condition not to be employed against you; there
were some of the Roman Colonels which moved that Menas should take you aboard,
and then carry you to Dyrrachium, but that, both he and Pompey detested, the
last alleging he would not cheat himself of a Victory. This being thus
determined, my Admiral thought fit to employ me to acquaint you with what had
past, to beg your excuse, to return your Presents, and to protest, that nothing
but the great Pompey could have made him violate his engagement. Gallippus thus
finished his Discourse, at which my Prince was extremely troubled, as indeed he
was at all things that retarded his retirement; but least his melancholy might
be misinterpreted, he made haste to return him this Answer: If your Admiral had
been principled like you, he would never have undertaken to serve me, or having
engaged himself, would have performed it; but tell him from me, I am very much
my own Flatterer, if what he has done to make the Romans his Friends, will not
produce a contrary effect: For by necessitating me to stay in Italy, he will
too necessitate me to conquer it; and that having hitherto had no designs but
of Revenge, he will now inspire me with those of Ambition, and force me against
my will to be victorious: But (my Prince continued) because you have so
generously opposed your Captains breach of promise, I give your Virtue that
Reward I should have given his services; and thereupon presented him all those
gifts that Menas had returned, which Gallippus made some scruple to accept, but
at last took: And then in acknowledgment of my Princes generosity, offered him
to sail into Sicily, and there to hire as many ships for his service, as would
transport his Army thither; which Spartacus absolutely declined, alleging,
that he would not have his Gratitude hazard his Ruin; and that since Pompey
was coming into Italy, he had now left the design of abandoning it, being 'twas
only taken up because he could see no enemies there, but those which were his
Prisoners. Gallippus admired at his gallantry, and having made him a million of
engagements to sacrifice his life and fortune, when the Honor of his service
should afford him an occasion, took his leave, and returned toward his ^ally:
But the report of his message to my Prince being diffused over the Camp, filled
some of the common Soldiers with such a blind rage, that not being able to
discharge their fury on Menas, for the violation of his promise, and for
leaving of them (as they falsely said) a Prey to Pompey's victorious Troops,
they determined to punish the innocent for the guilty, and make Gallippus pay
for his Captains crime, who not suspecting any treachery of that nature, was
setting foot in his skiff, attended only by his two Slaves, when a crowd of
those insolent men fell upon him; at first he endeavored to appease them with
an information of their error, but perceiving they were deaf to all reason, he
retired into the Sea to his middle, that none might come behind him, and there
with his Sword resolved to sell his life. One of his Slaves, in imitation of
him, got an Oar, and being joined to his Captain, twice preserved his life, and
gave so large a proof of a singular Courage, that my Prince (upon hearing of
this Barbarism, being run thither) admired it, and judged that his condition
was not answerable to his clothes; but though Spartacus's presence and
threatenings qualified, yet it did not extinguish the Tumult; which he no sooner
observed, than with his Sword, having killed three of the most violent, he
ended the disorder, by causing five others to be executed upon the place. All
things thus appeased, and Gallippus come out of his Fortification, my dear
Master begged a thousand Pardons of him, that his Soldiers had so far violated
the Law of Nations; and that if he esteemed the punishment already inflicted
not sufficient for their Crime, he permitted him to be his own Judge. Gallippus
assured him, that he had rather been too severe, than too partial; and having
by many Compliments repaid his civility, my Prince desired to see that Slave,
whose Fidelity, and Valor, deserved so plentiful a character. Gallippus
instantly called him, and spite of his habit and some blood which endeavored to
disfigure him, Spartacus observed that his shape, and mien, were answerable to
his Courage; and after a little reflection on the inequality of Fate, in
bestowing him such ornaments i^ his extraction were like his habit, or if the
contrary, in giving such bles^ings so disproportionate a Fortune, he very
intentively observed the Slave, and found that the Slave was not less fixed in
looking upon him. This made him remember he had once seen some features not
unresembling his, and as he was calling to mind where it had been, he heard
himfetch a deep sigh, and say to himself, Oh gods! what is it that I see? am I
deluded? or have I already found what I seek? These few words (which were loud
enough for Spartacus to hear) put him into strange disorders, sometimes he cast
his eyes upon him that spoke them, sometimes upon the ground, now trembling and
looking pale, and then instantly blushing: The poor slave did not only observe
those alterations, but imitated them, which wholly converted my Princes
suspicions into a certainty; but the better to confirm himself, he drew him
aside, and having whispered something in his ear, they both, to our great
admiration, embraced one another with admirable Transports; I was present
whilst all this was acting, and was so ravished with the strangeness and
intricacy of the Adventure, that before I could go to discover what it meant, I
perceived them both returning to Gallippus, to whom my Prince said, He that was
once your Slave, ( Gallippus) now begs one of you, but does not intend so much
to wrong your Valo^s wages, as to expect him as gift: the height of my desires
is, that you will let me have him at any ransom; and if those Treasures I
possess be not of sufficient value, I will lose my Army and my self, but I will
present you too all those in the Capitol. Gallippus, who relisht nothing of his
profession, and who thought to excuse himself to Menas, in giving the Slave his
liberty, for the service he had that day renderd him, replied, Generous
Spartacus, you have paid his ransom in desiring his liberty, which from this
instant I give him; and all I expect in exchange is, that you will believe I
have been less beholding to him in twice saving my life, than in furnishing me
with the happiness of obliging you. At this noble Answer, my dear Master ran
with open arms to embrace him that made it, and then sent me for his Cabinet,
from whence he took out many Jewels of an immense value, and by plain force
made him accept them. Then Gallippus having acknowledged my Princes liberality
in words as ample as the cause of them, and embraced a thousand times his
enfranchised Slave, took of both, his last farewell, and went from them with as
high a satisfaction as he had left them in. Gallippus being gone, Spartacus
returned to his Tent, leading his Slave with him, in so high raptures of joy,
that both his looks and actions testified them. They were no sooner come
thither, than he desired all that accompanied him (but I) to give him an hour
or two's privacy, and then he fell again to repeat his Transports with so much
earnestness, that I believed in those very embracings he had lost the thought
of ever doing the like to Parthenissa; but at last perceiving my astonishment
was the effect of my ignorance, he was so charitable as to tell me, what!
Symander, do you not know the Prince Sillaces? At those words my Eyes were
unsealed, and I admired as much all that while, I knew him not, as then I was
happy in doing it. I will pass by telling you how I flung my self at his feet,
how I embraced his knees, and how I washed them with my tears, since all my
Extravaganices were interrupted by Spartacus's who loved so passionately his
Friend, that he could not be at quiet, till he had asked him what strange
Adventure had reduced him to the sad condition he found him in. I know not
(said Sillaces) if it be a strange, but I am certain it is an advantageous one;
for when I least expected to find my liberty, and my desires, I have lighted
upon both; it is you (my dear Artabbanes) that I seek, and it is only in that
employment I have suffered miseries, which nothing could render tolerable, but
the reflecting upon him for whose sake I endured them. the gods forbid (my
Prince reply d) that I should be the cause of your sufferings, they are not
sure so cruel as to render my misfortunes infectious; and to make those that
share in my friendship, to participate in my miseries. You have none ( Sillaces
answered) unless you contracted them since you left Parthenissa. certainly
(said my Prince exceedingly astonished) when you speak thus, you look upon my
resolution, and not my condition; for there has nothing happened since I
abandoned that fatal Country, which could afford me any ease of my torments,
but what I found in my courage and resentments. Alas! (replied Sillaces) are
you still in that darkness which your jealousy cast you into? must you believe
Parthenissa criminal, till you appear so your self? and must I show you your
fault, to show you your happiness? Yes, yes, (he continued) I see your
suspicions will vanish no other way, prepare your self then to hear a Story,
which these two years I have sought you out to tell you, and believe it with
that faith you would an Oracle, for nothing it delivers is more certain. That
which Sillaces tells me, (said my Prince) I always credit at that rate. You
had best (he replied) not decline that practice now, for what I must acquaint
you with, will as much need your faith, as the cure of your Affilictions will
stand in need of it. Spartacus, at these last words, had too great an
impatience to delay the satisfying it by any Reply; which Sillaces perceiving,
began this ensuing Relation.

The continuation of PARTHENISSAS Story.
THE same morning, in which by Duel you decided your unfortunate difference
with Surena, Arsaces (as he usually did) was walking in those pleasant Fields
which are watered by the River Tygris, and as they were the shortest way to
Ninive from the place you fought in, so he had not long been there, but he
perceived some four or five Men advancing toward him, carrying something
betwixt them, which by the great care they showed of their load, manifested how
much they were concerned in it; but they were no sooner come near enough to
know it was the King, than one of them leaving his companions, came with all
the visible signs of an exquisite grief, and flung himself at Arsaces Feet,
where the abundance of Tears he shed, hindered him awhile from showing the
cause of them, but at last (though his words were interrupted with many sighs)
he told the King, I am come (Sir) to demand justice against one, who has not
only contemned your Laws, but you also: It Is against Artabanes that I ask it,
who this morning sent Surena a challenge, whose courage has been so
unfortunate, that this last proof of it, has (I fear) rendered him incapable of
ever giving any other: Yes (Sir) it is his Body that we are carrying back, and
his Murderer is fled, who could I have overtaken, I would never have implored
any other Sword of Justice for my revenge, than my own, and either punished the
killer of my Brother, or not resented the misery of surviving him. That word of
Brother, made us soon know 'twas Vixores that spoke it, and truly he so mingled
his grief with his expressions, that Arsaces, who (you know) doted on that
Favorite, was so inflamed, that he protested by a world of horrid Oaths, you
should never enter into his Dominions, but to bring your head upon a Scaffold.
Then running to Surena's Body, he flung himself upon it, and by kissing his
pale and bloody Face, and a thousand such other extravagancies, published his
Frienshdip and his Grief. I know not whether the motion in carrying, or Arsaces
tormenting him, was the cause, but we soon perceived that he began to breathe,
and suddenly after, faintly to open his Eyes. Oh gods! into what transports did
this discovery cast Orodes in, truly he was thereby so overjoyed, that he
performed many things unworthy of his years, and Majesty; but that these good
symptoms might be improved, a Litter was instantly brought, Surena put into
it, and carried to his own Palace, accompanied (on foot by Arsaces and all the
Court. The Chyrurgeons having immediately searched, and bound up his wounds,
told the impatient King, that till the third dressing, they could make no
positive judgment of his life, but they assured him, if his cure lay in the
power of Art, they durst boldly promise it. I was present whilst all this was
acting, and as soon as I found they left Surena to his rest, I stole out of the
company and went to Parthenissa, in hope to learn the subject of your
difference, but alas, I found her so drowned in weepings, that I forgot a while
the cause of my visit, to bear her company in that sad employment; at length
observing, that my weakness did but augment hers, I interrupted her Tears, by
desiring to learn the subject of them, for if she knew no more than I, she had
no just cause for so immoderate an affliction. Alas Sillaces (she replied) have
not you then understood what I came from being informed of, that Artabanes has
killed Surena, and being fled, Arsaces had solemnly bound himself by sacred
Oaths, that the reparation of his offense shall be a perpetual banishment?
Madam (said I) it is true indeed, Arsaces in his passion, when he thought Surena
dead, swore what you say, but since, it is found that 'twas only a long swound
he was fallen into, and that the hopes of his life are greater than the ^ears
of his death, so that I believe the King will repent, and recall his vows. But
Sillaces, (she hastily replied) do you tell me this as a Truth, or to flatter
my grief? I tell you it (Madam, said I) as the former, for I pay you too high a
respect to delude you into a greater sorrow, which I should unavoidably
perform, did I give you a false subject of joy. Then (she said) one of my
greatest fears is suppressed, but I am doubtful I shall not so easily silence the
other, which is (for, to you I dare boldly tell my thoughts) I apprehend I am
the innocent cause of this disorder, and that Surena finding the advantage,
Artabanes had over him in my affection, has taken this fatal way to destroy his
Rival. No, no, Madam (I replied) though I cannot tell you the cause of their
difference, yet I can assure you, that which you mention is not it, for Vixores
relation to the King, made us evidently understand, that the challenge came
from Artabanes: Oh gods! (she imediately replied) what it Sillaces that you
tell me? you have made my admiration as great as my grief; thereupon she began
to renew her weeping with such violence, that I have often since believed, some
Divine foreknowledge of your suspicions, produced her Tears; for my
particular, I was at first as ignorant of their cause, as perplexed at their
effect; but at last, remembering her grief, to repair my error, I told her,
perhaps (Madam) Vixores relation had more of design than truth, and knowing
that the Kings Edicts were only rigorous against the Senders, and not the
Acceptors of Challenges, he to exasperate Arsaces fury, and extenuate his
Brothers Crime, made that to be Artabanes, which was Surena's Offense. Alas,
(said the fair Parthenissa) would your conjecture were certain, 'twould exempt
me from fears, which makes me tremble; But Sillaces (she continued) if you have
any sense of that affliction, my suspense has cast me into, I conjure you to
enquire certainly, and particularly what has happened, for I verily believe,
the knowledge of what I apprehend, could hardly prove a higher misery than are
my doubts. I was so earnest to obey her, that immediately I went to
Lindadory's, as well to satisfy my Inclination as my Duty to Parthanissa's
command, for I was confident, your Sister was as well instructed with your
affairs, as any other could be; but alas, I discovered nothing there but fresh
causers of sadness, and found by a melancholy experiment, that the resentments
of Nature, are as violent, as those of Love or Friendship, and at my first
coming in, though I had armed my self against all weaknesses of that quality,
yet the fair Lindadory's Tears were so eloquent, that I thought it no sin to
imitate them; and having mingled ours together for our common loss, I began to
do that for her, which I needed as much my self; in brief, I so fortified her
hopes, by assuring her, you could not be dangerously wounded, since you had
strength enough to fly from Arsaces choler, and that Surema being in a
probability of recovering, 'twas not unlikely to make him recall a rash vow,
where the performance would be a greater sin than the breach of it; that in the
end I moderated her afflictions, and then acquainting her how I was employed by
the unconsolable Parthenissa, she permitted me to follow my enquiry, which
though extreme diligent, was absolutely fruitless; for though I asked of
Zephalinda, and she of all her Brothers Servants, and Confidents, yet we could
no more discover the occasion of your difference, than suppress the troubles it
created. All this while Arsaces sufferings were not inferior to ours, that
unfortunate Prince never abandoned his Fvorites Chamber, and by promisin^
excessive rewards to the Chiurgeons, courted their Art and Diligence; but now
the time was come, in which they were to give their positive Judgments of
Surena's life, and whilst they were taking off their Plasters, the poor Orodes
stood all pale, and trembling, and in a far worse perplexity, than if their
sentence were to have been pronounced upon himself; at last Surena's wounds
being perfectly viewed, the Chirugeons found they were exceedingly inflam d,
and so many symptoms of their being inwardly gangin^d, that they all with
Tears in their Eyes, acquaited Arsaces, that it lay not in the power of any
thing but a Miracle, to recover him; at this fatal declaration, the King
(fetching a deep sigh) fell speechless on the ground, and Surena perceiving so
high demonstrations of his favor, made such excellent and passionate
retributions for them, and so admirably exclaimed against Fate, not for ending
his life, but for not permitting him to end it in so generous a Princes
service, that all which heard him, found his impiety, rather a justice, than a
crime, Arsaces being by many remedies recovered from his fainting, was (before
he had the strength to speak) carried out of his Favorites Chamber, who no
sooner perceived it empty of all but his Domestics, sent one of them for the
Princess Zephalinda, who being come, was conjured by him, to obtain from
Parthenissa for him, the honor of a visit, to whom he protested he had some
secrets of Importance to communicate, which should he dye before they were
revealed, would leave too great a horror on his Conscience. The fair Zephalinda
immediately obeyed his injunction, and came to wait on Pa^thenissa, when she
and I, were admiring at the occasion of your silence. The sadness which so
visibly appeared in Zephalinda's Face, was at first attributed by us both
entirely to that unimitable Friendship, that generous Princess paid you, but we
soon found, that Nature had a large share in it. When she had informed
Parthenissa with the occasion of her visit, your fair Mistress was extremely
starl'd at it, whether it proceeded from a Prophecy of what she afterward
learned, out of sympathy with Zephalinda, or from that sad banishment, which
would inevitably follow by your Rivals Death; but to contract your suspension,
I will not inform you of all those pressing motives, his generous Sister used
to obtain her desires, since it is enough you know they were successful. But
Parthenissa was no sooner retired into her Chamber; to make her self ready for
the intended visit; than one of her Servants came to inform me, that a
countryman which had sought me at my own house, and mist of me there, (being
acquainted where I was) was come to speak with me, having a Packet, which he
said was of some consequence. zephalinda, (though she knew 'twas you which had
reduced her Brother to that extremity, never lessened her friendship, but was
so generous, as to profess she was confident 'twas ^urena, not you that was the
cause of her misfortune) and was so earnest with me to satisfy her opinion,
which was, that those letters were from you, that to obey her, I was uncivil,
and left her alone to go and receive them; The superscription I scarcely looked
upon, when I knew it to be your hand, and transported with joy, I ran up to
Zephalinda, and with her into Parthenissa's Chamber, where I assured them, that
not only I should now know your condition, but the cause of your Duel; but
alas, as soon as I opened my Packet, I found a Letter for the King, and another
for Zephalinda, but none for her which did most desire, and most merit one; I
confess, my disorder at it was not far short of hers, but she attributing your
silence to any subject rather than the true one, and believing my Letter might
discover the cause, conjured me to peruse it; But oh gods! what astonishment
was mine, when I found what it contained? it made me a long time continue
silent, and trembling, and Zephalinda had no sooner ended hers, but it
ingender'd the same effect; Parthenissa, who could not fancy (since you were
living, as appeared by your Letters) what strange accident could produce such
an operation, broke her own silence, to learn the occasion of ours. Alas,
Madam, (I replied) you will be more happy in theignorance, than the knowledge
of it. If (said she) I knew not Artabanes to be living, your words would make
me suspect he were dead, No, no, Madam, Zephalinda answered, the certainty he
is alive, is not greater, than having committed his Crime, he is unworthy to
continue so. Is it possible (said Parthenissa) that he can commit a crime,
which may render him worthy of death in your judgment? Yes Madam, (she
replied) and when you have read this Letter (presenting him to Parthenissa) I
believe you will be of my judgment; whilst he was the destroyer of Surena, I
excused the action upon the belief I had, that he was invited to it by justice,
but now I have discovered he can suspect your Constancy, and convert a passion
of Love, unjustly into one of hatred, he shall find I can from his Friend,
become his Judge, and when his actions are ill, not fear to term them so.
Whilst Zephalinda was thus speaking, the unfortunate Par^henissa read her
Letter, and no sooner found what was in it, than fetching a languishing sigh
from the botton of her heart, she only said; alas, Arta^^nes! how ill do you
reward the purest Flame? and then fell down at our Feet, without giving any
signs of Life, Zephalinda, who thought the sight of her Letter, would have
rather inspired her with resentment, than grief, a thousand times condemned her
own rashness, and by an abundant weeping, discovered her repentance for it; but
at last, what with her help and mine, we brought Parthenissa to her self again;
but indeed she employed that life we restored her to, to torment her self so
excessively, that we found our charity was a disobligation. Yes Artabanes, had
you but seen how she deplored your inconstancy, and how transeendent her
passion was, even when she thought you unworthy of it, I am confident the
knowldege how yor were loved, would have sufficiently punished your belief,
that you were not. Surena in the mean while, finding his forces very much
diminished, and apprehending he should not have life enough left, to disclose
that which would make his death a less misfortune, sent a servant of his to
know the cause of Zephalinda's stay, who finding Parthenissa so well recovered,
as not to need her help, went to give her brother an account of her employment;
but he hardly was informed of what had happened when he conjured his Sister
with fresh impatiencies, to beg Parthenissa to afford him the blessing of
seeing her before he died, for he had something to reveal, which might set a
period to her grief, and which he protested was of so high a concernment, that
she should never repent the visit. With this message, Zephalinda returned, and
though Parthenissa was in extreme disorder, yet we both so effectually employed
our Prayers, that we obtained what they desired, and were no sooner come into
Surena's Chamber, than he begged all but your fair Mistress, to go out of it,
which being performed, he told her; (Madam) I know the incivility of putting
you to this trouble, and of leaving you alone in this room, is so great, that
nothing but my weakness could render it excusable; I know too, that as some
expressions of my joy for this transcendent Honor, I should cast my self at
your Feet; but Madam, what is my Apology for the former, must be also for the
latter. I should too (I must confess) be offended at these wounds, which
necessitates me to this rudeness; but Madam, so much is the respect I pay you,
that I cannot be troubled at my own torment, when I consider it as a punishment
of having betrayed you; at those words the fair Parthenissa fell fresh a
weeping, which Surena perceiving, he cried out, Oh gods! would I were so blessed,
as to be the object, and not the occasion of those Tears; but alas (he
continued) it is in vain to expect a felicity, which the gods, as well as a
perfection as great as theirs, thinks me unworthy of. Know then, Madam, that I
have been wicked, in expectation to be happyy, but having lost the hopes of the
latter, I will no longer practice the former; Yes (fair Parthenissa) those Eyes
which are unresistable, had that influence over me, which they have over all
they look upon, or they which look on them, and inspired me with a flame, whose
violence forced me to embrace any remedy, that might moderate it; and finding
that my continual sights, did rather cool than inflame your Breast, I could not
fancy but some other possessed what I sought: To resolve this suspicion, I
courted Zianthes Favor with such humbleness and assiduity that at last I
obtained it, and from her learnt, that Artabanes was the happy Man which
blasted all my joys, and possessed what I but ambition'd; I must confess, when I
reflected on that seeming passion he had for Zephalinda, I wondered for a while
at that Truth, but upon that public breach betwixt them, I began to believe
the Mystery, and soon after to apprehend by Moneses's resentment, to see it too
visibly; This made me hasten Arsaces declaration in my favor, in expectation
that Artabanes would not oppose his King, but I quickly found by Zianthes
intelligence, that all the operation it produced, was only a necessitating you
to manage your Amors with greater privacy, and a bringing of an accession to
your aversion for me. This discovery had so powerful a production, that in its
effects, I had like to have found the cure of all my troubles, and an exemption
from needing that forgiveness, which I acknowledge I cannot be more ambitious,
than I am unworthy of; would to the gods, fair Parthenissa, I had been so
happy, for then I had died with this satisfaction, that I had only merited your
pity, and not your hatred; but the higher Powers which form our Fates, and
permit us not to make them, ordained the contrary, and Arsaces, who was too
much concerned in my Life, not to contribute every thing which might preserve
it, so necessarily conjured me to discover the cause of my languishings, that
at last I obeyed him, and gave him a true account of all which Zianthe had
informed me. At first, that generous King, would publicly have taken notice
to Artabanes, of his daring to contradict, what he had so openly manifested was
his intention, and then by some rigorous penalty, have commanded him never more
to see you again; but I absolutely opposed this proceeding, by representing to
the King, that it would infallibly ruin Zianthe, who being the only confident
of your Loves, must be immediately known to be the discoverer of them; that by
losing my intelligencer, I should lose my hopes; and that his violence to
Artabanes, might perhaps hinder the progress of his passion, but nothing
advantage mine. I will not trouble you will all those reasons I used to make
Arsaces deeline that overture, since at last he did it, and immediately caused
me to send privately for Zianthe, where giving her large Presents, and larger
Hopes, and by telling her how infinitely he was concerned in my recovery, so
entirely gained her, that she promised him, not only to leave no means
unessay'd, which might cast a jealousy betwixt you, and your Artabanes, but
also toact any thing I propounded, which might conduce to that end. This
assurance, which till then by all my Arts I could never draw from her, gave me
my health, by restoring my hopes, for I could not despair of vanquishing all
difficulties, when I had so powerful an Assistant; But, mada, for a long time
we could not fix upon any design proportionate to our desires, till the
Tabienian revolt, which necessitated Arsaces to raise a vast Army, to repair
that affront they had done his Lieutenants, and to reduce them to their
obedience. This I elected as the fittest opportunity to act, what I intended,
and besought the King before that Army was formed, not to declare who should be
the General, but afterward to make Artabanes, and the same night he gave him
his Commission, to enjoin him by inviolable commands, next morning to go to his
charge; This was performed as I desired, and the same evening, in which Arsaces
gave Artabanes his Orders, I made Zephalinda (who I durst not inform of my
resolutions, for I found her more inclined to your Interess, than mine) to
invite you to a Ball, where, whilst you were diverting your self, I writ a
Letter to you, as if that Command Arsaces had given Artabanes, was by your
advice to me, that we might, during his absence enjoy a satisfaction which his
vigilance, and presence denied us, and filled the rest of the Letter with some
expressions, which might make conjecture you had long honored me with a private
Passion. This Letter I sent Zianthe, and conjured her to let it so fall into
Artabanes hands, as if it had been by accident, for I knew he would wait your
return at your own Lodings, to kiss your hands before his departure* All this
was so admi^ably acted by Zianthe, that it produced the wished effect; (as that
very night she advertised me) and the more to confirm him in his error, I
caused a small Crystal Looking-Glass to be made, by one of the rarest Artists
in Asia, and by a false screw I artificially put my Picture betwixt the Cafe
and the Glass, and some time before, sent a Merchant to sell it you, which he
did, the curiosity of the work inviting you (as I ws confident) to buy it, this
glass you so justly prized, that for the most part you carried it about you,
and valued it, so much above any thing of that nature, that Artabanes took
notice of it. Zianthe therefore, after she had revealed unto him, what by the
reading of my Letter, she seemed she could not well any longer conceal, the
better to confirm that fallacy, showed Artabanes the LookingGlass, which we
well observed you had often worn, and then by opening the private screw,
discovered that to him, which you never knew of your self, and so excellently
insinuated, that the este^m you placed upon it, proceeded more from that which
was concealed in it, than from that which was visible, that being filled with a
rage, which rendered him incapable of all things but revenge, he went away, and
going down the Stairs, met with a Servant of mine in the dark, whom I had
expressly sent thither, who seeming to take him for one of yours, desired him
to tell Zianthe, that you lay that night at my Lodgings with Zephalinda, and
that he was sent purposely to wait upon her thither. You know, Madam (continued
Surena) that all that night you honored my Sister with your company, for when
you were returning late, I caused one of the wheels of your Chariot, to be so
dexterously broken, that upon the first motion, it fell all to pieces, so that
you were necessitated to remain at my house, which the deluded Artabanes
attributed to a contrary cause, and though, that to put the greater Complement
upon me, you evaded, allowing him the honor of taking leave; for his being made
General, and his resolution of going next morning to his charge, was so
suddenly divulged, that I am confident all Nineve, except those of my house
knew it in an hour; but there, I had taken such strict order, that none should
speak of it, that it came not to your knowledge, Artabanes therefore without so
much as answering my Servant, retired to his own house, where, had I seen the
defects my delusion produced, I had (it may be) repented it. But Madam, his
Griefs had another operation than I expected, for I believed the being so
egregiously abused, would have made him decline any resolutions, but those of
hating you, and have induced him to vent his despair, upon the revolted
Tabienians, in which time, by the assistance of your resentments for his so
abandoning you, and my humility and constant passion, I was not out of hopes to
gain what he had lost; but it seems he abandoned himself so entirely to
revenge, that as he had lost the hopes of possessing you, so he resolvd to
endeavor I should wear his Livery; in pursuance whereof he sent me a
challenge, which I could not decline, for he that has the courage to adore you,
cannot want it to dispute you; which I did, but the gods, (who will not suffer
infidelity to prosper in Love it self, where it is least unlawful) gave him an
advantage over me, which perhaps upon a juster subject he could not so easily
have gained: Whilst Sillaces (said Symander) was making this relation, my poor
Master was in so many several disorders, that in my life I never saw a subject
fitter for pity; but no sooner had his generous friend disclosed this fatal
treachery, than he cried out, O gods, Sillaces; what is it you tell me? I tell
(he replied) that, which, if your unjust suspicion had not been too
predominant, Pa^thenissa would have informed you of, and thereby exempted her
self, you, and all your friends, from that misery, your precipitate and
voluntary banishment has cast us into; but be not so cruel to your self, as to
interrupt me in that which makes your wound, and not permit me to apply the
cure: Alas (said Artabanes) it is not in your power, for though Parthenissa
should by an excess of goodness, pardon my crime, yet that it self would but
increase it, by demonstrating, I have offended the greatest Mercy, as well as
the greatest Beauty. You are (said Sillaces) very ingenuous to persecute your
self, and your wilfulness is admirable; you will run into a storm, and then
refuse the Harbor. No, generous friend ( Artabanes answered) that which you
call a wilfulness, is a justice, since for a Criminal to embrace Life, when his
Conscience will be more severe than his Judge can be, is to become as much an
ememy to himself, as to Justice. If (said Silaces) you will not permit me to
finish my relation, for the interest you have in it, yet at least let me obtain
that favor, as a reward of those sufferings I have undergone, to bring you
news, which I thought would not have been altogether unacceptable. I beg a
thousand times your pardon (said my Prince) if the effects of my despair have
been so uncivil, but as a pennace for it, I will no more interrupt your
Relation, but listen to it with as much silence, as my miseries will permit.
Surena (said Sillaces) had no sooner ended this discourse, than perceiving how
strange an influence it had over Parthenissa, he thus continued: Alas (Madam)
all the hopes I had in my misfortunes, I apprehend are groundless, for I
expected by disclosing my fault, to obtain a pardon for it; but I find by your
disorder, that you are more inclined to Justice, than Mercy. I confess (said
Parthenissa) you have by your relation, made your self very unworthy the
latter, for by your own acknowledgement, you are no longer wicked, but because
you can live no longer, and it is not your repentance, but your death, which
makes this discovery. It Is true, Madam ( Surena answered) and thereby learn the
power of your Beauty, which violently forces me to actions against my
Inclinations, and against Justice. But Madam, I have greater hopes of your
forgiveness, by submitting, than disputing, and the more to induce you to it,
consider, that if I am the only actor in this fault, it is because I only had
the means to act it; that none would have declined my crime, if he had had my
hopes; that it lay in my power to continue, as well as to create your troubles,
(for I understand Artabanes is too perfectly deluded, ever to return of
himself, and discover the contrary) consider too, Madam, that I have given you
an ill opinion of me, to restore you to a good one of my Rival, that you will
render my death as full of torment, withour uour pardon, as of quietness with
it, and excuse my fault upon the score, that the purest flame was the creator
of it, and that as it was my first, so it is impossible but it must be my last.
All the while Surena, was thus speaking, his sighs accompanied his words, and
had so efficacious power over the generous Parthenissa, that she told him; Yes
Surena, you have my forgiveness, and I beseech the gods, that it may render
your death as full of satisfaction, as that crime which made you need it, will
(I fear) ^ill my life with misery. At the end of these words she went out of
his Chamber, and coming where Zephalinda and I were, she told her (passing by)
Ah Madam, your Brother has forever ruined me. That virtuous Princess was as
much surpised at this Declaration, as Parthenissa had been, when she learnt
the cause of it: But Zephalinda perceiving your fair Mistress was too much
possessed with grief, to desire an explanation of what she had said, contented
her self to suspend her curiosity till a fitter season, and having waited on
her to her Chariot, returned to Surena, who she knew, by the emotions of such a
visit, would remain in too sad a disorder to abandon him; but as soon as
Parthenissa was got home, she learnt, Zianthe had absented her self, which so
confirmed Surena's relation, that Parthenissa immediately fell into a violent
Fever, and the distempers of her mind, so well conspired with the malignity of
the disease, that for seven days together, all the Physicians were in despair
of her recovery, but in the middle of her highest ravings, she would often
excuse, and condemn you, and in such passionate terms, that in her frenzy, I
almost learnt the subject of it; but at last, the gods who showed us our fears,
to indear our joys, heard our Tears, and by a happy Crisis asswag'd, and at
last took away her pain and danger; I say our Tears, for Lyndadory, Zephalinda,
and I, had hardly any other employment during her sickness, and that generous
Princess was so much more concerned in Parthenissa, than in her Brother, that
as often as possibly she could, she left Surena, to wait on her Rival. Whilst
we were thus paying our duty, and care, to your sad Mistress, Arsaces was not
less vigilant, and concerned about his Favorite, who, it seems, (was by those
powers, which were concerned in your Loves) reduced, into a danger of Death,
only to extort a discovery from him, which nothing else could have had the
power to do; for no sooner was his Treachery disclosed, than an Arabian
Physician (who certainly has farther pier^' into the secrets of Nature, than
any which ever have been of his profession) understanding Orodes grief, and the
subject of it, came boldly to him, as he was returning from the Temple, where
he had been sacrificing for Surena's health, and told him, that he would
undertake to end his fears, by recovering his Favorite, if for his cure, the
King would build a College for Physicians, and endowe it with a competent
Revenue for their maintenance; Arsaces, who easily saw, that to grant the
Ara^ian his desire, was but to oblige his people in obliging himself, greedily
yielded to his request, and promised him rewards, which though they were
immense yet were but short of his merit; for by an admirable Art, only dipping
some Linen in Surena's blood, and by covering it with a Powder, which he
turned the Sympathetick, in eight days to our wonder, and Orodes joy, brought
your rival out of all fear of death; but the Parthian Physician, who envied
what they could not imitate, gave out, that his cure was not the effects of
Knowledge, but of Magic: but the skilful Arabian, to make their malice, as
apparent as their Ignorance, promised to publish a Treatise, which should
evince, that for his receipt he was only beholding to Art. His Enemies
therefore, who imagined, that he which could perform a cure, could tell the
means how it was wrought, one night privately murdered him in his Bed, and so
that excellent remedy is, (I fear) for ever lost, and only appeared, to make us
think it a misfortune. But as soon as Parthenissa was in any condition fit to be
spoken to, Lindadory, Zephalinda, and I begged her with such incessant
importunities, to discover to us what Surena had to her, that at length she
granted our request. Alas! what disorders were we in at that relation? they
were indeed so great, that for a time Parthenissa attributed what was merely
our astonishment, to a tacit condemning of you, but Zephalinda's resentments
against Surena, gave her soonest the power, not only to condemn her brother,
but to draw Parthenissa out of that error, our silence had lead her into, by
telling her; But Madam, since the gods so mercifully have discovered your and
Artabanes's delusion, why do you so long let him continue in torments, whose
greatness you may know by your own sufferings, and which are too high a
punishment where his crime as much his design, as it is his misfortune. Madam
(said Parthenissa) (who condemned you, but to learn more Arguments for your
pardon) it seems then by your discourse, that Artabanes is not faulty, which I
must inform you, is a far different opinion from mine; for was it a sufficient
inducement to think me unconstant, because his Rival said I was so? if he
thought me guilty, why did he not accuse me? and if not, why did he condemn me?
is an accusation then a sufficient convincement? No, no, (Madam) when I
consider the slight foundations his suspicions have, I must believe he has
resigned his liberty to some new Conqueror, and that which he ascribes to my
inconstancy, is but an effect of his own. Ah (replied Zephalinda interrupting
her) how unjust are you now to Artabanes, as well as to your self, had he any
such criminal design, he would not have exposed his life to Surena's Sword;
that was too dangerous a counterfeiting? No Madam, he was deluded so
artificially, that he merits rather your pity than your resentments; for 'twas
not only Surena, said you were inconstant, but Zianthe (your Confident too)
whose flight has confirmed her guilt; besides your wearing my Brothers Picture,
and transcendantly cherishing the Glass which contained it, above all things of
that quality, your absenting your self from his Company, when it might have
been the last time of your enjoying it, and when all Ninive knew of his
departure, your making his Rivals house your lodging, and his next days
accepting a challenge to justify your election (as he alleged) were such
strong temptations, that I should rather have admired if they had not
succeeded, than that they did; whilst I thought him faulty, I was the frist to
condemn him, but now I find him only unhappy, I am become his Intercessor, and
if I prove not a successful one, I will publish to all the world, that 'twas
not the gods cruelty, but Parthenissa's ruined Artabanes. Madam (said
Parthenissa) your friendship makes your partial, and you could not but ^ondemn
what you excuse, did you reflect upon it with an unprejudicate opinion, for he
that could think me incapable of Constancy, I must make him so of my affection,
and since his believing me guilty of change is his fault, I am resolved it
shall be his punishment. If (replied the perfect Zephalinda) you are determined
to be rigorous, let him rather know his error, than conceal it; for whilst he
thinks you faulty, he may find his cure in that belief, but to learn the
contrary, will prove a torment almost great enough (if 'twere placed on Surena)
to punish his Treachery. Madam (said Lindadory, who all this while was drowned
in Tears, by an efflection on your sad condition) will you make my Brother
miserable, because others have made him unfortunate? will you make him bear the
punishment of Surena's fault? and will you not grant him your forgiveness,
because his rival has reduced him to a condition to need, and deserve it? Would
to the gods ( Parthenissa answered) I could find as much reason, as I have
inclination to pardon him; but Madam, the cause of his fault, is of so
misterious a quality to me, that perhaps in forgiving this crime, I may
discover him guilty of a greater, and what I inte^d as a Charity, may prove an
offense. Madam (said I) you ought then the sooner to clear your doubts; neither
will we become his Sollicitors, if he obey not your first summons, and if at
your Feet he do not acknowledge the infelicity of your credulity, and the
continuation of his passion: consider, fair Parthenissa, I conjure you, that a
longer delay may so confirm him in his error, that his despair may render your
mercy fruitless, by driving him into some fatal resolutions against his Life,
or at least, make him elect an eternal exile, and I beseech the gods, that
already he has not chosen one of those misfortunes, But why (continued
Sillaces) do I make the way to your Felicity so long, that I render it a new
misfortune, let it suffice, that at last Parthenissa seemed to give that to our
Reasons, which proceeded from her Inclination; Yes Artabanes, that generous
Princess pardoned your unfortunate Crime, assur'dus, that she would divide the
joy of your return, and that her Heart should be as open to receive you, as
ever. With this favorable declaration, I dispatched several Expresses, to seek
you, and to inform you of it; and in the mean time employed all my friends, and
my own power with Arsaces, to recall his Vows; but alas, our incessant Prayers
were so far from altering, that they confirmed his cruelty; and though I know
not from what misterious cause his aversion for you proceeded, yet I remember,
for his final snwer he told us; The Parthians shall be convinced, how sacred an
observer I am of my Laws, by making them as penal to the first Prince of my
Blood, as to the meanest of my Subjects; that though Surena be recovered, it
was no lessening of Artabanes's offense; that I owe the preservation of my
Favorite, not to his respect, but to the goodness of the gods, to whom I shall
make an unworthy retribution, if my first action was a violation of my Oaths;
And concluded, that whosoever mentioned your return again, he would consider it
as an affront to his Authority, and resent it at that rate. With this barbarous
answer I went to the thee Princesses, where I found two of my Expresses
returned, who assured us that they had been at Babylon, Selutia, Hecatomphile,
Arbelles, and all the other chief Cities of Orodes Empire, and made such
diligent search for you, that they durst engage their Lives, had you been in
any of them, their pains had not been fruitless; the others also at their
coming back, made us the like assurances, so that all their testimonies
concurring, it filled Lindadory, Parthenissa, and Zephalinda, with such
excessive sorrows, that perceiving nothing but your return, could put a period
to them, I undertook to give them an account of you, or never again to give
them any of my self. This motion extremely surpised them, who perhaps thought,
that an improbable way of finding one friend would turn to a certain one of
losing another; but I so represented, tha' my friendship to you, and my
eagerness of silencing all their Tears, would inspire me with a higher
diligence than any other, that I obtained my request; and indeed I found
Captivity a lesser trouble, than the seeing every day so deep a melancholy as
that which possessed your Sister, your Mistress, and your Friend. Immediately
therefore I fitted my self for my journey, and though the King did me the honor
to send me a Commission for that Army, which was desing'd for you, yet I wholly
declined it, and rather elected to become a wanderer, to restore you to your
felicity, than to tread the way which leads to glory, when not in order to it;
within two days I had fitted my self, and having taken a pretense (to obtain
the Kings permission) for a private affair, which would necessitate my absence
for some time, I took, leave of those, for whose sakes and yours, I undertook
so uncertain a voyage; I will not tell you how I raised their Faiths by naming
greater probabilities of success, than I fancied; nor all the passionate
expressions at our separation, but I must tell you, that in hope I might be so
fortunate as to succeed in my inquiry, I procured a Letter from Parthenissa to
you, which having secretly made up in a Ribbon, that night I lest Ninive, and
bethinking myself, that from that Peasant, which you sent with your Packet to
me, I might get some light of the way you took, I went directly to that
Village, where I found my hopes deceived but riding a days journey further, by
incessant inquiries after you, I learnt that not very long before, a Gentleman,
attended only by one Servant, had hired a Guide to pass over those Sandy
Deserts, which are between that place and Antioch, and by the description they
made of the person, and his sadness, I imagined it was you; I therefore
instantly hired the same Guide, who brought me to the same Inn you lay at in
Antioch, where the Master of it assured me, that Gentleman embarked himself in
a small Vessel that was bound for Cyprus; this gave me a belief, that since an
infelicity in Love was the cause of your banishment, you intended to confine
your self in that Island, where the Queen of that Passion had chosen her
earthly residence. With this hopeful fancy, I hired a Ship, and in two days
landed at Paphos, and from thence exactly visited every corner of that Kingdom,
yet all the advantage I derived from a hundred days spent in so curious a
search, was, to remain confident you were not in it; but because I was
informed, that several discontented persons, retired themselves into certain
small Islands of the Archipelago, I resolved to try whether you did not
increase their number, but we had not been under Sail above twelve hours, when
a Cilician Pyrate gave us chase, and though with my Sword I disputed my
liberty, yet at last being oppressed by number, I lost both, and received so many
wounds, that had not our Enemies Captain, by a good opinion conceived of my
Courage, been exceeding careful of my cure, I had mist the happiness of
restoring you to yours; about half a year I continued with this Cilician, where
I had nothing of a Slave, but the name, and whose affection I gaind so
entirely, that he often protested 'twas that only which hindered my liberty;
but out of apprehension that I might not have the same inclinations for him,
which he had for me, he would every day endeavor to wean himself from my
company; and as soon as he could digest our separtion, he would then give me my
liberty, to obtain a pardon for having so long delayed it; his former Charity,
and those fresh demonstrations of his friendship, were so justly predominant
over me, that when the valiant Gallippus, and Menas, with three Galleys more,
fell upon ours; I joined my self to the generous Cilician, and though after a
virtuous resistance he lost his life, yet in that action I saved it three
times, and laden with wounds, fell by his side; Gallipus and Menas having
inquired, after their victory, who I was, were informed by some which survived
our defeat, that I was a Slave, and only in gratitude to him, whose courage
took, and whose charity preserved me, I performed what they saw. I know not
whether my resolution or gratitude, gave them an opinion, that it was not
unlikely, the same usage might produce the same resentments, but whatsoever was
the cause, Gallippus took up my Body, carried it into his Cabin, and there so
pressed the Surgeons to show their Art, that as proof of it, by powerful
Cordials, they brought me to my self again, and having found my faintness,
proceeded rather from the loss of Blood, than any mortal wound, they then gave
Gallippus an assurance of recovering me, and afterward performed it. I cannot
but tell you, that had not higher reflections than any which related to my
self, silenced my despair, I had made my own Sword testify, that I preferred
Death before Slavery; but the consideration of my engagements to your fair
Sister, Parthenissa, and Zephalinda, and the eternal torment, the not knowing
your error, would be to you, made me look as a providence upon my double
Captivity, and as it were my double Refurrection; besides, I could not fancy
the gods, who are the relievers of Innoency, did so miraculously preserve me,
but to render me at last their instrument in it; and since the Sea was the
place where I lost any further intelligence of you, the being with Pirates, who
examine all Ships they see, gave me no small hopes, that those accidents, which
in appearance were misfortunes, might prove the best way of putting a period to
yours and mine; to conclude, the gods made not my conjectures false, for it is
by my Captivity, that they have brought my troubles to an end; but before I
have done so to my discourse, I must let you know, that in some sights, I did
Gallippus such memorable services (for 'twas with him I always went) that he
endeavored to obtain my freedom from Menas, which the barbarous Pirat always
declined; but the valiant Gallippus, to make my hopes ease my sufferings,
protested that the next service I rendered him, which might make his Admiral,
not justly to condemn his setting me free, he would rather hazard to lose the
expectation of his future preserment, than not do it; 'twas a long while before
I could on so favorable an opportunity, which at last was given me this day in
your sight; but my being a Slave, having been the means of inceasing your
Glory, I shall no more deplore it, than I do my other miseries, since they are
so fortunately finished and since by them I have given some proofs of a
friendship, whose greatness cannot be resembling to any thing so aptly, as to
his perfections to whom it is paid.

'Twas thus the generous Sillaces ended his relation, and 'twas in passionate
embracings, and not in words that Spartacus was eloquent in his gratitude; but
his friends perceiving that his silence expressed his impatience for
Parthenissa's Letter, immediately by unsowing a little Ribbon, which in all his
misfortunes he had artificiallay preserved, presented my dear Master with those
fair Characters, which, having kissed a thousand times, he found that they
contained these words.

PARTHENISSA to the Prince ARTABANES.
IF I consulted with Justice, and not with Friendship, this which is to recall
you from your banishment, should be a confirmation of it, and perhaps your
crime (if my affection were not your advocate) might deserve that punishment;
for in esteeming me inconstant, you have as much wronged my judgment, as my
Virtue; but since your fault affords you an evincement, that my affection by my
yet continuing it, is incapable of alteration, I pardon an error, which on that
score I can hardly condemn, and all the reparation I desire, is, that you will
never think me so near being guilty, as to have been thought so by you; that
you will make a grief cease, which nothing but your presence has the power to
do; and that you will be confident, it is as impossible for me to alter my
Passion, as to improve my first election by a second choice.


O gods! ( Spartacus cried out when he had ended reading) why did you give me
the courage to love Parthenissa, the happiness to obtain hers, and not virtue
enough to know she was incapable of vice; Then abstaining a while from words,
he made those sighs which interrupted them, perform their Office; but having at
length allayed that storm, he thus continued; Great gods! what crime have I
committed, that you make a declaration of Parthenissa's Passion for me, my
punishment? and yet you are therein but just, for since the suspecting of it
was my sin, it is fit it should be too, my torment. My Relation would be
endless, did I tell you all those rational extravagancies he uttered, I will
therefore pass them over, with all those Menaces he made against Surena's Life,
and only inform you, that never any man's condemnation brought him a more real
grief, than did Artabanes pardon to him, and that his despair for having
injured the perfect'st excellency, flung him into a violent Fever, which was
not only like to have cost him his life, but was really the cause of those
disasters, which afterward did happen. For Canitius (who my Prince had
honored with the office of his Lieutenant General) at the taking of Salapia,
saw the fair Izadora, and had for her so violent a Passion, that it gave him
the impudence to beg her of my generous Master, as a reward of his Services;
but Spartacus not only refused it, but gave his so just a reprehension for it,
that instead of producing repentance, it inspired him with revenge; to effect
which (as we afterward learnt) he held a private correspondency with Gellius
and Lentulus, at that famous Battle, in which they were defeated, and 'twas by
his Treachery, and the quitting of his Post, that all those valiant Germans
were then cut off; and for which, he attributing of it to their rashness, and
my Prince not to his infidelity, he had his pardon; which generosity was so far
from producing his conversion, that it gave him encouragement to abuse a
Virtue, which, if he had had any himself, he should rather have admired. This
Traitor therefore taking the advantage of his Generals sickness, which gave him
an unrestrained liberty to accomplish his infidelity, began by his Agents, to
let the Army know that Spartacus, who built his Glory upon their Blood, cared
not how profuse he was of so precious a treasure, whilst that by it he could
purchase his desires; that they had no reason any longer to follow a Captain,
who declined so much as acquainting them with his Name, and Country; that to
the best of his observation, they must not expect a period of their troubles
but by a period of their lives, for having led them cross all Italy, with an
engagement of disbanding them, when they had reached the Alps,, yet, when all
their dangers were past (but that of not observing his promise) upon the bare
noise of Crassus Army, he leads them from their security, to make them
undertake a hazardous War; that when by the only blessing of the gods, by the
defeat of Mummius, they had created such fears in Crassus, that they might with
as much safety, as honor, have retired themselves to enjoy their Valors
recompense, he declines Gallippus overture, of sending them a Fleet, which
would have conveyed them into a Country, where at once they might receive
their security, and their rewards, and for the hopes of a little Glory, which
their Swords and Lives too must purchase for him, he is resolved, not only to
expose them to all the Force of Italy, but to attend Pompeys triumphant A^my,
who are so accustomed to Victory, that they desire no greater certainty of it,
than to come to a Battle; in which, the best name our Victory can bear, will be
that of a happy rashness; neither can they have any hopes of his favor, had
they no other experiment of the contrary, than that of Salapia, where lest
Perolla should be too weak to shed their Blood, he sends him those prisoners to
destroy their Valors, which had been made so, by their valors; and that late
one of Gallippus's Slave, who, though he gave no other proof of his Courage,
than the defense of himself, and the killing of some of them, yet immediately,
as if the shedding their companions Blood, had been the best Title to a
recompense, his liberty is purchased, and by treasures far greater than any
which has been, their reward for two years misery and success; and not content
with this injury, but because they vented their just resentments upon a
violater of his Faith, from their General he becomes their executioner, and
lest they might judge that violence proceeded from the heat of Blood, he causes
afterward five of them to be publicly hanged, and offers their Enemy to
become their Judge, who finding Spartacus to be more cruel, than he himself
could be (though a Pirat) declined the motion upon that score only. It was with
many such instruments that the traitor Canitius, and his Instruments,
endeavored my Prince's ruin, and though he were the only Author of this
wickedness, yet he appeared the chief detester of it; neither was he content to
be false within our Camp, but carried his perfidiousness to that of the Romans,
and by a private contract with Crassus (which my Prince's indisposition
permitted him to manage with security) not only became his Friend, but his
Intelligencer; and advised him, during his Generals sickness to advance, and by
a strong Trench to shut up the neck of that Peninsule we then quartered in,
where if Spartacus ended his life, by his present disease, the command of the
Army by succession, being his, he would betray it into his hands; or if he
recovered, he would raise so dangerous a mutiny in the Army (for the which,
their being thus besieged, would give a sufficient rise) that in so great a
disorder he might make his advantage. He further protested, he would then have
performed that, for which he was futurely engaged, but that as yet those seeds
of disorder, had not taken root deep enough to produce the fruit he expected,
but yet as an earnest of the reality of his professions, he would not oppose
Crassus's making that Trench which was to besiege us; who upon this
persidiousness raised his hopes, and his camp, which he removed to the neck of
our Peninsule, where contrary to the advice, and above the hope of all his
Officers, he in a short while cast up a trench from Sea to Sea, of three
hundred Furlongs in length, fifteen Foot broad, as many high, and on the top
of it raised a Wall of an admirable strength, whilst this was performing, our
Army often repined at Canitius not opposing it, who to make his sitting still,
appear rather his respect, than his treachery, protested he would adventure
nothing, till Spartacus was recovered, left fighting under his fortune, the
success might be attributed to his own courage; besides, he often laughed at so
endless a toil (as he termed Crassus Trench) and said 'twas a work sitter for
Laborers, than Soldiers; but yet if the Romans effected it, they would but
become the makers of their own graves, for they must be so over-haras'd, that
it would be impossible for them to use a Pile or a Sword: I must confess, I was
of his opinion, and had I not been so, I esteemed it less hazardous to be
besieged by Crassus, than to fight a Battle under Canitius. Neither was it
singly Canitius's treachery, which gave the Roman General this confidence, but
Pompey's unexpected return had a share in it, for though Crassus had conjured
the Senate to send for him out of Asia, yet he had done it to palliate any
disgrace which might have befallen him, to manifest the greatness of the
danger, and the better to set off the glory of a victory, than out of a belief
that Pompey could so soon, and so successfully disingage himself from the
Mithridatick -War; but when to his grief, and admiration he received advice
from Rome, that not only Pompey was at Dyrrachium, and expected but a fair wind
to transport him into Italy, but that all the Senate considered him as the Man
destined for that work, and had made him General of that War, taking the very
rise from Crassus his own Letters, spite, and ambition made him undertake what
his judgment, nor his courage, could have invited him to. In the mean while,
my generous Prince lay struggling with greater difficulties than all the Roman
Empire could have raised him, I mean his despair for having suspected the
perfect innocence; which cruel thoughts, made him look with some sort of joy,
upon that sickness we considered with horror; but in the end, the gods (who had
not yet wearied themselves in persecuting him) abated, and afterward took away
the danger of his Fever; but then his Melancholy augmented, as his disease
decreased, and had so powerful an influence over him, that it appeared as
dangerous an enemy, as that which was so lately suppressed; to be brief, Sillaces
took so opportunely his good intervals, and so effectually employed them, that
Spartacus began to listen unto reason, and one evening, finding him much
inclined to relish his persuasions, he told him; Are you then, Artabanes
resolved eternally to render fruitless that miraculous discovery the gods have
made in your favor? will you by your wilfulness, necessitate Parthenissa to
believe, that what was your misfortune, was your design? will you render what
you would make the testimony of your Repentance, a greater offense than your
fault? and will you make your Love more obliging than your Hatred? for whilst
you thought your Presence was Parthenissa's trouble, you banished your self
from her, and now she tells you 'twill prove her only consolation, you deny it
her: No, no, ( Artabanes) if you think you have not really her pardon, a new
disobedience is not the way to obtain it; and if you believe you have, why do
you deny your self the benefit of it? 'twas with many persuasions of this
nature that Artabanes despair was assaulted, which at last were so prevalent,
that after a deep sigh, he told Sillaces, You have vanquished me, (generous
Friend) yes: I will go to Parthenissa, for since it is she I have offended, it is
unfit any other but that injured innocence should pronounce my sentence:
neither can she doubt how sensible I am of my crime, since I make her both the
Party, and the Judge, and offer my life unto Arsaces fury, only to preserve it
to her justice; you will find (said Sillaces) with ecstasies of joy, and a
thousand embraces, how little cause you have to be apprehensive of either, for
as Parthenissa's goodness has pardoned your offense, so if Orodes justice does
not imitate her example, let it be my care to preserve your being in Parthia,
from his Knowledge. My generous Master being brought to this good temper, we
thought it high time to inform him, that the Romans had in a manner besieged
us, and that the vastness of our Army had so exhausted the Island of all
Provisions, that our necessities, if not our courages must invite us to force
our passage. Spartacus heard this advertisement (which till them we had
de^lin'd giving him, reason by of his sickness, and melancholy) with a
singular satisfaction, and about some four or five days after, having recovered
sufficient strength to make use of a Horse, he came out of his Tent, which the
Soldiers celebrated with so loud a shout, that the Romans apprehended their
besieged were coming to be their Assaulters; neither do I believe their fears
had been any thing lessened had they known the true cause of that Allarm, for I
dare justly affirm, they more apprehended my Princes recovery, than a Battle:
But Artabanes having taken 10000 Men for his Guard, went to view that
miraculous Trench, which he more admired than feared; but lest his Officers
might misinterpret his silence, he told them; That Crassus (doubtless) had more
Pioneers than Soldiers in his Army: that since he never declined a Battle, he
rather thought the Romans secured themselves, than besieged him; that 'twas
impossible any people could take that pains, b^t for their own preservation;
yet lest the world might believe the contrary, he would in few days evince the
truth by a demonstration, and was more pleased to know where he might fight
with Crassus, than troubled at those difficulties he must surmount to do it.
And indeed not long after, when he had perfectly recovered his strength, and
when all his Army despaired of disingaging themselves from so ruinous a
labyrinth; in a stormy night, when the earth was covered with Snow, he gave
orders to all his Forces to be ready to march, and whilst he was putting on his
Armor, he told Sillaces; Come generous Friend, let us make Crassus defeat, the
way to assault Rome, and having taken it, let us retire into Parthia, where I
will manifest, that I prefer not the greatest Empire of the world, before lying
prostrate at Parthenissa's Feet, nay, that I relinquished it, for so glorious
and advantageous an exchange; yes Sillaces, I will in few da^s so cover my self
with Palms and Laurels, that my criminal jealousy shall not be seen, and do
such virtuous actions, that her justice shall pardon my offense; or my Blood
shall expiate it. These words were scarce spoken, when he put himself at the
head of the Army, and without the least stop, led on those Troops, who under
such a General, could not but be victorious; in effect, Sillaces and he, were
the first in person which pulled down the Roman Eagles, planted more fortunate
Ensigns in their places, and without giving their success any leave to cool,
with their Swords performed so great an execution, and so strewn the ways with
Roman Carcasses, that the effects of their valor almost hindered the progress
of it, and had they not had a nobler design, they might have besieged the
living Romans with the dead, and made as famous a Trench by their victory, as
Crassius had done by his labor; but the unequaled Friend so much undervalu'd a
Conquest, where nothing was considerable in it, but the number of the Dead, and
so abhorred all things which retarded their return into Parthia, that leaving
Crassus to deplore, and admire his defeat, they took the direct way to Rome,
which was to be the crown and limit of their Conquests; but alas, that fatal
poison which the Traitor Canitius had given our Soldiers, began now to show how
strangely it had diffused it self; and though Granicus (a considerable Officer
of our Army) were not of his conspiracy, yet imagining that Crassus loss had
made him incapable to revenge it, and finding the Soldiers prepared for any
Mutiny, he so well husbanded their disorder, that the second night, as we were
in our march toward Rome, he revolted with 13000 Men from our Army, and campt
with them near the Lake of Lucania, with intention to set up for himself.
Spartacus was extremely enraged at this, and none appeared more violent to
punish it, than the false Canitius, who inwardly rejoy'd at so unexpected an
advantage, and immediately advertised Crassus of it, lest he might lose that
favorable opportunity; but though my Prince was sensible of so great a
dismembring of his Forces, yet the belief he had, that in them all the Traitors
of the Army were out of it, he consol'd himself, knowing that they were less
dangerous in a distinct body, than under his Colors, and to satisfy those that
pressed him to be revenged, he told them; That he knew no way more probable for
their punishment, than their having put themselves out of his protection, and
that he doubted not, but in their very offense they would receive the reward of
it. Therefore believing himself for all that loss strong enough to carry Rome
by storm, he determined the next morning to continue his march, almost as much
troubled that Granicus had hindered it a day, as at his Revolt; but the first
Squadrons were hardly drawn out of the Camp, when advertisement was brought;
that Crassus, (who now fought for revenge, and the preservation of Rome) was
fallen upon Grani^us with so much fury, that 'twas impossible but in it he must
find his ruin. This Allarm so moved the gallant Spartacus's generosity, that
though Canitius, (and Crassus, who by that time was corrupted too) begged my
Prince to permit the Romans, to become his Executioners, yet considering the
danger, and not the cause of it, and remembering Granicus's Courage, and not his
Revolt, he lead his Ensigns back to the relief of those, who had so often been
victorious under them; and though his only appearing made Crassus return to his
Camp in a hasty march, yet it produced no other considerable effect; for
Granicus and all his Soldiers were killed before Spartacus's arrival, not one
receiving a wound in his back, or dying out of his rank, preserving that Order
with their Bodies, which they could not with their Lives, their Deaths
manifesting whose Soldiers they were, and their defeat, what General they had
abandoned; and indeed, my Prince was so taken with their resolution, that he
spent two days in giving them a Military Funeral, burying their Crimes in their
Graves. This sad Solemnity performed, we continued our design; but as if my
Prince's Virtue had not opposition enough from public and private enemies;
the heavens themselves conspired against him, and by continual Rains so swelled
the Rivers, that the Romans having broken down all the Bridges, it was
impossible for him to proceed. I leave you to think what his resentments were
at so froward a destiny, for it not only retarded the Conquest of Rome, and,
(which was more intolerable) his return to Parthia, but also gave Crassus's
recruits leisure to join with him, and the danger of the Empire made them so
considerable, that before the waters were returned into their usual channels he
came, and with much confidence pitched his Tents within some sixteen Furlongs
of ours, where the vicinity of our Camps, furnished frequent occasions of
fighting, which was our constant divertisement, in expectation of more
favorable weather; but one day Spartacus having advice that Scroffa and
Quintus, two of Crassus bravest Captains, were gone with all the Roman Cavalry
for Forage, he sent the generous Sillaces with all his, to intercept their
return, where after a bloody dispute, our Forces, by the valor of their
Leader, had the better, who with his own hand having given Scroffa very
dangerous marks of his courage, returned into the Camp, laden with Victory and
Wounds. My Prince received him in Triumphs, but was more afflicted for the
latter, than pleased at the former, esteeming the loss of so much precious
Blood, too prodigal a payment, not only for having vanquished those Romans, but
though it had done the like unto their Empire. But the Surgeons soon
mittigated his fears, by an assurance that Sillaces was in no danger, and that
the greatest trouble he was like to suffer, was the keeping of his Bed for some
10 or 12 days; Five of which were not expired, e're the Floods were so
asswag'd, that Spartacus might have continued his march toward Rome, had not
his friends weakness hindered it. Crassus imputed this delay to his Fear, and
having a while before, received advice from Canitius, that now all things were
in such a perfect readiness, that if the Romans could bring Spartacus to a
Battle, he would bring them to a Victory, he determined, as a provocation to my
Prince (which was a needless labor) to cast up two great Trenches, the one to
hinder our passage toward Rome, the other to hinder our Camp from Watering. To
interrupt this design, Spartacus made many vigorous attempts, and thereby
necessitated the Romans by fighting, to obtain leave to work; but the eighth
day after Sillaces's victory, the morning was spent in so sharp a dispute
betwixt us, and the Romans, and Seconds on either side came so thick, and
numerous, that my Prince perceiving he might engage Crassus, galloped back into
the Camp, and Commanded all his Army immediately to prepare themselves for a
Battle, which whilst they were doing, he came in to Sillaces, where he
acquainted him, that before night, he would be in a condition. immediately to
return into Parthia, or never to see it again; that nothing appeared a higher
misfortune, than to be deprived of his company and help, in so glorious an
occasion, but since he had so lately engrossed a memorable victory to himself,
he was hopeful he would not repine, if he also laid hold on so favorable, and
so often ambition'd an occasion, to imitate his example. Sillaces was extremely
surpised at this Declaration, and having sufficiently cursed those former marks
of honor, which now hindered him from increasing his Stock, he begged Artabanes
he might wait on him, though in a Litter, that since he could not be a sharer
in, he might at least be a Spectator, and admirer of his Glory; and thereupon
forcing himself to rise, he found how ill a correspondency his Mind and
Strength had together: This sad experiment, and my Prince's Prayers, made him
yield to his weakness and his friend, who having selected 7000 choice Men, more
for the Guard of Sillaces than his Camp, he gave me the Command of them, and
though I begged with vehement importunities, to be near his Person in so famous
an occasion, yet the consideration of some slight hurts I had received in
Scroffa's defeat, and the necessity of a faithful Attendant on Sillaces, made
him deny me. The two generous Friends having took leave of one another, with
words, which nothing but so perfect a friendship was capable to produce, and my
Prince having done me the honor to embrace me, he immediately lead his Troops
which consisted (not counting those left with me) of 55000 effective Men, to
that Field in which he was confident they would purchase so much Glory; where
he already found the Roman Army in Batalia, and with as much resolution in
their countenance, and posture, as if they had been victorious as often, as
defeated; his Army too being put in order, by an Oration, he animated his
Soldiers, and then gave order to the Trumpets, Clarions, and all the warlike
Music to do the like, by sounding the Charge; and that his Soldiers might see
his resolution, in all their sight, he killed that Horse, which he constantly
made use of in a Battle, saying, that if ^e were ^onqueror, he should want
none, and if defeated, he would make use of none. My Princes Army was divided
into two great Battalions, the greatest was led by Canitius and Castus, which
consisted of 30000 Horse and Foot, the other which made up 25000 more, had my
Prince in the head of them, who that morning was assured by those two Traitors,
that they would act miracles, which indeed they performed, in betraying the
greatest Virtue that ever shined upon Earth. The ground over which my generous
Master's Batalion was to move, proved ^o uneven, that the other went first to
the Charge, and those which led it marched with much order, and seeming
resolution, till they came within shot of their Enemies, but then Canitius and
Crassus (with each of them about forty of their chiefest Officers) turning the
points of their Javelins to the ground, abandoned their Soldiers, and ran full
speed to the Romans, who opening their Divisions, received them with shouts of
Triumph. This Treachery you may well imagine, brought a world of confusion in
those un-officer'd Troops, and in the height of it, the two Traitors,
accompanied with their adherents, and some Romans, returned, and Canitius in
Crassus's name, offered all those their Lives, who would lay down their Arms;
to which a gallant Thracian (that my Prince had honored with a considerable
Command) immediately replied, Traitor, it is a higher satisfaction to punish thy
Treachery, than to live by it, and it is upon that score, that I decline the
latter, to act the former; thereupon, breaking like Lightning through a hundred
Swords, he past his through Canitius's Body, and by so resolute a performance,
deprived him of his Life; but Euriles (for his Virtue, Merits, to have his name
recorded) had not the consolation long to outlive his and Spartacus's revenge;
yet before his death, he gave Castus (who was most earnest after it) so many
wounds, that he made him Canitius's companion, as well in Death as Infidelity,
and sent him to learn in the other world, the punishment which attends the
being treacherous in this. But though the beginner of this generous Action,
found his own end in it; yet it had so strange an influence over all those
which were ignorant of Canitius's designs, that in imitation of Euriles,
having changed their disorder into resolution, they opposed all those which
were not of their opinions, so that the numbers being almost equally divided,
there began a most bloody dispute, and the Romans had that satisfaction to see
those Swords which were designed for their ruin, employed to ruin those which
had that design; But whilst the Honest, and the Traitors, were thus engaged one
against another, ( Crassus being informed, that Canitius and Castus were dead,
to whom only he had past his word) came, and ended both their differences, by
ending all their Lives; which was no small satisfaction to my Prince's marty'rd
Friends, to see those which their companions fought for, to become the
punishers of their Treachery. But (continued Symander) you wonder, perhaps, why
Spartacus all this while was idle? but your admiration may cease when I inform
you, that the Fates, either not to see so unparalleled a Treachery, or to
contribute toward it, had on a sudden raised so thick a Mist, for above a
quarter of an hour, that my Prince, by the uncouthness of the ground, advancing
slowly with his Battalion, could not possibly see what had happened, and
perhaps had longer continued in his ignorance, had not a Trooper which escaped
the Enemy, come full speed, and aloud advertised him of those events which I
have told you, but not of their cause: and immediately after, as if that Mist
had been purposely sent to contribute to his ruin, and then to show him the
greatness of it, it suddenly broke up, and discovered the cruel execution the
Romans had made and their Army in all its Glory* marching a precipitate pace to
Charge us. Gods! what courage (but Artabanes) had not been startled under such
misfortunes? but his was so far from being thereby impaired, that it increast,
and turning to those that followed him, he encouraged them, both by his words,
and then by his example, for advancing some hundr'd paces before all the rest,
he called Crassus out, resolving as the Romans had by accident, deprived his
Army of a Wing, so he would by his valor deprive theirs of its Head. At this
Summons, two of Crassus valiantest Centurions, successively came out of their
ranks to my Prince, and by a fatal counterfeiting, were rendered for ever
incapable of deluding him again; Crassus perceiving by those examples, what his
own Fate had been, had his Valor resembl'd theirs, declined what he was going
to undertake, and to disguise his fear, commanded his Army to cut in pieces all
the Relics of those Slaves, (for those were his words.) But why do I dwell so
long on so sad a subject? let it suffice, I tell you, that Spartacus was become
so horrible by the being covered with his Enemies blood; that his Presence was
as much apprehended, as his Sword; that in his was verified the Fable of
Anteus, recovering strength by his very falls; that he never won so much Glory
in all his victories, as in that defeat; and that he performed such prodigious
exploits, that I absolutely believe, had he been blessed but with twenty of his
humor, and resolution, their valors had supplied the losses of Canitius
Treachery; but at length, those Divisions he had left, being infinitely
over-numbred, disheartened, and pierced in several places, were totally routed,
and most of the^ cut in pieces; Spartacus perceived it, and might have avoided
so general a Fate, but scorning to outlive a loss, which he thought would have
rendered him worthy of it, and observing a Roman, who had that fatal day made
himself admirably remarkable, by his courage, he seized upon one of those many
Horses which were without Masters, and taking a Javelin in his hand, he ran
full speed after him, and having overtaken him alone in the Grove, in the midst
whereof was a little Meadow, fit for his purpose, he cried out to his valiant
Enemy, To me, to me, brave Roman, I am Spartacus, and seek but a gallant Sword
to cure this days misfortune; It Is thee I seek (the other briskly replied) and
since thou have thought me sit to end thy sufferings; I should be very
unwilling to have thee mistaken in thy choice; thereupon they both leapt a
Ditch into that little Meadow, where having fetched as long a Career, as the
place would permit, they fell upon each other with more futy, than two opposite
Storms, and their Javelins flying into the Air into a thousand shivers, they
drew their Swords to supply that loss, and to end their combat, or their
Lives; and truly they were so intent upon each others ruin, that it is a
miracle they did not mutually act it; above a quarter of an hour the dispute
was so equally balanced, that detesting the faithfulness of their Armours,
they were often upon the point of moving a truce, till they had taken them off,
but so long to be idle, appeared a greater difficulty, than to cut them in
pieces in the fight; at last my Prince enraged, that posterity should know one
single Sword ended a life, which that day had diverse times forced a passage
through a thousand, recollecting all the strength which his Grief and Rage
could inspire him with, struck his valiant Enemy so furious a blow, that
cleaving his shield in two, it did the like unto the Gorget, and made a wound
upon the height of his Shoulder. He (on the other side) enraged at a
resistance, which till then he had never found, to be only vanquished when all
the Army he fought in was victorious, and to leave so liberal a gift unrepaid,
stiffening himself upon his Stirrups, and inflaming himself with those
thoughts, by an unresistable reverse, which though it glanced upon my Princes
shield, yet afterward lighting upon his Helmet, cleft it in two, and left his
Head and Face unguarded, and uncovered; which his Enemy perceiving, and as the
gods would have it, knowing perfectly those unequalled Features, though his
Sword were in the Air, to prosecute the advantage my Princes perfidious Armor
had given him, yet he suspended it there, and by crying out, Great gods! is it
not Artabanes that I see? not only hindered Spartacus by that example, and
those words, from giving him a blow, whose strength had rendered it unavoidably
fatal to the Receiver, but also made him say, who ever thou art, if thou be'st
a friend to (...) Romans, kill me as Spartacus, and if thou be'st a friend to
me, kill me as Artabanes, for this days misery will make the granting that
request, the highest proof thou can give me of thy being mine. The gods
forbid, (the Stranger replied, unlacing his Helmet) that ever my Sword should
be employed in so criminal an action, for though my ignorance made my
sacrelegious Arm offend, it is not the gods themselves that can command my
knowledge of you to repeat my sin; thereupon flinging off his Helmet, he
discovered a Face, which Spartacus no sooner saw, than they both ran with as
much willingness to embrace, as they before did to destroy one another; and for
a while, my Prince in the joy of such an encounter, had laid aside the thoughts
of those miseries which had caused it; but alas, they were too deep, and too
recent to be forgotten, and the sad remembrance of them, made him on a sudden
cry out, Oh gods! why do you give me so new a subject to desire Life, when you
had so lately given me many to detest it? and why (if you design my ruin) do
you make him know, and favor me, that was only capable to act it? These
reasonings made him that only heard them, admire what might be their cause, and
his wonder producing his silence, made my dear Master thus to continue; No, no,
Artabanes, when thou were a Slave to Fortune, and to the Romans, and when thou
sought'st Death and not Victory, the gods gave thee the last, and denied thee
the first; but now thou bear the glorious Title of Parthenissa's, the gods
having denied thee the la^ter, deny not thy self the former, show by so
generous an experiment, that he which for not obtaining the victory, could act
his own death, did not lose the one, out of an apprehension of the other;
Thereupon he had certainly extinguished the fairest life that ever was, had not
the generous Artavasdes (for 'twas he whom Spartacus had fought with, and whose
strange being in the Roman Army, shall be told you in its due order) observing
my Prince's despair proceeded from his defeat, first hindered the fatal effects
of it, and then to take away the cause, assured him that he was betrayed, and
not vanquished. Spartacus at this assurance (for till then he was ignorant of
it) looked upon his Friend with a Face which spoke his doubts, and then begged
him to deal clearly, and inform him, whether what he had said, was not only
out of a design to hinder his violence toward himself? But Artavasdes having
by many protestations, and particulars, assured him of Canitius and Castus's
persidiousness, made Artabanes (who saw that 'twas not Crassus, but Treachery
that had beaten him) to relinquish those sad designs he had upon his own life,
and to preserve it for a perfection, who only merited so transcendent a
blessing. This resolve was no sooner taken up, but the apprehension of
Sillaces's safety, began to afflict my Prince with such excess, that Artavasdes
for a while suspected, a relapse into his former despair produced it; but being
informed of the occasion, he immediately made Artabanes to fling away his own
Arms, to take those of a Servant of his, (which by accident was riding by) and
then assuring him, the power he had with Crassus was so great, that if Sillaces
were not already lost, he durst undertake his, and my preservation (for they
were so generous as to give me a part in their care) they both galloped away
toward the Camp, where they found, that night (and not victory) had put an end
to the Romans Assault, whereby it was apparent, if so unconsiderable a person
as Symander, could defend so large a Line with so few hands, what then would
Artabanes have done with so vast an Army, had it been free from Treachery?
Artavasdes therefore joy'd at Crassus's repulse, and having lodged Artabanes in
his own Tent, caused an inviolable secrecy to be administered to his Servants,
and his generous friends wounds to be dressed, which were many, and those much
inflamed by that violent agitation, that his care to preserve Sillaces, had
occasioned; he went to Crassus (who with eloquent Elogies gave his Valor a
just Character) and acquainted him, that a Servant, or rather a Friend of his,
(for his unimitable fidelity, merited that name) was taken prisoner in the
Enemies Camp, dangerously wounded, and had sent him word, that he had obtained
his own liberty, if Crassus would engage himself to their Commander in Chief,
to release the first prisoner of his quality which he should take; that whether
or no this was granted, he desired that a Surgeon might be sent him, (all
those of the Enemies were so busy about their own Patients, that none of them
had the time, or the charity to dress his wounds.) Artavasdes further told the
Roman General, that the Surgeon he meant to employ, might serve also to
bring intelligence, in what posture the relics of his Enemies were, and added
to those two so many further motives, that Crassus willingly yielded to both
his requests. Artavasdes was no sooner returned, than he acquainted my Prince
with what he had done, and after a short consultation, they immediately
employed the faithful Philanax (who my Prince mentioned in his generous Friends
adventures) as a Surgeon to Sillaces, who passing the Roman Guards (by
Crassus's direction) came with a Letter of Credence under Artabanes's hand,
into our Camp, and filled us both, by the relation I have made you, with a joy,
which nothing could equal but the greatness of our grief, before his arrival;
but the time pressing us, I gave all my Soldiers Orders (by Philanaxes's
advice) to shift for themselves during the obscurity, for we were not able next
morning with so small numbers to receive that storm was intended; therefore all
of them that night (by a way which the Romans thought inaccessable) descended
to a little River, that issues from the Lake of Lucania, where some that could
swim, helping others that could not, what by that charity, and some few Boats
and Planks which were there, and which had been employed to fetch Victuals to
our Camp, whilst the Floods were so violent, all of them (before day) recovered
the Mountains of the Brutians, where afterward they renewed the War, and
furnished Pompey with an occasion to tell the Senate, that it was Crassus had
defeated the Slaves in Battle, but 'twas he had pulled up the War by the very
root. But our Soldiers were no sooner gone, than Philanax and I prepared
Silla^^^'s Litter, and having put him into it, we carried him out of the Camp,
and freely passing the Roman Guards, brought him to Artavasdes's Tent, where
these three great Men manifested their joys, and friendship, in expressions,
which if not related in their own words, were too great a wrong unto them; and
the better to palliate the business, I writ a Letter to Crassus (as Commander
in Chief of his Enemies) and delivered it with my own hands, as a Messenger
sent expressly with it from the Camp, wherein I let him know, that upon his
promise of the like civility, I had sent the Prisoner he desired, and
afterward to favor the flight of that remainder of my Prince's Army, I
assured him, those in the Camp were in a readiness for some exploit, that 'twas
not impossible but they would make a desperate Sally, to fell their Lives
handsomely, and that I told him this the more freely, because I was resolved to
abandon his enemies for ever, being assured of my Life and Liberty by the
prisoner, I had brought off. Crassus for this Intelligence, and at Artavasdes's
request (who accompanied me to him) confirmed what the prisoner promised, and
immediately put all his Camp in Arms, in apprehension of a Sally, which
abundantly contributed to my poor companion's escape; For all the Romans being
only intent on the east side of our Camp, which was the only place for an
attempt, permitted those on the West (which was the way that lead to the River)
to make a more facile flight. 'Twas in this sort (continued Symander) that all
things happened in that famous Battle of the Trenches; I know some Romans gave
out, that Spartacus was cut in pieces, others (and more truly) affirmed, that
after the Battle, his Body was never found, and some too (knowing none could
contradict them, for there was no Quarter given) and, to receive a reward, cut
off a Head, which they said was my Prince's, carried it to Rome, and fixed it
on the Gate of the Capitol. To conclude this part of my Story, I will not tell
you all those desires Artabanes had to return to those Men, which escaped unto
the Brutain Mountains, whose courage and fidelity he admired, and with whom he
was confident to repair the misfortune of Canitius and Castus's Treacheries.
It Is enough you learn, That had not his wounds hindered him a while, and their
defeat afterward he would never have returned to Parthia, without having
redeemed that loss, which was his misfortune not his fault. The next morning as
Crassus was preparing to repeat his Assault, news was brought him, that his
Enemies had abandoned the Camp, at which his discontent was greater in
appearance, than in effect, for we had not so ill defended our selves the
precedent day, as to make any thing which avoided a second storm, appear a
misfortune. Three days Crassus spent, to repair the disorders of his Army, and
to bury the dead, le^t if left without Sepulture, the numbers being great, they
might infect the Air; in which time my Prince acquainted the generous
Artavasdes with his Fortunes, who admired as much to find Artabanes, the famous
Spartacus, as he was joy'd to have been the instrument of saving him. When
Crassus had ended his charitable, and necessary Office, he returned to Rome by
easy marches, which gave Sillaces and my Prince, the means of accompanying
Artavasdes thither, and where they had entered in Triumph, if their Success had
proportioned their Virtue.

When Symander was in this part of his Relation, one of the Priests of Venus
came in great haste to advertise him, and Callimachus, that Artabanes was
returned, and had brought with him a stranger, that yielded nothing to him in
the blessings of Nature, that they were both much wounded, but yet they seemed,
in the joy of having found out each other, to have forgotten the danger they
were in. Callimachus therefore perceiving Symander's impatiency, to satisfy it,
and his own, immediately went to learn the cause of this fresh accident, and
provide necessaries for persons which rendr'd his Charity as much a Duty, as
'twas a Virtue.

The end of the Second Part of Parthenissa.
PARTHENISSA, A ROMANCE.

THE THIRD PART.

To my Lady SUNDERLAND.
MADAM,
THe first time Parthenissa saw the Light, 'twas to enjoy a higher contentment,
than of entertaining you with her Adventures; In which, Madam, she told me, you
receiv^d some such seeming, or real satisfaction, that to continue the latter,
or to be revenged on you for the former, she has persuaded me to present you
with a Part of them. This, Madam, had not given me the presumption of obeying
her, had not Altezeera also joined her Prayers to Parthenissa's, and both
assured me, it would not be amiss that you should see, the Beauty of one of
your Sex has acted more, than one of mine could fancy; the first of which, you
might as perfectly know in your self, as the last in this Book. That to write
of you, is worse than to write to you, this being but an injury to your Person,
that to your Memory. (Though indeed the former has nothing of misfortune, but
that it is not as durable as the latter, which yet we cannot reproach you with,
it being our infelicity as much, if not more than yours) That I had injured
Altezeera as much in her Actings, as in their Relations; and having done so
much against her, I could only but this way, do something in proportion for
her; they further added, if my Writings needed no Protection, they were fittest
for your sight, and if they needed any, you were ablest to give it. And though
to all this, I represented, That if their ambition of being known, Madam, unto
you, had not entirely silenced their Justice, they could not have believed a
Crime against you, could have proved an obligation to them; and that in my thus
obeying them, I should necessitate many to conclude, I had an endless quarrel
to those which were the most perfect of your Sex, by injuring such of them as
are dead, in my Book; as such of them as are alive in the Dedications of it.
Against this, they enjoined me to remember the example of that excellent
Genius, who presented you his Oblations under the fair Name of Sacharissa, who
was guilty of both those crimes (writing of you, and to you) only to please
himself, of which they solicited me, to be guilty but only of one, (and that
also the least) to please and repair them, and yet was not only pardoned, but
admitted the high Honor of your Conversation, But Madam, though I were
concerned to say little against my obedience to them, the more to invite you to
pardon it, as being an offense of Ignorance, rather than Knowledge; yet I could
not but let them know, I considered that usage, Madam, of yours, was only more
and more to convince him of the greatness of his Crime, and of the greatness of
that Mercy which had pardoned it. That Cloud of Sacharissa, which some ascribe
to his modesty, I do to his Judgment, for thereby he was believed a perfect
describer of Fancy, whereas otherwise he would have been known a defective
describer of Truth. Yet I must say, the greatest fault he committed in
attempting your Character, was his attempting it; for in the necessity of his
crime, he had this satisfaction, That whoever had assumed his Design, must have
committed his Offense, and come as short of him, as (almost) he has of you. For,
Madam, you are above being described, which condition, though it be the most
unhappy as to us, yet is the Noblest as to you; and consequently we cannot
deplore an Ignorance, which is occasioned by a Perfection, that even in degrees
transcends it. I hope a part of it will be manifested in forgiving a Confidenc,
which is imposed, and not sought; and has indeed no title to your Mercy, but
that is great enough for it; which though infinite, cannot exceed the Joy with
which it will be received, nor the Truth which presumes, Madam to tell you,
that I am

Your most Humble, most Faithful, And most obedient Servant.

PARTHENISSA.
THE THIRD PART.
BOOK I.
THE News which the Priest of Venus brought to his Superior, and Symander, was
very true; for whilst the last was acquainting the first with his generous
Princes Adventures, he himself (as has been related) was retired into a
solitude which that morning he had discovered, where (by Fortunes giving him
some ease, the better to enable him to support her longer cruelties) he was
fallen into a slumber; and though his cares were so unusually civil, as not to
interrupt it, yet it was suddenly, by a noise of Horses, and clashing of
Swords, and Arms, which reached his ear, which invited him to take his Horse,
and gallop to the place from whence this Alarm came, to learn the subject of
it; the continuance of the noise, and the swiftness of his Horse, faithfully
and suddenly b^ought him to see a Combat which struck him both with admiration
and anger; the first was caused by a single Valor, which could not be but
transcendent, since it had such an Admirer; and the last was occasioned by six
armed men, which endeavored to destroy the possessor of it; who, to sell his
life at a rate worthy so high a purchase, and to make his Enemies deplore the
destruction of so great a Courage, or the effects of it, had already killed two
of them, with blows that struck as great a terror into the rest, as the very
example of those deaths; but finding at last that his Courage might be worsted
by, though not yield to his Enemies numbers, he was retired to a little Thicket
that sheltered him behind, and his Horse being killed in the retreat, defended
his right side, doing him service even after death: 'twas in this little
fortification and posture, Artabanes found him, and there being no greater
invitation to his generous mind for the relieving of virtue, than to find it in
distress, he instantly took up one of the dead men's Helmets, to join himself to
the oppressed stranger, who (as he was coming full speed toward him) thinking
the now wearer of the Helmet, as much his Enemy, as he that had so lately worn
it, cried out to Artabanes, Make haste, make haste, and help those, whose
hearts are as ill as their cause; and who need rely on their number, since
they cannot on their quarrel. Our Hero esteemed it more handsome and necessary,
to show the generous Stranger his error by his actions, than words, and at his
first strokes so abundantly did it, that he which he relieved, thought his
mistake a greater misfortune, than that which he had now more than hopes to be
freed from; and indeed Artabanes performed things so far above his strength,
though not himself, that three of the surviving four, left the Stranger, to
employ their Swords against an Enemy, who they concluded would render the odds
as needful, as it was dispoportionate; but the valiant Stranger finding he had
to deal but with one, and that his relief might endanger the Bestower of it,
suddenly abandoned his intrenchment, and as suddenly made his Adversary abandon
his life; but his Horse he made use of to assist his unknown Friends, who was
already in a condition not to need it, for he had killed one of the three; and
the other two perceiving how powerful an addition was coming, endeavored in
their Horses feet, to find a security they despaired of from their own hands:
Artabanes and the Stranger followed them awhile, but finding more difficulty in
the Chase, than the Quarry merited; and that the way they had taken to avoid
their resentments, rendered them unworthy of them, they gave over the pursuit;
and then the Stranger having with as much grace, as civility, begged a Pardon
from Artabanes, for a mistake created by the Arms he had on told him, Though my
life is rather a misfortune, than the contrary, yet my obligation to my
Deliverer is nothing inferior; and what my miseries made me desirous to lose,
(though not in so unhandsom a way) my gratitude now obliges me to preserve,
since I esteem the giver of my lite, has too great a share, and title in it, to
dispole of it without him. A^tabanes extremely satisfied with so obligaing a
civility, told the maker of it, I have (generous Stranger) as little title to
your life, as to your relief; and if by drawing my Sword in your quarrel, I
have done any thing, it deserves rather your resentment, than your thanks,
since I have contributed but to a Victory that was certain without my
assistance, and under a pretense of serving you, ^ob'd you in part of a glory,
which your courage only had won. Were not your performance (the Stranger
replied) of a quality that manifests you injure your actions when you decline
their merit, I might as easily evince that Truth, as acknowledge it; and if you
refuse that Present I offer you, (as having received it from you) I shall
esteem your declining it, as high a misfortune, as any that has made me esteem
my life so. If (said Artabanes) there be any obligation in what I have done, it
wholly reflects upon me, that have more obliged my self than you, in serving so
prodigal a gratitude; but (he continued) perceiving some blood dropping from
the Stangers wounds, as well as from his own, let us not lose the benefits of
your safety, by disputing who you derived it from; and though I am a Stranger
in these Parts as well as you, and as much your Equal in misery, as you are my
Superior in those virtues, of which, that ought not to be the reward; yet I can
offer you a retirement, till your health, or business, invites you to prosecute
your journey. I am (replied the Stranger) so miserable a creature, that nothing
can increase my being so, but the belief that you are a more; and though I
accept of your civility till my wounds be healed, yet I must beg your pardon if
I first learn from whom I received them. Are you (said Artabanes) yet ignorant
of that? Yes, (said the Stranger) and cannot fancy, any that knows me, and are
my Enemies, can be so much mistaken in their revenge, as to think killing me,
is any. 'Twas such discourses as these, that brought them where the marks of
their Courages and Victory lay, where the Stranger pulling off all the
Murderers Helmets, to learn if he knew any of them, found himself as ignorant
in their faces, as in the cause of their malice; yet one of them, by the
benefit of the Air, and by the turning of his Body, faintly opened his eyes,
and being asked of the Stranger, who 'twas that had invited them to so
unfortunate, and unjust an attempt, was only answered by half words, and signs,
'twas the Prince of Parthia; and then he closed both them and his lips for
ever. Whilst the Stranger was thus employed about this dying man, Artabanes
was about his companions, whose souls were so long fled from their guilty
bodies, that all his pains and art could not recall them; this made him return
to the unknown Gentleman, who he found (by that little intelligence he had
gotten) almost as moveless, as he that had given it him; but Artabanes's
presence drew him from his amazement, and after he had fruitlesly endeavored to
make a dead man speak, he begged our Hero's pardon for his necessary incivility,
which had so long suspended his waiting on him to that retirement, which he was
now ready to do. Artabanes obeyed this invitation, but observing that he which
made it, was more melancholy than he had been, he desired to know whether he
had newly learned any thing that caused it. Alas Sir (said the Stranger) I am
informed who has attempted against my life, and am involved, by that knowledge,
in a higher confusion than I was in, by my ignorance, Artabanes perceiving by
what he had said, that he was not willing to explain himself, altered the
subject of his discourse which he entertained him with, till they came to the
Temple (the place as the Stranger said of his intended journey) where our Hero
brought him to his own Lodgings, and where they had no sooner pulled off their
Helmets, than having awhile gazed at each other with a mutual and high
admiration, they suddenly after ran to embrace with as much joy and
satisfaction. One of the goddesses Priests was present at this Adventure, who
carried his Superior the news of it; and though at his departure, the two
friends were in one another arms, yet he, Callimachus, and Symander, found
them still in the same posture; and because the celebration of their joys,
hindered them from taking notice of this company, the last of it, being
unwilling to interrupt a contentment, which he knew was as just as great, took
the leisure to acquaint Callimachus, that the Gentleman his Prince embraced,
was the generous Artavasdes, the beginning of whose Story he had learned from
Artabanes, and the service he had rendered him, was the subject of their last
discourse. Callimachus was highly satisfied to have at once in his house, more
virtue than the world had besides; but whilst he was in the contemplation of
that blessing, the Chyrurgions which he had sent for, coming in, interrupted
it, and Artabanes, and Artavasdes, perceiving how rude their joy had been,
repaired it by a thousand excuses; but Callima^hus, more intent on their
healths, than their civilities, broke them off, to employ the Chyrurgions, who
having searched both their wounds, found them somewhat inflamed; and that they
might prove dangerous, unless by quietness and silence, they would contribute
to their recovery; and though Callimachus had prepared a magnificent Apartment
for Artavasdes, yet neither that, nor the Chyrurgions Prayer could invite them
to a separation; nay, 'twas with much difficulty that they extorted a promise
from the Princes, not to speak to one another in Four and twenty hours, which
they both professed was more troublesome to them than those wounds, to which their
silence was to be a contributory cure. Symander, who knew his Prince was as
much concerned in Artavasdes, as in himself, proportioned his care accordingly,
and the Holy Priest by his transcendent diligence, manifested he knew the merit
of his Guests; but the first time for their silence being expired, the
Physicians enjoined a second of the same continuance, which our Hero's would
not have submitted unto, but upon a faithful promise after that was efflux'd,
they should, and might without danger, entertain one another. Callimachus was
as impatient at this new imposition, as they were, on who it was imposed; and
though his curiosity was great, yet his civility was greater, which hindered
him from desiring Symander to Continue his Naration, or from begging his Prince
to command it him. But the so much impatiented however was no sooner come, than
Artavasdes removed his Bed, so near to that of Artabanes, that they might
discourse as commodiously, as if they both had lay'n in one. There the generous
Armenian began to exclaim against his fortune, for having rendered his miserise
contagious, and for having made the means of his deliverance, a greater
misfortune, than the want of it could have proved. But Artabanes took him up so
short, and so civilly, for thinking those wounds a misfortune, which had
secured his friend, that Artavasdes, by being fore'd to beleieve them none,
found them a greater. Callimachus came in as the two Princes were in those
discourses, and finding them so employed, offered again to retire; but
Artabanes had given his friend so true a character of him, that they jointly
assured him, his company could never prove an injury, but in his depriving them
of it: This (with their entreaties) stayed him, and he being too much concerned
in both their Lives, not to be ambitious to learn the Accidents which composed
them, cast out some oblique words that manifested his curiosity, which
infinitely revived Artabanes's who remembering some fad expressions his friends
had used in their late meeting, and being impatient to learn the whole, of what
he knew but in part, begged him to satisfy both Callimachus's, and his Prayers.
Sir, (said the virtuous Priest) since you have made my curiosity your request,
I will let you know, that Symander's Story being interrupted by the generous
Artavasdes's arrival, he cannot better repair that injury, than in telling his
own; and to induce him the rather to it, I can truly assure him, I had learned
a part of it before now, had not he himself hindered it; for we were already so
far advanced, as to your strange encounter at the Battle of the Trenches, and
to your coming to Rome. Artabanes was somewhat troubled, that to satisfy
Callimachus, he must be necessitated to remain awhile ignorant of a fresh
intelligence, to listen unto one he knew, yet he was so perfectly interressed
in all his friends Actions, and in the respect due to so signal a person, that
he besought Artavasdes to begin his Adventures, from their separation in
Parthia, ^ince till then Callimachus had learned them from his mouth.
Artavasdes having first tied the generous Parthian to repay his Story, by
acquainting him afterward with his own, began his obedience to his friends
commands, in these terms:

The Continuation of Altezeera's, and Artavasdes's Story.
AFter I had recovered my liberty, by your running so great a hazard to yours,
which I attest the gods was a higher trouble to me, than the benefit I thereby
enjoyed was a satisfaction, I found in Rysolis by your commands, a continuance
of your favors, who, under the pretense of searching for me as far the
Confines of Armenia, was my Convoy thither, where he dismissed me, as sending me
in the quality of a Spy, after my self. In my journey from thence toward
Artaxata, in diverse Towns, I saw many which deplored me for dead, and found by
the small services I had paid my King and Country, I was much more esteemed
of, than either I thought, or merited; I know not whether the vainty of
repeating those flattering sights, the desire of being at the Court before any
knew of my being at liberty, or the providence of the gods, made me continue my
Voyage in my disguise; but this I know, that had I cast it off, I had at the
same time cast off my safety with it. The Clothes I then wore, were a common
Troopers, so that a violent War being kindled in Armenia, I past the gates of
Artaxata in that quality, without examination, and lighting at the Palace, I
went (to my admiration) to the Princesses Apartment, without meeting any by the
way, and the door of the Chamber being unlocked, I gently opened it, where the
reward of so large a confidence, was the sight of the fair Altezeera; and
though I unexpectedly made a little noise, yet her thoughts were so obliquely
intentive, that she heard it not, and thereby gave me liberty to contemplate a
Beauty, that had nothing in degrees equal to it, but the zeal and passion with
which I adored it; and truly I was so ravished in the contemplation of so many
perfections, that had not the Possessor of them, by hazard turning her eyes
that way, taken me from my rapture, I had longer continued in it; but as soon
as I found to lengthen my felicity, was to lengthen my rudeness, I cast my self
at her feet, to beg a pardon, for having continued it so long, and for having
so much intrencht upon her retirement. My voice and my actions changed the fair
Altezeera's fear into admiration, since a Soldiers coming into her Chamber,
could not more create the former, than that Soldiers being Artavasdes did the
latter. Great gods! when her wonder was suppressed, how liberally did she reward
the sufferings of my duty, and manifested so transcendent a joy for my
deliverance, that the sight of it, inspired me with a greater, than the cause
of it could my Princess. There (generous Artabanes) I told her of your
gallantry, and that the same fortune I had had in Love, did follow me in War,
since I owed my preservation to my Conqueror; but alas these contentments were
as sho^t as their relation, for Altezeera assured me I was in more danger in
A^t^^ata, than in the place from whence I came; that she hoped by the clothes I
wore, I was not ignorant of it; and that I would more fully convince her
thereof, by retiring to my Fathers Army. Madam, (I replied, somewhat surpised)
If what you last mentioned must be the evincement of that belief, I fear 'twill
be also of my ruin; and if I must be banished from my Princess, and by her, I
shall be in greater danger in Armenia, than I was in Parthia, since the
consolation of my miseries there, is ravished from me here: As for my disguise,
'twas rather by chance, than design, for I am as free from fear, as guilt;
neighter do I know the posture my Father, and the Kingdom is in, though, as I
Traveled, I heard some discourses of both: But the information was so dark and
confused, that it left me in as deep an ingorance, as their silence could. I
will tell you then (said Altezeera) that Anexander, after some sharp encounters
with Zenaxtus (who you know, before your Expedition into Parthia, had taken up
Arms to revenge his Brother Celindus's death, and to maintain his ambition and
quarrel) within these ten days, under the very walls of Nicapolis, drew your
Father to a pitched Battle, in which his Courage and Cause gave him so entire a
Victory, that the marks of it were all the Rebels Colors, and the Field paved
with 35000 of their Bodies, the Relics, with their General, saved themselves
within that City, the Mertropolis of the Rebellion, which Anexander the next
morning besieged, and from whence Zenaxtus sent a Trumpeter, to let him know,
he was desirous to Treat, but it should be with his King, not his Conqueror.
Anezander esteemed it his duty to inform Artabazus of this, and as much his
duty to dissuade him from accepting it; which the more to induce him to, he
undertook in 30 days, to send this capitualating Traitor to Artaxata, in a
posture as low, as his condition, or hopes. These Letters came three days
since, and being debated in a general Council, (which till then, since your
imprisonment had * not been convened) Crassolis, and his party, by their old
power, and inclinations, advised and persuaded my Brother, to go Post in person
to Annexander's Camp, and there not only settle a Peace by a Treaty, or a
Conquest, but also have the glory of doing it. This being determined, and the
Council ready to break up, the generous Phanasder, who by your favor succeeded
Celindus in all his Commands and Dignities, and consequently was of the highest
quality in this Assembly, earnestly motion'd, that some immediate course might
be taken for restoring you to that liberty, you had so meritoriously and
successfully lost; and that for the effecting thereof, Ambassadors might be
sent to Arsaces. The false Crassolis in a set Speech, (being the mouth of the
Council) gave Phanasder an answer as handsome, as hypocritical, for his care of
so public a concernment; which to forget, (he said) was to be as unmindful of
the general gratitude, as safety. I tell you (said Artavasdes to Artabanes)
Altezeera's words, and Crassolis flattery] but (continued Crassolis) I am
apprehensive, that the way which Phanasder propounds, will be obstructive to
the end, which would be sooner reached by a seeming neglect of Artavasdes, than
a real and pressing solicitation for him, since I have ever observed, that the
Parthians raise the value of what they posses, by the value they know we place
on it. I must confess (replied Phanasder) were Artavasdes's performances of a
quality that they could be concealed, there might be some appearance in
Crassolis Allegation, but since the very Act which made him a Prisoner, makes
him unworthy to continue so, ourneglecting his liberty, will look too like a
design, not to be taken for one. These, and many other Reasons of Phanasders,
were so prevalent with my Brother, that he ordered Ambassadors should be sent,
and the care of sending them to Crassolis: The King thus declining his Advice,
followed it; and Phanasder, who saw it no time to dissemble, told Artabazus so
much, for which he received so severe a reprehension, that yesterday morning
when my Brother took Post to go to Annexander's Army, Phanasder retired unto
Artemita, the chief Town of his Government. But that which brought no small
accession to his discontent, was, Artabazus leaving the care of this City to
Crassolis, and with it, that of two such considerable and dangerous Prisoners,
as Tygranes, and Palisdes. But (continued Altezeera) that you may see my
Brother was not sent from hence only to eclipse your Fathers glory, but also to
raise that of Tygranes, I will acquaint you with an intelligence as strange, as
the manner of my learning it. You are not ignorant that Regeliza (my chiefest
Confident) has as much judgment, as beauty, the last of which has so infinitely
inflamed Crassolis eldest Son, that he has not long since acquainted her with
what effects it has produced; and though his Virtues, and Birth, might have
made her consider, and condemn that Declaration as a confidence, yet the power
she has over herself, made her suppress all resentments of words, in hope to
acquaint him with hers in a more sensible way; the better to effect this, after
by many Artifices she had induced the young Lover (who she knew his Father
doted on) to believe, all her doubts were, that his passion was rather an
appearance, than a reality; and that what confirmed her in that belief, was,
his never communicating any of those secrets, in which he was a principal
Agent, and which he could not conceal, were not his heart and word strangers;
she so admirably acted her part, that this morning her servant, to silence her
reproaches and doubts, clearly informed her, that Artabazus was sent out of the
way, but to place Tygranes in the Throne; That though Crassolis had not yet as
great an influence over that young Prince, as over his Father, yet he was
confident of obtaining it, by the obligation of a Crown, and of Liberty; That
Artabazus was too easy to be a good Friend, and was as facile to be lost, as
won; That on the contrary, though Tygranes was hard to begain'd, yet being so,
he was hardlier lost; That Crassolis had done too much privately, not to
apprehend the discovery; and having merited death, his Adversaries were too
diligent, and too considerable, not to fear it; That Anexander was so
successful and powerful, that either he would obtain, or assume the Authority,
either of which, would be his Fathers ruin; That Palisdes and Tygranes were
perfectly reconciled, and had joined their interests; That Artabazus and
Artavasdes absence, would give them the opportunity to be Governors, where they
were Prisoners; and that Crassolis (to leave as little in the power of fortune
as he could, and to seem to follow what he lead) was to be made a Prisoner by
his Friends, to have this mutation appear his punishment, not his design,
thereby not to lose the Father, if the Son lost himself; and that all this was
immediately to be put in execution, lest the delay of the Conspiracy, might be
the ruin of it. Regeliza seemed to approve this Plot, lest her Lover might
have suspected she condemned it; but he was no sooner gone, than she (being
more faithful to her Mistress than her servant) came this morning, and
acquainted me with what I have you, which was the cause of that deep melancholy
you found me in, and which your presence here will continue and increase. The
fair Altezeera (said Artavasdes) had no sooner done speaking, than I found,
that the Kings absence was the cause of so solitary a Court; that Artabazus was
an enemy to reason, and to gratitude, or to Artavasdes, and that Phanasder was
not to the two latter. 'Twas therefore that I humbly begged Altezeera to make
Artemita her Sanctuary, and not expose herself amongst those, to whom Loyalty
and Nature were only words. But my fair Princess absolutely opposed it,
alleging, that there was more hazard in a flight from Artaxata, than in a
continuance in it; That if she did remove, Regaliza must do so too, and
consequently lose all intelligence; or by leaving her behind, raise a jealousy
in Crassolis son of the Cause, and thereby inevitably ruin what it should
perform; That she had sent already an Express after Artabazus with the
intelligence, and an assurance that she would, to continue it, reside where she
had learned it, till either his Commands called her from thence, or his Forces
rendered it a secure habitation; that if after such an Engagement she should
fly away with me, who (all men knew) had a passion for her, it might raise too
pregnant jealousies that her love, and not her fear, was the occasion of her
remove; and that since she knew there was, nor could be nothing intended to her
prejudice, she had no reason to contribute to it, by her own Actions, and to
put herself in danger to be safe, when she was already so without any. I then
propounded my going immediately to Artemita, which was not above 200 Furlongs
off, and with Phanasder's Forces attempt to suppress the Rebellion before it
appeared. To which my Princess answered, That could I effect my Proposition,
what proofs could I bring of the intended Conspiracy, but Regeliza's saying it?
which would be too invalidated by her servants denial, and be looked upon (...)
an Act of my hatred to Crassolis: But my Proposition was so far from being
feasible, that Tygranes, and his Partisans, had above 4000 select men already
in Artaxata, who would execute their design before I could tell it Phanasder;
she therefore conjured me, since my continuing with her would but increase her
fears, and my danger, and that my being out of Artaxata might probably
contribute to the speedy reduction of it, and her deliverance, that I would
immediately leave off all thoughts of the former, and embrace the latter. This
sad command went much against my inclination, but it went more against my duty
to disobey it, therefore as soon as we had formed all our resolutions, and
settled our affairs and correspondency, I kissed my Princesses hands, and having
begged her to consider of the merit of my obedience, by the torment of it, that
thereby I might find my consolation in my very sufferings, I took my leave, and
going out of the Palace, I met my faithful Philanax, to whom I made my self
known, and whose joy at it, had like to have been as prejudicial to me, as if
it had been treachery; but finding his error, he immediately repaired it: and
after he had told me, that Lindesia with all her Family was removed to Thospia
(Anexander's Government) the place too, where he had found both his sickness
and his health; and that I had commanded him silently, and with some Jewels to
follow me to Artemita, without any disaster next morning by Sunrise I arrived
there, where the generous Governor made me a reception, in which I read both
his satisfaction and heart. The Night following Philanax came to me, and
acquainted me, that what I knew of in design, was turned into action. This true
Alarm made me think my immediate repair to the King and Anexander requisite;
and whilst I was fitting my self for my intended journey, Phanasder sent some
Troops of Horse to beat the ways, who did too, a Party of the revolted,
leaving 100 on the place, and presenting him with half as many Prisoners; from
some of which, we learned that a Post was intercepted with a Packet for the
King, and that Crassolis's eldest Son was killed in a quarrel, an hour before
they were come out of Artaxata; we immediately concluded, that the former was
the cause of the latter, and that Tygranes and Palisdes declined the forms of
Justice for the Sons punishment, lest it might have incensed, and appeared a
cruelty to the Father. My Equipage was no sooner formed, than I took leave of
Phanasder, who was extremely pressing to have been my Convoy, which I
absolutely declined, since it might lose a Province, I was confident his care
and presence would preserve; I besought him too, to be very vigilant for
intelligence, to communicate to me what he learned, and to raise what Forces
his power and credit would maintain. This Phanasder faithfully promised, and
having conducted me with 500 Horse to the Confines of his Government, we there
parted; but because I found that to Travel with all my company, would take up
too much time, I commanded them to follow me by easy journies, and only taking
Philanax with me, I continued mine, which was indeed so long and troublesome,
that the next evening, to refresh our horses and selves, we quitted the
Highway, to gain a Wood not far from it, (for we durst not enter into any
Towns, lest they might have become our Prisons.) We had not been an hour in
this wild Inn, when Philanax (whose turn 'twas to watch whilst I did sleep)
came and interrupted mine with the most dejected and confused look that horror
and amazent was capable to put on, and told me, Alas Sir, I fear we are for
ever ruined, and that the gods have forsaken virtue, to take part with vice.
This sad Introduction, and his sadder countenance, made me start up, and
impatiently enquire, whether too ^ittle rest, and too much travel, had not made
him frantic? Ah Sir! (he replied with a deep sigh) would I were, for that
would appear a less misfortune both to you, and me, than what has created in
you that belief: for as you were taking your rest, a sad voice in a
neighboring Thicket reached my ears, and invited me to discover the
unfortunate utterer of it; but I was no sooner approached near enough to
satisfy my curiosity, than alas I found it was Artabazus, tearing his hair,
and by a thousand other extravagant cruelties, seeming to take part with
fortune, by contributing to his own misery. Oh gods! ( Philanax I replied) what
is it that thou tellest me? That (said he) whose truth your sight may convince
you of, if you will silently steal wheremine received so fatal an intelligence,
Come (said I Philanax) I will go and satisfy my doubts, though I believe the
clearing of them, will be a greater trouble than they themselves are; but can
thou not (I continued) judge at the cause of this unexpected change? Yes Sir,
(he replied) and I am much mistaken, if it be not of a nature which will be as
great a grief unto you, as the effect it produces. We were by this time so
near, that had he continued his discourse, he must have had more Auditors than
one; and I had crept but a little further, when alas I did perceive my poor
King in so sad and dejected a posture, and so many tears running from his eyes,
that the loss of my own, had been more tolerable, than to have had them so
employed; I had not the patience to look upon his sufferings, and not offer
them my consolation and assistance, which rising up to perform, the noise I
made was so near, and so sudden, that the unfortunate Artahazus believing he
was surpised, covering his face with his Cloak, he cried out, Strike, oh
strike, for I am reduced to so much misery, that mine is incapable of
accession, but by permitting me to live, and continue in it.

The gods forbid (I replied, prostrating my self at his feet, and embracing his
knees) that ever I should ease my Princes Afflictions by so criminal a Cure; No
(Sir) they have doubtless sent me hither to offer you toward that duty (but in
a nobler way) my Sword, which if it proves fruitless, I will then employ it
rather to follow your Fate, than act it. These words and actions were as
strange to Artabazus, as the cause that rendered them necessary was to me; and
at length fancying he knew my voice, by degrees he unsealed his eyes to be
resolved, and no sooner was, than going back two or three steps, he cried out,
It Is Artavasdes! It Is Artavasdes! Yes Sir (said I) it is he, who did not he
value his life out of a belief that it might be serviceable to you, would
blaspheme the gods for having so long preserved it, to show him his King as
much forsaken of his Subjects, as of Fortune. I fear Artavasdes, (he replied) I
fear thou will repent thy kindness, when thou shall learn what has reduced me
to need and invite it; for know but two days since, I not only contemned thy
Fathers advice in not listening to a Treaty with the perfidious Zenaxtus, but
upon Hostages, sent even him into Nicopolis to conclude it; and relying on the
faith of that Traitor, against Anexander's prayers and intelligence, I kept so
careless a Guard in the Camp, that in a night as black as his action, he
surpised his own Hostages, cut thy Fathers victorious Army in pieces, I fear
himself too; and all the benefit I received from the fidelity and courage of my
Guards, was the time only with one of them, to fly where Fortune and the gods
did lead me, which was to this Wood, where enforced by hunger, I sent the only
companion of my misery to the next Town, who last night brought me some
refreshment, but accompanied with news, that after it, the want of relief had
been no misfortune; for alas he told me, that Tygranes was at liberty; that he
had seized upon Artaxata, declared himself King, and Partizan of the Rebels;
that he had imprisoned the faithful Crassolis, killed his Son for sending me
intelligence, and has promised Altezeera to Palisdes, whose Nuptials in five
days are to be celebrated. This morning I sent him again for further
intelligence, and to procure some Horses, both ours being dead by the violence
of our Travel; the faithful Guard was already at the extremity of the Wood,
when his care of my safety made him come back and assure me, if he were not
returned at a time he limited, I might conclude he was either killed, or taken,
and that therefore I should remove my self to some other concealment; this time
is an hour since eflux'd, so that when you came to offer me your assistance for
preserving my life, I believed it was somebody that was come to afford me his,
by easing me of it: Though I will not (continued Artavasdes) give you so low a
character of my grief, as to endeavor to describe it, yet I must tell you, that
my constancy, which was firm enough not to sink under the burden of my Kings,
my Countries, and my Fathers ruin, was too weak to undergo the thought of
Altezeera's, which had so sad an operation on me, that my misery appearing more
transcendent than my Princes, for awhile he suspended the sad reflections on
his own, to consider mine; but after that through pity, or goodness, he had
given me leave by his silence to utter a throng of sighs and complaints, he
told me, Consider Artavasdes what my griefs are, when thine have so strange an
influence; those that afflict thee, are thy misfortunes; those that do me, are
my faults; thou have that consolation, that the gods have made thee miserable;
I have that torment, that I made my self so, and consequently must consider the
cause of my misfortune as great a one, as the effect. Alas Sir! (I replied)
that which you allege for an Argument to console me, is an aggravation of my
misfortunes; for the Actions of the gods are more just than those of men, and
they having inflicted mine, it is a more pregnant testimony I have merited them,
than that you have those you have drawn upon your self; when I consider the
ways how mine are imposed, I cannot hope they will end, since that expectation
must be grounded on no less an impossibility than the justice of the gods; but
the ways in which yours are inflicted, carry their comfort with them, for had
you been guilty, you should not have been your own Punisher; and not being so,
you cannot doubt of your relief, but by injuring the highest powers as much as
your hopes. Were there (said Artabazus) but as much truth as art in this
Argument, I might be flattered into a belief, that I am as innocent as
miserable; but when the gods make us become our own executioners, it is so much
a mark of being guilty, that then to doubt it, is to have a higher title to our
punishment. Yet (I replied) we seldom see, that Humane Justice (which is a Copy
of' the Divine) does execute a Criminal by a Criminal: But Sir (I continued)
let us not contribute to our own misfortunes, by so long disputing whose are
the greatest, rather let us seek out a retiring, since by what you have told
me, I fear this will prove no safe one. Alas! (the King answered) that we
should fly, is not more requisite than it is impossible, since for ought I
see, you are as destitute of Horses as I am. No Sir (I replied) I have two, not
far from hence, which we will make use of; as for Philanax, I know he would
lose, much more hazard his life, to preserve his Kings. Yes (said that faithful
servant) it is my inclination, as much as duty; and next the spending of it in
your service, the best fortune it can aspire unto, is, to lose it in it.
Artabazus embraced him for his Loyalty, and gave him assurances, that if ever
he returned to his former fortune, he would build his in so plentiful a way,
that he should acknowledge he had found his interest in his duty. Then turning
to me, he said, But now Artavasdes we are fitted for our journey, whither shall
we direct it? Thospia, which is the only honest and secure retreat I can rely
on, has a way to it as hazardous as continuing here.

Ah Sir (I replied) why does your memory or suspicions, do the gallant Governor
of Artemita, and the Province belonging to it, so much wrong? you will find,
that could he rejoice in any of your misfortunes, he would in this, which will
afford him so ample an evincement of his Affection and Loyalty. 'Twas (said
Artabazus) neither my memory nor suspicions, but (I fear) my reason that made
me not look on Phanasder with the same faith that you do; for Crassolis, whose
judgment if forming opinions is as great as his honesty in communicating them
to me, has given me so bad, and perhaps so just a character of him, that I
should as soon put my self in Zenaxtus's hands, as his. Oh gods! (I cried out)
is it possible that Crassolis could so much bewitch your reason, as to make you
consider your servants as your enemies, and they as your friends? Believe me
(Sir) I will make that dissembler appear what he is, in the wo^st extreme, as
Phanasder will show himself in the best, with whom you shall find a Sanctuary
as inviolable as his faith, and for which I do engage you both mine and my life
Upon your score ( Artabazus replied) I will venture what I would not on my own,
neither would I give my retiring to Phanasder that name, were I as confident of
his Loyalty, as of his that made me suspect it. Sir, (said I, going to our
Horses) this is a time fitter to fly from a Traitor, than prove one; but I
will be contented to wear that name, if I do not evince that Crassolis does it
already. Then commanding Philanax to go meet the rest of my servants, and
return with them to Artemita, (which afterward he did through many dangers,
and then brought us word how the faithful Governor was put to death, in
torments as great as his fidelity, for not discovering to the Rebels where the
King was concealed.) Artabazus and I, by very unfrequented ways, and by as
great diligence as good fortune, in three days arrived there also; but never
was there a more melancholy and silent journey: for after I had acquainted my
King with all my Adventures since my imprisonment, his griefs were so obliging,
that they gave me the liberty without interruption of entertaining my own;
where to find a remedy for them appeared as difficult, as the torment which
thereby I incurred. We had not been an hour in Phanasder's Government, when he
(who was gone to beat up one of the Enemies quarters) returned with success,
and presented Artabazus with the Keys of Artemita, and with the lives of 200 of
his Enemies. I cannot express with what assiduousness and zeal he served his
Prince; you may learn them better by their effects than description, which
were, that they wholly converted Artabazus's suspicions into as great a
confidence, and made him acknowledge he had injured the best of his Subjects,
when he thought Phanasder was not so, who having first resigned his own
magnificent house to the King, received the honor of his orders, and doubled
his care and guards, came to visit and acquaint me, that by a Prisoner of
quality that day taken, he was assured, that to extinguish all difficulties
between Zenaxtus Partisans and Tygranes, the latter had engaged himself within
two days to give Altezeera to Palisdes; who either to satisfy his ambition,
his passion, or his doubts, commanded all his Party to keep their houses, till
he were in possession of what might invite them with honor and safety to take
the field. I am then (I cried out) a creature as far above being capable of
more misery, as of relief. Sir (said Phanasder) I would not have told you so
fatal an intelligence, had not my hopes of relieving your sorrow been as great,
as the certainty that this would create it. Alas! generous Friend (I replied)
my reason cannot so much yield to hope, as to afford me the latter with the
former: Do not I know Altezeera is in a place as strong by Numbers, as by Art
and Nature? Do not I see my self void of Forces, and of all things tending
toward her Relief, but my desires of attempting it? Do not therefore endeavor
to silence my despair, since it is as impossible a Task, as to remove what
creates it. At least (said Phanasder) let me acquaint you with what I design,
to prevent Altezeera's loss, which I know will be accompanied by yours.

Yes, yes, Phanasder, (I replied) I invoke the gods to punish me with a higher
affliction (were it possible) than the losing that fair Princess, if, in the
same minute I hear she is in Palisdes's Arms, I do not cast my self into those
of death. That (said Phanasder) which I have to propound, is of a quality, that
you may dye acting your revenge, if you cannot reach your hopes, and be certain
not to survive your felicity when you have lost it. Ah Friend (said I embracing
him) this is something worthy Phanasder, and my attention. I believe (said he)
when I have told it you, you will esteem it too worthy your hopes: This Night
(he continued) I shall have here a thousand select Horse, and as many Foot,
drawn out of the general Garrisons of this Province; I can take from Artemita
500 Horse, and as many Foot, without endangering the place, or Artabazus's
safety; these numbers being too few to storm Artaxata, we must supply their
want with Art; to effect which, to morrow Night (which is the Eve of the
intended Nuptials) we will march during the obscurity, by unfrequented ways to
Artaxata, and under some Ruins and Banks of Artaxis, we may conveniently lodge
a greater Body than ours; at the first opening of the gates, I will send in at
several Ports (to avoid suspicion) 200 of the valiantest and youngest Soldiers
in women's clothes, but with weapons under their gowns, who passing for
Villagers come to see the Solemnities, may, by degrees, draw toward the gate
next to us, seize upon it, and give us entrance; which if once we have, we
deserve to lose our hopes, if we do not convert them into certainties. I was
infinitely satisfied with so probable a way of relieving my Princess, and so
certain a way of death if that failed. But whilst we were making and answering
all Objections in our design, an Officer came and advertised his Governor, that
all those Forces he had sent for were near the City, and expected his commands;
this joyful intelligence separated us, he to dispose of those Troops, and I to
acquaint Artabazus how we intended to employ them. I found him somewhat
startled at the greatness of the hazard and attempt, but when I had told him
that our disease was too desperate to refuse any cure; that as we had lost our
selves by a deep security, so we must endeavor our restoration by as high a
boldness; that we could but lose 3000 men, and that we might recover half a
Kingdom, which at least followed the fate of Artaxata, Tygranes, and Palisdes,
he at last gave us his leave, and his prayers. The next Night all things being
(by Phanasdes care) in an exact readiness, we began our march, and by
continuing it without any intermission or encounter, an hour before day we came
and lodged our selves behind those Banks and Ruins, and having sent our young
Villagers scattering to the several Ports, they were no sooner opened, than
without any examination or suspicion, they all entered, and about half an hour
after, by a successful resolution, cut off as great a number as their own,
which composed the guard of the East gate, and having given the agreed-on
signal, Phanasder with 500 Horse, ran with full speed to the assistance of his
Amazon's, who, for all his expedition, were, before he joined them, deceased
above 50. I cannot express with what ravishment I followed with all the rest of
our little Army, nor with what fury we trampled over all those that opposed our
passage to the Temple, whither, I was told (by a Prisoner) Tygranes
(immediately before the Alarm) had lead the Princess Altezeera, who I was
greedily ambitious to relieve, lest I might lose the invitation and reward of
my attempt. I therefore begged Phanasder to pardon the impatiency of a Lover,
and to oppose our Enemies, whilst I was going to relieve our Friends. That
generous man conjured me to make haste, left he might miss of victory, by
missing me; I had not leisure to answer so flattering a Compliment, for I went
directly with 500 Gentlemen, to the dwelling of the gods, where I was
necessitated to sacrifice unto them near 1000 Soldiers that opposed my entry,
and where the reward of that victory was great, though the victory itself were
not; for by it I possessed the fair Altezeera, who I found abandoned by Tygranes,
and her designed Husband, and with whom I left all those to secure her liberty,
who had obtained it, being hastily called away to assist Phanasder, whom I
joined in the great field before the Royal Palace, ready to receive the charge
of 3000 Horse and Foot led by Tygranes and Palisdes. I will pass over the
Accidents in this little Battle, to tell you the event of it, which was an
entire victory on the justest side, and which showed that Fortune had no hand
in it: Palisdes found his Fate on that Sword on which his father and brother
had found theirs, but the Prince Tygranes by flight avoided his, though in this
Action he manifested so much courage, that had his duty been as great, he had
not given testimonies of it in a way which changed that virtue into a crime.
With the winning this little Battle we won Artaxata, which I left to his care
that had conquered it, and went to my Princess, who received me with such
passionate praises, that I found in them a higher reward, than in having been
successful; but observing that her joy or ignorance, made her attribute the
entire glory to him that had but the least share in it, I let her know, that
'twas not only Phanasder that had acted her release, but designed it too; that
for my particular, my grief for her captivity had been so large, that I could
do nothing but deplore it; and that it had not been so transcendent as to have
made me decline the thought of her relief, had not the thought of the
impossibility of it rendered it so. Whatsoever you tell me (said Altezeera) I
will call you my Restorer, and I believe Phanasder will neither envy nor deny
you that Title; but believe me (she continued) though you had not relieved
Altezeera, your Rival had not possessed her, but my evasion only was a trouble to
me, because the way which conduced to my not being Palisdes's, had rendered me
eternally incapable of being Artavasdes's. Thereupon she showed me a glittering
steel, which I can truly say struck me with more fear than all of the same
metal I had seen that day in my Enemies hands; which my Princess observing, she
told me, what Artavasdes! does a demonstration of my Affection fright you? And
had you rather I should be unconstant, than dead? Yes Madam (I replied) for I
had rather dye, than you should. But (said Altezeera) had you rather have me
live in vice, than dye in innocence? when too that vice, would render me as
unworthy, as undesirous to live.

Ah Madam (I replied) let us (I beseech you) break off this discourse, left
perhaps the evincement how much I love you, might induce you to suspect I do
not, You may (said Altezeera smiling) impose what Laws you please, where you
have made your Conquest, which I will obey, lest you might think it not so
entire as it is. We had in the Temple some discourses of this nature, which at
length were interrupted by the generous Phanasder, who came to kiss the
Princes^es hand, and to tell her, that now she had no more enemies in Artaxata,
than those which had lost their lives for having been so.

Have you then (said to Phanasder, after Altezeera had received him with a
respect worthy his services and virtue) given Crassolis the reward of his
infidelity? No Sir (he answered) Crassolis shall be (if you please) reserved
for Artabazus's sentence, which pronounced from that mouth, will be more
regular, and perhaps more sensible, we are too much his Enemies to be his
Judges: But (he continued) when I spoke of the Princesses Enemies, I only
intended those in Arms. I believe (said I) though Crassolis does more merit the
name of Enemy, than any that have been in Arms; yet we shall find it a more
difficult task to make the King think him his, than we had this day to conquer
all ours. If he does not ( Phanasder answered) he will find his punishment in
his fault; but were I of your faith, I would immediately be just to Artabazus
and Crassolis, by having the latter executed. No Phanasder (I replied) I
beseech you leave off that thought, for if we imposed his death, we might bring
his guilt to be doubted, by the way in which it is punished.

I tell you this (said Artavasdes) the more particularly, that you might see
how near I was to have avoided all my future miseries, and how I my self
contributed to the preservation of him, which caused them; for this Inchanter
Crassolis, made himself appear as innocent to Artabazus, as he did faulty to
us; nay, the loss of that life which discovered his Treason, he made a
successful argument of his innocence, and thereby obtained a power, whose
effects I shall eternally deplore with as much cause as violence: but whether
(continued Artavasdes, interrupting himself) does the reflection on that
Traitor transport me? I must beg your pardon for a fault, which I believe you
will excuse when you know the cause; and the sooner to acquaint you with it, I
will return to the fair Altezeera, who I left in the Temple, and who merited
one with more reason (perhaps) than the Deity to whom that was consecrated. She
too was so merciful to Crassolis, as to think it lust to have his King only his
Judge. Her opinion was our resolution, which we had no sooner elected, than we
returned to the Palace, and meeting by the way Palisdes's Body carrying to the
Grave, it had the noble Solemnity of Altezeera's tears, which afforded him a
fe^^city in death, better than his life had merited; but it may be she shed
those for his crimes, and not his fall. Phanasder and I having waited on
Altezeera to her Apartment, withdrew our selves, to make our dispatches to the
King, who in few days came to his old residence, and new conquest, where he
received Crassolis into his former favor, who made use of it according to his
former practice. You do perhaps, think it strange, that I found Altezeera so
early in the Temple, but I believe you will no longer, when I acquaint you,
it is the Armenian custom for the Bride to employ half the day of the Nuptials
in Prayers, and Divine Solemnities, to render the gods propitious to the
marriage. Her first thus happily prevented, I was a thousand times ready to
implore her permission to beg her of her brother, and when I had even suppressed
my fears, and taken up a resolution for so transcendent a request, I was
diverted from it, by the certain intelligence that Zenaxtus with an Army of
60000 men, was marching toward Artaxata, to recover or lose himself before it;
and that the Prince Tygranes was gone to Pompey the Great, (the Successor to
Lucullus's Army and Fortune) and by his prayers, and assurances of a
considerable Party's joining with him, induced that great Captain for a time to
suspend his prosecuting Mithridates, to invade Armenia, toward which the Roman
Eagles were flying with great celerity. Artabazus in this great exigency gave
me the command of all the Armenian Militia, and opening the public Treasures,
left them to my dispose, with which I immediately levied an Army to oppose
Zenaxtus, great enough to raise my hopes of relieving Anexander (if living) or
of revenging him (if dead.) I gave the gallant Phanasder Commission and Money
to levy another, to secure and defend the Passes on the Banks of Araxis, where
then Pompey was Campt, till I had decided the dispute with Zenaxtus, who was
the nearest and the most pressing Enemy. To be brief, Phanasder, who reigned
more in Artabazus's Subjects, than he himself did over them, so suddenly formed
his Forces, that before I thought he had sent his inferior Officers to have
raised them, I learnt they were all ready, and possessed of the Armenian
Frontiers. For my particular, with 6000 Horse, and 24000 Foot, I advanced to
meet the Enemy, he relying on his numbers, and I on my quarrel, and the virtue
of those that fought in it, we soon came to a Battle, which lasted till night
did the office of Trumpets, and founded a retreat. The advantages and the
animosities of both Armies were so resembling, that we soon found what called
the Soldiers to rest, was esteemed by them an injury, which the next morning
was again evinced; for they could no sooner see their enemies, than they went
to destroy them; and though we omitted nothing of either side which might end
the dispute before the day did, yet I believe this had been the perfect Copy of
the Precedent, if an Accident, as strange as the Battle, had not put a period
to it. The Scene of this long Tragedy was at the foot of a great Hill, which in
our hottest dispute we saw covered with a great cloud of Cavalry, that so
terrified both Armies, (not knowing to which of them the release was intended)
that whatever Zenaxtus and I could do, all our Soldiers at first suspended
their Swords as their thoughts, then sheathed them, and by degrees returned
under their Ensigns, thinking all dispute against so powerful a supply, as vain
as dangerous. I was enraged to find that the faith of my Army, for I was
confident those Forces came to ravish, not contribute to my Victory; and in
that belief I pressed my Army to return to the charge, that if they were friends,
they might see and have no share in our success; and if not, to fight them
before they were joined. But all my persuasions being fruitless, I was taking
some resolution of an honorable death alone, since I was denied it in company,
but those designs instantly vanished, and gave place to joys as pleasing, by
those new Troops falling like a storm on Zenaxtus's Army, who by it, having
lost their hopes, soon after did their courages and lives. My Army contributing
nothing to the Conquerors glory, but the not participating in it. Zenaxtus's
death accompanied by 40000 of his companions, was the end and expiation of
their Rebellion, all the rest having been killed the precedent way, and taken
in this. After the execution was ended, I rid up and down the Field, to learn
from whom Armenia and Artava'des had received so signal an obligation; but I
soon found the sight of my Preserver, was a greater blessing than the
preservation it self, for 'twas the generous Anexander; I flung my self
instantly at his feet, acknowledged him twice my Father, in giving me my life,
and in preserving it, and by a million of other demonstrations, endeavored to
manifest a contentment as great exteriorly, as it was in my heart. That
generous Princes ecstasies were not inferior to mine, which being somewhat
lessened, to satisfy my impatient longing, in knowing from what kind god he
derived his deliverance, he told me, after I was fallen into Zenaxtus's hands,
by his treachery to Artabazus, which might as easily have been prevented by the
King, as it was foreseen by me; the persidious Traitor had immediately executed
me, but that he thought a death without lingering, rather a mercy than a
revenge, therefore I was kept alive, till some torment as great as his cruelty,
or as he merited, was found out, which being at length, I was carried out of a
Prison that I believe could not be an inferior one to that he designed me; and
as the Tormentors were beginning their office, (my Judge being one of the
Spectators of his sentence) a Post arrived, who presented him a Packet, which
(as I after learned) brought the news of your success against Artaxata, the
death of Palisdes, the flight of Tygranes, and your being made Generalissimo of
all Armenia, this which in all probability should have increased his fury,
suspended the execution of it, and returned me to a less troublesome Prison; but
though he gave out, that he preserved me only, to make you (whom he was then
going against) participate in my sufferings, by imposing them in your sight;
yet I rather believe my reprieve proceeded from his apprehension of a turn in
fortune, and that his would be desperate, if yours were successful, did he
extinguish his fury in my blood: whatever was the cause I cannot determine, yet
he carried me Prisoner in his Army; but as the gods ordained it, Zenaxtus
committed the care of my restraint, to a Gentleman who was engaged in his
Cause, more by his relation to those in it, than his approbation of it. This
generous Keeper, the first night of our march, allowed me half his Bed, and
taking the opportunity of our being without Auditors, by a handsome discourse,
assured me of his pity for my miseries, and of his intentions to relieve them;
that my patience in enduring my Torments, was of a quality that convinced him,
it proceeded not from my Fortitude, but my Innocence, and concluded that he was
thereby invited to be of a Cause, which gave the Defenders of it power to
conquer their Enemies by their very sufferings. This proceeding was so free,
and so like a Gentleman, that to have doubted it, had been a Crime, as great as
his Virtue, I therefore gave him assurances of my believing his professions,
and that if he would decline Zenaxtus for Artabazus, he should thereby better
his Fortunes, as much as his Cause.

Sir, (said he) I will take up Arms to evince that the Quarrel I approve I will
defend, but I will accept of no Command but an inferior one to what I have
here, left those that are Enemies to Truth, and to me, should allege my
interest was my conversion. In brief (said Anexander) the next night, he so
judiciously ordered our Escape, that leaving nothing to Fortune, he left us
nothing to fear, so that without any encounter or interruption, we reached in
three days to Thospia, from whence my Deliverer sent Zenaxtus the cause of his
being there, and where, by Lindesia's power and care, I found that Body of
Horse ready for service, with which I marched after Zenaxtus, but could not
overtake his Army, till you had so weakened and harrast it, that I came rather
to act an Execution than a Fight; and instead of helping Artavasdes to a
Victory, I have robbed him of one. This flattery was so palpable, that I did not
esteem it fit by a Reply to evince it one, but begged him by his permission, to
have the honor to be known to his generous Preserver. He merits it (said my
Father) for I have seen him this day do more against Zenaxtus, than when he
gave Anexander his liberty; we went thereupon toward those new and victorious
Troops to find him, but alas we found him too soon, for before we had gone half
the way, Anexander perceived him pale and cold amongst the dead: oh gods! what
did not my poor father at the fight of that fatal object? But let us pass over
those grateful extravagancies, though they abundantly manifested how precious
to him the life was, whose death was so passionately deplored. The next morning
after our Victory, by a general Muster, we learned what it cost us, which was
10000 men lost, and as many unserviceable for the present; with this Army we
returned to Artaxata, whose littleness made some believe we had mist of
success, and others, that we had dearly bought and deserved it. Artabazus (when
my father kissed his hand) protested he had brought him two things he most
ambitiously desired, Victory, and Anexander; that he was as much obliged to him
for the latter as the former; and if he were capable of any grief whilst he
looked upon him, it proceeded from a reflection of what his Credulity had so
much hazarded, and for his having neglected an advice where the punishment of
it could not have been greater than the fault. My reception was much resembling
my fathers, so were my acknowledgments, which finished, I presented the King my
Commission, which Anexander's Liberty made my Justice and my Duty to restore.
But (said Artavasdes) why do I amuse my self to give you my story by retail?
It Is enough you know I kept my Commission, because my King would not receive,
nor my father accept it, and by that retension I found the duty of it, and my
promise obliged me to join with Phanasder, whose courage all this while had
kept the Romans from possessing what they daily saw, there being only the River
Araxis betwixt both Armies. But to abuse your patience as little as I can
without disobedience, I will omit my Princesses joys at my late return and
success, and her contrary pafsions for my then separation, which too appear the
more unfortunate, since the cause of it was to oppose the Conquerors of the
world (for that title the Romans gave themselves, and their performances did
almost confirm) with Forces too that were so diminisht by a former success,
that they could hardly expect any in the future: But what consol'd me in this
Expedition, was, if I were successful, my joys would be no longer protracted;
and if I were not, I resolved my life should not. 'Twas with these thoughts and
resolutions I advanced toward Phanasder, whose numbers I found as much
diminisht by sickness, as they could have been by a defeat, so that the
conjunction of both our Forces did not compose as great a Body as mine did
before Zenaxtus's defeat, or his before the mortality; but that which caused
our admiration was, that though Pompey knew our weakness, yet he made no
advantage of it by any attempts, but alas! our admiration was cured by our
grief; for not many days after, Artabazus (with a small Train) came to the
Camp, and told me, that all the higher Armenia was in a general flame, which he
had sent my father to quench, with Forces risen in haste, and that his
intelligence of Artaxata's intended revolt upon the least misfortune, had made
him esteem my weak Army a securer Sanctuary than that City. Oh gods! Sir, (I
hastily cried out) if Artaxata be no Sanctuary for Artabazus, how could he
esteem it one for Altezeera? I have (said Artabazus) neither esteemed it one
for Altezeera, neither left her there, she is gone to Thospia with Anexander,
who, were he not concerned in her safety for his Kings sake, I believe he would
be for his Sons. Those words made me blush, and the former made me know that
Pompey had lay'n quiet, till this new combustion might (by a diversion)
facilitate his entry. That same day therefore (because we hourly expected the
Romans advance) a Council was called, in which Crassolis (who attended the
King) assisted, his opinion was to determine all by Battle, not by Treaty,
since the latter could not possibly cement the fractions, but by the Kings
yielding much to the Prince, which concessions would be a dangerous President;
would be termed by the Armenians a submission, and would invite Tygranes unto
future Revolts by the first proving so successful, who being too reflected on
as a Successor to the Crown, the multitude (which commonly consider their own
benefit, and not the right) might in the future incline to him, who, according
to the course of nature, was probably longest able to reward or punish them;
That a victory against the Romans, would be one too against the Rebels, who
never had taken up Arms, had not they thought those of the Romans would have
exempted them from making any use of their own, that the cause of the revolt
being taken away, the effect of consequence would follow; and if the gods had
decreed our ruin, 'twas more like Armenians to fall by the Sword, than by
Submission, without which he durst (as he said) lose his life, if ever Pompey
would treat: This advice Phanasder and I opposed, not only because 'twas his,
(and consequently we might think it the worst) but because too it was really
so, and esteemed so generally by all the Council, who concurred in my reasons,
which were, That if the revolted followed the fortune of the Romans, by having
an external Peace, we should have an internal one also; That all the faithful
Armenian Militia were almost destroyed by Civil and Foreign Wars, by Successes,
and by Mortalities; That not only the Rebels within, but the Romans, and
Parthians without, were all pulling on her fate; That she had never more
Enemies, and less power to resist them; That nothing but a Peace could avoid
the former, and restore the latter; That it was better to yield something, than
lose all; That time might procure a return of those concessions, or enable us
to retake them; That by a present Peace we should (if there were in the future
an occasion of War) make it, when the Romans (Tygranes's greatest help) would
not be in a readiness to afford him any; That by making a Peace, Artabazus
would make Tygranes his Subject; but by a War, he would make him his equal, and
perhaps his Superior; That thereby the Roman and Parthian Arms, which were
ready to invade Armenia, would leave her in a quiet security, by being employed
one against another; and that if a Peace were refused, after an offer of
reasonable terms, we had thereby made the gods our friends, and invited them to
punish an enemy who was guided by the rule of Power, and not of Justice. I know
not whether Artabazus fear or judgment made him declin Crassolis's advice to
follow the Councels, but I know the next morning he sent a Herald to Pompey to
offer a Parley, which he absolutely declined, without Artabazus would submit
himself as conquered, and to his mercy yield that part of Armenia on the East
of Euphrates to Tygranes, and pay a yearly Homage for the residue to the Roman
Empire. Though my resentment at so barbarous a message was great, yet it could
not transcend my Kings fears, who valuing Pompey's power by his insolency, in
apprehension of the former, told me, there was no way but to submit it unto the
latter. Never, never Sir, (I cried out) shall Artabazus, whilst I wear a
Sword, unking himself, let the gods do it, if that misfortune be writ in the
Book of Fate; and though I esteemed it fit to Treat with the Romans, because
their Army was the greater, yet now I am absolutely against it, their unjust
and insolent demands having at least equaled our Forces; it is more glorious to
dyeat the head of 2000 Gentlemen, than to live with the Title of a King without
the power, and to let our succeeding Story's register, that Artabazus was the
first that dismembered his Kingdom, and the only man that was conquered in it.
The King esteemed what I said to be fitter for his commendation than his
practice, and the false Crassolis perceiving the Father was ready to give as
much by Fear, as the Son could win by Battle, upon the second sitting of the
Council, (which was to fix upon a positive Answer for Pompey) he was as
absolutely for a Treaty, as at the first he had been for a War, and so
proportioned his Reasons to his Princes Apprehensions, that he determined to
put himself into the Roman mercy, when the Presidents of some Kings of the
Gauls, and of the Africans, demonstrated they had none. Phanasder and I, at
this resolution, begged Artabazus's permission for our selves and Anexander, to
retire unto our Governments, that by seemingly becoming Rebels to his
Authority, we might preserve some Forces to maintain and raise it in the
future; but our request concerning our selves, found a resembling return to
that we had made for our King, and 'twas no wonder he declined his Friends
advantage, when he had already his own; but as the Assembly was upon the point
of rising, a Trumpet from the Roman Camp came into ours, and sent me (in) a
Letter from the Lieutenant General of that Army; I was surpised at the news of
that name, for I knew Pompey had been without one since the death of Sillanus;
but opening and reading what was sent me, I found the Contents of it was, to
desire a single meeting with me that day, and that the desirer of it was the
generous Ventidius (a Patrician of Rome) with whom (during my residence there,
and in Lucullus's Army) I had contracted an intimate and passionate friendship:
I cannot tell you my joy, to learn I had no small power with one Roman, that
had so much with all the rest; I immediately communicated this to Artabazus,
begged his permission to wait upon my Friend, and that he would not permit any
of the Council to be out of his fight till my return, left the discovery of his
intended submission, might hinder my preventing it. The King having promised my
desire, I dispatched the Trumpet to Ventidius, and immediately followed him my
self to a place assigned upon the Banks of Araxis, where I found my generous
Friend was already come, out of a confidence I would not fail his commands,
which, (after a world of embraces, and new reiterations of an ancient
Friendship) I desired to learn that I might obey them. I would not (said
Ventidius) have given you this trouble but to serve you, and to evince our
former confidence of one another is not diminished, or impaired by absence or
time, or by our now being of different Parties. I will acquaint you with that
which shall abundantly perform it: Know then, that but two days since I came
to Pompey's Army to be his Lieutenant General, which Title I derive from the
favor of Julius C^sar, who, if my affection deceive me not, you will see as
famous for his power, as he is already for his courage and virtue; and though
now he has the command of all Gaul, (one of the greatest and noblest Provinces
in the world) and though against that warlike Nation he has won more Victories
than ever Alexander did against the effeminate Persians, yet I have seen him at
the reading of that Grecians life, weep that his own has not been so victorious
and active, when indeed, if he ought to have shed any tears, they should have
been rather of joy, than a contrary passion, for Alexanders having been his
foil, and not his pattern; by this you may fancy what C^sar is like to aspire
unto, when though already he has attained unto such a height of glory, he yet
esteems himself scarce ascending; and lest Pompey (who he only thinks worthy
the name of his Rival) should prove a successful one, C^sar has sent me to the
second command of this Army, which he knows I have some interest in, it being^
composed (for the greater part) of Lucullus's.

But Pompey's Friends, who judge nothing but the Roman Empire can satisfy a
mind as large, have sent Domitius to him, to let him know, that it is more for
the interest of Rome, to make the Armenians their Friends, than their Subjects;
That they apprehend C^sar's Ambition, Power and Fortune, will make them stand
in need of more than Roman Arms, to maintain the Roman liberty; That besides
those fears, they have contracted as great and as just ones, from the Virtue
and success of a Slave, which if the progress of his Actions prove as fortunate
as the beginning, will soon make Italy the Scene of two contrary extremes; That
therefore he should with all diligence disingage himself from those Eastern
Wars, lest whilst he is increasing the Empire of Rome, another possess it. This
(continued Ventidius) I had from Domitius, who has been my companion in my
journey, and who esteeming me more a friend to Rome, than to Caesar, trusted me
with this intelligence, which Pompey so absolutely believes, that I being
informed 'twas Artavasdes which commanded the Armenian Army, and the bad
posture it was in, I took occasion this morning to let my General know, now the
opportunity was offered of obliging all Armenia to him, that his power might
make them fear, but his mercy love him; that by countenancing so unnatural a
Son against his Father, the success of the Action would be blemished by the
cause; that he which would be an enemy to him that gave him life, could hardly
be a friend to one which gave him a Kingdom; since the power which could confer
such a gift, will (by the knowledge of his own want of merit) keep him in
perpetual fears and jealousies that it will reassume it; that his carriage to
his father evinces, that those which most oblige him, ought most to apprehend
him; and that the General of Armenia was so particularly known to me and my
friend, that I durst engage my self as much for his gratitude if he were
obliged, as for his enduring all the miseries in the world, rather than incline
to any conditions which might look like a submission. To which Pompey (who has
set up his rest to win me) replied, I shall be rather induced to grant Armenia
what you desire, because their General is your friend, than out of a belief
thereby to make that Kingdom a friend to me; therefore Ventidius, upon your own
score I gave you a power (to conclude with them) as large as the Senate has
given me, I have too but even now received an assurance which makes me think
Tygranes fit for my revenge, (were he worthy of it;) For a Packet that he sent
Zenaxtus before his defeat and death, came by a strange Accident into my hands,
which (uncypher'd) discovers, his intention was to keep me here, to divert and
distract Artabazu's Forces, till Zenaxtus had subdued them, and then to permit
me no share in Armenia, but what I could purchase by my Sword; and though what
I now tell you may seem to lesten my obligation, yet if you consider it
rightly, it will raise the value of it; for if Tygranes had continued in
innocence, I must have rewarded it with my Conquests, but his guilt will give
the Romans what I shall win with their Arms. I will (continued Artavasdes)
exempt you from the repetition of our discourses, to acquaint you with their
conclusion, which was, that Artabazus the next day should visit Pompey, that he
should pardon his Son as Pompey would because he was so, and that he should
give the Roman Army 6000 Talents as a largess. That Pompey, on the other side,
should salute him by the name of King of Armenia, Friend and Ally to the Roman
Empire, that he should demand none of the Armenian Territories, but should
restore him to the little Kingdom of Sophena which the Romans had formerly
taken from his Crown.

After this result, the generous Ventidius returned to the Roman Camp, and I to
the Armenian, where I learned the King was still in Council; whither I went,
and where as soon as I came, Artabazus with a timorous action came toward, and
asked me, Well Artavasdes, what must I expect? Has Pompey raised his
conditions, because I was so long a granting them? No Sir (I replied) you are
so far from parting with a share of your King dom, that by the generosity of
Ventidius, I have gotten you another Thereupon I told him all we had concluded
on, but the poor Prince was so incredulous, that even for a time, his good
fortune afficted him as much as his ill, but when by many protestations I had
removed all his doubts, he ran to embrace me, and was in such transports, that
had we been ignorant what his fears had been, we might have read them in his
joys, never so many Titles of gratitude were given to all men, as Artabazus
gave me, the names of his Deliverer, Restorer, and Guardian-Angel, were the
lowest of his irregularities. The next morning we put all things in a posture
to conduct him to the Roman Army, but truly we found ours so thin by the
mortality, and by the absence of those which fled from it, that we could hardly
form a Guard fit for a King, and hardly leave one fit for a Camp. As soon as we
came to the Trench of the Romans, two Lictors, with Axes and Rods, came and
advertised Artabazus he must light, for never any man rid in a Roman Camp; he
obeyed this advertisement, and to repair his having offered an offense (which
his ignorance of their Discipline rendered none) as soon as he saw Ventidius,
who attended him within the Gates, he presented him with his Sword, which
Ventidius declined with much humility, and pointing at me, told him, you owe
(Sir) both it and your Crown to that Man. I was so ashamed at this submission,
that I heard not then my Friends complement, who conducted Artabazus to Pompey,
who came with much civility to salute him; but because my Prince's submissions
were below his quality, I will pass them by, as unfit for my repetition, and
tell you, that all which Ventidius and I had concluded, was ratified by Pompey
to Artabazus, only the Roman General placing the Father on the right hand, and
the Son on the left, desired the former to give the latter for his
maintenance, the Kingdom of Sophena, which too, he said he asked, only to
convince Tygranes, that they had both pardoned him. This Artabazus willingly
granted, and besides the 6000 Talents, gave the Roman Soldiers and Officers so
great an additional gratuity, that they found from his bounty, more than they
could have expected from their Swords. Pompey too, for Ventidius's sake, placed
on me many Civilities, of a nature, as generous as his own. But Artabazus had
no sooner past the River Artaxis, than Pompey sent for Tygranes to let him
know, before their parting, how great his faults had been, and the Mercies
which had pardoned them, and to infuse into him some principles, which might in
the future have made him acknowledge he had more obliged him by by his Advice,
than he could have done by his Sword. But that unfortunate Prince finding his
designs revealed, and his hopes ruined, was so incensed against Pompey (who he
considered, as the Author of both) that he told his Messenger he would not come
into a man's company, who for fear, or for 6000 Talents, had sold his Chest and
Faith. Pompey enraged at so sharp, and so strange a replymade him a prisoner;
this accession of misfortune made Tygranes utter some words, that induced the
Roman General to send him in that quality to Rome, there to be kept till his
arrival, to be led in triumph. Artabazus was soon advertised of this
proceeding, with the impossibility of having it altered, in which he found,
that Tygranes's want of duty which hitherto bad been his trouble, was now his
consolation, for my particular, I was so sensible of the Prince's sufferings,
though in them I read the justice of them; that I became both to Pompey and
Ventidius an earnest (though a fruitless) Solicitor. But whilst the Armenians
and Romans were celebrating their newfriendship on the Banks of Arraxis, there
came advice both to Artabazus and Pompey, that Arsaces was already in person on
those of Euphrates, with a vast Army, and had invaded the Roman Colonies in
Syria, by his youngest Son Phraates. Pompey at this Alarm, by a personal visit,
invites my King to join with the Roman Empire in a League offensive and
defensive, against the Parthians, and to conclude and ratify the conditions of
it, that he would send a solemn Ambassy to the Senate. Artabazus joyfully
embraced this overture, to revenge his affront (at the Battle of Miramnes) and
to be united to a power, to which the world submitted; for my part, all the
reluctance I had, proceeded from being thereby involved in a War against my
Preserver, and Restorer; but a public duty yielding to a particular, I
submitted to this League, with resolution, as well for gratitude as safety, to
avoid the generous Artabanes's Sword, and to employ my own as little as I could
(with Loyalty) in a quarrel he thought worthy to act in, and defend; (
Artabanes only by a smile took notice of his friend's flattery, who thus
continued his discourse.) Whilst the Roman General was with Artabazus, there
came an Express from Annexander to acquaint him, that by the assistance of
Evaxes and Falintus, he had defeated one of the Rebel's Armies, in the higher
Armenia, and that the other, learning their companions misfortunes, and his new
contracted friendship with the Romans, were come without Arms, and had
submitted to his Mercy, which he besought Artabazus might so act, as his
subjects might find more safety (as well as honesty) inreturning to their
allegiance, than in casting it off. This request, in the joy of the success
(and the necessity of Subjects Hearts, rather than Destructions) found a ready
grant; and that the intended Embassy might have the greater appearance,
Annexander was elected for the Ambassador, his Victories dispencing with his
Absence, and rendering his Presence the more considerable at Rome; and though
the League was but in agitation, yet Pompey before his march into Syria, to
convince Artabazus, how confident he was of its conclusion at Rome, and
perhaps, to manifest, how little he apprehended Phraates, he left Afranius in
Armenia, with Command, to unite his Legion with my Army, against Arsaces, for I
was immediately sent with all the Forces already raised, to oppose his invasion.
I cannot tell you, how infinitely I repined at Fortune, for creating new Wars
upon conclusion of the old, and for raising almost as many difficulties against
the satisfaction of my flame, as in the object that gave it a being, there were
Beauties and perfections: Annexander upon the Kingscommands, left that Army,
whose Swords had conquered one, and whose Fame had another, and was no sooner
at Artaxata, than he was sent from thence to Rome, with Pompey's Letter to the
Senate. His Equipage in that employment, was so magnificent, that many who
judged of the King's State by the Subjects, concluded Armenia had been a
Country fitter for the Conquest than Friendship of Rome, if the danger had not
appeared as great as the recompense. My Father having begun his journey, I
advanced toward Arsaces with Afranius, in whose little Camp I saw a pattern of
Discipline and Obedience, which made me no longer wonder at their success. I
had that consolation too, that my way lay by Thospia, and that my Princess did
my Army the houor of seeing it; whereby (but going to a battle) they received a
nobler reward (except the repetition of the same) than they could have enjoyed
after a victory. This prophetical recompense raised both the General and his
Soldiers resolutions, to act in Gratitude what they should out of hope, and
that which gave us no small one of obtaining a Victory, was the advertisement
one of my spies brought me, that Artabanes was not in the Parthian Army. But
the Euphrates being between that and the Armenian, for above three Moons we
only past the time in skirmishes, wherein our successes were so good, that
perhaps they could not more inflame our desires, to decide all by a Battle,
than they made Arsaces apprehensive of coming to that Trial, who was not long
after sent for by the Prince Phraates, being hotly alarmed by the approach of
Pompey, Orodes esteeming his youngest sons fears to be just, and thinking there
was more honor to be won from Pompey than Artavasdes, left his eldest Son, the
Prince Pacorus, General of that Army, against which I lay encamped, and with
other Forces went to relieve Phraates, and oppose the Romans. And though
Pacorus, three days after his Fathers departure, invited me to a Battle, which
next to victory, was the best happiness I could desire in that War, yet I had
no small reluctance to employ my life against a Prince, from whom I had
received it; but the ties of Loyalty to my King, and of Duty to his Commands,
made me return him word, I would obey them, which too, was accompanied with a
passionate and true vow, that I had rather have drawn my Sword against my self,
than him: That I could not expect his pardon did I not know, he did, the
obligations which Subjects have to their Kings, and that all my consolation
was, if conquered, I should increase his Glory, and if Conqueror, I should so
employ my Fortune, as thereby evince, I was so long ungrateful, but only
because I could not be otherwise. The next morning I drew my Army off the Banks
of Euphrates, to give Pacorus liberty, without interruption, to pass over that
Bridge of Boats he had made; and no sooner were the Parthians and Armenians
ready to begin the Battle, than I made a Proclamation upon pain of death, none
of mine should act Pacorus's, but that they should take as many prisoners as
they could, without indangering the general safety, and then the signal being
given, we began the charge; but the Parthean Army wanting Artabanes, wanted
Victory, which the Armenians purchased at a bloody rate; twice that day Pacorus
singl'd me out, and twice that day I fled the Encounter, after I knew against
whom I fought, though in our first meeting, my ignorance made me spill some
Blood, which when I knew from whom I drew it, I wished it had been my own. One
hundred and five Ensigns, 6000 Common Soidiers, and 300 Officers (in which
number Surena, Labienus and Vixores were) remained in our hands, as arguments
of our success, all which the next morning I sent to Pacorus with a Letter,
which begged him to believe the way in which I manifested my gratitude, was as
great a trouble to me, as it could be to him. Two days after I caused all the
Parthian and Armenian Bodies in one Funeral Fire to be burnt, and the next
night Pacorus having done the same with his Bridge, marched away, and left me
the liberty of returning to the fair Altezeera (a happiness greater than the
glory of the success) with whom I found Artabazus, whose pardon I implored for
having disposed of the effects of our Victory without his knowledge, and to his
Enemies. But he seemed to be angry at the request, not that I had offended him,
but that I thought so. As soon as the importunate ceremonies of my Triumph were
ended, I went to my Prince's Apartment, where I so represented the violence of
my Passion, and the hopeful opportunity of now imploring her Brothers
permission of rendering it as happy as 'twas great, that my importunate Prayers
extorted a grant from his words, which her blushes and disorder acquainted me
with before. Never, (generous Artabanes) never was there any thing greater,
than my joy at this concession, but my fears and tremblings when I implored it.
Oh gods! what did I not say to my Princess, that I could say no more? and what
vows did I not make, that my constancy should be as great as my felicity? the
evening of this blessed day, as I was going to cast my self at my Kings Feet,
and to implore a grant, which was as impossible to be desired with too much
humbleness, as to be received with too much ecstasy, I met a Gentleman sent
from him for me, who I desired to acquaint me, whether he knew the cause; he
told me that he could not imagine it, unless it were a Packet, which was then
delivered him by an Express. I shall not (continued Artavasdes) be ashamed to
tell you that I trembled, left this might be some new Alarm of going to the
Field, and in that apprehension I came into the Kings Closet, where he had no
sooner locked the door, than he told me; I hope Artavasdes you are not ignorant,
that if my resentments for your services are not as great as they themselves,
yet at least they are as I am capable of: but that I may be obliged to your
Reason, as well as to your Goodness, for so charitable an opinion, I have sent
for you, to conjure you, without any Ceremonies, to name your reward, which I
shall be as pleased to confer on you, as you can be to receive, and if it be
one which can satisfy your desert, I shall more value my power by that effect,
than by any other. Artabazus having thus spoke, fixed his Eyes upon me, and I
mine on the ground, with so much confusion in my looks and gestures, that he
read in my silence, what I was not able to acquaint him by my words. Well
Artavasdes (he continued) since you seem to give me your election, whether it
proceeds from your modesty, or the merit of your performances, that leaves me
but one way to recompense them; I must tell you, the former, and the latter,
directs me to reward both by the gift of Altezeera, who, if I be not much
mistaken, will find her own satisfaction in yours, and in my gratitude. Oh
gods! (continued Artavasdes) you only know my transports at those ravishing
words, which were no sooner spoke, than I prostrated my self at my Kings feet,
embraced his knees and told him, ah Sir, I beseech you do not mention reward or
gratitude, when you do the Princess Altezeera, nor so much wrong the blessing
of your gift, as to term it a recompense, since it is so far above manifesting
you are grateful, that by it I am rendered incapable of ever being so. Great
gods! (I cried out) lessen my felicity by some aff^iction, left I do not long
possess it. Yes Artavasdes (my King replied) you shall possess Altezeera, your
not demanding her, increases your Title to her; and I find my self as much tied
to this gratitude by your humility, as by your services; but to limit that joy,
whose greatness you apprehend, may destroy it self, and to show how soon the
gods have granted what you so earnestly implored, you must a while suspend the
fruition, to act that which may induce my Kingdom, to esteem me as just in
conferring my Sister on you, as I do therein esteem my self. Thereupon
(commanding me to rise) he gave me a Letter from Annexander to him, and another
directed to me, both which I read, and found they contained, that he had been
received at Rome with a magnificer (...) which testified his welcome; but in
the highest of his negotiating, the gods had struck him with a lingering
sickness, which most of the Physicians assured him, would be astedious as
irrecoverable; that therefore he implored, that I might be sent (if Armenia
were in peace) with Power and Instructions to perfect the Treaty, in case he
ended his life before it, and commanded me to do him the last office of closing
his Eyes, or if I came too late for that duty, yet at least, to celebrate his
Funerals. Consider (I beseech you) how sad an influence this unfortunate
Packet had on me, and how in one moment the gods convinced me, that neither
joy nor grief could destroy me, I should for ever have acknowledged the
confining my felicity, by (...), and the qualifying my sorrow by happiness, had
been their providence, if since, I had not found it their cruelty, for they
made me able to conquer those extremes, but to preserve me for greater; what
need I tell you more, than that my duty to my King, my Country, and my Father,
made me pass an engagement to undertake the voyage, and to mittigate the cause
and trouble of it: Artabazus by many assurances, accompanied by as many vows,
told me at my return, I should be established in a felicity, which he longed as
much to confer on me, as I could to possess it. I omitted to acquaint you,
there was another Letter to Lindesia, from Anexander, who received the news of
her Husbands sickness, with a constancy that rendered her unworthy the
affliction; but as soon as I retired from Artabazus, I went to my Princess, who
perceiving so high a sadness in my Face, was so much a friend to my passion, as
to believe nothing but a misfortune in it, could have created so large a one;
and in that Faith asked me, whether he Brother had been so unjust as to esteem
his alliance a greater reward than my services merited? I was infinitely
ashamed at this question, and that I should be capable of so transcendent a
melancholy (having my felicity granted) as to induce my Princess to suspect it
had been denied. In this perplexity I continued in a silence, that increased
her doubts, but as soon as I was able to suppress them, I did, by acquainting
her what had past betwixt my King and me, and how that I was never so near my
Blessing, and yet never was so like to be distant from it. This separation, and
Anexander's danger, the fair Altezeera concluded, was very sensible, since the
joy of Artabazus Grant could not entirely console me, which induced her to
suspend her own aff^ictions (for Anexander's condition) to lessen mine, that by
the knowledge of hers could not but receive a large accession. But when she
came to discourse upon my absence, and to bring reasons to qualify the hardness
of it, alas! they were so far from bearing that name, or from producing that
effect, that her esteeming they were so, or that they could be thought so by
me, created a greater misery, than she endeavored to silence. But the
necessity of my journey to Rome, either as a Son, or as a Subject, made me more
firm in my resolution of undertaking it, than Altezeera's not appearing
sensible of it, and though perhaps she lessened her disorder, that it might
have a resembling operation on mine, yet it produced a contrary effect, and
made me tell her, she had more Fortitude than Love: But though I apprehended
nothing more, than leaving my Princess; yet for three days, (during which my
dispatch was making) I did nothing when I was out of her company, but wait upon
my King to hasten it; the evening of the last day, coming to his Chamber, I
found him writing, and in great perlexities, sometimes blotting out what he had
written, then flinging away his Pen, and tearing his Paper. I was something
surpised at this, but at last, turning his looks by chance where I was, he
seemed as much surpised at my having seen his disorder, as I was at it; but
having somewhat composed himself, he called me to him, and told me smiling,
Artavasdes, it may be you do as much wonder at that little fury I am in, as you
will at the cause, which I will tell you, not only that you may remove it, but
be convinced, that I have nothing of reserve from my Brother, for that name I
will henceforth give you. Know then, that what Altezeera's Eyes have acted in
you, another Lady's have in me, and though by many vows I have professed to have
now a Passion only for her, yet as an argument of her Power or distrust, she
will receive no satisfaction, but of a Letter to my abandoned Mistress, that I
have deserted her, and of another to her self, that I only adore her, which
hard sentence I was obeying, when you came in; but having never been blessed with
a fortunate expression, I found my self more troubled to act my obedience, than
to undertake it, and since you are so happily present, I will make use of your
style, that my Mistress may be as much satisfied with it, as with my passion. I
was more perplexed to obey his commands than to learn them, for I was not
ignorant Artabazus was addicted to a Passion, which if placed upon a perfect
object for a legitimate end, deserves a nobler name; but knowing that the
Flames of Kings are apter to consume virtue, than cherish it, I was unwilling
to show my ignorance in a cause, which I too much detested to serve at so dear
a rate; and therefore excused my self of the former by the latter; but
Artabazus was so pressing, that at length being more vanquished by his
importunities than reasons, having perfectly received his instructions, to
follow them I writ this former Letter to the forsaken, and this latter to the
adored Mistress.

The First Letter was,
IF you saw the cause of my change, you would excuse the effects, and
acknowledge that constancy to you, after having seen her, is too great a
weakness to be esteemed a Virtue, Those Vows therefore I have made you: I do
not only recall, but give you leave to do the like with yours, and though you
should lose as much by the bargain, as I do gain, yet you cannot more deplore
that loss, than I should the loss of that time I should spend in your service,
after having seen my new Conqueror.


The Second Letter was,
SInce you desire another argument of my Passion, besides the having seen the
Beauty that inspired it, I have to obey your Commands, sent her (that first
made me a Lover) a Declaration, that I am no longer hers; But do not believe I
can be unconstant to you, because I have been so to her, since your Beauty, the
cause of my First change, renders me incapable of a Second, and that which made
me act one fault, will be my security of the acting another.


ARtabazus was so flattering as to commend these Letters, and having
passionately enjoined my silence, especially to Altezeera, whose scrupulous
Virtue (as he said) might think that a crime, which was but a diversion, he
desired me immediately to retire, that he might transcribe, and send them, and
commanded me two hours after to come and receive my final dispatch for Rome,
which by then should be finished. The short time which I found was left me, I
dedicated to the fair Altezeera, who I found had more constancy to discourse of
my departure than to see it. I will not particularize all was said when I took
my leave, which I did with so deep a melancholy, that I have often since
considered it a Prophecy and not a Weakness; my Princess too, perceiving its
greatness participated of it, and practiced a weakness her self, which she had
condemned in me; and it may be suspecting my fears had as great a share in it
as my separation, she told me, Artavasdes, I have hitherto determined to give
you no pretense to Altezeera, but what you had by your services and her
inclination, but to fortify your Title, which I find your absence and sorrow
will need, I here protest by all things I hold in highest Veneration, as long
as you honor me with your affection, I will pay you mine; I am now tied to you
by Religion, as well as gratitude, which are Bonds I cannot cancel, without
rendering my self, as unfit for all other Men, as unworthy of Artavasdes. And I
(I replied, casting my self at her Feet) do protest by Altezeera, who not to
adore, is a higher sin than to do it, that not only I will have a passion for
her, whilst she blesses me with a reciprocal one, but continue mine, though she
should prove so unmercifully just, as to recall hers. The fair Altezeera then
permitting me to kiss her hand, hastily retired into her Cabinet, lest I might
have perceived those Tears, which at once would have given the wound and the
cure. From my Princesses Apartment, I went to Lyndesia's, who perhaps with more
sorrow, but less demonstration of it, saw my departure; and because she had
then received the Picture of Udosia, my only Sister, which I was much taken
with (who had her education in a Principality that belonged to Annexander, and
who then began to disclose a Beauty, which I should without flattery have
thought unparalled, had I not seen Altezeera's and the fair Parthenissa's)
she gave it me as well to satisfy my request, as to convince the Romans, that
in one of those Nations, which their Pride called barbarous, there was a Beauty
to punish it. At last, by my Kings consent, having left the generous Phanasder
(who then declared himself a Votary to Love) my Lieutenant in Armenia, with a
small Equipage I left Thospia, and having past through Cilicia and Pamphilia, I
arrived at Lydia, where lighting upon a good Ship, I crossed the ^Egaean Sea, and
landing at Athens, which I then found as famous for her Ruins, as she had been
for her Learning, there I left one of my Domestic Servants (who I much
trusted) by reason of a great indisposition he was visited with. From Athens by
Land we traveled to Corinth, which stands upon that little Isthmos, that
separates Morea from Achaia. From Corinth we went to Seutica, from thence in a
Roman Gally, crossing the Gulf of Tyrrhene and the Ionian Sea, I came to
Terentum, but with much hazard (for your Army) at length to Rome, where I found
the virtuous Annexander had concluded the Treaty, but still continuing under
such a languishing, that my Grief for it could not transcend the Physicians
wonder at it. There I told him with repetitions, all that had happened in
Armenia, how my joys attended but my return and his recovery, to be
consummated; I showed him too the young Udozia's Picture, which he considered
with the admiration it merited, and lifting up his hands, only implored the
gods to protract his life, till he saw the fair Altezeera in my possession, and
the original of that Copy. Whilst I recided in that great City, the Fame of the
generous Artabanes so filled it, though under a name, which, (had not Fortune
loved Rome more than Virtue) he had imposed on all the Italians, that after the
defeat of Gellius and Lentulus, not only that Army which was by Annexander's
Treaty to invade Parthia under Marcus Crassus, was stopped; but Pompey who then
was as far on his return as Dyrrachium, was by diverse expresses commanded to
transport his Forces into Italy, where if he preserved the Roman Empire, he
would win more glory than he had done by so much enlarging it; But when by your
Valor and Conduct, the two Intelligences came out of Mummius and Crassus's
defeat, the Senate immediately were assembled, and though they showed a
magnanimity as great as their danger, yet I easily perceived, it proceeded more
from their dissembling than their nature. The result of that meeting was to
fortify Crassus's broken Troops, with all those which could be immediately
drawn out of Garrisons, or leavied, and to command him to put the fate of Rome
to Battle, that if the gods had destined her subversion, she might fall like
her self. The fame and necessity of this decision, drew under Crassus's
Ensigns, all the gallantry of Italy, and because we were to be companions of
fortune in another War, I resolved to be his in this, which by Annexander's
permission I was; The Roman General at my arrival in his Camp, offered me such
Commands, that I esteemed, not to have declined them, an injustice as great as
his civility, but though I refused participating in his Commission yet I could
not in his Councils and Intelligences, where I learned how Artabanes's Virtue,
which could not have been Conquered, was sold; the strange innundations which
happened then, facilitated our overtaking you, but your march to Rome so
Alarmed it, that the Senate invited Annexander to remove into the Capitol, left
the City might not prove a secure Sanctuary; but that generous Prince declined
it, to convince them, he understood their compliment as 'twas meant, which
rather to manifest their care, than their apprehension. At length that fatal
day came, wherein I lift up my profane Arm against the perfectest of Men, and
in which I had received the reward of an ignorance, I could not excuse (since I
could not attribute without injustice, the miracles Spartacus did, to any other
Sword, than that of Artabanes) had not he thought the greatest punishment was,
to show me my offense. Artabanes could not hear those civilities, without
interrupting them, which he did, to tell Artavasdes, you might more justly say
(generous Friend,) that for ignoring by your prodigious valor, who was the
master of it, and for preserving my self so long after having outlived my
defeat, you punished both those Crimes, by sparing a life, which if then taken
away, had been exempted from torments that can never cease but with it. I
believe (said Artavasdes) it will be a less trouble to you to hear the
continuation of my Adventures, than to find out matter to commend me, and in
that Faith I will prosecute them. But because the virtuous Callimachus had
heard all, till our arrival at Rome, I will from thence continue my relation.
As soon as Crassus was returned to the Senate, who denied him the honor of the
Triumph, not but that his success merited it, but because (as they said) the
persons did not against whom 'twas won, and that he himself had refused the
Ovatio-Triumph, which he esteemed as much too-low in one extreme, as his Lords
esteemed the other too-high in a contrary one; He was immediately dispatched
with his Army toward Parthia, taking Greece and the lesser Asia in his way,
and though Annexander by servent Commands, enjoined my return with the Roman
General, and to leave his death, or recovery to the gods, yet my duty submitted
to my passion, and that which made me confident that the latter would not be
suspended by the former, for above a Moon, was, the Physicians confident
assuring me within that time, Annexander would be past hope, or past danger; I
know too, that Crassus marching with a vast Army, I might give him so much
advance, and yet overtake him, before he could begin the War, besides, I
esteemed it my duty to endeavor the Prince Tygranes's deliverance, who was
daily expected at Rome, but my highest motive of continuing longer there was,
to enjoy the blessing of Artabanes's conversation, whose company made me so
much a friend to my self, and none to gratitude, as to rejoice at his wounds,
and pray against their speedy cure; and since I have begun to tell you my
crimes, I will not conceal any of them, for I was too in some manner satisfied,
that by your Kings cruelties, you were out of a capacity of commanding the War,
and of preserving him in a power to continue it, which though from thence I
promised my self success, yet my joy had not so poor a cause, but derived its
being from a certainty, that thereby I should not employ my life against the
preserver of it; all these motives the gods raised for my ruin, which happened
by my continuance in Rome, where I received a loss, which neither the Empire of
it, nor all those of the world can repair. As soon as Crassus had past the
Adriatic Sea, the same Fleet which transported his Army out of Italy, brought
Pompey's into it, he was received all the way in Triumph, but especially at
Rome, where not withstanding the generous Ventidius, and my Prayers, the
unfortunate Tygranes composed a part of it. This miserable Prince who had in
short time, resented the two greatest extremes, was no more able to endure the
latter, than he had been to keep the former; and though he were not blessed with
resolution enough to oppose the vice, yet he was to avoid the shame of it,
which he evinced, by the sad demonstration of becoming his own executioner. The
gods shall be my record, that I shed Tears of grief for the death of him, that
would have shed some of a contrary nature for mine, though too, by his fall, I
was then in a certainty of possessing Armenia, which by a legitimate
succession, was to descend to the fair Altezeera: for though Artabazus had a
Son called Artaxias, and that he was born after his Master was Crowned Queen,
yet being be gotten unlawfully (which blemish the King esteemed the Marriage
would deface) all the Armenian Nobility considered him rather as their Princes
shame, than his successor, especially too, when to be unjust to Altezeera, was
to be so unto themselves, since to have declined her rule, was to have declined
the rule of Virtue. But though Tygranes died not like a Prince, yet he was
interred like one, and no sooner were the solemnities finished of that Funeral,
than I fell into so violent a sickness, that Ventidius, who never was from my
Bedside, believed my own would be the next to be celebrated; neither for above
half a Moon, could he find any cause to retract that opinion; but asson as my
amendment began to dissipate his fears, I assumed them for him, and indeed, to
the best of my memory, I never observed so strange an alteration in so short a
time; For that quickness in his look, which was admired, where ever it was
seen, now was as much for the change, his Eyes were dull, and languishing, his
humor was resembling them, his discourses were as void of reason, as formerly
they had been replenished with it; in a word, I cannot describe the condition
he then was in, than to the contrary in which I first had the honor to know
him; I suspected a while his care and continual watching, had created the
alteration, and in that faith I apprehended the clearing of my doubts: but lest
I might by ignoring the occasion of his disorder, not offer him my assistance
to suppress it, I cast out some oblique words, which might acquaint him with my
desires, but he was so far from esteming them a Rise to disclose his pain, that
he continued in a perfect silence, from all things but sighs. This proceeding
induced me to believe his sufferings were for me, because he appeared so
unwilling to discover them to me; I therefore told him, I was apprehensive his
care of, had created mine for him. Yes Artavasdes (he replied, with a
languishing accent) my care of you makes me take none of my self, nor deserve
it, and then with Eyes big with Tears, he left me; but my admiration at it, did
not for three days, during which time he never gave me the favor of a visit.
So strange a proceeding had cast me into a relapse, but that I esteemed my
health necessary to find Ventidius out, and learn what the avoiding me, and my
sickness, gave me no hopes otherwise to expect. But the evening of the fourth
day, as I lay slumbering on my Bed, Ventidius came into my Chamber, so softly,
that I heard him not, and had not some groans, whose violence he could not
suppress, given me notice of his being there, I had, by not knowing his
torment, longer continued it; he seated himself by a Table, on which he leaned
both his Elbows, and his Cheeks upon his Hands, his Eyes were fixed upon some
object I could not discover, though I could all things else he did, by gently
opening of the Curtain. I had not been long in expectation, but mine was
rewarded by Ventidius's saying with a low voice, Oh gods! is it possible that a
Liberty and a Friendship, I have hitherto preserved, and gloried in, should be
destroyed, by that which, perhaps, is only an effect of Art; and not of Nature,
and which (may be) has an existence only in the sight? but (he continued, after
a short silence) thy fate is not singular, thou have heard of a Pigmalion and a
Narcissus; the follies of which were not as great, as of those that condemned
them; for Beauty is only that which passes the eyes, and the madness is not as
high to adore a moveless red and white, adorned with perfect Symetry of Parts,
and though dead, has a lively Air, and Vivacity, as to have a passion for an
Inhabitant of a Clime, where the Suns brightness engendered their obscurity,
and makes a constant night dwell upon their Faces; were there set rules for
Beauty, the World would have but one Mistress, and their Fancies are more
extravagant that dote upon a Face, they seldom see, and never but armed with
Frowns, where (were I one of their Votaries) that which demonstrates their
cruelty, should render it more than mine, who can enjoy my Mistriss's Beauty
without fearing my presumption should cloud it: where I can breathe my passion
without apprehending any punishment; and if silence be consent, without
suspecting a denial; I fear nor Age nor Sickness to impair the object of my
Flame: I can excuse my Love by all ways demonstrating the Creator of it, when
others in a few years, must be obliged to our Faiths, to believe they were not
as blind as the Boy they worshipped; and their felicity consists in, (what I
should esteem a torment) the remembrance of what they have been, whereas mine
consist in the possession of what it is; Their Summer must admit of an Autumn,
mine is a Spring that is continual, and though indeed it bears nothing but
leaves, yet those do never fall, and for all those advantages, I am deprived of
nothing but fruition, which some have determined, and found rather a cure, than
a reward of Love. This I have to say, if it be only a Picture, but oh gods!
what can I, if it be a Copy? (as certainly it is for Nature surpas^es Art) and
it is a greater miracle that Man should fancy such a perfection, than that the
gods should create it. But alas, ( Ventidius continued, folding his Arms, and
hanging down his Head) 'twere more for thy felicity that this were a Fancy,
than a reality, for thou might with greater confidence and hope, expect a
resignation from Artavasdes of the former, than if it were the latter; and be
better satisfied with the possession of a less happiness, by the gallantry of
thy Friend, than the greatest, by the crime of becoming his Rival. I could
(said Artavasdes) have longer listened to his rational extravagancies, had I
not esteemed it a Sin to build my diversion upon my Friend's sufferings, but as
I was about to silence them, I heard him say, what Ventidius? is Love then
really capable of that mystery which Lovers ascribe unto it? the changing of
Hearts? and have thou already so effemitate a one, as to apprehend with
tremblings, to disclose thy condition to thy Friend? If he be not virtuous
enough to excuse thy Sin; be thou to punish it? and by the gallantry of thy
performance, make him acknowledge, that to have continued his Rival, had been a
less injury than so to have removed him. Then rising up, I perceived in his
Hand, an enameled Box, covered with Diamonds, which soon made me know, 'twas
Vdosia's Picture, which had created this violent conflict. I made a little
noise, to let him know I was awake, which he no sooner heard, than he came to
my Bedside, where kneeling down, he opened the case in a perfect Agony, and
asked me, Artavasdes, do you love this Picture? Yes (I replied) but the
Original much better. Oh gods (said he) then you cannot any longer love
Ventidius. You are mistaken (I replied) and to evince that Truth, I give you my
permission to love it too; Alas (he replied) you may do that without fear, when
you continue my Rival, for she must have as much imbecility as beauty, should
she, for the unfortunate Ventidius, decline the happy Artavasdes. I know (said
I, smiling) nothing of her, but what you see, and that her name is Udosia,
Great gods! (said Ventidius, starting up) how came you then by her Picture? and
are you then the courted Party? No (I replied) I am confident, of all the world
she would not have Artavasdes for her Husband, and yet I believe there is few
she loves better. My reason (said Ventidius) is as much lost in those words, as
my liberty to the subject of them. I hope (I replied) I have given you so much
satisfaction, as not to suspect me your Rival: If I have not already, I protest
by your inviolable friendship, of all the Women in the world, I would not make
Udozia my Wise, and much less endeavor, or hope to enjoy her, by an
illegitimate way. You confound me (said Ventidius) as much as she does, and if
you delighted not to torment your Friend, you would not so long continue my
suspension. I will finish it (said I, embracing him) with an assurance, that if
you can like the Original as well as the Copy, she shall be Ventidius's; as an
earnest of which truth, I acquaint you she is my Sister. He that could describe
the generous Romans ecstasies and joys, must have resented them; for I that saw
them cannot, but when they were enough diminished, to continue our discourses,
I told him, he had said so many pertinent things of a Passion for a Picture,
that I conjured him to accept of Udozia's, that when time had ruined her
Beauty, he might preserve something to extenuate his extravagancy. Ventidius a
thousand times kissed the Present, and as many times embraced me for the
bestowing it; I then told him, 'twas not amiss to let Annexander know of his
design, whilst he resided in Rome, that he might be the more certain of
Udozia's Passion, which he could not doubt, when it would be both an effect of
her judgment, and her Duty. No (said Ventidius) I will ask her more handsomely
than so, for I will at the head of 50000 Romans, come and implore her in
Armenia, she shall see under my Ensigns, Forces that will give her by their
Virtue, those Kingdoms hers do merit, and which my birth denied me; for I will
not presume to declare my self her Servant, till I can wear Crowns of Laurel,
and present her with those of Empire. Yes, generous Artavasdes, I now repent my
self I declined that Army (afterward conferred on Crassus) but now I have the
ambition to Command, I shall not long be without one; I will make Glory my
Advocate as well as you, and it is fit I should be miserable, did I expect any
other way to felicity. To contract my narration; after I had assured Ventidius,
I would so fill Udozia's Breast with the Character of his Virtue, that she
should be as much taken with his Fame, as he was with her Picture, and that he
did injure her to talk of Kingdoms, after she was Ventidius's, he retired
himself in such raptures of joy, that in few days, he returned to his former
health. But alas! I was no sooner to mine, than the gods cast me into a
relapse, whose cause was worse than the disease: 'Twas the death of Annexander,
to which misfortune I paid so many Tears, that I thought (though falsely) their
storc had been exhausted; never did any death more convince me, there was
another Life than his; for had not he been satisfied of that truth, he could
not have yielded himself up to eternal Ashes, with so absolute a resignation.
Great Gods! (continued Artavasdes) why did you not then acquaint me how
miserable I was, that I might have left the World when Annexander did? and have
had so sure a way to eternal Felicity, as the following of him, and that in the
effects of my Duty, I might have found those of your Mercy: But alas, you had
destin d me to be as unparalled in suffering, as in Love: and thereby (I
hope) instructed me, there is a reward in another world, since my constancy is
denied one in this. [These passionate words, both Artabanes and Callimachus
sympathiz'd in, which made Artavasdes the sooner finish them, which he did by
thus resuming his discourse, after he had begged their pardon for having
interrupted.] Before Annexander's Funeral, by passionate persuasions of one of
his most confident Servants, I caused his Body to be opened, wherein (alas) I
too visibly found, he was sent to the gods by the wickedness of Men, which
being not discovered (during his life) made me not wonder that the Senate had
once expelled the Physicians out of Rome, for in this experiment, I found,
'twas their ignorance, and not their profession which was banished; but this sad
misfortune and discovery, with my impossibility of disclosing the poysoner,
cast me into a violent Fever, wherein, though those we adore, were not so
merciful as to end my Miseries and my Life, yet they were so just as to
discover, who wickedly would have been so charitable: for I had retained all my
Fathers Domestics, and being prescribed after my Physic, the drinking of some
Broth, as it stood warming by the fire, one of those little Dogs which are so
common, and so much cherisht in Rome, came and lapp'd it all up, but no sooner
had he been my Taster, than he began to reel, then to swell, and at last fell
dead by the Bedside. This happened whilst Ventidius was present, who
remembering how Annexander died, inquired of Philanax, who had made the Broth,
and having learnt it was one of my Fathers Cooks, he immediately went down,
seized upon him, and presented his naked Poniard to his Breast, in the
apprehension of death, he discovered that which made him desire, and think it a
happiness, but as he was ready to expire, observing Ventidius and Philanax were
spectators of his execution, he begged, and obtained leave to speak with them
privately, where he told them, that to dis-burthen his Conscience of a load,
which might sink it into eternal darkness, he acknowledge'd that 'twas he by a
lingering poison, had murdered Annexander, and that he had been hired to that
sin by Crassolis. This intelligence, (after Justice had past on the Criminal)
the only knowers of it told me, I kept it private, lest the Traitor, by the
knowledge of the discovery, might avoid the punishment of it. But though I had
in one Moon, cast off my sickness, yet I did not recover my health, and was
told, should not till I changed the Air. Ventidius immediately offered me a
magnificent Palace of his, which stood by the Sea side, within the Gulf of
Tarentum, whither I went, after having took leave of the generous Artabanes,
who I could not persuade to remove thither, till his wounds were perfectly
cured, and unto whom I promised to return, that I might enjoy the felicity of
his company, as far as Armenia, but I never had the blessing to see him since,
till by his Presence I not only received my Life, but the relish of it too.
Some ten days after my arrival at Ventidius's, by that excellent Air, I
recovered strength enough to walk abroad, and as we were diverting our selves
by the Seaside, we saw a Gally cast Anchor in the Road, and mann out a Boat to
land her Passengers, where, to my admiration, I found one of them was the
gallant Falintus, who at first seeing me, put on a joyful Look, which his Face
was so little accustomed to, that I observed, it was soon expelled, as an
intruder. But oh gods! why do I protract the disclosing my miseries, since I
complain their having given me no more, is a misfortune, because formerly they
have given me so many? Yes ( Artabanes) 'twas Falintus told me, that Artabazus
had displaced Phanasder as soon as I was gone: that by discontenting so gallant
a Man, he had lost the Hearts of all those which bore that Title: That he had
lost a great Battle to Arsaces and Pacorus: his Army being led by one of
Crassolis's creatures, who the common Soliers had sacrificed to their Fury (to
rob the Parthians of the Glory of an entire victory, by acting of a part of it
themselves:) That Artabazus, Lindesia, and Altezeera, had been shut up in
Thospia: and (oh gods! that I live to tell it!) that the last,

Here the miserable Artavasdes had not fortitude enough to resist the
remembrance of his loss, but abandoned himself to effeminacies, which made both
Artabanes and Callimachus more pity, than condemn them.

The generous Armenian was above half an hour, ever he could dry up his Tears,
or silence his sighs, but as soon as he had gotten the victory of those
Passions, which had so lately gotten it of him, he made use of it to continue
his Story, which he thus did, with the sorrow and attention of the Hearers.

PARTHENISSA.
THE THIRD PART.
BOOK II.
IEndeavour'd to tell you (said Artavasdes) in Epitomy, the effects of
Falintus's intelligence, because I thought the remembrance of those miseries,
would have denied me the possibility of their full relation; but now I find,
that those gods which gave me the fortitude to bear my affictions, will give me
too, that of repeating them. I will deduce the Story from its Original, not
only because I esteem the strange changes, and intricacies, it is replenished
with, worthy your attention, but that by the knowledge of my sufferings, I may
be obliged to your reason as much as goodness, to pardon those esseminacies,
which I believe (only, and then absolutely) excusable, when you learn their
cause. You may remember, I told you that I met the generous Falintus at his
Landing, as Ventidius and I was diverting our selves upon a pleasant Strand,
not far from his Palace; where Falintus desired me to retire, since his
intelligence was of a length, which by continuing where I was, might impair a
health he found by my looks was but newly restored; I obeyed this request, and
we were no sooner returned, than locking our selves up in my Cabinet, Falintus
addressing his discourse to me, began it in these words.

As soon as you were so far from Armenia, as Crassolis was confident you could
not receive intelligence time enough to repent his practices; the first he
disclosed, was, the annihilating the gallant Phanasder's Commission, and the
conferring it on a Creature of his own, both which he effected by the unlimited
power he has over his King, and though Altezeera and Orodes too, were
unsatisfied with it, yet the latter had been more to have declined his
Favorites Council; but no sooner was Phanasder retired to his Government, than
Pacorus, with all the Gallantry of Parthia (which by Pompey's precipitate
return to Rome, was safely united in one Body) presented himself on the Banks
of Euphrates, absolutely determind'd to repeat, or repair his disgrace; some
were of opinion, that Phanasders displacing, gave him the invitation to invade
us; others thought he began the War upon intelligence of Annexander's Treaty at
Rome, with hopes to determine it before Crassus could come either to divert
him, or assist us; whether the causes were great I know not, but I am sure the
success was, for the Armenian Army, consisting of those who sought for Pay, and
not for Glory (all of the latter quality, having flung up their Commission with
Phanasder) and the General being one, whose sudden elevation had astonished
him, the Armenians in the first Battle, were rendered incapable of a second,
for they left above 40000 on the place, but that which diminished the loss, was
the addition of one unto it, their General. This Victory being too infamous to
be insisted on, I will pass it over, to tell you the effects it produced: one
of the first, was the invironing of Tygranocerta (near which it was won) next
morning with an Army of 30000 Horse; where the King (with the Princess in his
company) had removed, the better to act upon any emergency; But Artabazus found
himself no sooner besieged, than he repented (but would not repair) his injury
to Phanasder's Authority, and to yours, which was violated in his. As soon as
the news was divulged in Parthia, that Artabazus was besieged, with as little
hope of relief as resistance; Arsaces came in person to Tygranocerta, where he
solemnly protested, he would be revenged for the Blood of his Subjects at
Offala, and for Artabazus's having hired the Romans to his destruction. The
gallant Phanasder, at the intelligence of the Kings misfortune, forgets his
injury to remember his duty: neither were the ties of Friendship and Love, less
invitations, to his performances, the first of those were on your score to the
Princess Altezeera, and the latter on his own, to the Princess Theoxcena, to
whom Tygranocerta not only belonged, but was then the place of her residence;
and who indeed was blessed with such charms, both of the Body and Mind, that
Phanasder was as unable as unwilling to resist them. But why do I so much abuse
the fair Theoxcena, and my self, as to endeavor to give you a description of a
person, that is above any? and who, if I be not much mistaken, you did
assiduously visit in your Friends favor, a little before you left Armenia. I
must confess, (I reply d) that as^oon as Phanasder had acquainted me with his
Passion, I acquainted Theoxcena with it, and with the merit of her Servants; of
which she was so absolutely convinced, that upon that score, she not only
pardoned, but received his Flame, and being at his own disposal, she thought no
argument could more evince how much she merited that liberty, than to give her
self to Phanasder, without those nice formalities, authorized rather from
Custom than Reason; and besides, she esteemed it both an injury to her own
election, and her Servants Virtues, only to be satisfied of their greatness, by
time. This generous declaration, my concern in my Friend, and his impatience,
made me the more sollicitous before my departure, to bring this affair to a
conclusion, which might be incapable of change. I believe (said Falintus) you
have so well effected that design, that if all her Sex were as constant as
Theoxcena, I had been exempted from an employment, which I detest, though in it
you may find, I will decline nothing for your Service, since I do it not, when
it is to your trouble: But whilst Phanasder was levying of Forces to hinder, or
at least protract the loss of Tygranocerta, he received an advertisement from
thence, that his Kings Fear or Weakness, had made him already offer to
capitulate with Arsaces, upon terms so low, that an absolute ruin had been a
fitter election, who yet returned him word, That he fought not for Glory, but
Revenge and Empire, and therefore the destruction, and not the submission of
his Enemies, should be the evincement of his success; This answer made
Phanasder conclude, that either Arsaces's cruelty, or advantage was great, and
to hinder both, (finding that to raise an Army, would be a work of time, and
consequently of danger,) with 3000 select Horse, he advanced toward
Tygranocerta, and at noonday passing over the Bellies of as many Parthians,
with the loss of 300, entered the Town, and so much revived the Besieged's
hopes, and the Kings goodness, that the former cast away their fears, and the
latter his ingratitude, There Theoxcena's reception of her Servant, was more
full of satisfaction to him, than the Triumph; but that all our enemies might
know, as well as hear of the relief; Phanasder and I, (for I had the honor to
be with him, and to compose a third part of his Forces) made such brisk and
successful Sallies, that though the number of the Fighters hindered them from
the name of Battles, yet the number of the Dead would have made them thought
so; which so transported Arsaces, that he solemnly protested, Tyranocerta
should be either his Tomb, or Artabazus's, and it may be we had made him keep
the first part of his Vow, had not the Divine Sword destroyed more Lives, than
the Parthian; for not long after our flinging our selves into Tygranocerta,
there fell into it from Heaven (if such a Curse can come from thence) a
Mortality of so strange nature, that nothing hardly could prove a preservative
for the Sound, or a cure for the Infected; so that to be Sick, and to be Dead,
were the same; This strange contagion so suddenly devoured our Forces, that
Phanasder himself consented to capitulate, but our Enemies knew too well our
conditions, to grant us any; so that many began to think that Plague no
misfortune. But Phanasder to make Arsaces believe, both his intelligence, and
his hopes were false, placing the Women on the Walls, with all the Men, and
Gallantry of the Garrison, he made so furious a Sally, that above 4000
Parthians were sent into the other World, to lament their Kings being
inexorable in this: and doubtless we had carried our success, to the height of
making him as much need our humanity, as we did his, had not the Prince Pacorus
(passing with all his Army over a Bridge of Boats on the River Nicephorus,
which separated the City and the two Camps) come, not only to his Fathers
r^ief, but rescue; for Phanasder had taken Arsaces with his own hand: but as he
was retreating with the Father, the Son fell with all his fresh Troops on ours
(which were tired and shattered) and forced, not only the King, but the
Victory from us; though Phanasder not to lose his Prisoner, did almost his
Life, for he received some such unhappy wounds, that making the retreat with
our Swords, just as he was entered the Gates, he tottered upon his Horse, and
had doubtless fallen, but that I caught him in my Arms, till further help came
to carry him to his Bed, whither he was no sooner brought, than my wounds, as
dangerous as his, sunk me down into a swound by him. And though his Action was
great, yet because his success was not, he fell into so deep a melancholy and
despair, that nothing but Theoxcena's safety (which she protested was involved
in his,) could induce him to permit the Surgeons, to search and dress his
wounds. Arsaces on the other side, assumed a rage as great, as the danger he
had lately, been in, and by reiterated vows, left himself as little power, as
will to be merciful. Pacorus having received the Elogy due to his Sucess and
Gallantry, returned to his own Camp, from whence that day he had not moved, but
that those which were to give him a false Alarm, did it so unfortunately, that
their intention was both discovered, and punished; but though their loss in the
Parthian Armies were great; yet their joys were so too, for they considered
our last attempt, as if it were to have been so; neither indeed were they false
Prophets in that conjecture, for the Soldiers by losing Phanasder, not only
lost their Leader, but their Inspirer; and before his wounds permitted him the
power of revenging them, or increasing their number, those of the Garrison were
so diminished, that he could hardly command, or obey any but himself. In this
extremity, when we expected a general ruin, we found a general safety. The
gods be praised, (I cried out, interrupting him, (for though I were not
present, yet I was a sufferer in the Danger.) Ah (Sir, said Falintus) you are
too prodigal of your Gratitude, for when you are instructed in the cause of our
preservation, I fear it will involve you in greater troubles, than we were
freed from; but not to anticipate your griefs, I will tell you my Story in
order. The same day in which Phanasder purchased so much Glory, and so little
advantage, amongst many of the Armenians, which then received their Fate,
Crassolis's only Son was pierced with so many wounds, that though we made our
retreat with so flow a pace, that we might have fetched off any of our wounded,
yet that young Gentleman was so mortally, that none of his Friends, esteemed
him worthy the carrying home, or declined the doing it, out of an apprehension
of reviving his Fathers affliction, by so sad an object. This unfortunate Youth
fell to the share of one of Pacorus's Favorites, whose Servants having
stripped him of his Apparel, found about his Neck, a Box, all set with
Diamonds, which contained within it the Picture of a Beauty, more bright than
those Stones that covered it; This Excellence they presented to their Lord, and
he esteeming it one, did the like to his Prince, who no sooner saw the Picture,
but he became as moveless as it, and continued in that ecstasy till he broke
it, to learn who 'twas it represented; but therein he found all about him, as
ignorant as himself, and suspecting, their silence proceeded from their
knowledge, not their ignorance, he told his Favorite; It Is in vain Labienus,
it is in vain, now to conceal who it is has wounded me, for were her extraction
as far below my Blood, as her Beauty is above my adoration: were she an Enemy
as well to my Nature, as my Flame; nor these, nor as many obstacles as she has
charms shall deterr me from my Passion, whose greatness none can condemn,
without declaring himself as much an enemy to Reason, as to Pacerus; do not
therefore add so much to the affliction of my Love, as to conceal who has
inspired it, for though I should never learn who is my Conqueror, yet I must
always give her that Name, and carry the effects of her power, though I should
never behold the Possessor of it. All that heard these extravagancies, were
perfectly ignorant of her name, which created them, but one of those who had
shared in the rifling of Crassolis's Son, after his Companions were gone, found
some weak symptoms of life in him, and either out of Charity or Avarice,
endeavored to preserve what he thought was not absolutely hopeless; toward
which he had caused his Prisoner and Patient, to be transported into his Tent,
and being by profession a Surgeon, had so well practiced his Art, that young
Crassolis began to open his Eyes, and at last to recover his Senses; but the
first thing he did when they were restored, was to search for his Picture,
which he no sooner mist, than he began to tear his wounds, to open a passage
for a Soul, which detested its dwelling after (and seemed to sympathize in) so
sensible a loss. This strange extravagancy, made the only witness of it enquire
the cause, which he had no sooner learnt, than he told him, how the richness of
the Case, had perhaps, made him lose what it contained, but if he would be
contented with the Picture, he would endeavor the restitution. Alas (said the
young Crassolis) the Picture is all I desire, and to invite you to restore it,
I do faithfully engage my self to give you as many Diamonds as can be pil'd
upon it. This large reward made him to whom it was offered, fly to his
Companion to acquaint him with it, who he found about Pacorus, when he was in
the torment of so unhappy an ignorance, which the Surgeon perceiving, and
deploring, punctually acquainted him with all he knew, which immediately when
the Prince had learnt, bidding his Treasurer give him higher rewards, than the
prisoner could Master of, he commanded him to conduct him to his dying Rival,
whither they were no sooner come, than the wounded Gentleman haftily asked for
the satisfaction of his hopes, but Pacorus permitted not his Guide to reply,
and enjoined all which were present to retire, and then presenting himself with
much civility to the Picture, begged him to tell him if he knew whose it was?
oh gods (said the young Crassolis) it is mine? and were but my Health as good as
my Title, who ever you are, you should lose it, or I would my life. Truly (said
Pacorus) I place as high a value on this excellent Copy, as you are capable to
do, and would not be deprived of it at a lower price, but that you may know I
esteem, and do not hate my Rivals (for then I should all Men) I will inform you
my name is Pacorus, and that I have both Force and Authority to punish your
threatenings, did not I excuse them upon the same account, which I hope you
will, my detention of both our Conquerors. Ah Sir (said the prisoner) if you
deprive me of my Picture and not of my Life, you are as cruel in the latter, as
in the former, and will be as severe in your Mercy, as in your Injustice; for
you must permit me so to call your making that Excellence your Prisoner. Alas
it is I (said Pacorus) that am hers. If you were, (replied the other) you would
not be her Besieger. Oh gods, said the Prince, somewhat surpised) is she then
within Tygranocerta? and have they made me so miserable a creature, as to
endeavor to destroy what I should, and do adore? No (continued Pacorus,
lifting up his Eyes and Hands) I invoke the higher powers to manifest theirs in
my confusion, if the fair object of my flame be within those Walls, if ever I
shed any blood near them, but for their defense. Great gods! (the Prisoner
cried out) could I believe this Profession, how happy were my ruin; and how
full of satisfaction my death, if it might contribute to the preservation of a
Beauty, whose perfections and cruelty, cannot transcend my Passion? Yes, said
the Prince,) falling upon his knees) I do here repeat my former protestation,
and implore the gods to fill this Excellency, as full of Ice, as she has me
with Fire, and to make me hated as much as I do love, if I do not consider my
Father as an Enemy, if he continues hers, and leave him no way to act his
revenge, but through his Son. I believe you (Sir) I believe you, (said the
wounded Gentleman, kissing Pacorus's Hands for joy) since to doubt so strange a
change, were to doubt her power that causes it, who has evinced upon me in
particular, that it is as much above being limited, as resisted; for she has
inspired me with a Passion without hope, the greatest miracle but that which
created it. I know (said the impatient Pacorus, interrupting him) what her
Beauty is, more by the effects, than I can by the description. I will tell you,
(the other replied) that the goddess of it, is the Princess Altezeera, and
though I look upon her as my future Queen, yet I find she has a greater
Sovereignty over me by her Eyes, than her Birth, and I resent more despair from
the greatness of her perfections, than from that of her quality. This
confession, nothing but a certainty of death could have disclosed, and if I
should have been so miserable, as to be mistaken in my conjecture, I am certain
I shall not be in my resolution, which will prove constant enough to punish the
discovery of a secret, which neither the tortures of a fruitless Love, nor
Flames as great as my presumption, has, or could extort from me. Yes (Sir) I
will tell you my short and unfortunate Story, I saw the Princess Altezeera, and
consequently adored her, but with a Silence as great as my Passion; the height
of my aspiring was to languish, and consume in that devotion, and because I
suspected my Eyes might discover my Heart, or my Actions, what I knew my words
should not, having some skill in Limning, by a thousand stolen opportunities,
and by an Idea which was always present, I drew this Picture, whose Eyes being
disarmed of their light, by these faint Colors, omitted me to contemplate
without dazzling, what I could not in the Divine Original. This is my highest
crime, and so much I adore what I love, that I shall esteem her the highest
Mercy if she pardons it; But (Sir) if ever the gods so bless your Flame, as to
make the Princess Altezeera the reward of it, and that your discourses lead you
to remember the occasion which made you first a Lover, do not mention my
unfortunate fire, with that scorn the ambition of it merits, but with some
resentment of that voluntary death I have embraced, out of a sense of my
presumption; Let the remembrance too, of that safety it will give her, and of
that blessing it will for you be instrumental in, extinguish a Fault, for which
I extinguish my Life, and though I am your Rival, yet the way in which I am so,
being a sufficient punishment for having been so. The poor Gentleman was able
to proceed no further, for either the enlarging his wounds upon the loss of
Altezeera's Picture; the despair of repossessing it; the apprehension of
out-living the discovery of his Passion; or the joy of his Death being like to
prove the preservation of his Princesses Life; cast him into a swound, from
which, all Pacorus's help, nor the Surgeons, could recall him any longer,
than to beg the Prince not to fight against his Conqueror; which he had no
sooner said, than an eternal silence closed up his Lips. Pacorus was so
generous as to celebrate his death with some Tears and Sighs, excusing his
crime by the knowledge of what created it, which by experiment he found, was of
a quality, that to avoid was far more difficult, than to imitate; but the last
summons of his dead Rival made him immediately go into his Fathers Camp, where
finding him busy about his approaches, and all the assistants withdrawing
themselves out of respect, he told Arsaces, after some other common discourses;
Would it had pleased the gods (Sir) to have given you an employment, more
suitable to your inclination and quality, than this you are now upon; for you
only labor for that which is already effected, and cannot be more successful
than you are, without rendering your self less worthy of it; Your Sword (Sir)
has made Artabazus confess he is vanquished, let not therefore his ruin do it;
If he makes any resistance, it is you give him that power, and by giving him
despair, you give him resolution: you have conquered him already by force, do
it again by humanity, make a King your friend, by declining making him your
Vassal: to conquer your self is a greater victory than to conquer one you have
already conquered; and the Romans hereby will apprehend a power, that has
vanquished both Arsaces, and Artabazus, together. I will not (said Falintus)
tell you all Pacorus's reasons, since they appeared none to his Father, who
esteemed the best advantage of a victory, was, to win, and not to merit a
Kingdom; and indeed that violent Prince was so far from pardoning his Enemies,
that he almost reckoned Pacorus in their number, for making so merciful a
Proposal. In the horrors of this denial he returned to his Tent, where after he
had spent an hour in the highest disorders that ever man was capable of, on a
sudden his Face assumed a joy, which Labienus (who only was present) knew not
unto what to ascribe it; but it sprung from a cause, which raised Gallantry to
a height, it never knew before; and if Altezeera's constancy could have been
capable of excuse, this performance had been a sufficient one for her new
Lover, finding Arsaces unremovable, by his having given him a flat refusal of
what he even begged with Tears, which till then he never had; That generous
Prince, the night before a general Assault was to be given, the breach being
wide enough, and wanting hands to defend it, (accompanied only by Labienus his
Confident) as if he went to view it, came into Tygranocerta by it, and having
delivered himself up to the Guards, desired them to bring him to the Princess
Altezeera, to whom he said, he had some affairs of singular importance to
impart; The Captain which commanded the Post, immediately brought him to the
Palace, where the Princess (who then was with her Brother at their Devotions,
expecting never to see another night, but an eternal one) being informed that a
Gentleman of quality (which both his Mien and Clothes spoke him) was stolen
from the Camp, to give her an intelligence, came into a great Hall to receive
it, but as soon as she appeared, the poor Pacorus found how short Art had been
of Nature, and that if he had had cause to love the Picture, he had more to
adore and admire the original; though some few days before, either an
indisposition, or some other Melancholy, had cast her into a Fever, which but
then she had got out of; but there is a Beauty in Lillies, as well as in Roses,
and that little paleness did but better set off the blackness of her Eyes,
which shot so piercing, and bright a Flame into the trembling Parthians heart,
that his silence, and disorder gave the fair Altezeera as great an
astonishment, as her Beauty had him. But his being somewhat dissipated, he
esteemed the making an Apology, for that fault was a greater than he had
committed, since his offense was of a quality which carried its justification
with it; therefore with as much Grace as Humility, he only told Altezeera,
Madam, He which has employed a part of his life against you, presents unto you
all of it, and will esteem your Pardon a Cruelty, if you preserve his, but to
employ it perpetually in your service: Yes Madam, you have now in your power,
the criminal Pacorus, who opposed your Brother's Arms, but he neither had the
power, nor the desire to resist yours, to which he renders his mind as much a
Prisoner, as his Body: Judge then (fair Princess) of the authority of my
Conqueror, who extends her power over that which is immaterial, and has no
existence, but in speculation; Punish (Madam) Arsaces's cruelty in Arsaces's
Son, or if what I have done, induces you to believe, though I am allied to him,
yet I am not to his crimes; show it, I beseech you, by commanding me to oppose
it at the breach, that if he enter, it may be through me, and so necessitate
him to a Victory, he must celebrate in Tears, as well as Blood; My life which
has been so often employed against you, cannot expiate that sin, but by being
sacrificed for you; however, you have now wherewithal to make (or rather to
impose) your conditions on Orodes, who perhaps, had rather lose Armenia, than
Pacorus. Oh gods! (continued Falintus) is it possible to tell you the fair
Altezeera's wonder and surprise, all the while the Prince of Parthia was
speaking? No no, it is not, for were it describable, it would be less than it
was, but left he might from some strange belief of her perplexities and
silence, she told him. Whatsoever (Sir) you ascribe your coming hither unto, I
must not to your submission, but to your power, which is more evinced by
entering this City alone than with an Army, or else perhaps, it is to increase
the Ardor of yours by joining the liberty of their Prince, to the winning of
Tygranocerta. Ah Madam (said Pacorus) I have so lost my liberty, that it lies
as little in my Armies Power, as in my own Will to recover it, and if I have
flung my self within these Walls, 'twas rather to deterr the Parthians from
entering them, than to incite them to it; you reign too absolutely in my heart,
not to know this Truth, and if you desire I shall dye fighting against Arsaces,
it is rather to satisfy your revenge, than you doubts; but if I am so
unfortunate, as not to fall in your defense, you have still wherewith to act
your revenge; Your Beauty gives you as much the power, as my past crimes gives
you the justice. Since (said Altezeera) you will have me believe you are come
to preserve those you have hitherto endeavored to destroy, I will do it; but
it proceeds more from my obedience, than my Reason, though I must acknowledge,
I have had so high a Character of the Prince Pacorus's Gallantry, that I should
have thought him capable of all, but this which he has now acted, and which is
of a Nature, that to suspect, it is too great to be true, is to oblige it when
it proves so. Madam, (the Prince replied) if you suspect my Professions, but to
invite me to evince their reallities by my actions, you will as much oblige me
upon that score, as injure me, if your doubts proceed from any other. Whilst
the Princess and Pacorus were thus discoursing, Labienus was brought to
Artabazus, to whom he told his Princes Story, and how by giving him Altezeera,
he had not only wherewith to save his Crown for the present, but to secure it
in the future. The King, at so unpresidented an accident, was cast into
admirations, as great as his fears, but having reflected a while, both on the
Virtue of Pacorus's performance, and on the advantage of his Alliance; he gave
Labienus an answer which gave him large hopes; for he was concerned in his
Princes felicity, and by having seen Altezeera, he found his Passion was as
commendable, as great; but Artabazus esteeming it high time to visit his
voluntary Prisoner, went with Labienus to him, and found, his person was as
handsome as his action. There Pacorus, by reiterated, and passionate
expressions, implored a Pardon for a Crime, which his ignorance made him
commit, and which his knowledge did sufficiently revenge. 'Twas in discourses
of that quality they spent the residue of the night, and the day no sooner
appeared, than Arsaces Army stormed the breach, and thereby gave so hot an
Allarm, that it came to his Sons hearing, who hastily told Altezeera; That Life
(Madam) which has been employed against you, shall now serve to preserve you,
or else shall be lost for having been too-active, and too-impotent, farewell
fair Altezeera, you shall find I will shed my Blood for you, with greater
confidence than I dare tell you so. Then saluting the King with much humility,
but his Sister with much more, he put on his Helmet, and followed by Labienus
and some Armenians, he ran where the noise and danger called him, which was
indeed great, and had not his Courage and Fortune been so too, we had lost
Tygranocerta, and he his Life; but though he performed things as worthy wonder,
as relation, yet all had been fruitless, had he not by lifting up his Helmet,
and telling his Name, struck such a reverence and damp into the Parthians, that
they made a general stand in the way of victory, and suspended their bloody
Arms in the Air; which Pacorns observing, though his wounds were many, and
dangerous; yet leaning on his Sword in the mouth of the breach, he forced
himself to tell them; These wounds, valiant Parthians, which I have hitherto
received, carry your excuse, in your ignorance, but those you hereafter give
me, must be sins of design, and consequently pierce me deeper, than your
Swords; neither can you avoid this crime, but by retiring to your Camp, for
whoever makes his passage into Tygranocerta, must do it thorough his Prince,
who commands you by that duty you owe him, and which he will abundantly reward,
to return to Arsaces, and to let him know, that by becoming an enemy to the
Princess Altezeera, he has made Pacorus his; That if he values his Sons safety,
he must demonstrate it by his care of hers; which if by a repeated Assault, he
endeavors to endanger, I will draw my Army in for to maintain it, and esteem
the crime of opposing my King, and my Father, a lesser than his, which
necessitates me to it; and if at last I have not force to resist his, I will
not want it to end a Life upon a breach, which it was so unfortunate as not to
defend. Do not believe, (he continued) that this Declaration is dictated by
heat, or passion; no, it proceeds from a just and digested resolution, and if
either Arsaces, or you, do doubt the contrary, and that these wounds do not
sufficiently manifest this Truth, I will by so bloody an experiment, convince
both him, and you of it, that perhaps your griefs shall be as large as your
doubts. These words spoke with grace and vehemence, and the great respect all
the Parthians paid Pacorus, wrought a proportionate effect; many were willing
to obey his Commands, others which knew his disposition, apprehended to
prosecute a victory, which could not succeed, without losing more than they
could win in it, and some who thought to have seen their Prince at the head of
their Troops, killing the Armenians, were so surpiz'd to find him at the head
of his Enemies, killing his Servants, that their wonder made them obedient, and
observing Pacorus's Army had not stormed, contrary to their Orders (for I
omitted to tell you, he had given them express commands, not to draw out of
their Camp, whatsoever they heard, till they did so, either from himself or
Labienus) they began to suspect there was some intricacy in the business, which
their prosecuting any further, might discover to their ruin, or their
Prince's; all these inducements, and (as the gods would have it) one Rysolis, (
Pacorus's Creature) commanding these Troops, were the causes that they began by
degrees to retire, with several tones of murmurings, which sufficiently
manifested, their retreat proceeded from diverse apprehensions. But the Enemy
had no sooner abandoned the breach, than the Prince, by the loss of a deluge of
Blood, swounded in Labienus's Arms, who by the assistance of some Soldiers
which had defended it, was carried to the Palace, and lodged in a magnificent
Appartment, Artabazus had provided for him, and where, by force of Cordials he
was restored to that life, which but seemingly had left him. His senses were no
sooner returned, than the chiefest of them was entertained by the fair
Altezeera, who Artabazus had brought with him to acknowledge, and reward that
Gallantry, which had been so advantageous to them both. After the King had made
his retributions, he withdrew himself to the other side of the Chamber, to
resign his place to the Princess, who Pacorus no sooner saw, than he fell into
tremblings and confusions, which better expressed his acknowledgements, than his
words could; but Altezeera esteeming his performances, merited more than a
silent visit, told him; You have, Sir, endangered your Life to preserve your
Enemies, and by that demonstration of your Virtue, we find our safeties
purchased at a rate, which makes us esteem them a greater misfortune, than our
ruins could have proved. Alas Madam (said Pacorus) you more endanger my life,
by giving those I have fought for that name, than those have done which I
fought against, and were there any merit in my duty, it is too abundantly
rewarded by your saying there is, and by a visit, which I would perpetually
implore, by repeating greater dangers, and greater wounds; but alas Madam, can
you so soon pardon a declaration I made, when I thought I should repair it by
my death, which before now I had acted, did not I find my life would at least
contribute as much to your safety, as the loss of it could to your revenge; but
Madam, I told you a Truth, which was of a quality which told it self, and my
words did acquaint you, but with that, which every perfection about you does,
so that what I presumed to mention, was as needless, as presumptuous.
Altezeera, (who extremely dis-relish'd entertainments of this sort) replied, if
my expressions (Sir) have not acquainted you with my gratitude, I believe my
suffering of these discourses will, but I give them to your actions, and
condition, and will in the future, acknowledge your abstaining from them, as
great a favor, as any you have done, or are capable to do unto me. Ah Madam
(said Pacorus, after a little silence, and some sighs) why do you inspire me
with so much passion, and command me to conceal it, and why do you take from me
the power of obedience, and yet enjoin me it; would to the gods you had
commanded me to suppress my Life, instead of my Words, you should have seen by
an instant experiment, that I prefer nothing before the honor of obeying you,
and in that performance be convinced, if I am disobedient to your first
Commands, it is because I am incapable, and not unwilling to be otherwise: Yes
fair Princess, it is as impossible for me not to tell you that I adore you, as
it is not to do it, my Passion would be less, could my obedience be greater, I
can therefore hardly condemn a fault which justifies so glorious a Truth; but
if the fair Altezeera does, that Arm which has opposed her Enemies, shall
execute one of them, and forget the interests of his Master, to satisfy those
of his Conqueror. I render (Madam) my intentions as visible as my Flame, that
you may either permit the latter, or punish the former; were you a Beauty which
needed time to evince the reality of my Passion, or which perseverance and
services might give me a Title to, I should use that dull method; but since
your perfections do not only manifest the former, but suppress all hopes of the
latter, I have the first minute of adoring you, as great a Title to my
Felicity, as I can have the last, so that the object of my Flame being
different from all others, the ways of my addresses must be so too; and the
refusing me that blessing now, is to assure me you will eternally do it, since
there can never be any thing in me to induce it; therefore Madam, resolutely
pronounce my sentence, for next living in your Favor, the greatest felicity
is, dying by your Commands, which latter I protest, by the Princess Altezeera I
will perform; but yet, Madam, do not think I will, to pay you one duty, decline
another, and deprive you of my service, whilst it is so blessed as to be useful
to you; No, before he which adores you shall fall your sacrifice, he will make
many others do so, which fight against you, and will never neglect his own
quiet, till he has established you in yours; for your suppressing my hopes,
shall not my duty, and to serve you for any reward but the Honor of serving
you, were to deserve none. Altezeera was extremely perplexed at this vow, and
judging of his resolution by the violence in which he uttered it, she replied;
Your wilfulness (Sir) reduces me to strange extremities, either to suffer your
crime, or to suffer by it; but believe me, if I should elect the first, I must
unavoidably the last. Ah Madam ( Pacorus cried out) had the gods any way but
this to make me miserable, whilst you permitted me to adore you? No fair
Altezeera: I will dye sooner than live at this rate, and did not my duty enjoin
me this election, my gratitude would; I will, Madam no more hope to raise my
felicity, since it must be by your sufferings, I will languish out this sad
Life, till it may be no longer useful to you, and when it cannot serve, it
shall not trouble you. Pacorus spoke those words so distinctly, that Artabazus
ran to his Bedside to learn their cause; but the Prince had too-fetl'd
thoughts of Death, to disclose any thing which might prevent it, and Altezeera
was too much offended and troubled, to discover the occasion of either; but
though the King could not learn the reason of this disorder, yet he imagined
it, and in that Faith drew the Princess aside, where whilst he was infusing
Gratitude, if not Love, into her, some of Pacorus's Domestics came in, who
having understood their Prince's condition, had abandoned the Camp, to come and
pay him their Duties. 'Twas by them he was informed (at the Parthians return to
Arsaces's Camp, and at their telling him the cause of their not taking
Tygranocerta) that Orodes had assumed the highest fury that ever Man was
capable of: that he had called him Rebel, Traitor, and all those injuries which
a violent rage is aptest to dictate: that he had protested he was more troubled
for his Sons crime, than for that victory it hindered: that he hated him as
much as he had loved him: that he would have sacrificed all those which would
have obeyed Pacorus, had not they vowed to sacrifice themselves, or redeem him
from his voluntary restraint: and that the next night they intended to repeat
the Assault. This news more perplexed Artabazus, than either Altezeera or
Pacorus, who knowing his Father, was unresistable in his fury, immediately told
Artabazus; I know (Sir) Arsaces will make use of Force, and therefore I will;
he has an Army to assault you, and I shall not want one to defend you; neither
can that Army which has reduced you to this condition, better repair that sin,
than to free you from it; it is therefore with your permission I will send
Labienus to my Camp, that if Orodes does attempt his threatenings, I may have
wherewithal to make them still bear but that name; My Army (Sir) cannot be more
gloriously employed, than to preserve a pefection as high as the sin that would
destroy it, and from hindering their King from being unjust, and barbarous; for
the Faith of those I shall draw into Tygranocerta, I will mine; and that they
shall continue within these Walls, but to obey you, and to defend them. I
cannot tell you what operation this gallantry had with Artabazus, who only
expressed it by a thousand embraces; but the Princess Altezeera, was so moved
with it, that before she left the Chamber, she told Pacorus, If you do not
believe your Life is considerable to me, you do me as great an injury, as an
obligation if you preserve it. Madam (said the Prince (taking the confidence to
kiss her hand, on which he Printed his burning Lips) I will preserve my Life,
till I know my death will be a greater duty; Whilst Labienus was preparing
things in his Princes Camp, which lay on the West side of the River Nicephorus,
Arsaces was the next night preparing to assault Tygranocerta, yet with
intention, that so much of it should be spent, as the light of day might see
his Vicotry; He chose to begin the Assault during the obscurity, to avoid the
Enemies Darts, and Arrows, before they came to the breach, and left the sight
of Pacorus might produce a resembling effect to the precedent. At the hour
assigned, the Arsacian Parthians began the storm, and no sooner did the Allarm
reach Labienus, than he entered Tygranocerta with 10000 of the same Nation, but
of a different Party. The Affailants admired to find the breach so well
defended, and the Defendants that they durst assault it, but the day no sooner
appeared, than the Stormers wonder ceased by another, and by their griefs; the
first, to find that those which should have contributed to their victory,
opposed it, and the last, to find, theirs must be won of their Contrymen, to
be won of their Enemies, these, and many other motives, too large to be
deduced, by a motion of Labienus's, and by the hazard and crime of the attempt,
made the Arsacians condescend to return from the Assault of Tygranocerta, so
the Pacorians would from the defense of it; which compact being concluded, was
immediately performed; for Pacorus, (to suppress whatever jealousies Artabazus
might have) commanded Labienus to retire to his Camp, and not move from thence,
but upon a resembling cause to that which had drawn him from it; and truly that
generous Prince seemed to be grieved at nothing in his Soldiers success, but
his having had no share in it. During this fight about the Town, there was
another in the Camp, for Arsaces understanding of what Labienus had done by his
Princes Commands, marched out of his own Camp with 20000 Men, to his Sons (over
the Bridge of Boats which Labienus unfortunately had not broken) to keep those
in awe by his Forces, which his Presence and Authority could not; but Pacorus
was so passionately loved by his Army, that though Arsaces reigned over, yet he
did in them, so that they all opposed the Arsacians, as if they had been
Armenians; and if the gods had not protected Orodes's person, he cast himself
into so many dangers, that that obedience his Sons Army paid him by Affection,
they must have by Duty. But though the King had assumed an inordinate rage, yet
he had not so absolutely resigned all his Faculties to it, but upon the
approach of Labienus, and his Forces, who were then returning to their Camp;
Arsaces, who believed they came victorious from the Assault, and would prove so
in the relief of their Companions, sounded a Retreat, and having drawn up his
Army near the Bridge, and secured it, sent a Trumpet to command Labienus to
come to him, and an engagement for his safe return; Labienus satisfied with the
latter, obeys the former, and in words (the most moving he could invent)
implored him to pardon and settle a Passion, whose greatness he might judge by
the effects, and whose justice he could not but be satisfied with, when he saw
the Beauty which created it; that he could not destroy his Sons Love without
his Life, that therefore his Revenge on his Enemies, would prove theirs on him,
and that by a Marriage he might save Pacorus, and possess Armenia (for then the
news was brought of Tygranes's death) But Arsaces, who sent for him only to
know the cause of his retreat to the Camp, and to command his continuance in
it, having learnt that 'twas by a mutual agreement, and not by a repulse, that
the Arsacians were returned, more troubled at the first cause of it, than he
could be at the last, proclaims immediately Labienus (and all those which
should assist Pacorus) Traitors; but finding by what they had done, what they
might do, he left Phraates, Surena, and Vixores, with all those Forces he had
brought with him, to hinder Labienus relieving Pacorus, in case he should
attempt it, and flying to his own Camp, he drew all his Soldiers out of it, and
by few but sharp words, condemned their remissness, and called that their
Fears, which they palliated with the name of a tenderness of shedding their
Companions blood: that if this opinion was misplaced on them, they had an
opportunity now to evince it, since he had brought Labienus to obey him by duty
or by force, and they had now ouly to oppose those Armenians, who could no
longer continue their preservation, without as high a dishonor to the
Parthians, as advantage to themselves; in brief, he so fully removed all their
scruples, and so incited their Valors, by injuries, and promises of Reward,
that the Solidiers by a precipitate march, went to repeat the Assault. Oh gods!
what a confusion did this Alarm raise in the Armenians, who found their
expected ruin the more bitter, by their late confidence of having absolutely
avoided it; but this sad news no sooner came to Artabazus's knowledge, than he
ran transported to Pacorus's Chamber to acquaint him with it; The generous
Parthian at this fatal intelligence, did Labienus and himself so much wrong, as
to suspect his Fidelity, but learning that the Camp was in as great disorder as
the Town, * he condemned himself for having condemned his Favorite, and
finding all things desperate, inspight of Artabazus and his Chirurgion's
entreaties, he hastily put on his Clothes, and commanded some of his Domestics
to carry him in a Chair to the breach, whither as he was going, he met the
Princess Altezeera, at whose Feet (causing his Men to stay) he prostrated
himself all pale, and bloody, (for by the violence of his fury and motion, some
of his wounds fell fresh a bleeding) and having a while embraced her Knees, he
told her, Can you yet (Madam) have so much goodness left, for one whose Father
endeavors your destruction, as to permit him to speak to, and see you? this is
an undeniable proof you know, and possess my heart, for if that were not
legible, you might justly make me a sacrifice to your revenge, and not permit
me the honor of dying one for your safety. I go (fair Princess) to fall for
your preservation, if I cannot obtain it; and you shall never see this offender
again, unless by his services he effaces some of his offenses, if Arsaces do
deprive me of that generous Ambition, I will deprive him of his Son, and if I
now find my Fate, all that I implore, is, that the way in which I receive it,
may expiate the sin of the Fathers cruelty, and the presumption of the Sons
Passion. These words, with the postures he was in, so pierced the Princess's
Heart, which was capable of all impressions, so near allied to Virtue, as Pity,
that she demonstrated hers, by some Tears she could not possibly restrain,
which Pacorus observing, he continued; you weep, fair Princess, I will go and
dry your Tears, by making those which cause them, to weep Tears of Blood, or
not live to see and participate in your sorrow. Then with a trembling respect,
taking the Princesses hand, which her confusion made her not oppose, he printed
on it such passionate and ardent kisses, that those which saw them, thought his
Soul would sooner come out of his Mouth, than his Wounds; in this ecstasy he
had longer continued, had not a great cry awakened him out of it, and called
him from pleasure to danger, whither he went with Tears, not for the latter,
but for abandoning, as he thought, eternally theformer. As soon as he came to
the breach (which by the industry of some Defendants, had been a little
repaired) he caused himself to be set in the mouth of it, where danger, as
great as his resolution, threatened him, and where he found that shout he had
heard, proceeded from the Armenians, at the arrival of Phanasder, who hearing
the danger Tygranocerta was it, caused himself to be carried where 'twas most
visible, esteeming it a nobler destiny, to dye in the Bed of Honor, than in
that of sickness; I followed him immediately with the same resolution, and in a
resembling posture, and came time enough to see Pacorus with his Sword,
threaten the Conquerors, who no sooner saw their Prince in so sad and generous
a posture, than by degrees those clouds of Darts and Arrows began to diminish,
and at length ceased; as soon as the noise was so, Pacorus with eloquence than
I thought a man in his disorder was capable of, so moved the Parthians Hearts,
and Affections, that in the end, concluding with a reiterated, and deep vow,
when he could no longer defend the breach, he would kill himself in it, and
that he was confident if they would retire, either to restore his Father to his
former affection in few days, or himself to his Duty, they began by little and
little to draw off, which when they were entirely, Pacorus told Phanasder and
me, that he never had a higher Duty, than that which he paid Altezeera, and
that he only mentioned that word, to reduce the Parthians to theirs, and to
protract the time, till he could draw in Labienus, and some Forces. Whilst we
were in the admiration of this generous Prince, and upon our return the
Sentinels upon the highest Towers, gave us a fresh Allarm, which we found was
no false one, for we immediately perceived the Parthian Ensigns flying toward
us, and the foremost of them carried by one, who Pacorus at last knew to be
Arsaces, who seeing his Soldiers retreat, and learning the occasion of it, in
that fury both inspired, he ran to the Ensign of the first Milliary, and having
forced it from him, he cried out to the rest, I told you, degenerate Parthians,
'twas your fear, you disguised under a false Name, for now that you fought for
Glory, and against your Enemies, you resign your first to the last, in which
number I include the false Pacorus, who is a Traitor to his King, and to his
Father, and whose sight should rather inspire you with revenge, that respect;
you fight not against your Prince, but his crimes, which being great enough to
make me divest my self of all the dictates of Nature, may well invite you to
cast off those of respect; neither can you avoid punishing his sin, but by
committing a greater; remember, from your Prince he is become your Enemy, and
that in taking Tygranocerta, you subdue a Kingdom, and a Rebel, who is much
more considerable; neither will I command you to act what I will decline, do
but follow your King, destroy you the Armenians, and I will Pacor^s. Let us go
then, valiant Parthians, by your performances merit that Title, which the more
to induce you to, I vow by the gods, I will find in this assault, my
satisfaction or my death. Finishing these words, he marched at the head of his
Troops, and through a storm of Arrows, which were shot, before Pacorus knew his
Father, he came to the foot of the breach, somefollow'd him out of Duty, some
out of Fear, but the most (as I have been since told) to oppose, and divert
him, if affairs were reduced to exreams; but the generous Pacorus no sooner
knew Orodes, than he commanded the Armenians, to forbear all hostility for a
little, and that good conclusion of this difference, or his death, should
render his Orders useless, or dispense with their infringement of them; this
being obeyed, he raises himself up, and leaning on his Sword, he cried out,
Arsaces, cruel Arsaces, here is that Son, which thou prosecutest more than
Armenia; retire thy Forces out of the latter, and I will deliver thee up the
former, and if thy fury has not so entirely divested thee of Nature, as to
become the executionr of thy Son, he will in recompense become his own, and
thereby evince himself thine, since nothing but so near an alliance could
induce him by death, to exempt thee from what, if acted, will make thee deserve
it. There is Divinity Arsaces, within these Walls, and if thou esteem'st my
saying so, no Truth, thou will change thy opinion, if thou reflectest on what
her defense has made me undertake, and what reverence thy Soldiers have paid
her Defender, or if both these will not invite thee to that belief, the seeing
of her will; but if nothing can move thee to reason or pity, I attest that
perfection I adore, and which thou committest a sin if thou do not, that the
first step thou make toward her destruction, I will act mine, and perhaps,
when thy choler has resigned what it has usurped over thy reason, thou will
find some, in deploring a Son, who thou did once honor with thy affection,
and who has lost it in a performance, which hereafter (but when it is too late)
thou will confess has given him a better Title to it. Whilst Pacorus was thus
speaking, all the Parthians, (as their King) did make a stand, and in imitation
of the Armenians, had desisted from shooting, with Looks, in which a small
Phisiognomist might have read their Hopes of not doing it again, and in a
silent eloquence, seemed to implore that Command from Arsaces, whose answer
they expected, and heard with impatience, for it was thus; Traitor, and
degenerate Pacorus, who to aggravate thy crimes, can mention the name of Son,
and yet be in Arms and Rebellion against me; know, that the same moment thou
have cast off the duty of a Son, I have divested my self of the relation of a
Father, and consequently that death thou threatnest me with, loses that
operation with me, which thou act it, I shall in part excuse the sins of thy
Life, and consider it rather as an effect of the greatness of their horror,
than of thy affection! Neither can I commit any higher crime than to pardon
thine, for thou have robbed me in one action, of a Son, of Glory, and of Quiet,
which two last I must, and will restore, by the destruction of the first; for
that Divinity thou mention'st. I am confident she is none, were it only for
inviting thee to sin; but if she be one, let her show it in her defense, for I
am determined on so vigorous an Assault, that nothing but a Divinity can render
it unsuccessful; Then turning to the Parthians with a furious look, he
commanded them to follow him, and began in a hasty march to ascend the breach,
but he was stopped by Pacorus, who cried out, Stay Arsaces, stay, since thou art
so greedy of my death, behold I will act it, and it the taking out of the World
him that robbed thee of a Son, of Glory, and of Quiet; and if he that restores
thee to the latter two, can merit any favor from thee; I conjure thee by those
obligations which I will immediately confer on thee, content thy self with the
submission, and seek not the ruin of Artabazus, or if thy rage has stopped all
ways to mercy for him, yet a least, let his excellent Sister be respected, as
near as you can extend your duties to her merit; I conjure thee once again by
the name of Father, by the name of King, by this blood, I shed for thy
satisfaction, and by my last breath, grant me this request. Then with a Look,
which entirely relished of Death, turning the Pommel of his Sword to the
ground, and the Point to his Breast, he said, farewell eternally, fair
Princess, I am capable of no more but to live your Adorer, and to dye your
Martyr, and then cast himself so suddenly on the fatal Steel, that though some
endeavored to prevent it, yet they could not so absolutely, but that he made a
large wound in his left side, and fell on the ground, sweltering in a Sea of
Blood; which the Parthians no sooner observed at the foot of the breach, than
in that rage, the loss of their Prince inspired, they were going to increase it
by that of their King, who was so struck with Pacorus's last words, and
actions, that it dispelled all his fury, which had no sooner resigned its place
to Grief, Reason, and Nature, than in those dictates they inspired, without
considering the mutiny of his own Soldiers, or the danger of the Armenian, he
clamber'd up the breach, and cast himself on the pale, and bloody Body of his
generous Son, and by Tears, and a million of as pregnant testimonies of his
conversion, acquainted Pacorus with it, so timely too, that the least delay had
rendered his change as fruitless, as `twas real; for Pacorus finding, after the
amazement of his Fall, that he was prevented of his intent, drew out a
concealed Poniard, which he was going to sheath in his Heart, had not Orodes by
molifying his own, preserved his Sons. Great gods! (continued Falintus) could I
tell you these changes which then happened, which were as great as sudden, I
might fill you with that wonder which did all that were present, and truly when
you consider this mutation, the more you do it, the stranger you will find it;
the Father and the Son came to take Tygranocerta, the first instead of winning
the Town, looses both it and his Son; and the last, both his Father and his
liberty, and yet commands where he has lost it. Artabazus and Altezeera find
their Protector in their Enemy; Arsaces loses his Army, because he will lose
his Son, ye at last finds his satisfaction in their disobedience; Pacorus does
the like, and learns this truth from thence, that Affection is a stronger tie
upon Soldiers, than Duty, and the unhappiness that all the Parthians loved
another, better than their King; he finds Death the way to Life, and Danger to
Safety. The Armenians who did fear to see Orides within their Walls, see it now
without any, and that breach they intended, he should never enter but by their
deaths, they see him do it with satisfaction. Arsaces, who had the Armenians at
his mercy, finds himself at theirs, and finds himself so without any
apprehension, but for the death of him whose life was so lately his greatest.
The breach which was the Scene of the general dispute, is now of the
reconciliation; and if the Armenians and Parthians had any desires, they were
mutual for Pacorus's recovery, and against Arsaces's relapse. So strange an
alteration drew Artabazus and Altezeera thither, whose presence contributed
more to the generous Patients recovery, than the Chirurgions A^t, by which,
nevertheless they assured the impatient Kings, if no new acce^s happened, they
would restore him to that health, he had so meritoriously lost. There 'twas
that Arsaces saw Altezeera, and by that sight, what Nature had pardoned in his
Son, then reason did; 'Twas thought awhile by Orodes's silence, and first
contemplation, that the influence of the Princesses Eyes, would have run in a
Blood, but it seems he was but so far in the way of Love as Admiration, which
he soon left, by the reflection on a Beauty in Parthia, who had so large an
ascendant over him, and so just a one too, that his inconstancy could not be
more a fault, than a punishment. (These words made the poor Artabanes, by a
deep sigh, acknowledge a truth which he determined eternally to deplore; but
his generous friend, to make his attention divert his melancholy, thus
continued his Relation.) But the calm in Tygranocerta could hardly transcend
the storm in Pacorus's Camp, which Phraates affaulted with much resolution, and
found as much in his opposition, but if in that day he gave proofs of a large
courage, he did of as large a cruelty, showing all those which submitted to his
mercy, that he had none. The faithful Labienus endeavoring to force a passage
to the relief of his Prince, almost found his ruin in his Duty, for being
pierced with two Darts, he was at length taken prisoner, and the cruel Phraates
to punish the fidelity of his Life, had given Orders to deprive him of it,
which was happily prevented by an Express from Arsaces, who sent to end those
differences in the Camp, which he had put a period to in the Town; that being
but a consequence of this. The bloody Phraates received the command of his
being so no longer, and the cause of it, with amazement, repenting he had shed
so much Blood, only because he could shed no more, for he esteemed the
difference between his Father and his Brother, irreconcilable; and by his
actions evinced that was his Faith, which when he found 'twas an erroneous one,
he began by a thousand formal contritions, to manifest a Repentance, which he
neither had, nor was capable of, and which he counterfeited so, that he
discovered he did so. But (continued Falintus) the apprehensions I had, that
Arsaces was guilty of a resembling Crime, made me propound to Arbazus, the
detaining of him, now we had the power, which I said, the gods gave us, to
raise in us the Will; This proposal I fortified, by never having engaged our
Faiths for the contrary; that his change was rather from Passion than Virtue;
That not being the latter, it would soon expire; that by having him in our
hands, we had our safeties too, and so good a tie upon the Parthians, that we
might derive it from our selves, and not from their Mercy, And, that we had
wherewithal upon their retiring to gratify the Son, by restoring the Father. I
had too (said Falintus) to my self, as strong a reason as all these together
which yet I durst not mention (I mean) the apprehension that if Orodes were at
liberty, the Princess Altezeera would be the condition of the peace, which
being informed my King was intent upon, though that should the rather have
induced me to motion it, yet it did to silence it, since it might have rendered
me suspected, and that my former allegations were for you, not him. But
Artabazus absolutely declined this overture, either through Fear or Virtue, but
indeed all his Arguments for his so doing, relished of the latter: But
(continued Falintus) why do I dwell so long upon this subject, as if it were to
one who were little enough concerned in it, to be delighted with it; It Is too
much that you know, after Arsaces and Pacorus had had some private discourse
accompanied with passionate gestures, and that the Father had kissed and embraced
the Son, he took leave of Artabazus and Altezeera, in words which resented of
nothing but Friendship and Peace, and begged the last to give him good account
of a Son, which he entirely left to her dispose, and from whom only they both
expected his recovery. After these civilities were finished, he descended the
same way he came up, and was received with more shouts from his Army (which
attended him at the foot of the breach) for leaving Tygranocerta, than he could
have had, if he had conquered it. Pacorus immediately after this separation,
was commanded by Altezeera to preserve a Life which she now acknowledged, she
was more than ordinarily concerned in; To which injunction, having made his
passionate and eloquent retributions, he was carried to his Apartment,
Artabazus doing him the honor to go on foot by his Litter. But the strong
apprehensions Phanasder and I had, that these transcendent obligations, the
power of a King, and Brother, and the general safety which would as absolutely
be hazarded by Altezeera's declining Pacorus, as settled by her receiving him,
made us jointly conjure the fair Theoxcena (who was ever publicly and
zealously concerned in your interests) to go visit Altezeera, and by her
persuasions, convert or fortify her inclinations, which was a Duty our wounds
hindered us from paying you, and which were more troublesome to us upon that
score, than any other. The fair Theoxcena by our desires, judging of our fears,
assumed them too, and with a hasty earnestness, went in her Chariot
immediately, to Altezeera, whose discourses at first were somewhat cold, but at
last were so entirely divested of all that dull quality, that Theoxcena
returned to us with a Gayity, which manifested his satisfaction, and with
assurances, that what we had contemplated as arguments of Fear, Altezeera did
as evincements of her constancy, and that she reflected with joy on Pacorus's
obligations, from no other motives, than that Artavasdes might be in them
convinced, she was incapable of change, since Pacorus's Services, Person, and
Quality, had not that Power. This generous declaration converted our Fears into
nobler Passions, for we were so much concerned in your satisfaction, that we
had rather have hazarded the public, than it. The next day Regeliza came to
visit Theoxcena, where after the first civilities, she told her with a freedom,
which is not common to Courtiers, That the Princess Altezeera did not entirely
approve her last solicitations, whatever Face she received them with, since,
if Artavasdes were the object of her Passion, she desired he should continue
so, without deriving that Felicity from any secundary causes; and if he were
not, she might attribute her visit, rather to a sounding her intentions, than a
confirmation of them. This Madam (said Regeliza) the high respects I pay you,
makes me discover, and I believe you cannot doubt my Heart, since I acquaint
you with my Mistrisses. The virtuous Theoxcena paid this freedom by many
embraces, and protested what she had done, was merely an effect of her Duty,
which since it was esteemed a fault, she would not repeat, neither discover the
Cause, or Author of her ^ilence. Regeliza thereupon told her, that to the best
of her observations, Altezeera was as constant as fair, and that if ^he
deceived Artavasdes, she deceived her too. Some other Ladies then coming in,
they began a different discourse, which had not continued above an hour, but
that (as Regeliza was upon the point of her return) she fell into an
indisposition, that lasted all that night, which she spent on a Couch in
Theoxcena's Cabinet, but the next morning, being in some degree recovered, she
returned to the Princess, who soon after fell so extreme ill, that many thought
her Confidents sickness had changed its place, and communicated it self to
Altezeera, who gave express order, that none should give her any visits, till
she were in a fitter condition to receive them. This news, and this order, very
much troubled the generous Phanasder's Mistress, who apprehended, that
direction was chiefly for her, and that it was general, but the better to cloud
it as to her particular. But whilst the fair Altezeera lay struggling with a
dangerous sickness (which was so much the more so, that the Physicians were
entirely ignorant from whence it proceeded) Arsaces sent a solemn Embas^y to
Artabazus, to acquaint him, that as nothing but the bestowing the Princess
Altezeera on Pacorus, could give Armenia peace, so that alone should. But alas!
her indisposition so increast, that her Brother feared she was like to be the
gods, rather than Pacorus's. As soon as this fatal news came to Pacorus's
knowledge, he blasphemed them for it so transcendently, that it increast their
Title to her, at least diminisht his. Those that attended him, during
Altezeera's sickness, found his condition was more dangerous from hers, than
his own, and protested, he sent so often to know if she took any rest, that he
hindered her from taking any. Three days successively Artabazus had constrained
Pacorus to keep his Bed, and silenced his curiosities, by words which assured
him in few days, it should be satisfied by Altezeera's sight. But Arsaces,
whose Ambassadors were returned with protestations, that nothing but the
Princesses sickness hindered the honor of being his Daughter, grew so impatient
of this delay, both in his own and Pacorus's behalf, and Altezeera's
indisposition arriving so unfortunately, that it relisht more of design than
mischance, so inflamed him, that he passionately sent Artabazus word, unless
Altezeera would declare to his Ambassadors, the same assurance he had, he would
look upon this protraction as a delusion, and resent it at that rate. This
harsh message so troubled Artabazus, that (all trembling) he went to Altezeera,
and conjured her on his knees, by the affection of a Sister, and by the
preservation of that Empire, in which she was to succeed, that she would give
her self to Pacorus, who besides the Title of his merit, had that of power,
which though he was so civil, as absolutely to decline, yet his Father that had
not those invisible restraints, might start into an action, in which they might
find an eternal ruin. Altezeera to this, (as Regeliza informed Theoxcena)
replied, That the obligations of fear were not so much to be considered by
generous Minds, as those of Virtue, and that consequently, the Parthian was not
to be gratified by the ruin of Artavasdes, to whom they were both engaged by
undeniable promises; that could she violate that faith, it might give a just
assurance to Pacorus she had none, and so that which he designed as a cure of
their disorders, might create as great as those they suppressed. Ah Altezeera!
(said the King) It Is not we, but necessity, disobliges Artavasdes, and in
believing, he would sacrifice his interest for our preservation, we acquaint
him how much we believe he values us; if in this we are not mistaken in him, he
is not disobliged; and if we are, he merits to be so. There are (replied
Altezeera) some things of a quality, in which we may have so good an opinion of
Artavasdes that we may thereby leave him none of us; and if I be not much
mistaken, this performance will be of that nature; let us therefore, Sir,
suspend our resolutions, till we know his, and if he can consider any thing
above me, I may be induced to consider Pacorus above him. If (said Artabazus)
you can esteem it possible to observe this course, after you have perused this
Paper; I durst almost bind my self to submit unto it. Then presenting her
Arsaces's Letter, which was the cause of his visit, she had no sooner read it,
than she coldly said; 'Twas not with those Arms she was to be vanquished it.
But Artabazus, who knew there was a storm in that calm, conjured her with fresh
and powerful motives, to make her self a Conqueror by yielding; yet all was in
vain, for though in Tears he implored a more merciful answer, yet the only he
could extort from her, was, that if ever she were Pacorus's, if should be as a
Gift, and not a Sacrifice. The poor Artabazus, almost frantic at this ill
success, went to visit Pacorus, who all this while had labored under a belief,
that his Princess was in some extremity, and that her being in no danger, was
rather his information than her condition; these being his constant fancies,
'twas no wonder they were as much his dreams, from one of which he was newly
wakened, when the King came to see him, whose disordered look, and moist Eyes,
so abundantly confirmed his fears, that to remove, or resolve them (upon
Artabazus's going away (which he did without acquainting him with his Fathers
desire and threatening, either as thinking it impertinent, if he were accessory
to it, and cruel, if he were not) Pacorus immediately caused himself to be
dressed, and in spite of his Wounds, or Servants, trained himself along to
Alterzeera's Apartment, where having begged and obtained a permission to visit
her, he prostrated himself on his knees by her Bedside, and after a short
silence, which his joy and pain made him keep, he brake it to tell her: I could
not (Madam) so much as hope a pardon for this presumption, did I not tell you
the cause of it, which proceeds from so high and just a concern in your health;
that I have endangered mine, to come and learn the state of yours; in which
too, I shall find for the future, what to expect from the gods, for if they
grant not the fervent'st Prayers I am capable of, I must expect they will never
condescend to my others, and so lay aside Devotion as a needless, or at least a
fruitless thing. Altezeera, who considered Pacorus as accessory to Arsaces's
Crime, told him coldly, he could best give an account, whether she were in any
danger, since her greatest proceeded from his Father, and him. Oh gods!
(continued Falintus) how these words struck the poor Pacorus, you only can
tell! but I can that his disorder was such, as she took it for his guilt, and
that astonishment which should have evinced his being innocent, made her think
he was not; but after his confusion gave him leave to speak, he cried out, can
I then be so near guilty of so horrid a sin, as to be thought so by my
Princess? and is she so much my Enemy, that she will wrong her perfections,
rather than not wrong Pacorus? ah Madam, if you desire my death for my
presumption, you might have taken some milder course, than to send me out of
the world, as much hated by my self, as you: Great gods! (he continued, lifting
up his Eyes and his Hands) why have you given this Excellence so many charms to
inspire Love, and so little Faith to believe it; Yet Madam, perhaps I have done
already what might create your belief of mine, by a more pregnant persuasion
that Faith; but alas Pacorus why do thou so wrong thy actions, as to believe
thy words can create in her a knowledge of that truth, when they could not:
show her by thy death what thou were during thy life, for she would not use
thee at this rate, were it not for that end; yes Madam (he continued,
addressing his speech again to Altezeera) I will now satisfy your suspicions or
your desires, then drawing out a Poniard, which he constantly wore, he was
about to increase the crime of that design, by acting it, when the Princess
cried out, hold Pacorus, I command you, hold, if I have any desires, they will
be satisfied in your obedience, not in your death, and if I have any doubts,
you may be satisfied in this Paper, if they were not legitimate. Then she gave
him the Letter, Arsaces had sent Artabazus, which he had left with her, and
which Pacorus had no sooner perused, than fetching two or three profound sighs,
he told her, Yes Madam, I am criminal, but I am only so, in being the Son of
such a Father; who before a few hours are effluxt, shall send you assurances of
another quality, or you shall be convinced I am a sufferer and not a sharer in
his Guilt. Thereupon, rising up, he took his leave, with a countenance so well
appropriated to his words; that those could not more discover his innocence,
than the other did. As soon as Pacorus was returned to his Apartment, the
violence of his motion, but much more that of his grief, cast him into a new
Fever, and set his wounds fresh ableeding, with which he writ Arsaces a
Letter, so moving, and so passionate, that it obtained from him one, which gave
him as much satisfaction, as that he had sent to Arta^azus, did the contrary,
and another to the Princess Altezeera, wherein he protested, 'twas to
accellerate his Sons felicities, that he was so rude as to make use of
threatenings, which though it were a strange crime, yet it might serve to
evince how infinitely he was concerned in the honor of her alliance, since only
as a believed way unto that end, he made no scruples to act it, which he
repented of, and begged a pardon for; and to put himself out of a capacity to
repeat that guilt, he would withdraw his Army, if she commanded it, into
Parthia, and till he knew with what Orders she would honor him, he would (in
expectation of them) retire a hundred Furlongs from Tygranocerta. This Letter
(said Falintus) contained many things of a resembling quality, which my memory
is not faithful enough to retain, and which coming to Pacorus when Artabazus
was with him, he made him the Ambassador to carry it to his fair Sister, who
received that testimony of his innocence and power, so well, that in the
dictates those resentments did inspire, and in that lively representation,
Artabazus made her of Pacorus's passion and danger, to obey the Kings
importunity, and perhaps her inclination, she forced her weakness to write
these few, but powerful words. Live Pacorus, if you desire Altezeera should.
Never any remedy was more sudden nor efficacious than this, and if there be
any charms in words, they sure inhabit in the obliging ones of Love, Pacorus
idolatriz'd Altezeera's and was a thousand times more satisfied with them, than
with that health they afterward restored; and if he had now any desires, none
were more violent than those of recovery, to acknowledge at his Princesses
Feet, that he owed not only his, but a more transcending Blessing to her
goodness. Altezeera too, as if her sickness had proceeded entirely from her
constancy, no sooner had divested her self of that, but she did so of the
other, and either to sympathize with, or please, her Servant, assumed her
Beauty and Health, as fast as he did his. But the fair Theoxcena, either to
satisfy her affection, or her doubts, went to visit the Princess, and Regeliza
being then gone to pay one to Artabazus (who of late was so taken with her
company, that many thought it was with her) none of Altezeera's other women had
either the confidence or the command to deny her an admission: When she came
in, Altezeera was newly fallen into a slumber, which Theoxcena considered, as
so conducing to her health, that on that score she denied her self the honor of
her conversation, without any reluctance, and in expectation of it, went to a
window in the Chamber, which afforded a diverting prospect. Not above half an
hour was expired, when Regeliza returned and being ignorant the Princess was
asleep by her coming in, interrupted it. Altezeera knowing 'twas Regeliza
opened the Curtains, and no sooner saw Theoxcena (who was presenting her self
to her) than shutting them hastily again, she cried out, oh gods! Regeliza, is
not it Theoxcena which I see. Yes Madam (said the fair Theoxcena, somewhat
surpised) it is she, who has acquainted you with her rudeness, that she might
with her affection, which could relish of no quiet, till she were satisfied of
a health, for which she has so great, and so just concerns. Alas Madam (
Altezeera coldly replied) if you have any concerns in mine, I shall beg you to
manifest them, by denying me any more the honor of your visits, which will be a
way more conducing to that end, than any other you can elect. 'Twere almost as
hard to fancy, as describe Theoxcena's astonishment, the lowest effect it
produced, was an amazed silence, which Regeliza observing, drew her aside and
begged her to impute it rather to a sudden and disordered wakeing, or indeed
to any thing sooner than a decrease of her affection, in which too, she would
be a friend both to Altezeera, and to Justice: But Theoxcena, who ascribed it
to the relics of that distaste Regeliza had informed her of, or to her
infringing the general Orders, which prohibited any visits, went again to the
Princess Bedside, and told her since the crime (Madam) of waiting on you, is
esteemed greater than the duty which invited me to it; I shall henceforward
content my self to enquire of your health at a less offensive distance, and no
more pay you my visits by intrusion, but obedience. Altezeera having only told
her, she would esteem it a great obligation; she withdrew her self, Regeliza
waiting on her to her Chariot, and making by the way many excuses, which
sufficiently manifested themselves to be what they were; I ommitted to tell
you, that the next day after the dispute betwixt Phraates and Labienus, the
first of them hearing of a reconciliation, as strange as 'twas either
unexpected or undesir'd, sent to visit Pacorus, to implore a forgiveness for an
action, which because 'twas against him, he considered as a crime, though it
were a duty, and which he might the easilier grant, since in his very offense
he might read something for his justification, for in manifesting he loved a
King more than a Brother, it evinced how good a Subject he would prove, when he
became one, by Pacorus's right to the succession. But Sir (said Falintus to me,
after a short silence) you must now prepare your self to receive an
intelligence that I hope will verify the Fiction of Achilles's Lance, which,
not only had the power to give a wound, but to cure it too. Yes (Sir) the gods
gave Altezeera her health, but she employed it to so ill an end, that we
esteemed her sickness a less misfortune, and if Theoxcena by her strange usage
had some cause to suspect she was distracted when she kept her Chamber; we had
much more to believe she was so when she left it, since the first action she
then did, solemnly to promise her self to Pacorus: Yet Artabazus imposed this
restriction on the Grant, that their Nuptials should not be celebrated in
Armenia, nor till the Parthians were retired, lest that which she intended as a
gift, might look like a constraint, and that the Armenians might be consol'd in
the loss of such a friend, by being freed from so many Enemies. If, Sir
(continued Falintus) you esteem this a loss, do but reflect on the cause of it,
and you can no longer think it one, which opinion I have so justly assumed,
that for your relief, I will not conjure you to make use of your Fortitude, but
your Reason only. Great gods! (I cried out, all pale and trembling) is it
possible then ( Falintus) that Altezeera can be false? and that Fear, not Love,
should create her sin? Must that which creates it, be as great an offense to
Virtue, as me? unjust Heavens! (I continued) could you give none the greatest
will to ruin me, but her that had the greatest power to do it? And did you
raise me to the highest hopes, but to make my despair resembling? Alas
Falintus, I must summon Death, and not Reason for my cure, since the latter in
this occasion, does with me as it does in the mysteries of Divinity, it may
confound, but cannot help: Neither has the reflection on her constancy, the
power to do it, for I find, that more my misfortune than her fault, and what
satisfaction can it prove, that she had no imperfection, but what was only one
to me; her crime is not, that she wants loveliness, but Love, and her new
Conquest cannot more certainly evince the former, than my death must
unavoidably the latter. If, Sir (replied Falintus) 'twas Altezeera, and not the
Crown of Armenia you ambition'd -- Ah Friend (I cried out, interrupting him)
may the gods continue me in as great torments, as they have cast me into, if
ever I ambition'd any Crown, but one of Mirtles, so it were of Altezeera's
putting on, and having lost the hopes of that Crown, if I do not contemn all
others, as much as she does my Passion. Then, Sir (continued Falintus) in my
opinion, your Case is not so desperate as your thoughts suggest, for in that
very performance in which she has taken away your hopes, she has given you
some, since she that has been once inconstant may be thought with probability
to prove so again. I, but Falintus (I replied) you say she is in a manner
married to Pacorus. It Is true (said Falintus) but that mystery in Nuptials of
two being one, is oftener visible to Faith than Sense; and was there never yet a
Wife was kind to any but her Husband? Great gods! (I cried out, starting up,
and laying my hand upon my Sword) that any but a Friend durst say this, and
that a Friend should, No, no, Falintus, the way you take, will give me rather
Horror, than Love, for I should hate her more for being so kind, than so
unconstant; though I am an Enemy unto her, I am not so unto her Virtue, which
did I but believe were stained, or so much as capable of being so, I should
injure her as much as she has my Passion, or my Hopes. But Falintus who
perceived how great my fury was, by the pain I had to suppress it; that he
inspired me with as much rage as grief; and that he had given me Poison rather
than Cordial, was so just, and so civil, as to implore my pardon, beseeching me
to believe, that he passionately ambition'd my consolation, since out of but a
bare hope of giving me some little, he scrupled not to tax Altezeera's virtue,
which too he had done, because he esteemed it a maxim in the cure of Love, to
give the Lover an ill opinion of her, that made him one. Yes Falintus (I
replied) embracing him with some sighs, I forgive you, and will only enjoin you
for reparation, to believe for my sake, what you should for Justices, which is,
that Altezeera has no faults, but such as are only so to the unfortuate
Artavasdes, and that he is as perfect in all things, as I am in misery. I had
rather (said Falintus) rob you of that Faith, than assume it, for I fear, if it
continue yours, it may make us lose, what we esteem as much, as ever you did
Altezeera; the short remainder of whose story, I will beg your permission to
tell you, that you may find some consolation in her fault, since I believe she
begins to find in it, her punishment. I would (I replied) listen to your
relation, with a higher satisfaction, if my Life, as well as my Felicity had
been tied to it, and were to expire withit. I believe (said Falintus) if you
hated not Altezeera, you would never have mentioned so offensive a wish, for I
am confident your death would prove a much greater trouble to her, than her
inconstancy can to you. Would to the gods (I replied) I were certain of that,
it should not be long before I acted in one performance, both my revenge and my
quiet: but (I continued) generous Falintus, let me not thus interrupt the
finishing of your Relation, in which, perhaps I may find some reasons to make
your thoughts my belief, and to which I will listen with as much attention, as
one in so transcendent a torment is capable of. I have already (said Falintus,
prosecuting his narration) acquainted you with that public and solemn
engagement, which Altezeera gave Pacorus, which too was in the presence of
Arsaces, Phraates, Surena, and Labienus (who then was recovered of his wounds)
and the Parthian King, to evince he had neither any remnants of hatred, or
fear, came into Tygranocerta only, with those usual Guards which attended his
person. The joy of this contract was expressed in a solemn Tilting, in which
Surena obtained entirely the honor, which too he purchased at so much the easier
rate, because Phanasder would not dispute it, who had too-deep an impression of
your grief, to receive any of joy, especially in a performance, the cause
whereof had divested him of all his. But though neither he, nor I assisted at
this public celebration, yet we resolved Altezeera should not run into a Sin,
without being told of it, which Phanasder and I jointly went to her Apartment
to perform, where we were received with that grace, which is as unseparable
from her, as charming is from it; but as soon as ever we began to acquaint her
with the occasion of our visit, she imposd on us a perpetual silence, and gave
us no reason why we should keep it, but that 'twas her Command; only she told
Phanasder, he had cause indeed to solicit her in it. To which he replied,
That perfect Friendship (Madam) I pay Artavasdes; gives me an abundant cause to
solicit for his felicity, and perhaps the care I have of you, (Madam) is not
a much inferior one. I beseech the gods (she replied, smiling) that both
Artavasdes and I, may deserve your care. Phanasder begged her to interpret her
Prayer, and her smile, but when he perceived she absolutely declined, to show
we came on business, and not on duty, we immediately retired, cursing either
the nature or humor of the Sex, which to preserve a charitable opinion of, we
went to Theoxcena, to whom we gave an account of our visit, which she would not
accompany us in, her last having had so unfortunate a success. That generous
Princess seemed to be glad that either Altezeera by her silence confessed her
crime was of a quality, where to offer to extenuate, was to increase it, or
that her guilt was such a torment, that she avoided all entertainments which
could revive it; and though this were her opinion of the Princesses silence,
yet she hoped it would not be yours, but that you would ascribe it to an
insolence as high as her Inconstancy, that therein since she would not reward
your Passion, yet at least that she would cure it. But Phanasder who could not
put an interpretation upon Altezeera's Prayer, that you might merit his
friendship, at last placed one upon her saying, he had cause to solicit for
you, as meaning his, not preserving Tygranocerta, reduced her to need it; and
though we represented to him, she could not act so transcendent an injustice,
as to lay that to him as a crime, in which he had purchased so much Glory; yet
we could not efface his suspicions, which he fortified by saying, she that
could be capable of so high an injustice, as abandoning you, for Pac^rus might
justly be suspected to be capable of any other. Regeliza who formerly, often
visited Theoxcena, still continued that practice, protesting to be as ignorant
of the cause of her Princesses inconstancy, as troubled at it; she too invited
her from Altezeera, to continue her v^sits, who continue her visits, who
confessed she could not more sensibly revenge her injuries, than showing her by a
daily conversation those charms, of which by her misfortune she had so long
deprived her self, and which she begged her to impute to her sickness, and not
to her change. Theoxcena thus civilly invited, and knowing that what Altezeera
alleged would prove her revenge, would become her own satisfaction, she went
to visit the Princess, where though she used her with the same civilities, she
had formerly practiced, yet The oxcena's judgment, or suspicions, denied her a
belief that they were with the same freedom; and indeed it is a common
observation in most of that Sex, that a division betwixt any of them, though it
may be closed again, yet there will be still remaining some Cicatrice, that
will perpetually show where the wound has been; but Theoxcena, who scrutinously
observed all she did, found, that her joy was but a part she acted, since she
was often out of it, and as she has told Phanasder, and I, she has diverse times
observed her ready to shed tears in her highest mirth, and in the midst of a
discourese to stop and start, as if her ill Angel had met her; neither was this
her practice only in her Chamber, but in the greatest Assemblies, which clearly
manifested her resolutions were not as strong as her Grief, or Guilt, Regeliza
told Theoxcena too, that she had several times surpised Altezeera in such
agonies, that had you seen them, they would have converted your resentments
into sorrow. One evening too, Theoxcena found she had not made her Prince's
condition worse than it really was, for, coming to visit her, and finding no
body in the Chamber, she stole to the Cabinet door, where looking through a
crevice of it, she discovered Altezeera, acting sorrow so to the life, that she
apprehended 'twould have proved her death; and indeed Theoxcena found in that
sight, as much cause to pity, as to condemn her inconstancy; which had so
strong an operation over her, that the immediately retired, apprehending lest
the visibility of her disorders might have manifested she had discovered the
Princesses. But she was no sooner returned to her own Palace, than she was
visited by the generous Phanasder, and I, where having told us what she had so
freshly disclosed (which in our judgments evinced, Altezeera had more
inclination to repair, than continue her crimes) Phanasder after a short debate
with himself, propounded that which I extremely relisht, but which Theoxcena
did not, which was, that he would cause a powerful insurrection in Armenia,
which should necessitate the Parthian Army to continue in it, and consequently
Altezeera not to go out of it; that seemingly to suppress it, he would raise
Forces to join with Pacorus's Army, that in the mean time upon some pretense of
affairs into Syria, I should from thence go directly to Rome, and inform you of
all that had happened, to desire you to make of your particular interest, one
of State, and to press Crassus (who we heard was to invade Parthia) to advance
speedily into Armenia, and to hinder an alliance, which if not prevented, would
render his Conquests impossible, and if prevented, as facile; and lastly, to
assure you, that upon your appearance either with the Romans, or singly, all
the seeming Rebels and his Forces, should declare for you, and thereby force
Alterzeera to as great a necessity of giving her self to you, as she pretended
there had been, to give her self unto Pacorus; or at least make it clearly
evident, her inconstancy was her choice, and not her constraint; which too, you
might have the power to punish, in him that was the creator of it. This
generous motion (as I told you) I infinitely approved, but the fair Theoxcena
seemed as much averse to it, both as induced thereunto out of that high concern
she had in Phanasder's safety, and perhaps reputation, which might both run no
small hazard in this action, as out of a doubt too, that it might appear to you
rather a disobligation, than the contray, who perhaps, by thus having lost the
hope of possessing her, had also lost the desire. To these, and many as
pregnant arguments, we represented the duty of Friends, and the inclination of
a Lover, the first not more powerfully inviting our assistance, than
Altezeera's melancholy would the continuation of your Passion, and the freeing
her from Pacorus's; Yet for all this we obtained Theoxcena's consent, rather by
her silence, than her granting it. Having thus elected this resolve, under a
pretense of paying a vow to the god Aesculapius, when I recovered of my wounds,
I begged and obtained leave from Artabazus, to go into Syria, to a Temple
Dedicated to him, which stood upon the Banks of Euphrates; Phanasder would have
accompanied me the first days journey, which I absolutely declined, lest it
might give a suspicion of that, which were absolutely ruined, if any were taken
of it; we therefore took leave in Tygranocerta, from whence in three days he
determined to depart, to put that in execution which we had in design; but
instead of going to that Temple, I went but two days on the way thither, and
the third (without any Servant, because 'twas a pilgrimage) I took the shortest
way to Tire, where having hired a swift Quinquerem Gally, the wind too blowing
fair at East, till we came to the length of Tarentume, to which we sailed and
rowed in sixteen days (so signally did the gods favor my employment) I caused
the Mariners to put into this Gulf, which though I thought a misfortune, I now
find is a providence, and hope you will so improve it, as not to make the gods
repent they have conferred it on you.

'Twas thus said, the generous Artavasdes to Artabanes and Callimachus, that
Falintus finished his Relation, which I hope you have too just an opinion of
me, not to remember, and though it be of my telling, yet that it was in his
words, since many of them were so flattering, that I could not have been vain
enough to have spoke them of my self; neither will I trouble you with any of my
sorrows or disorders, otherwise than by a brief and true assurance that they
were proportionate to my loss; which, to repair or revenge, I determined to
make use of that excess of Gallantry, which the generous Phanasder had offered
me, and to effect it, immediately to return with Falintus in his Gally. But
alas, this resolve was no sooner formed, than the thought of leaving Artabanes
in Rome, and of retiring without him, destroyed it suddenly again, and that
too with more reason than 'twas formed. But Ventidius observing my trouble, and
fancying the cause, so absolutely undertook my excuse, and the care and
protection of you (for, continued Artavasdes) you know by your permission, I
had acquainted him who you were) that in the transports of an injured, and
hopeful Lover, I at last received Ventidius's assurances as satisfactory, and
having again by vows confirmed him my permission to serve Vdosia, and my
assistance to obtain her, I staid no longer than I writ to my dear Artabanes
that I referred the cause of my fault, and the care of his, and the generous
Sillace's safety to Ventidius's relation and Friendship, which being finished, I
went immediately without any Servant but Philanax, to Falintus's Gally, where
after a million of embraces and vows of an eternal friendship, I took a final
leave of Ventidius, who promised to apologize for my abrupt departure to the
Senate, by the advantage they would probably derive from it, and who
immediately departed for Rome, as we did for Asia. The same wind which had
hindered Falintus's Navigation, so favored ours, that in eighteen days we
landed at Alexandretta, from whence with extraordinary diligence in six days
more I arrived at Satala, a Principality which was fallen to me by the generous
Annexanders death, and in which Vdosia resided, whom I went purposely to see,
and to give her those just impressions of Ventidius, which should fortify her
Heart against the reception of any others. I saw her, (my dear Artabanes) and
found in that sight, how much injury the Painter had done her, and how much
right Ventidius had done himself in his election, for indeed, never Beauty did
both promise and give so much at once as Udozia's, which (in a word) possessed
such transcendent perfection, that had it not been for the relics of my
Passion, I might have found the honor of being her Brother, would not be
greater than the misfortune. After these professions which my relations and
esteem made me make, I began to conjure her by both, that she would fix her
thoughts upon a person, which I not only esteemed most worthy of them, but
which was really so, and which she might be in some degree confirmed in, when
his interior graces were at least equal to those perfections of Nature, of
which I presented her an imperfect Copy; thereupon I gave her Ventidius's
Picture, in a Box so precious, that nothing could be more, but what it
contained; and then gave her a character of him, which thought it were short of
Truth (which had been an inevitable error to whosoever had undertaken it) yet
it failed not to produce that effect, which a more proportionate one to his
desert had done; for Udozia whilst I was speaking, with her Cheeks died with a
perfect Vermillion so concernedly considered the generous Ventidius's Picture,
that I thought she would be wounded in the same way, in which she had wounded
him; and I was no sooner silent, than she told me, I know not Sir, whether I
have more cause to be satisfied with your care, or to be the contrary in so
evident a demonstration that you doubt my obedience and affection, since in
this one Command, concerning Ventidius, I find pregnant arguments of both, for
your election cannot more abundantly demonstratethe former, than your so
earnestly commanding me, what is as much an effect of my judgment, as
obedience, does the latter. Dear Udozia (I replied) embracing her) I am not so
much an enemy to my own Felicity, as to doubt your Affection; but if I did,
your giving your self to any man at my request, had abundantly suppressed in me
that belief, since when you scruple not to be unjust (for I esteem it too
transcendent a reward, to be a kind of injustice, and your giving your self to
any Mortal, is that rewarad) to raise in me that Faith; I cannot decline making
it mine, without revenging on myself my own incredulity. Udozia still retaining
her blushes (which this discourse continued in as high a quality as my request
for Ventidius had created them in,) made me a return as full of flattery as
mine was void of any, and then gave me a positive assurance of an absolve
resigning her ^elf to my dispose. I thought it then high time to let her know
the generous Annexander's death, which till then I had declined, because Grief
was an ill preparative to Love, being of a contrary quality; and because I
thought if she received the former, it would so entirely possess her heart,
that the latter would not have so dangerous an admittance; at last by degrees I
acquainted her with that fatal intelligence, which having forced us to mingle
our tears together, by little and little, I began to dry my own, and she hers
in imitation of me; but knowing that to divert a sorrow, is to lessen it, I
resumed again my discourse of Ventidius, to whom I told her, I would, and to
whom I then did dispatch an Express, to acquaint him with his Felicity, which I
assured her he was determined to come and implore at the head of fifty thousand
Romans, whose courages so led, would soon invest her in Empires as large, as
the Heart which adored her. I then began to enquire in what posture Armenia
stood, for Satala was upon the frontiers of it, and the first place in the
Kingdom I had rested in: Udozia told me all things were in a general quiet:
that the Parthian Army (upon the intelligence that Crassus lay about the famous
Temple of Hierapolis, intending suddenly to invade their Country) were all
with Arsaces returned into it, but 10000 Horse, which remained as Guards to
Pacorus and Altezeera, who were shortly to follow, and which had hitherto been
interrupted by a fresh indisposition of the latters, who yet was now so well
recovered that in three days, she with Pacorus, intended to leave Tygranocerta,
and to begin their journey for Parthia, on the frontiers of which Empire,
Arsaces with all the gallantry of it, had published he would meet them, and
that all this she had received by an Express the day before, from Lindesia. I
was not more astonished to learn Armenia was in so perfect a tranquillity, than
joy'd to find Altezeera had not yet left it; and after a short reflection on
both, I ascribed the former to the latter, and that the gods by having so
obligingly detained her, had induced Phanasder to suspend that Insurrection he
intended another cause producing the effect, for which only that was designed.
Neither was my Fancy so little flattering, as not to create in me some hopes,
that Altezeera's indisposition was rather a pretense than a reality, and
purposely contrived to give me time to come to her rescue, and my own felicity:
In this Faith I esteemed it not requisite to invite Crassus's invasion, who
too, being in this place, was at too great a distance, to answer so sudden an
occasion as mine, but rather to fly to Tygranocerta, and there to form my
resolutions according to my Intelligence. Therefore having found Udozia had as
much discretion as Beauty, to let her know that was my belief, I privately sent
for Cleomen, the Governor of Satala, who I commanded thenceforth to obey
Udozia's Orders, to whom I left entirely the Care and Governof all: Cleomen
gave me a million of thanks for so pleasing a Command and published himself
exceedingly satisfied, that what he had hitherto done by inclination, he should
now do by duty. Then after having given Udozia fresh assurance of a passionate
affection and friendship, and conjured both her and Cleomen, to keep my being
in Armenia a Secret, with fresh Horses, and only with Falintus and Philanax, in
four days I crossed the lower Armenia, and came to Tygranocerta, late at night;
the first place I lighted at, was at the Palace of Theoxcena, with whom I was
confident to find Phanasder, or learn where I might, and by the advice of so
good Friends and Judgments; fix upon the best resolution; but there I learnt,
Theoxcena had that day left Tygranocerta with Artabazus, and all the Court, who
were gone to accompany Pacorus and Altezeera, toward the frontiers of Parthia.
Oh gods! what horror did this fatal news strike me with? but not to contribute
to my misfortune, I determined (having given our Horses a little refreshment)
to follow that Beauty which fled, both from my Passion and me; and therefore
went directly to Phanasder's Lodgings, for I could not learn at Theoxcena's any
intelligence of him, but that he was not gone with her. Falintus, who went in
first, got me a private Apartment, in which I continued til he returned, who
soon brought me word, that Phanasder was a days journey from Tygranocerta, and
that before he went he had left order, if any came to him from either of us,
that he should be speedily advertised of it.

I therefore immediately dispatched a Messenger to him, to let him know I was
come, and that I would the next day overtake Altezeera, and learn my destiny
from her whilst she was in Armenia; and that if he would follow me, he should
be certain to hear of me from Theoxcena, to whom only besides the Princess I
would discover my self. This Express being dispatched, after three hours rest,
we began again to prosecute our journey, and the next night overtook the Court,
which, by good fortune, lay at a magnificent Castle of Evaxes, whither as soon
as we arrived, I endeavored by all means possible to speak to Theoxcena; but
neither my own endeavors, nor those of Falintus and Philanax could procure it,
unless absolutely one of us would discover himself, which we positively
esteemed destructive to our design; therefore, after a short consideration, I
resolved to make my self known to Evaxes, of whose fidelity I was justly
confident, and from him to implore the blessing of an opportunity to entertain
without any witness the Princess Altezeera. The civil Evaxes, joyfully received
my disclosing my self, and more the means I gave him of obliging me, which he
undertook positively; and bringing me by stolen passages to that Room allotted
for her Bedchamber, he placed me in a Cabinet contiguous to it, and assured me
so to order all things, that once that night, I should have that opportunity I
so passionatly implored. I embraced him a thousand times for this obligation,
and gave him as many verbal retributions, which finished, I only conjured him
to tell me truly, whether Altezeera were yet married to Pacorus, to which he
absolutely assured me she was not, neither would be, till her arrival in
Parthia. Immediately after this he left me, and 'twas already so late, that I
had not been above half an hour in my impatiency and my Prison, when through a
favorable little hole, I perceived the Princess come into the Chamber with all
those Charms with which she conquered whosoever beheld her, and waited upon by
Pacorus the last evincement of that power.

WHen the generous Artavasdes was in this part of his Relation, the Chyrurgions
coming in, interrupted it, by acquainting him it was time to dress both his and
Artabanes's wounds. This Summons they obeyed, though in it the last of them
found a new affliction in his friends hurts, whose dressing was so long of
necessity to suspend a Narration, in which he could not be more concerned than
he was ravished; but at length the Chyrurgions having performed their duties,
and having assured their Patients, that their wounds were as hopeful as their
Art could wish, they immediately, by Callimachus's command, withdrew
themselves, and then Artavasdes, upon his and Arta^anes's passionate desire,
thus resumed his Story, where they had interrupted it.

PARTHENISSA.
THE THIRD PART.
BOOK III.
GReat gods! (continued Artavasdes) you only know my Transports at the seeing
of so many Beauties, and of him which ravished them from me! Ah! (said I to my
self) go Artavasdes, and prostrate at thy Princesses feet, conjure her not to
make herself the reward of any thing but her perfectest Adorer, and in that
quality implore her for thy self: If Pacorus pretend a Title to her under that
Notion, decide it before the Judge, and recompense of the Combat, and by
vanquishing thy Rival, conquer her disdain, and inconstancy, or by being
vanquished by him, end thy torments, and thy life: This Artavasdes, is the
noblest, as well as readiest expedient; but alas! (I continued) she that
preferred Pacorus before thee, will not so much hazard the object of her love
and inconstancy, as to expose his life to a hand, which strikes with the Sword
of Justice and Revenge.

Whilst I was building and destroying a thousand such resolutions, and
thoughts, Pacorus was entertaining Altezeera with all the respect and devotion,
so great a beauty and flame could inspire. I must confess my disorders for
awhile gave me not leave to consider what he was doing, or what he said; but
when they did, I endeavored by an extraordinary attentiveness to repair that
precious time I had so misimploy'd; and I was no sooner composed to a settled
hearing, than I heard Pacorus, who kneeled before Altezeera, thus speak to her:
My Princess, alas! why did you confine my joys from being perfected till you
came into Parthia? Was it to torment the ambition of my desires, by so long a
protraction of them? or to punish my crime in my continuance of it? or else did
you so much injure my felicity, to esteem it of so common a quality, that
circumstances could indear it? and that the suspension of the blessing, could
bring any accession to it? If it be the first of these, to continue the
punishment of an aspiring which my Princess has so often pardoned to my
reiterated prayers and tears, is to be as much unjust as she is capable of; and
if the latter, she is almost as injurious to herself, as cruel to me.

Ah! (thought I) how unjust are the gods rather, to confer their blessings on
one who has no title to them, and who if he had, merits none, by exclaiming
against a felicity which nothing but a little time will place him in, and
perfect; when at the same instant they divest me, not only of the joys, but
hopes of them, when she too which ought to be the distributer of them is mine,
by services, by gift, and by vows. That distance betwixt the place where
Altezeera was, and where I remained so sad an Auditor, was so great, that she
not uttering her answer with that violence Pacorus had done his question, I
could not hear it, but I remember after he had printed an ardent kiss upon her
hand, he rose up, and told her, I will go rather Madam, and implore the gods
either to hasten the motions of time, or retard those of my impatiency; for
whilst they both continue as they are, my torments must do the like: Then
after some discourses, which I heard but in broken parts, he withdrew himself.
I observed, that for a short time after, none appeared in the Chamber, nor that
any noise was made about it, and believing I derived this opportunity from
Evaxes's favor and engagement, not to lose it, I came trembling and pale, out
of my concealment, and going to Altezeera in an unequal pace, I no sooner came
to her feet, than prostrating my self at them, I told her, If Madam, the
miserable Artavasdes presents himself before you, it is not to reproach you
having made him so, nor to summon you of those holy and passionate vows, which
raised his joys to a transcendency nothing can proportion, but the torments
your having concealed them has cast him into: Neither, fair Princess, can you
tell him it can be more his duty, than he does you, that it is his inclination,
to create your felicity by the ruin of his own. He does not therefore come to
conjure you, not to give that blessing to the greatness of Pacorus's Title,
which you a thousand times have promised to the greatness of his Passion; for
he always esteemed it so unjust you should bestow the divine Altezeera, on one
who is almost as much her Subject by the advantage of her birth, as by that of
her beauty, that he would have killed himself, that he would have died to
prevent in her so criminal a mercy; and if he has lived in a contrary
flattering hope, 'twas only because he esteemed no sin so great, as to disobey
her.

Whilst I was speaking a thousand things of this quality, which too I uttered
in the pressingst Accents that ever the highest grief and flame was capable of;
Altezeera was so surpised, and astonished, that had her affection remained as
fixed as her body then did, I had been exempted from transcendent torments, by
resembling felicites; nor did she awhile after I had ended speaking, give me
any Answer which might have resolved my doubts, whether her silence proceeded
from a cruel, or obliging cuase; for all she said when she broke hers, was
only, Oh gods! Is this Artavasdes that I see? Yes Madam (I replied) it is that
Artavasdes who has given the divine Altezeera so absolutely his life, that he
durst not without her permission put a period to it, though what she has of
late acted, has made him languish in such torments, that the best way of making
them cease, next to that of the blessing of her esteem, is to make them cease,
next to that of the blessing of her esteem, is to make them cease, by the
blessing of death: It Is therefore (Madam) I present you this Poniard, that if
you will not be just to your vows and promises, yet at least, that you will be
charitable to him, to whom they were made; and if I implore any thing before I
die, it is only that I may do it with the consolation of receiving my ease from
her, from whom I have my sufferings, and that she will declare I died as
innocent, as unfortunate. This (fair Princess) if your justice does now deny
me, your pity cannot long; for my languishings will evince, death is the lesser
ill: Neither, Madam, do I implore it on any score but yours, for my sufferings
proportionating my loss, will make such deep impressions in you, that your
joys in your intended Nuptials, will receive a resembling disturbance, at
least if you have not as absolutely banished Compassion from your heart, as
Love; thereupon kissing the hilts of the Poniard, I offered that part of it to
her, and presenting her my breast, I implored her to make what had been the
Scene of her highest Empire, now that of a proportionate pity. But alas she
declined making use of that Weapon, to wound me with a more curel one, I mean
her words, which accompanied with an inflamed look, told me, Traitor
Artanasdes, though thy Crimes merit I should become thy Executioner, as well as
thy Judge, yet I decline being the former, to make them appear the greater; and
if (as thou say) thou do esteem no sin higher than to disobey me, I
command thee evince the truth of that profession, by never coming again into my
sight. Then rising up hastily, she went out of the Chamber by the same door she
came into it; and though her remove was very sudden, and that my amazement was
as great, yet I cried out, Stay Altezeera, though Altvasdes know himself
innocent, yet because you do not think him so, behold how he will punish not
his guilt, but his misfortune: Then running to that Poniard she had flung away,
I took it up, and in the horror and despair of my condition, I had sheathed it
in my heart, if Evaxes (who listened at a backdoor) had not has^ily come in,
and snatching it out of my hand, prevented it. Though it be a transcendent
wrong, when one is in proportion at misery, to take away the cure of it, yet my
rage not having so absolutely blinded me, but that knowing what was in its own
nature an offense, was intended for a charity, I only told Evaxes (having first
furiously looked on him) it is in vain Evaxes, it is in vain you think to keep
mefrom death, by having only took from me one means of acting it, when the
ways which lead unto the Grave cannot be more, than the causes which invite me
to it: Then turning from him, and observing Altezeera was gone, I ran
precipitately after her, but alas she had locked the door upon me, and thereby
I found she had not only excluded me from the hopes of possessing her, but from
those of clearing an imaginary guilt, to which she implicitly ascribed that
fatal deprivation. In the rage of so strange an usage, I was a thousand times
about to have forced it open, had not Evaxes hindered me, by representing, that
if Altezeera had not apprehended my vindication, she would neither have then
denied listening to it, nor debarred me the means of discovering how passionate I
was to evince it; That since her Actions so evidently demonstrated that Truth,
I ought to impute her objecting Crimes to my charge, but as a cloud for her
own, and consider that to be her inconstancy, which she disguised under the
name of her resentments; That since she was of so volatile a disposition, 'twas
better I had made that discovery in the condition I was yet in, than in that
which Pacorus was so near embracing, since I might consider, that as my
felicity, which he could not learn but as his torment; That it was still an
Argument she loved me, when she declined imposing those miseries on me my
desires ambition'd, to confer them on another, whose subsequent troubles I
should pleasingly disclose those I had so happily avoided.

These reasons would have appeared so to any but me, and would too so to me,
had I but listened to them, which then I did not; for all the while he was
speaking, I was so too, sometimes resolving to go and punish Artabazus, for
having been so far from hindering his Sisters inconstancy, that he solicited
and provoked it; but then the reflection on the greatness of the Sin, hindered
me from acting it, especially too when that reflection was fortified by that on
his quality, which made it a greater injustice not to act for the safety of his
Subjects in general, than to do it for any one of them in particular, so that I
had no just cause to be offended with him, for having of two evils elected the
least. My fury not finding a fit object in him, I began to contemplate Pacorus
as one, who was not only the cause of Altezeera's inconstancy, but the
continuer of it, and whose destruction would both revenge me on him and her.
But then the reflection on the occasion of his Sin, appeared a sufficient
Apology for it, and knowing how impossible 'twas to see, and not love
Altezeera, in the very necessity of his fault,; besides, by services and
engagements, she could not be more mine, than upon both those scores she was
Pacorus's; and yet I had been so unjust, as to solicit her for Artavasdes, and
therefore 'twere to be more so, to punish that in another, which I practiced in
my felf; that she was only mine by the first grant, and his by the last, which
in all concessions of Love is the bindingst Title; and lastly that I owed a
life unto him, which till I had repaid, I was his Debtor, and therefore should
not be his Murderer.

Whilst my Reason and my Passion were thus making War against each other,
Evaxes, who still apprehended the last of them would fling me into some strange
Crime, and that my continuance where I was, might into a proportionate danger,
(all the Guards in the Castle being Parthians) he conjured me so passionately
to retire to an Apartment he had provided for me, and there establilsh my
resolutions, when my resentments were so qualified, as not to silence the
dictates of my reason, that at last by following, rather than by promise, I
obeyed him, who led me by a stolen passage to my Chamber, not meeting any one
by the way, which though we had, I am confident I had not been discovered, if
at least I had been as unknowable to all, as I was to my^^lf. There I told
Falintus, and Philanax, what had happened, and there 'twas that Evaxes
repeating those reasons my rage hindered me from hearing, (which too were
strengthened by many others as powerful from Falintus) I determined the next
morning as an evincement of their operation, to retire into some solitude, and
there spend as much time as the banishing Altezeera from my heart, would take
up, whose influence there was not already a little eclipsed, since I could form
a resolution of extinguishing it.

This Declaration proved as pleasing to them, as that which created it, was the
contrary to me; but they having retired themselves, I past the night in such
confused thoughts, that it had been difficult to have collected any thing from
them, but that they were the productions of an exorbitant di^^emper. The day no
sooner appeared, than telling Falintus and Evaxes, whither I intended to go the
next night, and having commanded Philanax to follow me, as soon as he had
learnt from them, whether my being in Armenia, and my last Action were
discovered, how they were both relished, and whether I might safely demand
justice of Artabazus for Anexander's Murder, that in the certainty of being
denied it, I might thereby act it myself, immediately (before the Court was up)
I took Horse, and was accompanied out of the Castle by Evaxes, (who for a long
while made no scruples to trust me alone, being so newly recovered from a
despair, whose effects were yet somewhat visible in my face; but having secured
his jealousies by many vows, and by the improbability of my so much
contributing to my Enemies triumphs, I finally took leave of him, and had not
Traveled above an hundred Furlongs, when coming into a Wood at the extremity of
a great Plain, I was stopped by a violent Cry behind me, which turning about to
learn the cause of, I saw the man that uttered it, come running toward me, as
fast as his Horse could carry him; as soon as he came near me, he drew his
Sword, and bade me defend my self, if my Crimes had not divested me of the
Courage to justify them: This Declaration, though it much surpised me, yet I
did not near so much as the knowledge that 'twas Phanasder which made it; but
being confident he mistook me, I prepared my self for nothing but to embrace
him, and offer him my Sword and Life to join in his revenge; but perceiving he
esteemed himself discharged of all other Ceremonies, by having denounced the
Combat, I cried out to him, hold Phanasder it is Artavasdes speaks to you. It Is
he ( Phanasder briskly replied) that I seek, and who to his other Triumphs must
add that of my Life, or in the loss of his, I must repair my wrongs.

Oh gods! (I answered) if my Death could be but as great a satisfaction to
Phanasder, as to me, he would oblige us both in acting it; but since such a
satisfaction cannot be perfected without as great a Crime, let me understand
first wherein you esteem me guilty; for if I do not so entirely vindicate
Artavasdes, that you must acknowledge Phanasder criminal, for having thought
him so, I will employ my Sword, not to resist, but execute your Revenge. If thy
Crimes (said Phanasder) were not too-too-much apparent, I should not have
sought this opportunity, which since they are, I will not spend it to show thee
thy sins, but to punish them. Then, having again bid me defend my self, or my
submission should not be my Sanctuary, he charged me with such fury, that I
found by experiment the high character I always had of his Courage, was but
too dangerous a truth. But his rude Reply to an offer he could not have
declined without seeking to be my Enemy, and the certainty I found, that I must
derive my safety not from my innocence, but resistance, though they made me
finally draw my Sword, yet I made but use of it to keep him from acting a sin,
I know he would in a right understanding as much deplore, as now he was
sollicitous to perform; and indeed he pressed me so incessantly and vigorously,
that had not an unexpected Accident ended the Combat, my death or his must have
done it; for making a furious blow at my head, and I defending it with my
Sword, his flew out of his hand in two pieces.

At this Phanasder was not more astonished, than I was satisfied, which I
expressed by telling him, Phanasder, Let that Life I give you, convince you that
I am still your Friend. No, no, Artavasdes, (he hastily replied) it convinces
me thou art the contrary; for if thou were not, having laden me with such
sorrows, thou would not deny me their cure, being it is in thy power,
therefore I declare, if thou can be yet concerned in having me esteem thee my
Friend, nothing can be more contributory to it, than to make use of thy
Victory, which the more to induce thee to, I protest by all those wrongs thou
have done me, I will leave no place unsearch'd, nor no means unattempted for my
revenge. If (said I) my giving you your life after your first declaration, has
not convinced you that I am your Friend, I hope the doing it after this latter,
will sufficiently effect it; for were I concerned in your death, I have not
only the power, but the provocation to act it. But, Phanasder, I had rather
expose my life to your fury, than secure it by the destruction of what I prefer
a thousand times before it, which not only my friendship for you, but even your
hatred to me makes me profess, and which I still implore to learn the subject
of, that if I do not extinguish your desire of revenge, I may present you
wherewithal to act it. Oh gods! (replied Phanasder, lifting up his eyes) why
do you give unto guilt the same expressions with which innocence should be
clothed? Then turning them to me, he told me, Artavasdes, thou will not then
by ending of my torments, show methou have some pity, if not friendship for me.

No, (I replied) for should I so put a period to yours, I should create in my
self greater than I cen extinguish in you. Remember then (he replied) that
there being no way to end those I groan under but by my death, or thine, that
denying me the former, thou necessitatest me thereby as much as by thy crimes,
unto the latter, which I will perform, though thou should conceal thy self in
that heart, which thou valu'st more than thine own; then turning about his
Horse, he thrust himself into the Wood full speed, my pity at his condition not
being greater, than my ignorance of what created it, I followed him, to learn
what he had twice denied me; and when I found I could not overtake him, I
endeavored to make my voice do it, which was so far from retarding, that it did
but hasten his course, so that I soon lost sight of him, yet for above four
Furlongs I followed by the track of his Horse, but then mine began to faint,
and suddenly after fell dead under me, by a deep wound he had received in the
fight, and which my earnest prosecution of Phanasder made me not observe. 'Twas
thereafter my heat was mitigated, that I began to find how much the gods took
delight to torment me; and after I had a little reflected on those strange
Accidents which had arrived me in so short a space, I could not abstain from
saying, Great gods! was it not enough misery for the unfortunate Artavasdes to
lose his Princess, but you must add unto it, the losing of his friend? And were
not both those losses sufficient to glutt your hatred, but that you must give
me resolution and fortitude to survive them? Ah cruel Powers, did you give me
Innocence but by punishing it as Guilt, to change mine into it? And are you so
sollicitous to make me blaspheme, that you make Innocence unfortunate, to
invite me to it? But (I continued, after a short silence) if I have offended
you, let the world read my sin in my punishment; but since I have not offended
either Altezeera, or Phanasder, why would you induce the world to believe I
have, by making them my Persecutors?

'Twas with as many extravagant Reasonings as these that I fed my despair, and
my rage not permitting me to rest, I found my self out of the Wood, as soon as
I remembered I had been in it, and seeing a Village not far off, I went thither,
where having hired a Horse, I prosecuted that journey Phanasders strange
distemper had interrupted. As soon as I came into my Inn, I found, that
Falintus and Philanax (having met with no obstructions) were gotten thither
before me, from whom I was informed, that though they could not find by any
intelligence they had learnt, that my being in Armenia, nor my having been at
Evaxes Castle were known, yet they had cause to believe both were, for
Crassolis that morning was retired from the Court; neither could they any more
discover the cause of his departure, than the place of his retreat, so that
Falintus told me, I might be confident Artabazus would not deny me justice for
my Fathers murder, since Crassolis to think his own guilt, only not my
knowledge of it, made him fly, and in that faith he might return; which as
soon as he did, then was the time of demanding justice: For the giving of it
then, would give me revenge with it; and to implore it now, were absolutely to
miss of the latter, by a concession of the former, since to condemn him, were
but giving him advice to secure himself.

These Reasons since I could not suspect, either them, or the Author of them, I
determined to obey, I then told Falintus, what as unfortunate, as strange an
Accident had arrived me with Phanasder, which he admired at as much as he was
ignorant of the cause, and told me, This morning, Sir, I met him coming from
the Princess Theoxcena's Apartment, and with a countenance whose disorder he
could not conceal; after he had by some short embraces and expressions
congratulated my happy return, he then precipitately asked me where you were,
for he had some business of high concern to communicate unto you.

I told him, that both Philanax and I, continued at Court, purposely to learn,
and send you things of that quality; and that if he were over-harrast with his
late journey, and that he would acquaint me with the secret, I would overtake
you that night, and stop you till his coming.

To this Phanasder replied, That he would trust me with his heart, but that the
business he had with you, was of a nature which would lose its virtue, if it
were delivered you by any but himself, and therefore he passionately conjured
me to let him know which way you had took, and to pardon a silence which I
could not condemn, when I should be instructed in the cause. I did therefore
satisfy both his requests, and 'twas by my information that he so
unfortunately found you out; but could not you, Sir, (continued Falintus) in
his passion, collect something which might tell you what created it?

No, (I replied) though by reiterated entreaties I conjured him to tell it me;
and with faithful promises, if I were guilty, to contribute to, and not oppose
his revenge; but all was in vain: and I could collect nothing but that he was
as confident I was criminal, as I am, that I am not. The best part of the night
we entertained our selves in resembling discourses, which at length I put a
period to, by conjuring Falintus to continue about the Court, to endeavor to
learn the cause of Phanasder's change; that though his carriage rendered him
not absolutely worthy my care, yet thinking the knowledge of his error would
not only punish the Criminal, but restore unto me the gallant Phanasder, I was
passionately concerned therein; That he would enquire after Crassolis, and send
me constant intelligence to a Solitude near Satala, which I had elected in a
great measure by his persuasions and reasons, and where I would pass away the
relics of my melancholy and love.

Falintus would have accompanied me thither, which I absolutely declined; and
then he having as absolutely promised to obey my former requests, the next
morning we separated our selves, he taking the way to the Court, and I to
Thospia, where I intended to visit Lyndesia, before I secluded my self from the
World. There that excellent Woman gave me such admirable Reason, for the
suppressing of my Passion, that I must havebeen entirely divested of the
former, had I not divested my self of the latter; which whilst I did not (for
I shall not scruple to confess, that sometimes I made a start into Love) by the
reflection on Lyndesia's reasoning, I acknowledged my self void of any, and
knowing my self to be so, I excused my fault, in the knowledge of my condition:
Neither did she only give me precepts, but example against the assaults of
Fortune; and what she would have had me practice in Altezeera's case, she did
in herself Anexanders, though in it she found so little reason to fortify
herself with, that perhaps that was the only reason with which she did it;
neither did her calmness in so high an essay, appear anything like
insensibility, no, it showed its cause in its effect, and the gods did in some
degree repair her loss, by making it so largely evidence her virtue: I have
been (continued Artavasdes) somewhat the more particular in Lyndesia's
character, because her perfections are of a resembling quality, as also to
oppose a Maxim as absurd as common, which is the declining the praise of those
to whom we have a near relation; whereas those that have not any, can hardly
make an exact character; and by this low rule, the chief, if not the only way
by which we must attain to the knowledge of a perfection, must be the Argument
for not publishing it. I continued two days at Thospia with Lyndesia, from
whose actions, as well as words, I received that consolation I feared she would
have needed. The third day I took my leave, and desired her to continue Udozia
where I had given her an absolute power, not only as it was a place near which
I intended to reside, but being on the frontiers, Ventidius, (whose passion I
had not only at large acquainted her with, but made her approve) upon the
making his Addresses to Udozia, might not be necessitated to put himself in any
hazard, by coming unaccompanied, or Armenia, by coming with an Army. This
Lyndesia having granted, I left Thospia, and in twelve days came to my little
retirement, where retaining none but Philanax with me, and two or three
servants for necessary uses, I began to make a fierce War against my Passion,
and my Sadness, which I found were Enemies easier to be conquered, than
extirpated, and like some barbarous people, were invisible, when any power was
extant to oppose them; but when that power appeared no more, they instantly
did, and assumed as high a Sovereignty, as if they had been Conquerors. This
made me incessantly continue in Arms, and those I made use of, were the
remembrance of the services I had rendered Altezeera of her vows, and of her
unconstancy; for which I found so little excuse, that what had given the wrong,
I thought would also repair it: A thousand times in this resolution I was going
to abandon my Solitude, and by a public undisturbed serenity, evince I robbed
her of so much of her triumph, as that my sorrow composed no part thereof; but
alas immediately I fancied Altezeera in all her charms, and captivating my
resolution, with the same eyes with which she had my liberty, with whose
influences, my traiterous fancy so conspired, that though I were at too great a
distance to receive their real impressions, yet by that false helper I carried
still their effects about me. Never man endured those torments the miserable
Artavasdes did, and his fate was so particular, that whilst he yet disputed
the Victory, he resented more pregnant sufferings than he could have in the
very losing it: And if mine received any intermission, 'twas from the visits of
Vdosia, in whose sight and conversation I had some good intervals, which
continued me in some charity to the Sex, by receiving from one of it the ease
of those pains another had made me resent. 'Twas thus for a long while that I
languish'd away my time, during which I received frequent and faithful
intelligences from the generous Falintus; his first was, that notwithstanding a
scrutinous enquiry and search, he could never learn either waht was the cause
of Phanasder's change, or what was become of him: That the fair Theoxcena, as
Author of, or participater in his discontents, had retired herself either
absolutely, or conditionally from the world; and that he was as ignorant of the
place of her retreat, as of what was the occasion of it: That Altezeera had
been solemnly married to the Prince of Parthia, immediately after her arrival
in that Kingdom: And that Crassus had lost his Army, and his Life, in a furious
Battle against the Parthians, who had been assisted by a visible Divinity, that
vanished as soon as did the Roman hopes. These three Intelligences were as
sensible unto me, as any others I was capable of; for in the first of them, I
lost my friends; in the second, my Mistress; and in the third, my hopes of
revenging or repairing that loss. I will pass over the many sighs and
complaints I gave to those accessions of sorrow, to let you know, that the
Solitude which Reason could not make me abandon, Friendship did: For I received
an advice from Udozia, that Ventidius with an Army (as formidable from the
Nation, as the numbers which composed it) had already crossed the Hellespont, and
was so far advanced into the letter Asia, that if intended to see him before he
entered Armenia, I could not any longer delay my visit. This Alarm I joyfully
received, and in some degree I was reconciled to the gods, who, though they had
denied me the establishment of my own felicity, had yet blessed me with the power
of settling my friends. In two days I had fitted my self to leave my
retirement, which I could not do without some reluctance, as an acknowledgement
of those uninterrupted hours of melancholy I had spent in it; my first journey
was to Satala, where having formed my Equipage and received those reiterated
assurances from Udozia, which were to settle Ventidius's, and my felicity, I
crossed the mountain Scordicus, which separates Armenia from Cilicia, and in two
days after came to Tharsus, the Metropolis of that Province, where Ventidius
then lay; who having Advertisement of my Arrival, drew out all his Army (which
consisted of 50000 natural Italians) into a large Plain on the East Side of the
City, where he received me with a million of Embraces at the head of them, and
where I found nothing more worthy admiration than the Forces, but their
General. 'Twas at this first meeting (after I had saluted all the Roman
Tribunes) and as we were riding to Tharsus, that he told me: If (my dear
Artavasdes) I have so long abstained from acknowledging Udozia's victory at her
feet, 'twas only to evince my respect equal to my Passion, and not to declare
my self her Subject, till I presented her with an Army that might make those so
by her commands, which were unworthy to be so by her sight: The gods know how
just this duty is, by esteeming it fitter to abandon their Rome in Crassus's
defeat, than that I should be any longer suspended from paying it: Yes (my
Artavasdes) I am now come to implore that Assistance you have so generously
promised me, and by which if I am victorious, I shall no more fear any other
Conquests, than desire them. He told me many as passionate words as these, and
delivered them in an Accent which was so full of grace and concern, that I
easily perceived what inspired them, and from whence they came. Ventidius had
no sooner ended speaking, than I told him: If after those miseries the cruel
gods have imposed on me, I have found sufficient fortitude to outlive them, I
derived it principally, perhaps entirely, from my concerns in the generous
Ventidius; and if since my torments began I have relished any thing of joy, I
attest the gods, 'twas only by reflecting on my success for him, which has been
as proportionate to my desires, as to his. Yes (my Ventidius) Vdozia sets that
value on you which you have ambitioned, and if by my imperfect character she
has assumed such an esteem of you, judge then what it will rise unto, when she
sees your person, and has heard the charms of your conversation? Ah Artavasdes,
(said Ventidius) I apprehend you have been so much more my Friend than Nature
and Education has, that to continue in the blessing of her esteem, I must live
in it by your character, and to continue that felicity, I must deny my self the
other of seeing her. If this (I replied) be your fears, you have not many hours
Travel to clear them; but certainly you could not have so good an opinion of
Udozia, if you had so ill an one of her judgment. 'Twas in such discourses as
these that we entertained one another till our entering into Tharsus, where that
necessary formal Civility for awhile denied us a privacy, which, as soon as we
enjoyed, Ventidius employed a part of it, to tell me those admirable
vicissitudes of the Roman State, in the victories and death of Julius Caesar;
which latter, though the Conspirators believed would either have restored the
Roman liberty, or made them Lords of it, yet they had failed of both, and the
event did manifest there was more difficulty in making the Romans assume their
freedom, than there had been in making them lay it down. That the gods had
evinced how they disrelish'd the spilling of that great Man's Blood, not only by
depriving the Actors in it of that end they promised themselves, but by
bringing all those to an untimely death, which had brought Caesar to one.

He further acquainted me, how that after the defeat and death of Crassus, he
found little opposition to be General in his stead, and as little to raise an
Army to revenge the Roman honor and loss; and though the Command was of a
quality which might have raised desires of possessing it in the most recluse
spirits, yet he had only sought and embraced it, but to have a handsomer way to
make his Addresses, and a more powerful one, to revenge my wrongs; That
therefore he had procured from Mark Anthony, Octavius Caesar, and Lepidus (who
then composed the second Triumvirate) a full liberty not only to revenge on
Artabazus the violating of that League Anexander had concluded with the people
of Rome, but also if he esteemed it requisite, to make that Revenge a
dethroning of him, and establishing in his room such an Armenian Prince, as he
was confident would have honesty enough to value that virtue above interest:
That this power he had the more easily obtained, because the Princess Altezeera
by marrying Pacorus, had declared herself as much an Enemy to Rome, as to me;
and being the apparent Successor of Armenia, the Senate were justly jealous of
uniting that Crown with the Parthian: That too he had the earnestlier
ambition'd this, because that forfeiture of Artabazus's gave me a right to
Armenia by my birth, which a Roman Army would so confirm, that he would find in
injuring Artavasdes, he had as much wronged his interest, as his honesty.

The gods forbid (I replied, interrupting him) that you should employ your Arms
so unjustly, and that I should for my Kings crimes, do any thing but lament
them; besides (generous Ventidius) had Artabazus forfeited his right (which I
know he cannot, being answerable for his Actions to none but the gods) yet
still the Princess Altezeera has a Title as firm, as my resolution not to
oppose it: For to be Wife to Pacorus, and Friend to Rome, are not inconsistent;
and we have examples, that the Conjugal and Regal rights, are not so
incompatible, but they may jointly subsist. But were they not, I am so far from
divesting her of her Empire, that had I that of the World, I would prostrate
it, as I did my Liberty at her feet, and esteem the Title of her Subject, and
the visible effects of so transcendent a Virtue and Government, a far higher
satisfaction, than to take the Reins of it into my own hands: That since I had
neither the power nor the will any other way to revenge my self on the fair
Altezeera, than by manifesting my innocence, I was confident the declining so
large an Empire to maintain her right after such insensible injuries, would
fully do it; and the knowledge of her fault, would in some degree repair it.

I further implored Ventidius, That the Armenians for Udozia's sake, might
avoid a storm, which perhaps their King had deservedly drawn upon them; and
that the greater his Title was to their destruction, the greater would that
mercy appear which declined acting it. I too well observe ( Ventidius replied)
that you are born under a Monarchy, by giving Sanctuary to the offense, in the
Title of the Offender, and making his quality annih^late his crimes, which
aggravates them: for faults in Kings are more unpardonable than in others,
since they have so great influence over all, and since those can hardly punish
offenses which commit them. We that are Romans allow no Sanctuary but to
Virtue, and esteem it too troublesome a respect to put the Gods to punish, what
we our selves have the Power: Besides, their goodness is so transcendent, that
it is often an invitation to Princes and Magistrates to rely on it; but they
seldom do err when the punishment and the sin are inseparable, and when those
they wrong are to be their Judges. That Kings do publish they are to give an
account of their actions to none but the Gods, is not a greater Tyranny in
them, than imbecility in such as either believe it, or grant it. The giving
them that Power, is to encourage them to be Tyrants, by having no Obligation on
them not to be so, but what they impose on themselves; Whereas we Romans,
though we leave our Governors a latitude to show they are virtuous, yet we
also leave our selves one to punish them, if they prove otherwise; and indeed
wise men will avoid such temptations, and perhaps few that are so will give it
them: Besides, you that subject your selves to a successive Monarchy, are tied
to your Rulers as to your Fate, you must submit to the bad as well as to the
good; whereas we are confined to ours but as to our Clothes, if they are
sullied, unfit, or worn out, we make our selves new ones: You at best have but
the bare word of a Woman for your Governors, we the word of Virtue for ours:
You by making Blood a sufficient Title to Rule, invite them to dullness and
vice; We by making Desert the way unto it, necessitate them to Virtue and
Merit: You by trusting the Power to one, run a hazard which we avoid; for there
needs but imbecility, or corruption in one, to ruin all; but we trusting to
diverse, many a one must be weak, and perfidious, to create our misfortunes; and
none being absolute, it is Reason, and not Power, which forms our results and
actions. To omit many other Preeminencies, Commonwealths are not subject to
Personal Vices, as Lust, Avarice, Luxury, Inconstancy and Cruelty. That there
is (I replied) a necessity of a Supreme Power in all Governments, to whom final
appeals and resolutions are to be left, (to avoid perpetual disputes and
uncertainties) is not more true, than that Power is absolutely best invested in
a Monarch; which to evince, I shall desire you but to reflect on the greatest
States and Empires that were, or are, and you shall find, 'twas from the virtue
of one Man they had their Beginning or Laws. Moses made those of the Jews;
Lycurgus those of Sparta; Solon those of Athens, (though indeed of short
duration;) Nimrod the Empire of Babylon; Arsaces that of the Parthians;
Alexander that of the Grecians; Cyrus that of the Persians; and to omit many
others, Romulus that of Rome; and it is a Maxim as general as true, That what
creates, is the best of perfect and preserve. Neither when Monarchy was banished
from Rome, was there any mutation in the Monarchical Laws, but the change of
perpetual Kings into annual Consuls: It Is too, no small manifestation that
Monarchy is the best Form, seeing it is the Government of Heaven: Besides, that
which is the most desirable and seldomest found in Aristocracies, Oligarchies,
and Democracies, is almost inseparable from Monarchy, which is, an internal
quiet that proceeds from a general submission to one Authority, which is that,
which gives a power and ability to defend or enlarge a State; whereas in
Republics the greatest and commonest aim is to make many an Individual what a
King is already; or else eternal differences between the Nobility and People,
or among each other, if either has suppressed the other: Besides, in a
Commonwealth a Man is seldom famous without Envy, nor loved without Fear, those
very actions which evince him to be capable of serving a State, rendering it
dangerous for that State to be served by him; so that to be esteemed well, one
must not deserve too well, and a great Merit is as usual a Title to Ruin or
Banishment, as it ought to be to Reward. But in Monarchies, the Prince is above
those fears, and consequently not only leaves a latitude, but gives an
invitation to the highest Merits and Actions, by rendering them acceptable, and
not dangerous duties: It is evident also that there ought to be a Supreme above
the Law, for what invitation have those to preserve That, without which they
can neither commit an offense, nor deserve a punishment? whereas a Monarch,
besides the Obligation of Trust, the Laws are not only that which gives him the
Power, but that too which maintains him in it, by being as it were his Guard,
in making Death the Reward of all attempts against his Person or Authority; so
that he is likelier to preserve the Laws which receives a benefit by them, than
he which can receive no prejudice but from them; and to give the Power to those
who must live under it, is in effect to invite them to favor themselves; to
let the People too be Judges whether the Dispencers of the Law do it equally,
is to give them a latitude to destroy those Laws which should govern them;
since the greater part of People conclude the less, and the greater part of all
Nations are the worst. Besides, it makes a Judge apprehensive to distribute the
Laws without partiality, when those he gives his Sentence upon, are those who
must pronounce his, and so, often, out of hope of a mutual lenity, mutually
prove unjust. But it may be objected, The People will not repine at the
executing those Laws to which they have assented, or which they themselves have
constituted. To this I answer, Those Laws which are proposed, are commonly so
equal in themselves, that none can decline his assent unto them, without
publishing he intends to violate them, which were an antedated folly no
rational Creature would be guilty of; and those too, which give their Votes to
the framing of Laws, are then commonly clear of those crimes, which those Laws
are made against; so that what they assent unto a first out of shame, or
innocence, when yet they incur the penalty of those Institutions, they wish
they had never been made; and indeed the People are far better pleased to make
severe Laws, than to have them observed; since the first of these is an
excellent demonstration of their goodness, and their unalterable resolution of
continuing it; and in the last, they cannot divest themselves of Nature, which
violently inclines all men to a self-preservation, as the highest, and first
principle. To let the Supreme Trustees of the People be subject to be called
unto account, is the certain'st way to make them Tyrants, since the
apprehension of punishment induces all Men to act what may secure them from it;
and if they have done any thing amiss, either by design, frailty or ignorance,
it invites them to invest themselves with a Power which may defend them from
Ruin, and thereby, the acting of one Injustice, renders the acting of a
greater necessary; as Thieves, who out of apprehension of having their Theft
revealed and punished, add unto it Murder; and as your Catiline, who told his
Soldiers, That the Ills they had done, could not be secured but by acting
greater: Whereas the Monach being above those apprehensions, if he commit a
fault, he needs not run into that necessary wickedness, but is rather obliged
by so noble a privilege, to repair it by some generous actions, which may
render him worthy of it. Besides, it is seldom that a Commonwealth is grateful
to a deserving Man, which is not only a large deterring of any from being so,
but also as large an invitation if he be so, to pay himself; was there ever a
People more beholding to Men, than the Romans were to Camillus, and Publius
Cornelius Scipio; the first for restoring the Roman State to the Roman People,
when not only in all probability he might have made himself Lord of it, but
even when they were so low reduced, that there were hardly enough Senators left
to give him a Commission to serve them, and when he had been used at a rate,
which might have clouded his Ambition with the name of a just Revenge: And the
last of these, for not only preserving the Roman State, but by adding to it as
great a one; yet their returns were such, that if a Stranger had but known
their usage, and not their actions, he would have esteemed them the destroyers,
not the restorers of their Country. These two are not the only, though the
most famous examples; Marcus Livins, Caius Martius Coriolanus, Lucius Amilius,
the Asiatick Scipio, and such a vast Catalogue of others, that 'twere much the
more difficult task to name who they were ungrateful unto, than to whom they
were not. Neither is this Vice the approate one to the Republic of Rome, but
common to that Government. The Syracusians were the like to Dion, and
Hermocrates; The Spartans to Agis, and part of his Family; and, as some have
thought, to Lycurgus; The ^acedemonians to Pansanius his first Virtues, and
Victories; which, it may be, made him think, Vice was the Virtue, by their
ingratitude to the latter; and the Athenians to Themistocles, Pericles, Cimon,
Alcibiades, Aristides, Phocion and Miltiades.

Doubtless the example of these, inspired Marius and Sylla with those designs
of rewarding themselves, and of making the People grateful against their wills.
And what King form Romulus to Lucius Tarquin, did ever spill so much Roman
blood, and filled Rome with such disorders, as those two did in disputing for
that Title: Neither did all the Kings empty so many Roman veins to maintain
their name, as Caesar did to restore it, and Pompey to hinder it. Is it not
then irrational to spend more in resisting Monarchy, than can be lost by it?
The same Caesar does both ways evince this truth, for till he won the Crown,
the storms were not greater, than the calms after it. Besides, what you told me
of the Romans being now under a Triple Monarchy (for so I account the
Triumvirat) palpably manifests, that that Form of Government they have found by
experience is the most perfect; for the Conspirators by killing of Caesar, so
clearly left them their voices, that their election of Monarchy evinces it is
their choice, and not their constraint. Their Banishment of the Tarquins, was
evidently as much an action of choler, as this of premeditation, so that I may
say, they did then but lose their way into Aristocracy. If too the Roman
actions are to be credited before their professions, we find they are
absolutely convinced, that the Government of One is the best; for seldom was
there any thing of danger in the Commonwealth, but they immediately created a
Dictator, who is an absolute Monarch for the time being, and to whom the very
Senate and People, do absolutely resign themselves, as appears by Camillus, who
coming to relieve Rome, as she had agreed for, and was paying for his Liberty
to Brennus King of the Gauls, he brake off the Bargain; and that barbarous
Prince taxing him for violating an Agreement made by his Superiors: He replied,
That being Dictator, he had none but the gods, and acted accordingly; and to
evince 'twas the Truth, and not the Success, which made the Romans approve of
Camillus's Reply, Quintus Cincinnatus when Dictator, in that Quality, not only
degraded Minutius from his Consulship, but constrains him to be a Lieutenant
over those Legions, the Equians had worsted under his command. Five times was
that great Camillus in resembling dangers, created Dictator, and I believe his,
and Cincinnatus's happy conduct, gave the people no ill relish of Monarchical
Government. The Military Tribunes, and Decemvirs, though instituted by the
people, were of no constant, or long duration, as always finding that
Government which was farthest from Monarchy, the most confused; this made the
Consulary Dignity, and Dictatorship, of longest continuance. Two illustrations
of this are very pregnant; the first was in the institution of the
Dictatorship, which proceeded from the revolt of the Veians, and Fidenates, who
having cut in pieces a Colony of the Romans, and they desiring revenge, created
four Tribunes with Consular Authority, and sent three of them to this War, who
through Ambition and Variance, did nothing considerable, but that they did
nothing which was so; upon which, the Romans finding the error of this
Democratical Generalship, immediately created Mamercus Dictator, who almost as
immediately revenged their losses and wrongs; the other is, of Quintus and
Agrippa, who being both sent against the Equians, the latter was ^o much a
Friend to Truth above Ambition, that he desired Quintus might go alone, since
no great Affairs could ever be performed, without the Sovereign Authority were
invested in one: And if you observe it, Rome never obtained such Victories as
under a single General, and never received such losses as under a plural; which
first as clearly appears, besides those famous examples of Camillus and Scipio,
in Posthumous at the Battle of Regillus, in Cincinnatus, in Caesar, and in
Pompey, who both triumphed over Europe, Asia and Africa; the latter also being
chosen single to defend the Roman liberty, when Consuls were not only in being,
but in Authority; as the last does, in the examples of Fabius the Great and
Minutius, in Varro and Paulus Emilius, at that fatal Battle of Cannes, in
Marcellus and Crispinus, in Gellius and Lentulus; and to omit many others, so
recently in Brutus and Cassius; neither has this been a particular fate to the
Roman State, but to all others who have practiced the like Discipline; as the
Carthaginians, when Hanno and Bomilcar commanded against the Tyrant Agathocles;
to Asdrubal and Syphax, when they commanded against Scipio; to the Athenians in
the Sicilian War, first under Nicias and Alcibiades, who did nothing jointly,
and all things asunder (as in discourse, two Negatives make one Affirmative, so
in War two good Generals makes one ill one) afterward in the same Country
under Nicias and Demosthenes; and the State of Athens obtaining that famous
Victory of Marathon, must not be attributed to the ten Generals, but to the ten
Generals having the judgment which the Athenians wanted, of giving the sole
power to the only Miltiades. The same misfortune attended Antiochus's Fleet,
when jointly commanded by Polinus and Hannibal, against the Romans, which
latter found sufficiently the obstruction of a Commonwealth, the Hannoan
Faction in Carthage fighting against him, more than the Romans in Italy; and
had he been King of Carthage, he had doubtless been the like of Rome; so that
if Rome affect an Aristocracy, it is perhaps more out of Gratitude than Reason,
neither can I omit (to illustrate what I affirm) two remarkable Adventures: The
first, when the Latins came to re-invest Lucius Tarquin, in his Thronne, the
Romans believing nothing could oppose a Monarch, but a Monarchical General,
gave the sole command of that great day to Posthumous, who gave them the
Victory: The other was, when Torquatus and Decius were Consuls, and fought a
furious Battle against the same People, the latter to obtain the Victory,
devoted himself to a voluntary death, as if the gods had destined it to a
Monarchical Generalship, and denied it to a Democratical. Besides, in
Commonwealths, the giving of none the Superiority, gives all a desire of it,
and makes that every ones hope, by being no bodies possession; so that those
Abilities and Courages which in a Monarchy manifest and vent themselves, for
the increasing the State, in other Governments, are employed to possess it; I
confess indeed that there must be many weak or perfidious, to ruin a
Commonwealth, but then there needs but one able and honest to preserve a
Kingdom; which proves, that to make your happiness, you must have many blessed
with those virtues, which one needs but have, to make ours; so that, as much as
it is more likely to have one able and honest man than many, so much it is more
likely that Monarchy should be a better Government than a Republic. Neither
are Commonwealths free from personal faults, for never was any King more cruel,
avaritious, or unconstant, than Athens and Carthage; and though the Body of the
People are exempt from some particular Vices, only because they are
inconsistent with many, and inherent to one, or perhaps their not knowing them,
or not having the power and means to act them, yet those that govern, being
particulars, are not at all free from them; and that which was the pretense of
depressing Monarchy in Rome, was the real cause of depressing the Decemvirs,
for 'twas but the Son of the King acted the Rape on Lucretia; but 'twas Appius
Clodius in person, and a Decemvir that would have acted that of Virginia, had
not her death relieved her misfortune. It was (doubtless) too, the justice of
the gods to show the People that sin in a Governor, which they had so severely
punished but in a Governors son. As to our being necessitated to take a woman's
word for our Kings, if there be any misfortune in it, you must except not
against us, but the gods, who have made them witnesses in their own Cause; yet
that great Trust invites them to a proportionate virtue, and it is also the
only proof you have at Rome, of that so adored Title of Patrician.

That there is ( Ventidius replied) a necessity of a Power, to which all final
Appeals ought to be made, cannot be a greater Truth, than it is, that That
Power is best placed in the Representatives of the People, since what ever can
be said, for the having it in a King, can be said for the having it in Those
Representatives, and much more also: For besides the high obligation of Trust,
which is common to both, and indeed the chief, if not the Only upon Kings (at
least if we credit what they say, That they are accountable to none but the
gods) That Authority is likelier to be careful in making, and maintaining of
Laws, to which they and their Posterities must submit, than that Authority
which is so far from receiving a prejudice by ill Laws, that thereby it
receives an Advantage; for the less the People have, the more the King has.
Neither can the Law be more the Monarchs Guard, than it is the Peoples; for as
a King owes All he has to the being Above the Law, so the People owe All they
have to their being under it; so that Both deriving Both their All Is from that
Principle, it is likely the Concern for maintaining it, will be equal; for
though a King may lose more in quality than any Individual in a Commonwealth,
yet he cannot lose more in quantity; for the greatest Loser, never knew a
degree beyond All; where All is lost, the disproportion may be in the losing,
but cannot be in the Loss.

Neither has the aspiring of any Individual, more or oftener, involved
Commonwealths in War, than the same Passion in Subjects or next Successors, has
involved Kingdoms; so that that fault is not produced by the ill constitution
of that Government, but by the ill inclinations of some under it; for where
Ambition does Reign, those desire to do so who are possessed by it, under either
Government. And if those ills are unlikest to be attempted, or acted, which are
likest to meet with most opposition, then doubtless the design of Usurping the
Sovereignty, is less like to be undertook, under the Government of a
Commonwealth, than under that of a Monarch; for if the intended Usurper have
success against the Forces of a King, he finds the People prepared to embrace
that form of Regiment; but though he have success against the Forces of a
Commonwealth, he will find a new difficulty, in constraining the People to
submit to Monarchy; in one He is to destory but the Governor, but in the other,
the Governors and Government: The People too are much more apt to fight in
defense of Both of those, than in defense of One, especially their own
concernment being in the Last, and but their Rulers in the First Besides,
Reason (the health of the mind) is much more satisfied the Possessor of it
should acquiesce in the certainty of having no Superior, than run a hazard of
that, to have no equal; so that it is the rational part of man, which keeps him
to the Government of a Commonwealth, and the Passionate only which makes him
an Enemy to it; which evinces, that as much as it is likelier that Reason should
actuate Rational Creatures than Passion, so much it is likelier that a
Commonwealth should be quiet, than disturbed.

I confess indeed, that you need but One exactly Wise and Honest, to make your
Government happy, and that we need Many to make ours so, yet it is much probable
that Choice should find Many Wise, and Honest, than that Nature, or Education,
should always make the Eldest of One Family to be so; to which be pleased to
remember, the discovery of your Governors Crimes, creates the trouble, but the
discovery of ours, ends it. I acknowledge Commonwealths have been ungrateful to
deserving men, but I cannot acknowledge, nor can you I am confident prove, that
their having been so, proceeded from their Form of Government. But because you
have instanced some Examples of their Ingratitude, lest thereby you would cast
that aspersion on the Government, which is due but to the Governors, I will
name some celebrated Kings who have been guilty of the like Crime; that either
thereby you may acknowledge the Error of such a misdistinguishing, or else that
I may make use of it to retort it on you, and evidence by your own Arguing,
that if the faults of Governors must be ascribed to the Regiment, Monarchies
therein are equal with Commonwealths.

The first instances, shall be in two Kings of the Jews (the Father and the
Son) whose Subjects do glory in being (as it were) the Menial Servants of the
God they worship, and do owe the Institution and Progress of their Government
to Miracles; their names are David and Solomon: The one signal for the Sword of
War, the other for the Sword of Peace: The first a Man after their Deities own
heart, and the last a Type of that great Prince, their Prophets have so often
foretold, and they so certainly and intently expect; yet the former made one of
his last injunctions to his Son, the not permitting Ioab's hoary head to go
down in peace into the Grave: Ioab, who (in effect) made David King, when he
was not, and kept him King, when he was; who would not take a Town till he
came, that he might have the honor as well as benefit of success; and Solomon
so well obeyed his King, or rather so truly Acted that Part, that Ioab's life
which deserved an Altar, could not be secured even in the embracing of one, but
was there offered as a Sacrifice, to the obedience (at least) of one of his
Kings, and to the jealousy of another; some faults overballancing many
services; the former writ in his Kings Heart, the latter in the Air.

Another instance is in Alexander surnamed the Great, as much perhaps for his
C^uelty as Success; Calistines more justly famous than him, dyed by him;
Clytus, bolder for his King, than to him, yet did the like; Parmenio, without
whom he hardly got a Victory, and with whom he never lost one, had the like
Fate.

In a word, this King destroyed more gallant men of his friends, than of his
enemies. But yet since you have mentioned him for the Founder of so great an
Empire, as the Grecian, I shall desire you to observe who 'twas he esteemed
fittest to Govern, and when it was he made that Declaration, or rather Law; it
was when death was forcing him from his Empire, and and when his Queen Roxana
was ready to present him with a Successor to it: Yet even then he ordered, and
sealed it with his last breath, that the worthiest only should bear that Title;
evincing thereby, that he alone was next to the Crown, that was so to him in
virtue, not in blood; he found he should injure truth, more than his posterity,
if he allowed not virtue the highest, nay the only Title to Government. An
Action so every way excellent, that if any thing could, this might have cleared
his Fame from those stains, cast upon it, by the blood of Calistines, who, had
he lived under a Commonwealth, the sincerity of his heart, and the eloquence of
his tongue, had engaged him in no more danger, than Cato's and Cicero's did
them whilst under that Regiment; their words and actions needing no pardon
under a Commonwealth, and finding none under a Monarchy; the first dying, in
appr^hension Caesar had too much clemency, and the last finding Antony had too
little.

Nor can you say it is peculiar to Commonwealths to be ungrateful to their
Soldiery, were there no more to illustrate the contrary, than the preceding
Examples in the Iudaick, and Grecian Empire; but the truth is, all Authorities
have been shie of their Soldiery, for since the Sword has introduced most
Governments, since it does maintain all, and since it only can ruin any
Government, it is not so strange that Rulers are jeaous of those which wear it,
as it would be if they were not. As to what is so much insisted upon, and so
often mentioned of Prescription by Time, to prove a Government just; that, to
any rational person will appear, is not to uphold Truth, but Power, which if
illegitimately acquired, the longer the possession lasts, the greater the
injustice is; for perseverance in ill, in any other case, never turned ill into
good, so that in this, it is granted as a Convenience, rather than a Right;
besides, if any person under any Government, declare he has a will to destroy
it, he thereby gives that Government the Right to destroy him. If then a Will
in any particular to subvert a Government, merits such a punishment, probably
that Government will believe a power to do it, deserves as much; for the Will
in an Individual of destroying the Authority he is under, never created the
Power, but the Power has often created the Will; so that if the lesser danger
is esteemed justly punishable you may thereby judge what is concluded of the
greater. It has been also not only the Maxim, but the practice of many Kings
and Commonwealths, to make a War, and seek the depression of a Neighbor State,
only because that State was increasing to a greatness which might depress
theirs, and this, because a preventative care, has been allowed of as a just
one; so that if States, toward the preventing of a real or imaginary danger,
from those they have no Authority over; from those which have not then the
power to hurt them; and from those which perhaps may never have the will, and
who have not so much toward the ingendring of it as the power, may justly
according to the principles of Safety and Government (the last being chiefly
established for the first) even by a hazardous War suppress such, how much more
will they believe it just, to suppress those, from whom a nearer and pregnanter
jealousy does arise, and where the safety that performance presents and
ascertains, is not derived from the Rules of Policy, which makes Success
Justice, but is derived from the Rules of Authority, which makes the safety of
the People, the supremest Law, and those the best, if not the only Judges of
that safety, who are by the People entrusted with it.

To all which may be added, that Maxim as General, as Wicked, and at least as
usual in Monarchies as Commonwealths, to hate what they fear, and to depress
what they hate. These, and a throng of such other Arguings, the Craft, or
rather Wickedness of Governors under either Regiment, have established as
principles to destroy the generousest Calling; a Calling without which they
could do nothing, and for which they seldom do any thing; sometimes they make
the prosperity of it necessary to the existence of a State, and sometimes the
destruction of it as necessary; sometimes they say it hinders, or revenges
oppression; and sometimes it invites, and continues it; sometimes they make it
a Scaffold, to raise their structure to the Clouds; then use it like a
Scaffold, and lay it in the dust. These last words I spoke, to evince the most
noble, is the most unfortunate profession; it sowes merit, and reaps
ingratitude; yet the knowledge of the last, has never frighted the generous
followers of it from the first; perhaps prove, that what would deter in all
other professions, is the encouragement of theirs; and that true virtue, unlike
material things, the less'tis fed, the larger it grows.

I hope by this time you are satisfied, That ingratitude to gallant men which
are Soldiers (for unto such only as I remember you have proved Commonwealths
have been ungrateful) is not a sin inherent to that Go vernment alone, but unto
all Regiments. I must confess, if to Govern many by one, is good, it is chiefly
so in an Army; for not only where the supreme Power is divided, the affection
of the Soldiery is so; and where Faction is, Ruin is not far off; but also the
greatest Actions of War, depend so entirely on the embracing of opportunities,
that whilst two are disputing a thing, the time of acting it is expired.
Besides, it is a rare felicity to have two in supreme Power, so much friends to
their Duty above their Ambition; as for the first, entirely to silence the
last; and rarer to have them both blessed with what we call, presence of mind, in
the highest, and pressingst dangers, and actions, and equally invested with it;
for if there be but the least disproportion in that essential virtue to
Generals, it may be as prejudicial and destructive, as if that difference were
in an extreme. But after all this, I cannot but remember you, that as our
plural Generalship in Consuls is ordered, where every day one of them commands
in chief by turns, there is little hazard to the Commonwealth, and less
advantage to the enemies of it: But because you have instanced some signal
losses we have sustained under a double Generalship, lest you might too ascribe
it to that form of Ruling an Army, I will only mind you of a couple of as
eminent Victories as ever Rome was happy in, purchased under that sort of
Generalship.

The one under Marcus Cornelius, and Quintilius Varrus, in a furious Battle in
the County of the Insubrians, where the Carthaginians not only lost the
Victory, but what was more deplored, and more justly so by them, even the
generous Mago, Brother to their great Hannibal both in blood, and in virtue.

The other, under Nero and Livius, on the famous Banks of Metaurus, which River
changed its color as much with Carthaginian blood, as ever Aufidus did with
Roman; there the Noble Asdrubal, a true Son of Amilcars, found his Fate, and
the Manes of above 50000 Italians were appeased, did resign their solitary
Walks to those Africans, which had sent them thither; there the Carthaginian
glory was first eclipsed, and the Roman prosperity breaking through so thick a
cloud of blood, was never hindered from shining by another. Not to let the
Trustees of the People be called by them to an account, lest thereby, if they
have erred, they should defend their Crimes by Arms, is like killing ones self,
for fear of being killed; the highest Tyranny, cannot transcend, what this way
the People give, to avoid Tyranny. Indeed by such a Donation, Trustees may be
hindered from sinning, because they are elevated above the Law; and where there
is no Law, there is no Sin, but the People will not be thereby hindered from
Ruin, but theirs will be rather ascertained and accelerated; for if both
Honesty and Fear, will not deter Governors from ill Governing, certainly
Honesty alone is much unlikelier to do it; and if they will be Tyrants against
the Law, they will be much more above it. It Is true, the Title of Patrician is
in high veneration at Rome, and one of our Consuls is to be of that order; but
yet though we take the word of a Woman for his being a Patrician, yet we take
the word of Virtue for his being a Consul; the former makes him electable, but
the latter makes him elected. But (continued Artavasdes) why do I tell you (and
so confusedly) our opinions, when I only undertook to tell you our actions? Not
to continue this fault, though we had several of this quality, yet I will
relate no more of them, to obtain your pardon for having particularized so many.

For conclusion of all, I told Ventidius, that I was confident he had argued
against Monarchy more for his diversion, than as 'twas his judgment, were it
for no other reason, than that he persuaded me to be a King, which if he
esteemed an ill, I knew he would never have invited me to.

If (said Ventidius) I invite you to be a King, it is not only that the
Armenians have unreluctantly submitted to that Government, and that you have
now every way the justest Title to it; (for as to that which you allege for
Altezeera, that the ties of Marriage and Empire are not so inseparable, but she
may severally act the duties of both, I must answer, That where there is on the
one side, but a possibility of an advantage; and on the other, an appearance of
a vast prejudice, it is inconsistent with the Maxims of State, in expectation
of the former, not to prevent the latter) but also that I esteem no form of
Government so bad, but to change it by a War is worse; and that where the
Governor is good, the Government will be so. At last Ventidius found himself in
no small perplexity by my unalterable resolution of usurping neither upon my
Kings, nor my Princesses rights; for at his departure from Rome, he had so
clearly satisfied the Triumvirat, and especially Mark Antony (to whom Asia was
allotted) that they both had lost theirs, the better to invest me in them, that
he much apprehended, if after having demonstrated the danger of Artabazus
possessing the Crown of Armenia, and Altezeera's continuing the right to it, he
permitted both, it might prove of ill consequence, and either leave the Roman
Lords an impression that he was careless of his Trust, or intended some
sinister end by so palpable an omission. I must confess, I found as much reason
in his fears, as in that resolve of mine which created them; but hoping whilst
we continued at Sattala, we might find out some expedient for their redress, or
that if we could not, yet his leaving Armenia in quiet, would not only be more
probably, but better effected by the entreaties of a Mistress, than a friend, I
desired him to suspend all determinations till we came thither, toward which
next morning we intended to go; and because Ventidius's leaving his Army (and
leaving it too so unaccompany'd) might not relish of any thing but his care of
it, he assembled his chiefest Officers, and told them, He was to make a short
journey which would exempt them from a long one; that he was hopeful by a
private interview with Artabazus, and my assistance, to make the Armenians more
useful to Rome, than they could expect by ^n entire conquest of them; that upon
these hopes he must leave them for a few days; and that his absence might not
retard their march, he ordered them to continue it, till they came to
Alexandretta, since if there were a necessity of subjecting Armenia in their
way to Parthia, their seemingly passing by it, would render Artabazus more
secure, and manifest besides, they had a strong belief of his returning to the
Roman friendship, since in a confidence of it, they had marched beside his
Kingdom, when they might have invaded it; Ventidius further told them, That the
entry into Armenia out of Syria by the mountain Imanus, was less difficult,
than to enter it out of Cilicia by the mountain Scordiscus; that 'twas better
to try moderate ways, than extremes: and lastly, they should not move from
Alexandretta, where in 14 days he would not fail to meet them. The deep
respect all Ventidius's Officers paid him, and the just opinion they had of his
sincerity and judgment, made them perfectly relish this motion, which they had
no sooner declared, than taking some light Numidian Horse for his Guard, we
went to Sattala, with as much secrecy, as expedition; whither as soon as we
were come, and lighted at Udozia's Palace, I perceived that great man's
countenance and discourse, so sensible an alteration, that had I not
experimentally known those violent emotions which are inseparable from perfect
Lovers at their approach near their Mistrisses, I should have as much admired
at, as I was satisfied with them; but these confusions hardly merited that
name, if compared to those which succeeded them as soon as he saw Udozia, who
came to meet him in the great Hall of the Palace, and who participated in no
small degree in his disorders; but truly hers were such, that methought they
performed something near to a Miracle, by bringing an accession to her beauty,
which the generous Roman was so justly ravished with, that his wonder spoke his
passion more significantly, than any expressions were capable of; but as soon
as he found his too-much admiration and silence, might entrench upon his
civility, he went toward Udozia with a grace and majesty peculiar to the only
Ventidius; and having with a deep respect kissed the bottom of her gown, he told
her, That freedom, Madam, which without dispute I have long since yielded to
your Picture, I am now purposely come to pay you, whose Power perhaps could not
more transcendently manifest it self, than by conquering a Romans liberty by a
shadow, as far short too of the charming substance, as all other real beauties
are short of it. But if the Copy infused a high flame, judge then what the
transcendent Original has done, and judge I beseech you Madam of mine, only by
that Rule, since nothing can equal the vastness of my passion, but the vastness
of that beauty which has created it, which former shall be as infinite in the
duration, as that which gave it a being is in perfection. This Compliment could
not be fuller of Passion, than the answer to it was of Civility, which I pass
over as being nothing essential to that Story you have enjoined me to tell you;
but yet though I omit the particulars of this first interview, I must not the
acquainting you, that as soon as I had brought Ventidius to his Apartment, I
retired with Udozia to hers, where I told her at large, how absolutely her
servant had offered me the Crown of Armenia, and how as absolutely I had
declined it: Udozia was infinitely more satisfied that I had refused it, than
that I had the power to wear it; and gave me such handsome retributions for the
former, that I found there might be as great a reward for having been virtuous,
as in being so: but knowing how much higher an influence an adored Mistress has
over a Lover, than any other confinement is capable of, I conjured her, as I
did tie my self from doing Artabazus any harm, that she would Ventidius, and
give as good an account of her servant, as I would of her Brother; Udozia at
first made some scruples to implore from Ventidius what he had obliquely denied
me, since it would evince she thought she had a power over him, which she very
much doubted she had not; but yet at last she determined to do Armenia a
considerable service, or by hazarding so sensible a disgrace as a repulse would
amount unto, manifest she apprehended nothing more than not obliging her
Country, and nothing at all, when the safety of it, came in competition with
any thing else: 'Twas therefore some three hours after, being informed
Ventidius was gone to divert himself in the Palace Gardens, that Udozia, armed
with such generous and public thoughts, went thither to him, waited on by none
but me, where after a short search, we perceived him lying upon some Grass,
shaded with Lemmon, and Pomegranate Trees; and truly he was so intent on what
he was doing, as we perceived that was the viewing Udozia's Picture, before he
saw her, which as soon as he did, he rose up surpised, and told her, I have
been, Madam, comparing together the Charms of my first and second Vanquisher,
and find the disproportion so transcendent, that I have no way to excuse my
first submission, but to remember I made it to a Conqueror, who though she made
not use of such unresistable Arms as my second, yet she did of her name. If
(said Udozia) I esteemed it not a higher wrong to the generous Ventidius, to
believe so small a beauty as Udozia's could captivate him, than not to credit
what he has so often repeated, I would not conjure him by some demonstration to
evince a truth, which he cannot be more concerned to make me believe, than I am
to have pregnant cause to do it. Ah Madam (said Ventidius) I shall acknowledge
your furnishing me with an occasion to manifest so high, and just a truth, to
be as transcendent an obligation, as it is an impossibility and cruelty, if the
way you propound unto that end, be by merit or time; neither can such
injunctions be more a torment to me, than an injury to your Beauty. I have
already (said Udozia) told you I am so much concerned in believing what you
endeavor to persuade me, that I shall not so long protract my own satisfaction,
as to prescribe any length of time to confirm it; nor so flatter my self, and
wrong the generous Ventidius, as to motion merit in that sense he seems to do
it; that which I have to propound, is of a quality, which if he will grant it,
'twill take up no more time than to say he does so.

Oh gods! (replied the impatient Ventidius) the highest favor next to finding
out so obliging an expedient, is immediately to name it. It Is (said Udozia) to
pardon Artabazus's and Armenia's fault, which perhaps the necessity they were
both reduced unto by Arsaces's activeness, and Crassus's remissness, may in
some degree extenuate; or if both those do not, yet still in the Concession I
shall find the greater proof of what I am not a little concerned to be
convinced of.

Would to the gods, fair Princess, Ventidius replied, their Faults were as
great, as the Power she has over me, which commands me to excuse them, I should
the sooner do it, since thereby the greatness of the proof of the truth, would
be the more proportionate to the truth itself: Yes, Madam, I do absolutely
forget them; and though I know of how vast prejudice it may be to me to disobey
the people of Rome, yet I know 'twill be of infinitely more, to disobey the
fair Udozia, for whom the reason that I should eternally obey her, cannot
transcend the inclination which I have perpetually to do it.

The generous Ventidius (I replied) shall not run any hazard to obey Udozia;
and though I am much concerned in my King, and my Country, yet I am much more
my Friend, so that I determine immediate^ to make a journey to Artabazus, who,
if he gives you not a rise to oblige him, and such an one too, as may apologize
sufficiently for your doing so, you shall not hazard your destruction, to
manifest your civility.

All (said Ventidius) I will desire, since he is in the blessing of fair
Udozia's concern, is, that he will not, by being an Enemy to Rome, provoke me
to disobey her commands, or after such a provocation, by not doing so, render
my self unworthy to have been honored with them. But (he continued) is there no
other way, but by Artavasdes's absence, to settle Armenia?

No, (I replied) I believe mine will accelerate this great work better than any
others. 'Twere to be too prolix, to tell you Udozia's retributions and mine to
Ventidius, with his civilities on them: I will therefore only acquaint you,
that being ready to take horse, I recommended the care of Ventidius to Udozia,
and enjoined her so to use her Prisoner, that he might have no desires of
altering that name; Ventidius answered me for her, 'twas impossible she should
deny me that request, since 'twas so, that he should ever desire a more noble
Title. Then (after having begged me to tell Artabazus from him, that for some
powerful considerations, he would desire no greater penance for his past
fault, than to repeat it, which was, to continue a Neuter) I began my journey,
which proved not very long, because above my expectation, I found the King at
Cammona, whither the necessity of his Affairs, by the intelligence of Ventidius
being on the Frontiers, drew him; all the Court admired at my coming to it, and
Artabazus when he saw me come into the Palace Garden, (where he was then
walking with some of his Council) was as much surpised one way, as after I had
told him the occasion of my visit, he was the other. He made me a thousand
excuses for the necessity of his Crime, (for so he termed what he had done with
Altezeera) and with as many embraces, acknowledged my care, and my affection,
when (as he said) he was so far from meriting either, that he did the contrary.

In a word, after I had told him on what terms he might have Ventidius his
friend, not only (with raptures of joy) he condescended to them, but by a
Letter to him, acknowledged he had twice derived both his safety, and his
Crown, from his generosity to Artabazus, and friendship to Artavasdes. As soon
as I had thus settled my business to my Kings liking, as well as Ventidius's,
(for the latter could not more joyfully embrace the occasion offerving Udozia,
than the former did the friendship of the Romans, against whom he was so ill
provided, by the absence and discontents of Phanasder, and, as he said, of
Artavasdes too, that he was determined to have submitted to their mercy, to
avoid doing so to their force) I took leave of the King, without letting him
know how I had refused that Title, or imploring his justice against Crassolis,
who, I learnt, was still concealed, and which consequently I thought had been a
fruitless, and probably a prejudicial request. Artabazus, who found me
positively resolved to depart, seemed to be as much grieved for my leaving him,
as he had been pleased at the cause, and the result of my visit; and to invite
my continuance, he offered me large advantages, amongst many others, that of
commanding, during my life, the Armenian Militia; yet this, as well as the
rest, I entirely declined: for though I thought nothing could dispense me from
a general care of Armenia, and the King of it, yet I esteemed my wrongs might
not only excuse my not living at Court, but also my refusal of any Command
which was not conducing to my revenge on Pacorus, who, though he had by giving
me my life, thereby confined me to act nothing particularly against his, yet by
his having rendered it my torment, I esteemed my self thereby not concluded
from ending it by his hands at the head of an Army; besides, I resolved my self
not a little disenfranchis'd from that obligation, by restoring him so many
considerable Prisoners after the Battle on the Banks of Euphrates, and by the
care I had of his person before, and in it. 'Twas therefore that I implored the
King to excuse my not accepting a Command, which though of infinite honor, yet
was considered by me less out of that respect, than from an assurance I thereby
received, that he thought I was not his Enemy, though he had given me the
highest provocation to be so; which good opinion he had contracted of me, I
could not better merit, than by declining so advantageous an offer, to put my
self in a far meaner condition for his service, which I esteemed my attending
on Ventidius was, and would prove, and for the doing of which, I humbly begged
his permission. Artabazus granted me my request, because I would not grant him
his; and having again convinced my belief, that he would not be an Enemy to the
Romans, by many pregnant reasons, and by others, I took a final leave, and with
as great expedition in my return to Sattala, as in my going from it, I safely
arrived there, and found (during my absence) that Udozia had so well discovered
her servants merit and perfections, that any intercession of mine for him could
not have been more just, than 'twas unnecessary. Ventidius seemed almost as
much satisfied with the success of my journey, as with my return; and finding by
the former he could not make a longer residence at Sattala, without as largely
intrenching on his honor, as by his abandoning it, he should on his felicity,
he declared the next morning he intended to force himself from his joys, to
return to his Army. This resolve, and my former observation, made me esteem it
as fit, as I did believe it would not be difficult, to obtain an assurance from
Udozia, that when Ventidius did crown himself with Laurel, she would with
Myrtles, and make him a Conqueror in Love, after he had made himself one in
War; to make her confess to me this was her resolution, was far more facile,
than to make her do it to Ventidius; but at last the passionate conjurations of
a meritorious servant, united with those of a beloved Brother, were so
prevalent, that they extorted a declaration, which she could not deliver with
more blushes, than he in whose favor 'twas made, received it with ecstasies and
Transports: I remember amongst many other expressions of the generous
Ventidius's, this was one; I bless the gods (my fair Princess) that they have
made it my destiny to fight against a Nation, which never yet was vanquished,
that the world may be convinced, this high conquest was reserved for Udozia's
Soldier, who can no more be denied Victory, bearing that most glorious Title,
than it can be, that that Title is so. These necessary Productions of a
transcendent Joy, and Passion, were no sooner qualified, than I assured
Ventidius, I would wait on him in this War, to fatisfy my Friendship as well as
Revenge. This promise was received with new raptures, and I found how agreeable
my company was to him, since it could appear as a great joy, in his being
already possessed with so high an one. Udozia made no small scruples to deprive
her self at once of both her concerns; but when I assured her my Presence might
in no unconsidrable degree contribute to the preservation of Ventidius, whose
too-high Appetite to Glory, might cast him into resembling dangers, and that
his conversation, and the diversion of War, might efface the Relics of a
grief, whose entire distinction was not indifferent to her, she at last
consented to my voyage, and perhaps my departure with Ventidius the next
morning, did not a little contribute to the free liberty of her weepings, for
since in the very Tears themselves, none could read their cause, she shed hers
the more unrestrainedly; and her Brother, and her Lovers joint departure, made
them as equally ascribable to Affection, as Passion; though for my part, I not
only believed, but was satisfied with their relishing more of the last, than
the first. But Ventidius now assured his victory over the Parthians, would give
him a more noble one in Udozia (at least one that he valued so) flew to his
Army, resolving to bring his own, and that Empires fate to a sudden trial. All
along the way as we went to Alexandretta, he entertained me with such
passionate discourses of his Flame, tha^ I must acknowledge, they set my old
wounds fresh a bleeding, and by his admirable expressions of a successful Love,
he not only made me resent more pregnantly my own misery in a contrary Fate,
but inflamed me with resolves, to act in this War such performances, as might
force Altezeera to esteem me worthy her Affection, though she were incapable to
confer it on me; or by a noble Death, and my misfortunes, and desires together.
The joy of the Roman Army at Ventidius's coming to it, appeared as great as it
could do in a Victory, and they were so satisfied with it, that though he had
brought them nothing but his person; he had been as welcome, as bringing with
it the assurance that he had tied Artabazus's hands; at which, all the Romans
seemed to be much satisfied, not that they wanted the vanity of believing
themselves soon able to have done it, but that they considered all things as
misfortunes, which retarded their revenging the death, and appeasing the Manes
of so many of their Citizens, as fell with Crassus. Ventidius extremely pleased
to observe, his Army were in so obliging a temper, began his March the next
morning, toward the River of Euphrates, where his Intelligencers assured him a
vast Army of the Parthians lay, to justify their Frontiers, The Roman General
sent an Herald to them to denounce the War, which he said the Romans were not
wont to steal upon, but to make with their Enemies; that since he was
determined to prosecute them to the end of the World, and that nothing could
avoid a Battle, 'twould be more generous, if they would exempt him from a
tedious march, by dividing the length of it between them. This denunciation and
desire being sent, found a generous return from Labienus, who commanded the
Parthian Army, and who advanced four days march into Syria, to decline all
disadvantages over the Romans, since (as he said) the Parthians * thians needed
no greater, than they had in their Courages; which because so pregnant an
Argument as the loss of Crassus, and 40000 of his Countrymen could not
convince them of, he was coming purposely to manifest, by a fresh
demonstration, which he was confident would be so signal a one, that though
none of them should live to acknowledge it, yet their deaths should do it for
them. Ventidius excused this high reply, by the Parthians putting themselves in
a condition, which he was more than persuaded would soon afford him a certainty
of revenging it. The two Generals having agreed upon a set day to decide the
Quarrel, by one of the Parthian Trumpets, which past between both Armies, for
the making of this bloody bargain, I diligently inquired after my dear
Artabanes, who I concluded was not in the Parthian Army, because another
Commanded it; but this Trumpeter, either through obedience or ignorance,
continued me in mine; but the joy that I should not fight against my generous
friend, could hardly transcend my grief, when I knew I should have the like
Fate against Pacorus, yet I hoped this Battle would facilitate my desires
against another opportunity. At last the fatal day came, and 'twas then I
perceived in Ventidius, so many Martial Charms, as well in his Knowledge, as in
his Looks, that had Udozia but then seen him, she must have unavoidably
composed a part of his that days victory. The General of the Romans would have
in this Battle, resigned that Title to me, but I appeared as much offended at
the offer, as he was generous in it, and 'twas then he protested, he deplored
his not being a Monarch, since thereby he had been accountable to none but to
the gods, and Reason, for his Actions, and consequently would have forced me to
have taken that days Command. I will not tell you (continued Artavasdes) my
return to this flattery. It Is enough you know I did decline it, but yet could
not, the Command of the Italian Cavalry, which was composed of the Youth and
Gallantry of Rome, and by which charge I found Ventidius gave me means, as
ample as my desires, to purchase Glory. He himself took his place at the head
of the Legionary Soldiers, and the signals were no sooner given, than the
Armies began the Battle, with such fury, that had I not known they were both
composed of the Warlikest Nations in the World, I could then no longer have
been in that ignorance; I will not amuze my self, to give you the retail of
this famous day, it is enough you know Ventidius did like Ventidius, and
consequently pierced and broke whatever opposed him; and though he found a
virtuous resistance, yet it was so far from hindering his victory, that it did
but set if it off the better. The Parthian Cavalry are generally the best that
are, and their numbers much exceeding ours, we found we needed the Legionaries
help, which as soon as Ventidius had, he advanced a precipitate pace to afford
it us. I include my self in the number of those that wanted it, though the gods
gad given the Right-wing, which I commanded, as entire a victory, as Septimus a
defeat, who commanded the left; So that the General of the Parthian Horse and
I, observing our mutual successes, rallied Troops together with what expedition
we could, but that Nation being more active of their Feet, when they cannot use
their Hands, than the Romans, and the execution remaining more bloody on our
side than theirs, their Commander had sooner brought his Soldiers under their
Colors, and in greater numbers, than I could possibly under mine; yet
Ventidius's arrival so well redrest that misfortune, as I found it none; our
new dispute seemed a second Battle, and Ventidius found he must obtain two
Victories, to win one. I cannot with Truth decline telling you, That observing
the General of the Parthian Horse, who was much more remarkable for his
Courage, than his Arms, which yet were in the beginning all covered with
Rubies, though now with a nobler, but resembling color, I rid up to him, and
having singl'd him out, I endeavored to take a revenge of those many deaths he
had given diverse which served under me; but those which were spectators of our
Combat, feared, and believed I would increase his Victories, rather than
punish them; I must confess, his first strokes were so unintermissive and
brisk, that I might have made that my own opinion too, and perhaps the rage of
its being mine, did not a little contribute to the giving of those wounds,
which soon made the beholders to alter it, but in bestowing on him some which
were very dangerous, I received many which were so, but mine were so much more
obliging, or my constitution so much stronger than his, that uniting all his
Forces to give me one blow (which might revenge my having so much diminsh'd
them) as his Sword was in the Air to act it, his Spirits abandoned him, his
Arms fell softly to his side, and then he himself fell off his Horse on the
ground; some Romans, according to their barbarous custom, ran to cut off this
valiant Parthian's Head, to present it to their General, but perceiving their
intent, I lighted hastily to prevent it; but I found my self so weakened by the
loss of Blood, that I no sooner touched the ground with my Feet, than I did the
like with all my Body, yet as the gods would have it, remembering the cause why
I had abandoned my Horse, I crept where the generous Parthian lay, where not
being able to defend him by my Commands, I did it with my Sword, and received
some wounds to preserve him, who had given me so many; my assistance had been
fruitless to him, if Ventidius had not then come to mine, of whom I had only
strength enough to beg, as he loved Udozia, or Artav^jdes, that he would
preserve my valiant Enemy; which words I had no sooner uttered, than I fell off
my knees by him, and almost in as unpromising a condition as he was in.
Ventidius, (one of the most generous Friends) thought he could not better merit
that Title, than by having as much care of my desires, as of me; this made him
at the same instant in which he sent for the Chirurgions, to beat off those
Soldiers, who endeavored by the death of the Parthian to revenge, my supposed
one, and many of their companions real deaths, which he had that day acted;
Ventidius found so much difficulty to effect this, that as he afterward
confessed, had not my pressing conjurations inviolably engaged him to it, he had
given his Soldiers a liberty, which the Parthian usage to Crassus, made it
almost as high an injustice to deny them, as did the sad condition this had
reduced me to; but at l^ngth, having made himself to be obeyed, he caused (and
helped) me to be carried to my Tent, and set up another near mine, to which he
made my Enemy be brought; but he was so sensible of my danger, that he was no
longer so of his Glory and Success; for commanding the Tribunes to prosecute
the Victory, and bring him an account, at what rate they had bought it, and how
dear the Parthians had lost it, to my Tent he immediately returned thither
again, where he found me so much restored, as that I had strength enough to
congratulate his glorious success, which was so much the more so, by his having
chiefly, and almost solely purchased it, and to ask him afterward what was
become of my valiant Enemy whose usage I implored from him once again might be
as re^embling to mine, as his danger was. Ventidius gave me that account of
him, which I have given you, which made me send one of my Domestics to enquire
after a Life, I was as much concerned to preserve, as I had lately been to
destroy; my Messenger brought me word, that as yet he was not recovered from
his fainting, but that the Chirurgions by some certain symptoms, found he
would not long continue in it. I was as glad at the last part of this
information, as troubled at the first; and observing that Ventidius only called
him the Parthian prisoner, I asked him whether he had not yet learnt his Name
and Quality. I have not, ( Ventidius replied) discovered either, but I am
confident, all the rules of Phisiognomy are false, if his Quality be not
answerable to the richness of his Arms; for the Chirurgions to stop his
bleeding, having taken off his Helmet, I perceived, in spite of his paleness,
a Mien, and Features, which could not but be charming in a perfect health,
since they were almost so in the condition he was then in. This Character
(continued Artavasdes) would have made me suspect it was Artabanes, but that my
success secured me from that fear; and as I was begging Ventidius to enquire
scrutinously who the Parthian was, Septimus came in, and assured his General
that by the least partial computation on both sides, the Romans had lost 2000,
and their Enemies 27000. Ventidius finding me in so promising a condition,
suspended awhile the duties of a Friend, to act those of a General, but he had
no sooner hastily dispatched his Spies* to learn the Countenance and intentions
of the Enemy, and settled his Guards, than he returned to me again, and gave me
no small hopes, but those he had employed, would next morning satisfy my
curiosity, and learn who the Prisoner was; with this flattering expectation we
entertained one another till the hour prescribed me for sleep, which I could
not do, till I had first sent to enquire how the Parthian did, and learnt that
he was restored to Life, though not to his Senses. The next morning the Sun was
hardly risen, when Ventidius came hastily into my Tent, and having sent out all
those in it, he told me, with a Face covered with joy. At length Artavasdes, at
length the gods have manifested themselves to be so, by having given you
wherewithal to revenge your wrongs, and that Altezeer^ in a posture to repair
those she has so unjustly laden you with; Yes Artavasdes, that Prisoner which
yesterday was made one by your Courage, is Pacorus, who understanding of my
intention to decide our quarrel by a pitched Battle, came in post from Selutia,
and from Altezeera to the Parthian Army, which also he was the more invited to,
by its being commanded by Labienus (his Favorite) This is confirmed by three
several Spies, who all assure me, that the Gentleman with the Arms covered with
Rubies, is Pacorus, whoseloss the Parthians as much lament, as that of the
Battle, and of their General, of whom as yet they can learn no news; you will
have also (continued Ventidius) the Felicity of seeing your Revenge acted,
without being the Judge, or Guilty of it; For one of my Instructions from the
Triumvirat and Senate, is, neither to give, nor receive Quarter, so that in my
necessary obedience, you may derive a satisfaction, which perhaps your own nice
Gallantry would scruple to confer on you. Judge generous Friend (said
Artavasdes) Judge if my astonishment were great at so strange and unexpected an
adventure, in which I had on small debate, whether it were an accident fitter
for my joy or grief; but after a short reflection, and dispute on it, I
replied; Ah Ventidius, Pacorus must not dye, my Honor as well as Reason will
oppose it, for to let a Prisoner be executed by the Sword of Justice, which
avoided it by that of War, cannot more entrench upon both our Reputations, than
it must on my Felicity; for though Pacorus's death will free me from an
injoyning Kival, yet alas, the way in which it is done, will raise me as great
an obstruction, as it removes; for with what confidence and hopes, can I
present my self to Altezeera, having been in effect the murderer of her
Husband? by so horrid a crime, if she has any aversion for me, it will be as
abundantly as justly increast, or if hereafter she should discover my Innocence
(which is too-bright to be eternally clouded) I should hereby render
heruncapable to reward it. No generous Ventidius, the gods have too palpably
taken the protection of Pacorus, to make me become his destroyer, and they
never yet permitted sin to be the way to Felicity; besides, I owe him a Life,
which if I now repay, I shall ease my self of a burden, that next to
Altezeera's Inconstancy, does most load me; neither is it impossible, but so
high a demonstration as this is, of my concern in her satisfaction, may create
in her a proportionate one for mine, and induce her to confess, what she has
done was her fault, or at least her misfortune, which acknowledgement of her
offense, I shall esteem the highest blessing, next to her repairing it; neither
shall I ever hope her pardon, for having made Pacorus a prisoner, but by
setting him at liberty; and those wounds I have given him, cannot more nobly be
excused, nor by so pregnant an evincement, that I was ignorant to whom I gave
them, as that of restoring him his liberty, when I knew it. I shall therefore
(generous Ventidius) conjure you, by all those motives which you esteem most
prevalent, permit me to dispose of Pacorus before his qual^^y be known to your
Army, lest so great a gift afterward might prove a proportionate prejudice to
the Giver. That this Prisoner (said Ventidius) is Pacorus, is not more certain,
than that before now all the Army know it, for my Spies never being employed
but about public concerns, I never used to receive their intelligences, but
before such of the Army, with whom I use to advise how to improve, and act upon
them, so that this being given me, as the custom is, and being a thing of so
great encouragement to the Soldiers, and Honor, and advantage to you that took
him, I was so far from endeavoring to suppress it, that I contributed on both
those scores to the divulging it; neither can I think, but therein I heve
abundantly served you, which I believe will be your opinion too, if you act not
as much againct your self, as the gods do for you; for I know you are too-much
a Friend to Virtue, and too-knowing in Altezeera's, either to desire, or expect
a reward of your Passion and Services, in the condition she now is in; so that
their being but two obstacles to the attaining of your felicity, that of her
real Marriage, and that of your imaginary Guilt, the greatest of them by
Pacorus's death, will be removed, and who knows whether therein both of them
will not be so, for perhaps the danger Armenia was in, did invite her to her
crime, and it may be the more to supress Pacorus's jealousies (who could not
but learn her pre-ingagement to you) she broke with you on your pretended, and
unmention'd fault, the better to palliate her own; neither is it unlikely, but
that Pacorus by some Arts of his, has settled this misunderstanding betwixt you,
and after his being possessed of Altezeera, lest she should learn it privately by
some other way, and so as a reparation recall you to her, has himself disclosed
it, thereby to hinder her from such a proceeding; besides, should Altezeera
come to learn your innocence, 'twill be so far from being an advantage to you,
that it will be a torment to her, and consequently to you; and Pacorus,
according to the course of Nature, being as probable to live, as either
Altezeera or you, all you can derive from the manifestation of your Integrity,
is only to let her know, but not render her capable to acknowledge, or reward
it; whereas if Pacorus be sent into another World, at the same instant your
innocence is cleared, it will undoubtedly be recompensed: These reasons
(continued Ventidius) cannot more evidently manifest that Pacorus's death is
necessary to your Felicity, than I will, that it cannot be so much as suspected
to be your action, or by your consent, for his being a prisoner cannot be more
generally known, than that my Commission commands me to take none, or if any be
taken, to execute them; so that that which is a general order, no body, nor
Altezeera her self, can consider as a particular act for your satisfaction, or
interest; what you have already done for Pacorus, evinces also that Truth,
since when you had the power to kill him, you not only declined doing so, when
too he had sufficiently invited you to it, by leaving only strength enough to
perform it, but also employed that little remnant of life you had left, to
preserve his, which had reduced you to that extremity; and (said Ventidius) you
must give me leave somewhat to mention my own safety in this particular, which
will run an infinite hazard, by not only infringing my Commission, but by
letting go so considerable a Prisoner. Would to the gods (I replied) I could
as easily answer all your objections, as the last, since then I could promise
my self a Concession of my request, as much from your Reason, as Friendship;
for whatsoever is the cause of Altezeera's change, I am confident Pacorus being
thus removed, will not leave her a Latitude to repair it; but on the contrary,
'twill make me for ever incapable of appearing what I am; though you allege,
that my having once preserved Pacorus, will evidence I am clear of his death,
yet I am satisfied it will prove the contrary, for, to save him when I knew not
who he was, and to permit his death when I knew him to be Pacorus, will justly
show, she was obliged by my ignorance, and wronged by my knowledge; and indeed
will render me as guilty to her, as to my self, for knowing the perfect
friendship Ventidius blesses me withal, she cannot doubt if I had embraced
Pacorus's preservation with earnestness, but my success, would have been
proportionate to my desire; besides, should she never know I was consenting to
his death, 'twere enough perpetually to banish me from her, that I did.
Ventidius was about to answer me, when Septimus, and a great many Officers,
came into my Tent to visit me, and to give him an advice of such importance, as
necessitated him awhile to leave me alone, which I no sooner was than I began
to dispute with my self on my admirable and strange fate and to elect some
course upon so emergent an occasion; at length the gods made me pitch upon one,
which at Ventidius's return I resolved, to communicate to him, in the
expectance whereof, I sent for one of my Physicians and Chirurgions, who waited
on Pacorus, to learn how he did; they told me, that as yet he had not recovered
his senses perfectly, nor spoke, but they durst undertake his cure, if I were
concerned in it; Yes (I replied) I am so, infinitely, and enjoin you, as you
value me, to have a care of him, and that you will not only keep from his
knowledge, that 'twas I which he fought against, but my being in the Roman
Army, both which you may imagine, are of no small importance to me, since I
commend them to you as much as his cure, or my own. This they not only promised,
but undertook to perform, which they might the more easily, because he was only
waited on by my Servants. An hour after, Ventidius returned to my Tent, where
he told me the occasion which drew him from it, was, an Advertisement brought
him, that Labienus, who was left for dead amongst many thousands that were so,
was by the care of one of his servants, the foregoing night brought to a
Countreyhouse not far off, where beyond all expectation they found him give
some symptoms of Life, which the diligent Servant to improve, went to a
Village not far off to fetch a Surgeon, to send advice to the Parthian Army
of this rare accident; and to let them know how dangerous a place their General
was in, that they might suddenly remove him from it; one of my Spies by good
fortune was then in this Village, and so industriously played his part, that he
got perfect information of this Truth, which then he came to discover to me,
and which occasioned me to send a party of Horse to seize upon Labienus, and
bring him hither; they are just now returned, but without him, for an hour
before, 2000 Parthian Horse had carried him away in a Litter. Ventidius having
made me this little Relation, began afresh to assault me about Pacorus, but
when he found my resolution, if not my reason, was unconquerable, he told me,
since I was so absolutely fixed upon my prejudice, he would afford me his
assistance in it, were it only to convince me he would not deny it me in
anything, and that what he had mentioned concerning his own danger, was purely
to invite me upon his score, to yield to what was to prevent mine, since I
declined it upon my own; that therefore he was determined to send an express to
Rome, to let the Senate know his victory, and the taking of Pacorus, whose
liberty he would represent (as his own opinion) would sooner settle the Eastern
World, than his death, since his being of a generous disposition, an obligation
that was so, would invite him to be a friend to Rome, which would be a more
virtuous Conquest over the Parthians, than they had over Crassus; whereas his
death by rendering the Parthians desperate, will render the War so too, which
otherwise might be concluded without hazard, and with glory; I will (continued
Ventidius) so fill my Letters, not only to the Triumvirate, and Senate, with
inducements to Mercy, but also all those I shall send to my particular Friends,
that I hope they will produce what you desire, at least if they do not, I will
be advertised of it by a Post, who shall arrive before my Express, that if
Pacorus's death be commanded, before I receive that order, I will by letting
him escape, render it impossible to be executed: this course (said Ventidius) I
elect, because perhaps I may have no cause to break my instructions, and if I
have, the doing it, may prove a greater obligation to Artavasdes; besides,
Pacorus's wounds cannot possibly be cured before an Express do go, and return
from Rome; neither will it be amiss we learn what countenance Altezeera put
upon the news of his death, or imprisonment. This generous assurance made me
embrace the maker of it, and then I told him, since his departure, I had given
strict Order Pacorus should be kept in a perfect ignorance, either of my having
been his Enemy, or of my being in the Roman Army, which I had done in
expectation that some advantageous expedient might be found out for me, if he
gave the Parthian his liberty, who I intended to visit in excellent disguise,
thorough which, if Pacorus did not discover me, I might be satisfied Altezeera
could not; and having made him know 'twas from me he derived his liberty and
life, I would return into Parthia with him, where I made no doubt to learn the
cause of my disgrace. But (said Ventidius) suppose Pacorus should know you, and
yet not seem to do it, till he came where he has a power to ruin you; and what
good too, can it do you to learn the cause of your disgrace, when it lies not
in the Princesses power to redress it? If Pacorus discovers me (said I) which I
will almost render an impossibility, I cannot yet suspect, but what I do for
him, will confine him from doing any thing against me, and to learn the cause
of my disgrace will at least silence the torment of my suspension, and restore
me to Altezeera's good opinion, which by her marriage, is the highest felicity
I can now aspire unto; besides, who knows what accidents may happen, which
being upon the place may improve; and I must tell you, I begin to flatter my
self with a belief, that the gods are weary of persecuting me, since by this
new accident they give me some signs of it. I will (continued Artavasdes) pass
over the particulars of our discourses, to tell you the results, which were,
That Ventidius yielded up his Reasons to my desires, and assured me, if he had
no answer from Rome, by the time Pacorus was able to make use of his liberty,
he should notwithstanding be restored to it. Ventidius immediately after
withdrew himself to make his dispatch to the Senate, and to let Udozia know of
that success, which he deplored, since thereby I was disabl'd from giving her
an account of it. Whilst we were in expectation of Pacorus's and my recovery,,
the Roman Army Camp'd upon the same place, in which it had been so victorious,
for I could not persuade Ventidius to prosecute his Victory by any hazard of my
Life, which he thought would run no small one, by my removing with the Army, or
my being left in any of those small Towns which were adjacent to it, so that I
did more oblige the Parthians, by having fought against them, than the contrary
in having done it. And though Ventidius sat still so long, yet he made his
Army believe, it proceeded from the impossibility of doing otherwise, till the
great number of the wounded were cured, which if left behind, that Guard, that
unavoidably must be so too, for their security, would endanger the marching
Army. Yet during my cure, the Romans made a sharp war on the Parthians, by
frequent and successful incursions; and I constantly sent to visit Pacorus, but
under the name of Pharasmanes, which was, that I intended to assume in my
disguise; but at length being perfectly recovered, the better to act my part,
by the same messenger which returned with Udozia's answer to Ventidius (which
was as obliging as he could desire, or perhaps expect) I gave out, I had
advertisements of some stirrs in Armenia, which Ventidius persuaded the Romans,
my Presence only would suppress; so that taking a public and formal leave, I
made all the Camp believe I was gone; but the same night I returned privately
again, sending all my Equipage to Udozia, and reserving only Philanax, with
that Physician, and Surgeon, which attended Pacorus: and to show you my
Disguise was really what the name imports, I have but to acquaint you, that
though Ventidius expected me at a set hour, and knew I would wear one; yet we
not only saluted one another, but I told him I was sent from Artavasdes, to beg
his pardon, for not being able to wait on him till next morning, without
discovering of me, which he did not, till I told him who I was, and which
indeed was not strange, for my Hair, that naturally is of a dark brown, I had
colored of a bright Flaxen, and by a certain composition, strangely altered
the color of my Skin, and to perfect all, by the help of a certain Gold Wire
fastened, and concealed in my Mouth, I had disguised my Voice as much as my
Face; in a word, I had not known my self, if it had not been for some internal
griefs, which nothing had the power, either to disguise or mitigate, and which
but too well forced me to remember, that I was still the unfortunate
Artavasdes. Ventidius was extremely satisfied with my having so deluded him,
which he fancied an impossibility, till by experiment he found his error. The
next morning therefore I went to visit Pacorus, and to give him the
Consolation, his condition, and the duty of a Gentleman required; I found him
well advanced on his recovery, but I found him perfect in all those charms of
conversation, which till then I never knew he so abundantly possessed. I will not
scruple my generous friends (continued Artavasdes) to tell you, I was not a
little troubled at it; and truly by my constant frequenting him, I began to
despair of my condition, by having cause to believe 'twas Altezeera's judgment
only which had made me unfortunate.

To abbreviate my story, I will let you know, That at last Pacorus was so well
recovered, as my Physician told me, within three days he might without danger
make use of his Horse; two of which were scarcely expired, when Ventidius's
Messenger from Rome came privately into the Camp, and assured him his Express
from the Senate, would be with him within 48 hours; That what had been
propounded by him to the Senate, had been largely debated in it, and had been
carried according to his desires, had not Mark Anthony opposed it, who
suspected Pacorus's liberty would settle Asia in a perfect peace, and
consequently take away the occasion of his going into the East with an Army,
which he coveted, only to palliate that Passion he had for Cleopatra the Queen
of Egypt, and which he durst not publicly manifest, lest it might create any
differences betwixt him and Octavius Caesar, whose Sister the Princess Octavia
he had married, and who in all men's eyes (but Anthony's) transcended her as
much in beauty, as in virtue; That therefore he had so managed the business in
the Senate, that they had sent a positive Order immediately to put Pacorus to
death. Ventidius was not disheartened at this Advertisement, and to hinder me
from being so, he immediately (but by ways too prolix for a repetition) put
things in such a certain posture, that I knew there would be no difficulty that
night to steal away with my Friend, and my Rival; till when, I spent the time
in taking leave of my dear Ventidius: but as soon as the hour came, I went to
Pacorus, and having brought him into one of the most obscure corners of the
Tent, I told him, I believe Sir, you have already learnt, that he by whose good
fortune you were made a Prisoner, hazarded as much himself for you; as he did
against you, and thereby you were preserved from losing your life as
absolutely, as you have your liberty. This Gentleman who was so much your
Enemy, and your Friend, is in the latter quality so much mine, that though he
is called Pharasmenes as well as I, yet there is an high equality between our
minds, as between our names; in his success against you, he received some such
wounds, that though they were not as dangerous as yours, yet they were in such
unfortunate and inconvenient places, that he has not been able to pay you those
visits, which he knows is due to your virtue, as much as to your quality; 'twas
therefore that I being sooner recovered of mine, he enjoined me to supply his
place: But, Sir, that you may see his concern in you extends further than the
formal parts of humanity, he has now sent me to you, not only to let you know
there is an express Order come from Rome to put you to death, but also to
attempt all imaginable means I can to prevent it.

At this unexpected Advertisement, Pacorus appeared in some disorder; and truly
I should have wondered more at the contrary, than I did at it, having by
Altezeera a far dearer blessing to lose than life. I gave him a little time to
reflect upon his condition, which the more he did, the more desperate it did
appear; Crassus barbarous death, and the Romans as barbarous usage to all
Princes who they esteemed, or at least termed so, made him tell me, Your
generous Friend, I believe, ( Pharasmenes) by his desires, has already as much
obliged me as he will have the power, for I know too well the condition of the
Romans, to be ignorant of my own; I shall not yet but acknowledge my self
extremely his Debtor, and as much as if what he desired were acted. I beseech
you therefore, tell him from me, that having no other way to pay what I owe
him, I will do it in contributing to his glory, by the resolution of my
sufferings, which perhaps I shall in some degree perform, if I endure my death
with as much resolution, as I opposed it.

This generous Reply gave me new invitations to serve him, and confined me
afresh to act against the dictates of my Love, to follow those of my Honor,
which forced me to embrace Pacorus, and to assure him before next morning, I
would participate in his intended punishment, or free him from it. To be brief,
I performed the latter; and by learning the wo^d from Ventidius, I brought him
safe out of the Camp, where I told him, That having by that Action lost my
Fortune with the Romans, I must depend for it on him; which if he approved I
would wait on him into Parthia. The generous Paecorus embraced me a thousand
times for this assurance, and gave me as many thanks for it, as for his life
and liberty. We found some good and swift Horses in a little Grove, which by my
orders were brought thither by Philanax, who I then sent to Udozia, he being as
perfectly known to Altezeera, as the contrary to her husband.

I need not tell you the Alarm Pacorus escape gave unto the Roman Camp, how
seemingly diligent Ventidius was to recover him, what formal Letters he sent to
the Senate, to excuse himself for a misfortune, which was so much the more
extenuated as to him, because Pacorus was escaped before he had received their
commands for his execution, nor the vast promises he made of taking him again,
or Parthia in his stead, it is enough you know, that what he said was received
as he desired; for Anthony was satisfied, Pacorus was at least delivered in
such a way, as would ascertain a War as much as his death. Whilst these things
were thus transacting amongst the Romans, the Parthian and I came safe to
Seleutia, where the Count then resided; Pacorus (who perfectly knew the Palace)
led me to the Princesses Apartment, where we found with her (for then
Parthenissa, Lindadory, and Zephalinda, were in the Isle of Eden) Arsaces and
Phraates all in Mourning, but alas Altezeera having more in her looks, than
clothes, I cannot, if I would, tell you the Raptures and Transports at so
unexpected a return from Death, or Captivity, (for they knew not which had been
Pacorus's fate) but after the first celebrations of this joy, he led me by the
hand to Arsaces and Altezeera, and told them, 'Twas to me they owed his life
and safety; and then acquainted them with all, with which I have you. Arsaces
made me so many Compliments and Thanks, that in them I read his concern for his
Son; but alas Altezeera did the like too, and wounded me a thousand times more
with her gratitude, than she could have done with a contrary usage, manifesting
by the esteem she placed upon the performance, how much a higher one she had
for him for whom 'twas performed. I must confess, I was so confounded at it,
though I had armed my self against it by having prepared my self for it, that
had not the company been more intent on their joy, than me, they had discovered
me inspight of my disguise. To pass over what would but trouble you to hear,
and me much more to remember, or relate, I will tell you, after a magnificent
Supper, where the King and Princes constrained me to sit with them, (giving
therein that honor to my services, which they thought was not due to me) the
Princess Altezeera leaving Pacorus, took me aside to reiterate her civilities
for his deliverance.

Great gods! you only know, with how much difficulty 'twas I abstained from
telling her, That her leaving Pacorus, to come unto Artavasdes, which she did
in that way of Gratitude, she should have done in another; And that she had
Reason to be Grateful for Pacorus's deliverance, if she knew from whom she
derived it; but I had then enough fortitude to suppress those risings, and to
tell her, That had I but known so transcendent a reward as the satisfaction of
so fair a Princess had attended that performance, I had acted it as much out of
the dictates of Interest, as out of those of Honor or Friendship.

We entertained one another awhile with discourses of this quality, but the
time was not long, for the impatient Pacorus came to ravish her from me, and to
place himself in those ecstasies and raptures, which the cruel gods had
eternally denied, the as-unconstant, as-unfortunate Artavasdes. This separation
was so operative, that had not the Prince Phraates, and the chiefest of the
Court came to conduct me to my Apartment, I had continued as fixed to the place
I was in, as to my infelicity; but their civilities drew me out of my thoughts,
which I suspended till they had left me in my Apartment, whither they
accompanied me against all my resistance. As soon as I was a Bed, the
remembrance of Altezeera's gratitude for having continued the impossibility of
Artavasdes's being made happy, came fresh into my thoughts, and made me utter
things as disjointed as my hopes; but when I came to reflect, that in that same
instant I was deploring Altezeera's cruelty to me, she was in my Rivals Arms,
and affording him those joys, which to be deprived of, could not be so great
Misery, as to possess, was a Felicity, what did not my rage and resentments
make me speak? Ah (said I Artavasdes) was it not sufficient that the gods, and
Altezeera contributed to thy torments, but that thou must do it thy self, by
bringing Pacorus not only to the embraces of thy Princess, but thyself also to
be the Spectator of them? Never more, Artavasdes, never more complain of the
gods, they had given thy Rival into thy hands; and when they began to declare
themselves thy Friends, thou did declare thy self thine Enemy, and by that
performance have not only divested thy self eternally of hope, but also of the
ease of complaining against all but thy self, without becoming as unjust to
them, as thou have been to thy Love; whilst my thoughts inclined me on this
side, they suggested to me many such reasonings; but after a short calm, they
began to incline me to consider Altezeera, armed with all those attractive
charms and graces, which formerly had conquered me, and which by their yet
retaining me in captivity, too sufficiently proved their being infinite, and
confined me to believe all my sufferings for her, were too much my duty, to be
my trouble.

No, no, Artavasdes, (said I in those dictates) thou have still the same
quarrel to the gods; for, by the way in which they gave thee thine Enemy, thou
could not restore thy hopes, but by becoming unworthy of them; and those same
gods which afforded thee the power of revenge, made the acting it a greater
sin, than it could be a satisfaction, and gave thee honor and virtue enough to
suspend all the inspirations of resentment; do not then destroy the merit of
thy performance, by repining against it, it is more noble to merit Altezeera
without possessing her, than to possess her, without meriting her; neither can
what thou have done, but one day contribute to the disclosing of thine
innocence; and that which discovers, must invite her to reward it; wait then (
Artavasdes) the manifestation of what the gods (without declaring themselves
none) cannot long conceal, and find thy satisfaction in thy very torment, by
being pleased that Altezeera is so, though in Pacorus's arms; and by
calculating thy own joys, by the seeing of his, if ever the gods remove the
obstruction of her marriage, and thy pretended guilt. It was above a thousand
times that I built and destroyed such resolutions, sometimes determining to
discover my self, and know my fault, or make her acknowledge hers, and then
again declining that resolution; for I knew too well Altezeera's scrupulous
virtue, to have any hopes of living near her afterward, though I should prove
my self innocent; and so the apprehension of being banished from what I loved
to see, made me rather elect to be thought criminal, and enjoy that felicity,
than to appear otherwise, and be deprived of it.

I had longer entertained my self in these disputes, had not the Suns
appearing, and afterward some of the Princes Officers, put a period to them:
The first of them which came into my Chamber, gave me advice, That Pacorus had
settled a large Pension on me, and formed me an Equipage which I found
proportionate to my real quality; But alas the next that visited me, were sent
from the Prince and Altezeera, to know how I had past the night? Oh gods! what
difficulty had I to abstain from sending them word, that their having past it
so well, had almost made me pass it as ill: But though this strange Message set
all my wounds fresh a bleeding, yet I had so much discretion left, as only to
answer it with a Complement as civil, as theirs was seemingly so. As soon as I
was dressed, I went into the Palace Gardens, which were so admirably obliged both
by Art and Nature, that they would have unavoidably proved a diversion, to a
less inveterate Melancholy than mine; I had not been above two hours there,
when I might perceive Pacorus and Altezeera at the end of the Walk I was in,
coming toward me, at which sight I could not abstain from whispering to my
self: Can you then Altezeera, after having past a whole night in Pacorus's
embraces, present your self without confusion before him, to whom you had first
promised that blessing? And can thou ( Artavasdes) after being convinced that
she has done so, outlive that misfortune? Or if thou do not do it, to be
revenged upon the Ravisher of thy right and joys? I could no longer continue
any reflections of this quality, because I went to meet them, where Altezeera
by many reiterated expressions for Pacorus's delivery, but too-too-palpably let
me know how dear it was unto her: Neither was it only at this time that she did
so, but so constantly upon all occasions, that it gave me no small Alarm she
had discovered me, for I feared she could not so incessantly persecute me out
of Gratitude, but Hate. But (continued Artavasdes) if I should acquaint you in
particular with all things that happened whilst I resided in Parthia, I should
take up almost as much time as did my residence there; I will therefore only
acquaint you with those things which are most essential, and in pursuance
thereof let you know, That one evening, when all the Court were walking in the
Palace Gardens, I had the honor to lead the Princess Altezeera, and being
undesignedly gotten into a retired Walk, she earnestly conjured me to let her
know the story of my life, since (as she said) 'twas from it, she derived that
which made hers her satisfaction. Would to the gods fair Princess (I was upon
the point of saying) that my life had not lasted a moment longer, than when
upon its own score, it had created the felicity of yours. But knowing such a
Reply would have proved destructive to that resolution I had assumed, of
expecting in disguise, and with patience, what the gods had determined of me, I
gave her an account of my life, such as my invention then suggested, till my
arrival in Syria with Ventidius. But, Madam, (I continued) I cannot now obey
you, without something violating a friends injunctions; yet if you command me
to proceed, you shall find, I esteem nothing more highly, and justly, than the
honor of obeying you. Truly (said Altezeera) you have told me so many
admirable things in your life, and I have been so infinitely obliged unto it,
that I should desire the continuation of your story, did I not apprehend your
granting my curiosity, might prove almost as great a trouble to you, as a
satisfaction to me.

Madam (I replied) to convince you, I cannot but please my self, while I do the
Princess Altezeera; I will acquaint her with the residue of my story, and the
rather, (not only as it is her command) but as she has some concerns in it.

A Rtavasdes was beginning to speak, and to finish that small remainder of his
Narration, when Callimachus's servants interrupted him, by bringing in their
Supper, which both he, and Artabanes would have dispensed with, for what it
hindered them of; but the sooner to repair that misfortune, they took a little
refreshment, and then Artavasdes having minded them, he addressed his discourse
to the Princess Altezeera, continued it in these words.

PARTHENISSA.
THE THIRD PART.
BOOK IV.
THough that Friendship, Madam, between Ventidius, (the now Roman General in
Asia) and me, be very great, yet I can truly say, that between him, and
Artavasdes, is equal to it; and perhaps I should speak no untruth, if I assured
you, that between Artavasdes and me, is not inferior unto either. Ventidius
being so far on his way to Parthia, as Tharsus in Cilicia, was there met by
Artavasdes, but Artavasdes so changed, that you would as soon have taken me for
him, as I should have taken him for himself; but, at length, knowing who he
was, more by our ears, than eyes, we thought nothing could appear so strange as
his alteration, till we learned that yours (Madam) was the cause of it, and
that the change of his face, could not transcend that of your mind; but then
our wonder ceased, or at least changed its object; for whereas we admired
before at his being so pale and languishing, we now did more that he was alive,
having known at Rome how passionately he adored you, and how only he did value
his life, because you did, and because you had therein rendered it a blessing
to him.

He further told us, That since his disgrace, (which was the less supportable
for having never learned the cause of it) he had confined himself to a
Solitude, from which nothing but his engagement to Ventidius could have so long
absolved him, and whither (having satisfied it) he would immediately retire,
and so assiduously solicit death, as he was confident in a short time to have
better success in that Address, than in his former; that this course he
elected, as the only means to end his Torments, and your Cruelty too (Madam)
having also left him no other way to justify his innocence, which he protested
to us in such moving terms, that both Ventidius and I, were abundantly
satisfied of it; I cannot (Madam) but tell you, that being convinced he was not
faulty, I persuaded him often to imitate what he admired, and as you had
elected another Servant, so that he would another Mistress: But alas! he was
too much a Captive, so much as to think on Liberty; and condemned me more for
such a motion, than those gods for acting against him, what had made me esteem
it a reasonable one.

Whilst I was thus speaking to the fair Altezeera, she was in so great
disorder, that she observed not mine, which did proceed in no small degree,
from my not knowing from whence hers did; but the better to learn it, I thus
continued my discourse.

I will not (Madam) particularize Ventidius's journey to the fair Vdozia, (in
which Artavasdes and I accompanied him) and for whom he had contracted a
Passion, which I believe is transcended by none, but by Artavasdes's for you,
and by yours for the Prince Pacorus. Neither will I tell you all those Reasons
the unfortunate Artavasdes used for continuing in his solitude, nor ours to
draw him from it, because I fear you are not enough concerned in him, to listen
to them with that patience, which their length requires. It is true
Pharasmanes, (said Altezeera) I should hardly have the patience to listen to
them, because I know they are but a continued series of that dissimulation,
with which he has captivated your belief, and did but too long mine, in so high
a degree, that I shall not scruple to acknowledge, I once esteemed, as much as
I do now detest him. Oh gods! (Madam, I hastily replied) if Artavasdes be
guilty, why then did you not tell him his crime, that he might have appeared so
to himself, as well as to his Princess? which latter, if you had performed, I
durst undertake he would have been more odious to himself, than he can be to
her. That which he did (said Altezeera) was of a quality, that to have told him
of it, was but to have done that to him, which he did to me; let it suffice
Pharasmanes, that I had the confession of his offense from him that committed
it. If it were not (I replied) a sin, not to believe the fair Altezeera above
Artavasdes, I should do it in this particular, for if what he did, was his
election, and not his misfortune, why did he impose on himself so strict a
penance as a three years recluseness? And why did he give a higher testimony
of his innocence than that amounted unto, which, Madam, you will learn, in the
sequel of my Relation. You will do well then (said Altezeera) to prosecute it,
for that which you have already mentioned, is one of the most pregnant proofs
of his guilt, and proceeded from a contrary despair, than that to which he has
ascribed it unto. I was (continued Artavasdes) beginning to speak something
farther in my own justification, when Altezeera interrupted it, by saying, But
Pharasmanes, I conjure you leave off all discourses of Artavasdes's Adventures,
and continue your own. This I found was almost as difficult to be obeyed in one
sense, as in the other; but though I apprehended I should discover who I was,
if I took too much pains to discover what Artavasdes was; yet I could not
abstain from thus speaking to Altezeera. Alas Madam, why do you take so short a
way to make me fear you are more desirous of Artavasdes's guilt, than his
innocence. The fair Altezeera at these words turned up her vail, and looking on
me, by a deep sigh, seemed to reproach the uncharitableness of my opinion; but
this she did in so moving a way, that in the flattering dictates it inspired me
with, I was going to fling my self at her feet, and there to implore the
knowledge of my supposed offense, or to end the torments of that denial, by a
real death; but something which was the god over my inclination, suspended me
that time from obeying it: and observing my Princess was in no disobliging
temper, I resolved to make some use of it, and therefore I thus continued. I
hope (Madam) you will pardon a disobedience, which only ambitions to preserve
my friend from losing as absolutely the honor of your esteem, as he has that of
your affection; in confidence of so just a forgiveness, I will presume to
acquaint you, That Ventidius and I were finally so prevalent with Artavasdes,
that we persuaded him to the Roman Army; and though we told him the War would
prove a diversion to his melancholy, yet we too evidently found he elected it,
rather for a cure of his. And indeed in that Battle we fought against Pacorus,
though many strange Accidents befell him, yet I esteemed none of them more
justly merited that name, than that he 'scap'd with life. Perhaps, Madam, you
will be of my opinion, when I tell you (and that truly) that 'twas Artavasdes
which fought against Pacorus, and having been victorious over his Rival, he
became his defender against all the Roman Army, and at least as much hazarded
his life for, as against him; but Ventidius's arrival hindered you from losing
that which you love best, and that which loves you best; neither can Pacorus be
more happy in the first of these qualities, than I am just in attributing the
last of them to Artavasdes, who having only life enough remaining to speak
three or four words, made use of it to recommend Pacorus's cure to Ventidius,
more than his own. Judge Madam, (I continued) of the merit of this Action,
which were I not too much a friend to Artavasdes, I would say, speaks more for
itself, than I can for it. This which you tell me (said Altezeera) is nothing
essential to what you would evince, since I never doubted Artavasdes's
Gallantry, but his Love; and that this performance proceeded from his concern
in honor, and not in me, I believe you need no greater eviction, than that he
was ignorant who he obliged, positively, or relatively. It Is true Madam (I
replied) Artavasdes was ignorant that he fought for himself in the Combat, and
against himself after the Victory; but yet, if what our Priests do tell us is a
truth, that our good Genius's commonly incline us to those Actions, which
though we then understand not, yet afterward approve, I may infer from thence
something of advantage in Artavasdes's favor. But why do I so much entrench
upon the merit and clearness of his innocence, as to endeavor to prove it by
disputable inferences, when I can by evident demonstrations? To hasten
hereunto, I must acquaint you Madam, that both the successful, and the
unfortunate, were carried in a deep Swoon by Ventidius's orders into several
Tents, where the first thing Artavasdes did when he was restored to life, was
to enquire after his enemies. Neither did his care cease, or diminish, when the
next morning the Roman General brought him word who he was; and though
Ventidius did much admire at it, yet he had by much a juster cause to do so,
when after he had represented, that by his Commission he was to give no quarter
to any Parthian, and that by Pacorus's death, he might have the blessing of
revenge, and perhaps therein remove the highest obstruction to a more
transcendent one. Artavasdes was so far from approving the motion, that he so
absolutely disrelish'd Ventidius for making it, as he protested, nothing but
the giving Pacorus his liberty, could repair having assumed any thought against
his life; and then uttered so many passionate expressions upon that duty, which
in spite of your cruelty, he had still preserved for the fair Altezeera; that
perhaps if I told you all the truth, I might invite you to suspect I did the
contrary. I was present, Madam, at this honorable conference; and though my
wounds were many, and as dangerous as those of Artavasdes, yet my friendship
never made me abandon him; and that very friendship, and my ignorance of those
Charms which I have since discovered in the Princess Altezeera, made me esteem
his desires as strange, as I now find them just; and forced me to speak some
things against that excellency, which though infinite, cannot transcend my
crimes, or his mercy, if she pardons them.

Yes, Madam, upon Artavasdes's score, I perfectly hated you, and in those
dictates I was often condescending to the death of what you loved: nay, I would
have had Artavasdes done the like; and when he represented he had no handsomer
way to obtain your forgiveness for what he had done against Pacorus, and to
show you the wrong you had done to Artavasdes, than to ruin the hopes of the
last, to settle the joys of the first. I replied, That if you honor Pacorus
with your affection, he did in that performance but more certainly exclude
himself eternally from so much as hope; and if you did not, That by obliging
(at least not injuring) you, he removed his highest Impediment. Besides, If
that were the testimony he would give of his Passion, it might bring in
Question, whether he had any? which belief he would render a just one, if he
preferred his Rivals felicity above his own. I told him besides, It was better
to repent (if such an action needed it) for having acted his Revenge, than for
the omission of it: for besides the felicity of such a performance, the first
sort of Repentance was a Virtue, but the last a Vice. Ah! said Artavasdes, how
ill do thou reason! if the fair Altezeera loves Pacorus, I had rather destroy
my expectation, than her happiness; and if she does not, I yet commit a sin
which unavoidably will clothe me in a proportionate Misfortune, and ruin my
hopes in the same way by which I elect to establish them: for by being the
Murderer (or accessory to the death) of Pacorus, I leave her not the Power, if
she had the will, to reward my Fidelity and Passion; and by removing one
Impediment, I create a greater; for it is much more probable Pacorus will die
soon enough by the course of Nature, than that Altezeera should marry his
Murderer. Above all this (said Artavasdes) I pay too-transcendent a respect,
not only to all which the fair Altezeera esteems, but to what also belongs unto
her, to act any thing to the prejudice thereof; and it is upon that score I have
hitherto attempted nothing against my own Life, which evidently evinces she has
still a power over me, by being capable to make mine so great a Torment, and by
then restraining me from ending it without her permission: Neither can I
apprehend any trouble from repenting an omission which was dictated by Honor,
by Reason, and (which is more than both those) by that Duty I owe my Princess,
which is the Name I must eternally give her; as Kings, though unjustly excluded
from their Crowns, cease not to call them so, nor to have a right unto them,
which want of possession cannot prejudice. He gave me, Madam (I continued) as
pregnant Arguments as these, which I purposely omit, not only because the less
reason was in his performance, the more it had of Merit; but also because his
actions will give you a better Character of his Heart than his words can. But
at last when the peremptory Command came from Rome for Pacorus's Death; Great
gods! you only know how it struck Artavasdes; but I do, that his loving so much
Altezeera, and Altezeera so much hating him, would have made him consider that
fatal Order with less horror, had it been sent for Artavasdes instead of his
Rival. But the former's unfortunate condition hindering him to visit Pacorus,
and to act publicly for his safety; he sent for the generous Ventidius, and
conjured him to let Pacorus escape, in terms so pressing, that I can truly say,
I was as much affected with them, as he which delivered them. Ventidius
represented to him, how much the concession of his Request would turn to his
own prejudice; but finding that would not operate, he let him then know how
much it would be to Ventidius's own. This moved Artavasdes much more than the
former, but nothing so much as did the fair Altezeera's satisfaction, which to
effect, he afterward sent for me, and violently protested, That if Pacorus
lost his Life, he would not survive him, since that was the only evincement he
had in his power, that he was free from so horrid a Sin. This resolution I read
as visibly in his Heart, as words, and acquainted Ventidius with it, who more
concerned in his Friend than in himself, yielded to his desires. Never, Madam,
did I see Artavasdes so filled with Joy as at that assurance, no, not when he
was in the blessing of your Affection; which made me conclude he esteemed it a
more transcendent Felicity to make you happy, than to be made so by you. 'Twas
thus, Madam, that Pacorus was delivered both from Captivity and Death, and
Artavasdes to avoid the possibility of drawing his sacrilegious Sword against
the object of your Passion, did as absolutely abandon the Roman Army, as the
felicity of Life, which for almost these four Years he has never relisht, nor
indeed any but what proceeded from this last Service he has paid you, and
which he earnestly enjoined me to conceal from your knowledge, electing rather
to be still thought Guilty, than appear the contrary to cloud and suspend your
Joys. I had no sooner done speaking, than the fair Altezeera with some Tears
cried out, Oh gods! Parasmanes, Is all this possible which you have told me? I
was going to reply and assure her, it was not only possible, but true, when I
might perceive Pacorus and the rest of the Company coming toward us; I gave
Altezeera notice of it, who otherwise was so intent on her Thoughts, that she
had not minded the Prince's Arrival; but as soon as she did, pulling down her
Vail, she endeavored the best she could to conceal her Disorder. I could not
abstain from repining at this cruel interruption, for I was confident in the
heat of Altezeera's confusions, to have discovered the quality and greatness of
them, which probably in a more settled Temper, her Virtue, or Judgment, would
invite her to conceal. As Soon as Pacorus and the rest had joined us, he began
by many Raileries to make a War against me, for having so long engrossed the
Princess; but I had too many sad and confused thoughts, to make him any
frequent returns of that nature, which the sooner ended our Walk: But alas, I
had afterward much more occasion to be offended at Pacorus interrupting us,
than I then had, since for above a quarter of a Year after, I never had the
opportunity of entertaining Altezeera without Witnesses; Yet I observed from
that day forwards, she was more pensive and melancholy, than she had been; and
if she avoided my conversation, 'twas more from a desire of being alone, than
from any aversion she seemed to have unto it. All this tedious ^ime I past in
more tedious sufferings; but at length there happened an accident by which, if
I had not been destined to have been my own Enemy as much as the Gods have
been, I might have discovered my Fate, and perhaps have found it as full of
Felicity, as now it is of Torment. The Prince Pacorus was extremely addicted to
hunting the wild Bore, but commonly before the Huntsmen forced him out of the
Forest, he would place himself in a Stand, to Shoot. This Recreation he one day
invited me to, and placed me with a Javelin in a Stand within call of his. The
King, the Princess, and all the Court were in a large Plain which environed the
Forest; but whilst we were in expectation of the Bore, I hear a clashing of
Swords, and suddenly after my name repeated, twice or thrice by Pacorus. I
instantly leapt out of my Stand, and ran toward his, where I found him
assaulted by three men in Disguises, one of whom he had pierced with his Arrow,
yet not so mortally, but that with the help of the other two, he himself was
reduced to such extremity, that apprehending I could not come time enough to
his relief, (which truly I may say I embraced without balancing) I cried out,
'twas Pacorus; my voice was no sooner heard, than one of the three came running
to me with his Sword in his hand, and told me, 'twas Pacorus they meant; This
Declaration made me meet him, which made it halfway, and darting my Javelin at
him, pierced him through and through, and nailed him to the ground; immediately
I seized upon his Sword, and came so timely to Pacorus, that by the Wounds he
had already received, he was even sinking down under their burden: but I not
only presented him with Relief, but Victory: for one of the remaining two, I
found so weaken^d to my hand, that I esteemed his condition unworthy my Sword,
if his Crime had not made him the contray; and the other frightened by the
Death of his Companions, was killed almost as easily, as he justly deserved it.
The generous Pacorus, though he wanted strength to dispute his Life, yet did
not, to come and acknowledge by words and Embraces, that 'twas from me he had
now twice derived it; but in so gallant a Gratitude, he had so overstrain'd
himself, that he fell speechless as he was performing it. I durst not forsake
him in that extremity, lest by wanting my assistance, his seeming Death might
have turned into a real one; and lest some further Accomplices in this fact,
might, whilst I went to call for help, have rendered him past any; whilst I was
in this perplexity, the Boar by another way had quitted the Forest; and a
Gentleman which waited on the Plain, came to advertise the Prince of it, and to
bring him his Horse; but he was so frightened at the strange accident, and at
the stranger condition his Lord was in, that turning about, he ran full-speed,
and gave the Alarm of it to Arsaces, Altezeera, Phraates, and all the Court:
and though they suddenly came to the place where this Tragedy had been acted;
yet by some fresh water which I fetched from a neighboring Fountain, I had
brought him from his swound; I cannot tell you the general regrets and
mournings of all the Company, especially those of the fair Altezeera, which
though they infinitely transcended all the others, yet they could not Mine, by
observing they did so. But after Pacorus's Wounds were bound up, as well as the
place did permit (which he would not until three slight ones I had received
were dressed before his, till he had told the particulars of this accident, and
the service I had rendered him) all the Court and my Princess too, came and
made me retributions too long and too flattering to be repeated; which were no
sooner ended, than Phraates taking some others with him, went to pull off the
Disguises of those dead Traitors, to learn who they were; but their Faces were
as strong a disguise as their Vizards, being both alike unknown. This news
being brought to Arsaces, he had their Heads taken off, and fixed upon short
Poles at the Gates of Seleutia, where 100 Talents were proclaimed for whosoever
should discover who they were, or who had employed them. Whilst this was
a-doing, a Litter was brought to the Prince, who was carried in it to Seleutia;
but my Wounds being less for number and danger, by my Princesses command I rid
with her thither in her Chariot, and there being none in it besides, after she
had somewhat moderated her Tears, she began a-fresh to give me new Torments by
new expressions of her Gratitude; but observing I took no relish in them, which
she attributed to my Modesty (but which alas proceeded from another cause) she
told me; If Pharasmanes, your Friend have still those inclinations for me which
he once had and which you would still persuade me he has, I believe he will
esteem you as little his in this days performance, as I must by it acknowledge
you infinitely Mine. I am confident, Madam (I replied) The Service I have paid
you cannot more satisfy you, than it will him, who I know, if he thought this
were not really the fair Altezeera's Judgment, would be thereby more
dangerously wounded than Pacorus is. It Is now, Madam (I continued) that I must
conclude my Friends fortune desperate, when that excellence which is to form
it, believes surmises against him, more than Demonstrations for him; and
(Madam) if that which he did for you in the Roman Camp, and that which I have
this Day performed on his score, are not pregnant Arguments enough for an
Innocence which Ambitions no higher a Reward for being so, than to be thought
so; I leave you to Judge, whether my despair for Artavasdes, be not too
sufficient grounded. Altezeera, who observed I could not utter these words
without sympathizing in their sadness, and truth, was so generous as to reply;
If ( Pharasmanes) what you tell me of your Friend, be what you desire I should
credit, I will do it, though perhaps the strongest motion which induces me to
it, ^ill be your satisfaction. Madam (I replied), I had much rather you would
believe it for your own, which would bring no small accession to mine; and
which to invite you to the more powerfully, I dare protest by all the gods, and
by that which Artavasdes adores as much, that if he will resent any trouble at
what I have this Day performed, it will proceed only from his not having paid
you the duty. Altezeera blushed at this assurance; and as she was about to make
me a reply, the Prince Phraates (who rid) came to the Chariot-side to console
his Sister; but his words could not so much do it, as his looks did the
contrary, which carried in them so visible and contagious a sorrow, that then I
began to assume an affection for him, which the Character I had of him, and his
earliest Actions had made me thitherto deny him; which affection you may
imagine was not small in its very Birth, when it was not suppressed, though I had
thereunto so much invitation, as his hindering me all the way to Selutia from
entertaining my Princess. The Night that succeeded this Day, I took no rest,
more from the trouble of my Mind, than my Wounds, which indeed was more hurt
than my Body; 'twas during the Night that I had more leisure to reflect on the
admirable Revolutions of the day, which forced me to say, Great gods! what has
the miserable Artavasdes done, that makes you so ingenious to persecute him?
was it such a Crime to adore what was your excellentest Work, and most
resembl'd you as well in perfection, as in tormenting me? was to be constant to
a virtuous flame, a Sin? if neither of these can bear that Name, it is with
injustice that I bear your plagues; for I am guilty of no other offenses: was
it not enough that you made Pacorus ravish my Right, my Reward, and my Felicity
from me, but you must afterward constitute me his Tutulary-Angel? and not only
make me present whenever any danger threatened him, but make me also preserve
his life, and in so unfortunate a way too, as not in that performance to lose
my own; there could not be a higher torment than to save a successful Rival,
unless it were to outlive that act: both these yet you have made my Destiny,
and you are not content with this, but that little satisfaction which attends
so much suffering you deprive me of, by rendering my concealment necessary: You
can make me undertake the danger, but you will not suffer me to receive the
Reward: The revealing of Innocence, which to others is a recompense, to me must
be a Punishment as great as Guilt; for the Reward which attends the disclosing
of mine, will be the trouble of Altezeera, and the Banishment of Artavasdes; To
continue near her, I must be unworthy that Honor; and to make my self appear
worthy of, I must be banished from it; if I remain near Pacorus, I am eternally
destined to preserve him; and if I go from him, I must lose that sight which
preserves me. Great gods! either put a period to your Cruelty, or to that Life
which is the object of it; for whilst you continue both, you cannot make me
more miserable, than you make your selves unjust, These irreligious reasonings
ended not, but with the Night; and the Day was as full of torment, though
Altezeera did visit me; for she did it, as she her self told me, to obey
Pacorus: And alas! though it were to me, yet it was not to Artavades; My cruel
Fate made me still Artavasdes when 'twas to receive a punishment, but when
'twas to enjoy a blessing, it made me Pharasmanes. Whilst Pacorus and I were
healing of our Wounds, I received such incessant Obligations from him, that I
found my self as much tied to him by Resentment, as by Fate; and the higher
Powers did every day so far remove me from my hopes, that I began not to
despair, but thereby I should remove my self from their Cruelty: but I had no
sooner formed so flattering an expectation, than they immediately ruined it,
and by that infinite Power they showed in tormenting, they manifested, they
only wanted the Will to oblige me; which alas, I feared was as great a
deficiency, as if both were wanting. That (my generous Friends, continued
Artavasdes) which I have now to tell you, will perhaps make you think what I
have said, proceeds from my reason, not my irreligion: for though by an
internal Consumption I was so much pined away, that the Physicians assured me,
if in few days there did not happen as strange an alteration in one extreme,
as there had happened in the other, my recovery would be a fitter subject for
their Prayers, than Art; yet I struggled with my infirmity, not to conquer, but
to contribute to its Victory; and therefore 'twas that every day I constantly
waited on the Prince, and Princess, in their several Appartments; who were both
so Generous, as to be in^initely concerned in my visible Declination. One
afternoon I went to the fair Altezeera to pay her a visit; but some of her
Servants told me she was newly gone to Regeliza's, who, (said Artavasdes) I
forgot to tell you, continued her Mistresses favor, and was married to a great
Lord in Selutia; she being in extreme danger in her delivery, had passionately
begged from Altezeera the Honor of a visit, since probably (as she said) 'twas
the last time she should ever receive it. This News did exceedingly trouble me,
because I knew it did the fair Altezeera, whose return I resolved to expect in
her own Appartment, not only as the distance between hers, and mine was such,
that my weakness made my going to my own, and return to hers, a greater trouble
than my attending could amount unto; but also I elected the latter to learn the
certainty of Regeliza's condition, in which both positively and relatively I
was not a little concerned. I had not continued two Hours in this Expectation,
when the Princess returned, but with Eyes so filled with Tears, that I too
suddenly read in that effect the cause of it: As soon as she was come into the
Chamber, in which I waited for her, all her Servants withdrew themselves, and
finding they did it as duty to her Grief, I was going to imitate them; which as
soon as she observed, she told me, You may stay Pharasmanes, if your going away
proceeds from any consideration of me. Madam (I replied) the deep sadness which
I too visibly perceived in your Looks, makes me conjecture the cause of it is
the Death of Regeliza, whom I know you too justly deplore to offer yet, or hope
to lessen, or interrupt your Tears. It Is true (said Altezeera) Regeliza, and
the Son she went with, are both Dead, but she has told me something before her
Death, which has but too powerfully consol'd me for it, and which perhaps if
you knew, you would confess if there were any Justice in my shedding some Tears
for her loss, it should proceed from a contrary cause, than to that you ascribe
them to; I have ( Pharasmanes) my heart too much contracted to tell you now
what it is that does it; but if to morrow you will visit me, you shall know
what I believe will invite you to excuse my not being able to acquaint you with
it now. Altezeera had no sooner ended those words, than in fresh weepings she
did retire hastily into her Cabinet; and it being somewhat late, I did to my
Chamber, where I past the Night in a thousand several conjectures what this
strange accident might be; but it so perfectly merited that Name, that I was so
far from imagining it, as I could hardly believe it, when Altezeera told it me.
At length, as soon as the impatiented hour came, I went to the Princesses
Appartment; I found her on her Bed all alone, and in passions of Grief which
transcended those I had left her in, which thereby I concluded had a high
cause, when a proportionate Judgment and Fortitude made time bring an accession
to them. The Chamber (though it were day) had nothing of Light in it, but what
it received from a few silver Lamps; and the Princess, who as soon as she saw
me, and that none else was in the Room (which she had expressly given charge of)
she told me, Come Pharasmanes, and see the miserablest Creature living; one
which so justly possesses that Name, that though the gods granted me my wishes,
they could not yet divest me of it. Would to the gods. Madam (I replied, struck
to the heart with those sad words) that my Death could restore you your quiet,
you should soon and experimentally know, there is nothing so dear unto me. No
Pharasmanes, (she said) it is my Death, not yours, must restore my quiet, if any
thing has that power; nor would I be long from receiving that remedy, did I not
apprehend it would prove none to me: I must Pharasmanes, I must languish in
Torments, for they are as fit for my Crime, as my Justification; but that you
may know my despair is just, I must communicate a secret to you; though I
apprehend your knowledge of it will infect you with so transcendent a sorrow,
that it may even bring an accession to mine. Regeliza (the Princess continued)
finding her self past hopes of recovery, importuned me by so many several
Messages to come and visit her, that at last I did it, though I fancied all the
effect it would produce, would only be an aggravation of my Grief, and no
diminution of hers, which alas, though in a different way, proved too sad a
Truth: I was no sooner come into her Chamber, than she desired all the rest to
leave it; and then with some deep sighs, she thus told me: I should (Madam)
despair of the gods pardon in the other World, did I leave this without
obtaining yours, and though what I have committed be of a quality which was
authorized by duty, and extenuated by the event, yet I cannot but call it a
Crime, and nothing shall make me term it otherwise, but your esteeming it none;
which if you do, I shall leave the World with as little regret, as if you do
the contrary, I shall with horror. Know, Madam, That not long after Artavasdes
went to Rome, Artabazus sent for me privately into his Closset, where after all
those flatteries which he thought most effective, he told me; Regeliza, My
satisfaction and that of Armenia, now entirely is in your hands, both of them
consist in the breaking that Passion which is between my Sister and Artavasdes.
Whilst I considered Tygranes as my Successor, I was as much concerned in the
consummating of that Marriage, as now I am in the interruption: Whilst
Altezeera was like to be a subject, I esteemed none that was so* more worthy of
her, than him she had elected: but since Tygranes Crimes both against me and
the Romans, has rendered him as unworthy my care, as their Mercy; I consider
Altezeera now as what she shall be, and in that quality I cannot without horror
contemplate her placing her self in a lower degree by her election, than the
Gods and Nature have destined her unto; nor in one performance so much injure
my Sister, as to deprive her of her best Subject, to make her self one. This
(continued Artabaz^s) I would have told Artavasdes before his departure, had I
not apprehended his despair would have involved Armenia in new Wars, and that
Altezeera was too far engaged in her Passion and Vows, to let any political
consideration absolve them; I therefore elected to effect that by Art, which I
concluded was any other way unfeizable; and therefore before Artavasdes
departure, pretending a flame for a new Mistress, and that she would not be
convinced of it, but by a slighting Letter to my former, and an assurance of my
Passion to her self under my hand: one day in Artavasdes sight I so well
counterfeited an indisposition to Write, and so extolled his Style above my own,
that having acquainted him with what I have you at length, I procured two
Letters from him, to those effects I desired and mentioned, which I said I
would copy; but which indeed I have reserved for another use; for by their help
and yours, I make no question but to raise such a Fraction between the Lovers,
as nothing but a miracle shall discover it, or unite them. This (said
Artabazus) I have done by the advice of Crassolis, who is confident (and so am
I) if you will place Artavasdes Cipher on one of the Letters, and contribute to
the delivery of it by a Servant of his, whom we have suborned for that effect,
and who will leave him in his Journey to Rome; it may shake her constancy,
which soon after we my ruin, if the other Letter which addresses it self to
his new Mistress, be presented to Altezeera by you, as miraculously found in
Theoxcena's Closet, who we have thought the fittest person to give Altezeera a
jealousy, not only for her perfections, but that Artavasdes before his leaving
Armenia, so assidiously visited her, though we know 'twas on Phanasders score.
This will doubtless produce the effects we mention; and when it has, I will
engage the Prince Pharn^ces, the great Mithridates Son, to make his addresses
to her, which in the rage of her Lovers inconstancy, will certainly prove
successful; and when once she is Married, I will not much apprehend the
disclosure of the Fallacy. If (continued Artabazus) you esteem of my
Friendship, you will not deny me this proof of yours; and if you value
Altezeera's advantage, you will grant it me upon that score; neither can your
refusal prevent it; for if you should reject this Design, you will but
constrain me to act it a more offensive, and perhaps bloodier way; for I am
determined (at whatsoever rate) to perform my intentions. This was the effect
(Madam, continued Regeliza) of what Artabazus spoke to me, though he gave me
more large and pregnant Arguments for my Obedience, than my memory or weakness
will permit me to repeat; but though I had the fortitude to resist his presents
and flatteries; yet I had not to oppose that which he alleged was for your
Advantage: there (Madam) he assaulted me where I was least able, and least
willing to resist; neither could he have made me an Enemy to your desires, but
by convincing me that therein I was a Friend to your power and honor; I had
this consolation, that nothing could make me prejudice you, but for your
advantage; nor does a Physician merit his Patients resentments, for depriving
him a while of health, to restore him thereby to a more perfect one. But,
Madam, I will not so much as think there are any arguments for my
Justification, lest you should believe there are none for my Pardon; for I
would not have so sensible an addition to the Misery of being denied it, as to
know 'twas done so against reason. To be brief, Madam (for I find my Death
hastens) to serve you as I thought, to obey my King, and to preserve
Artavasdes, whose Death was obliquely threatened by him, and who I thought you
would be less displeased to see live in your hatred, then dye in the honor of
your esteem and love; I finally condescended to act what I could not hinder;
but yet in expectation, that time might produce some as strange Revolutions in
Artavasdes favor, as it has done to his prejudice; and that Artabazus might be
converted, I persuaded him and Crassolis (who was all this while present) that
'twere best only at first to give you the Letter, which was to acquaint you
with Artavasdes change, and then a good interval between, to present you the
other, which was to acquaint you who had occasioned it; for if they were
delivered both at once, it might relish of design; and besides the latter
coming, when the first had shaken your Constancy, it might find the less
difficulty to suppress it. I believed, Madam, the first of these would not
thrust you to what they both might; and that if you were not another, there
was still left you at any time, in showing you Artavasdes Innocence, the Power
to reward it. 'Twas thus, Madam, that the constant Artavasdes was betrayed,
whose false Servant Allaner presented you with that false Letter, which had so
strange an influence on you, and which I abundantly contributed unto, till I
saw how much it hazarded your Life by that dangerous sickness it cast you into,
a little before Pacorus's besieging Tygranocerta: You know (Madam) that during
your indisposition, I took Artavasdes part to make it cease; and you confessed
'twas I which restored you to health, by restoring you to hopes, that the cruel
Letter had something of mysterious in it, which I undertook to discover, and
which I had done, but that your, and the general danger, with Pacorus's
transcendent Gallantry and Services, made me esteem that generous Prince had a
better Title to you in every respect, than Artavasdes had; and that to disclose
we betrayed him, had been to betray you, who I resolved the gods favored in no
small degree, since by so strange a way they lead you to so noble an end, and
converted even the very treachery of your Friends into your Advantage. 'Twas
therefore (Madam) that feigning once an indisposition at Theoxcena's, I
continued all night there, and made you believe at my return, that I had found
that Letter there which I had brought thither, and which I then presented you
with a superscription. Cipher to it of my own Invention: But alas! I soon
repented it, when it cast you into that violent fever; and I was a thousand
times upon the point of disclosing all unto you; But then the certain ruin of
Armenia, and the as certain of the generous Pacorus, with your miraculous
recovery, which you told me proceeded from your having as absolutely banished
Artavasdes from your heart, as he had you from his; and your esteeming your
self obliged, if not out of Love, yet out of Gratitude, to give your self unto
Pacorus, silenced that resolve by which you have enjoyed a felicity, that I
hope will be no small inducement to procure a pardon for so successful a crime
and event, and without which I shall leave the World in Torments, which perhaps
will inspire you with as great a repentance for having imposed them on me, as
me for having merited them. Neither (Madam) is it one of the meanest services
my Insidelity has done you, to preserve Artavasdes Life, who without what I
did, had tasted of that fatal Cup, which has sent his Father into another
World. Regeliza had no sooner ended speaking, than she did her Life (though she
seemed to have something more of high concernment to inform me of); but she had
that consolation to do it doubtful of those Resentments, which had she lived,
she would but too visibly have observed. This ( Pharasmanes) is the cause of
those Tears you have already seen, and which can never cease till their source
be exhausted; if I resent any advantage by Regeliza's Death, it is that it
affords me a cloud for my sorrow, and makes the World believe she is the object
of my weepings, when alas she is the cause. You see by this I am convinced of
your Friends Innocence, and I hope you are so of mine; I am miserable,
Pharasmanes, more than faulty; but perhaps I shall not appear so to Artavasdes,
who may think my believing him capable of change, as great a crime, as I find
it a punishment. Alas ( Pharasmanes) I am in fears as great as my griefs; Not
to let him know I have discovered he is Innocent, may continue him in troubles
as high as mine, when I thought he was not; and to let him continue his belief
of me, is to invalidate this miraculous discovery, and render his hate almost
as great a Justice in him, as misery to me. Great gods! (she continued) why did
you not make me believe Artavasdes innocent, when I had the power to reward his
being so? and why did you make me know he is so, when I am divested of that
Power? But doubtless it will be a less affliction to the generous Artavasdes to
be satisfied, I want not the will, but the ability to recompense his virtue,
than if I wanted both. It Is therefore ( Pharasmanes) I have desired this visit
from you, that you will by an express acquaint your Friend with my unfortunate
Story: I dare not do it, in apprehension my Letter might miscarry; besides, I
am too full of grief to describe it, and perhaps of seeming guilty to be
credited; Tell him ( Pharasmanes), Oh tell him all that the highest sorrow ever
dictated, and tell him all that is short of Altezeera's, the greatness of whose
Torment, if he suspects, because it has not yet destroyed her, tell him, That
that it self is a transcendent argument of its being so, and that I would curse
its lingering, did I not cherish all things as a desirable Justice, which
punishes my unfortunate Inconstancy. I believe generous Friends (continued
Artavasdes) you do not wonder that all this Time I interrupted not her
discourse, which filled me with so much amazement, grief, and joy, that I had
hardly life enough left to hear her; but as soon as she had put a period to it,
I resolved to do the like unto my disguise; for I esteemed, though the criminal
Artavasdes needed one to approach his Princess, yet the innocent Artavasdes did
not. 'Twas therefore after a short debate, prostrating my self before her, I
told her, Your Commands, Madam, to Pharasmanes are obeyed; he has already
acquainted Artavasdes with all that you have acquainted him with, and would to
the gods it had been by Letter, and not Sight; for no description of Grief
could equal this evidence of it; I had rather have fancied it less than it is,
than be so sensibly convinced of its greatness. Whilst I was thus speaking, the
fair Altezeera raised her self up a little; and having a while attentively
considered me, she said; Alas Pharasmanes! what operation will this discovery
have on the poor Artavasdes, when I apprehend it has had so fatal a one on you?
This she spoke, believing by the distemper of my looks, and the strangeness of
my words, that my mind had participated in the disorders of my heart; but I
soon took her out of that perplexity, though it cast her into a higher, for I
replied, Though this discovery (Madam) has a transcendent influence over me,
yet I am not so happy as to have it increase to that height which you believe
it has reached; for to lose my senses, were a less misery, than to have them
employed as now they are. Yes, my Princess, give me leave to assume that Name,
now I have assumed my Innocence; I had much rather be eternally deprived of
reason, than have so much, as to find it a Misery; you will be (Madam) but too
absolutely convinced of both these Truths, when I let you know, that I am
Artavasdes, who in the hopes of manifesting my Innocence, have endured as
transcendent Torments as could attend a proportionate guilt. The troubles you
resent at this disclosure, makes me say this; and I shall do the like of all my
greatest blessings, if they produce such fatal effects. Neither can the gods
bestow any on me, if they must be built on your sufferings: Those cruel Powers
know this Truth too well, not to practice it; and they are so infinitely
concerned to afflict the unfortunate Artavasdes, that they make the revealing
of Innocence as great a punishment as the want of it. I said this while I only
reflected on the fair Altezeera's Tears; but alas! I had much more cause to say
it, than I had when I did: for after I had uttered a World of expressions of
this quality, lifting up my Eyes to my Princess, I perceived her all pale and
moveless. This unexpected and additional misfortune, cast me into strange
perplexities; and fearing left Altezeera's Women were too far to give her
relief, I endeavored it my self by all those ways I had heard practiced to
recover one from a Swound: But alas! all my attempts were fruitless, and she
lay with as little Life as I therefore desired; but the horror thereof had so
efficacious an influence over me, that what with my precedent distempers, and
this accession to them; I fell into a resembling indisposition; and being upon
my Knees on the Princesses Bed, when I went to give her my assistance, my
faintness surprising me in that posture, I fell down by her, one of my Arms
also being under her Body to support it, continued so during my Swound; and had
not the sad state we were both in, evinc't the cause of it, I might have been
as worthy of Envy, as we were of Pity. I tell you this (continued Artavasdes)
the more particularly, because of that unfortunate effect it might and did
produce: for while I lay in this senseless but happy posture, Phraates came to
visit Altezeera; and no sooner perceived her in my Arms, than he did also the
occasion of it: but that wicked Prince, delighting as much to destroy virtue,
as he should have done to preserve it; having first extinguished all the Lamps
but one (for I found them so when I recovered, and by what he did, I justly
conclude he did this too, though I have yet no other proof of it but by
inference) he went hastily to Labienus Appartment, which was contiguous to the
Princess's, and there told him in a counterfeit sadness, he had made a fatal
discovery of his Brothers dishonor, which he begged him to come and be a
Witness of, for otherwise the deep opinion he had contracted of Altezeera's
virtue, might by making him suspect his own Eyes, contribute to the prolonging
of her Crimes, and Pacorus disgrace. Labienus struck to the very Soul with this
strange intelligence, asked Phraates what proof he had of it. Alas (he replied)
but too too much: for but even now going to visit Altezeera, I found her in
Pharasmanes Arms; It seems the joys and extacies they had relisht, had mutually
stupefied their Senses, so that I surprised them asleep in the Scene of their
lust. Labienus found it a hard thing to believe Altezeera guilty of such a
Crime, especially being accused of it by so known an Enemy to virtue, as he was
resolved Phraates was; therefore to silence his malice or his own doubts and
fears, he went with him to Altezeera's Appartment, where his Guide conjured him
to make no noise, nor continue, lest it might waken us; which Labienuss having
promised, Phraates first looking into the Chamber to discover whether we were
still in the same Posture, which he did, immediately brought in Labienus, and
so artificially interposed himself in the light of the Lamp, that it shone not
at all on our Faces, which if it had, would have discovered the Truth; but on
our Bodies, which confirmed the wicked Phraates Fiction; but yet Labienus (as
the gods would have it) observing it, asked Phraates why he did so? Who replied,
lest the light, by shining in our Eyes, might wake us whilst they were present;
and then immediately hearing us breathe, led off Labienus, who was so strangely
perplexed at that fatal sight, that by the strange operation it had on him, he
concluded 'twas not fit to tell it his Prince till he was more recovered of his
Wounds, if it were fit to tell him at all. Phraates as absolutely concurred
with him in the first of his resolutions, as he opposed the latter, which he
said was in effect to be guilty of Altezeera's and my Crimes; they being also
of such a quality, that to conceal, were to participate in them; and that
'twere better Pacorus should know his wrongs, to put a period to, and revenge
them; than by so fatal an ignorance omit both. Labienus on the other side
objected, That if his Prince's Misfortune was of a nature, that to revenge,
would efface it, there would be two inducements to it; but since that which
should revenge it, would not only make it public, but indelible; and that the
highest good in such an ill, was, not to know it (since there was no
possibility of proving a Woman Chaste); he esteemed it handsomer and better, to
tell Altezeera of her Faults, that she might banish both me and them; or by her
doing neither, render the disclosure of her offense so necessary, that the
necessity of it, might render it a proportionate Justice. But Labienus durst
not use too many reasons to prove Silence was good, lest that might have proved
one to Phraates not to keep it. Whilst they two were disputing of our Sin, I
came to my self again, and discovered that which gave a rise to one of them to
call it, and to the other to believe it one; but the restoration to Life had
been much worse than Death (where at least my griefs had ceased as well as my
hopes, which had been an advantageous bargain) had not immediately my Princess
too recovered: for Nature finding none come to her assistance, went to her own;
Oh gods! How was I surpised to find my self in a posture of Felicity, and not
in a relish of it! and how confounded was I as well as Altezeera, to find how
much more obliging the effects of my misfortune had been, than those of my
Constancy and Innocence! but alas! I had much more cause to be so, when not
only the Princesses Women came running in to her assistance, but when they also
found her in a high Fever, that threatened to cast her into an eternal Death,
as soon as she was restored from a temporary one. So many witnesses hindered
her from speaking to me; and they beginning to undress her, hindered me from
continuing longer in the Chamber, which I left without receiving any other
fruit of my being Innocent, than the knowledge that it had been more for my
quiet, I had never been so. Ah, when I was retired to my appartment, what did I
not say against the cruel Destinies, which had formed mine so perversely, that
transcendent punishments attended as well my real Fidelity, as my seeming want
of it? The next Morning, I knew by the public voice of the Court (for I durst
neither satisfy my apprehensions or duty by a personal Visit, or by employing
any of my Domestics to do it) that the Princess was in a Fever, which by
giving so little hopes in the beginning, made the Physicians with tears
apprehend the conclusion; but it was too violent to continue long our
suspensions, and I was satisfied of her recovery, before any symptoms of it, by
knowing the gods would not give me so certain a cure of my Misery, as the Death
of my Princess, and consequently mine. At last her Fever left her; when the
Physicians had done so, and the generous Pacorus who had tied his Fate to
Altezeera's, began to cherish his own Life when he was assured of hers, but
till then he contributed all he could to accompany her; and the more certainly
to effect it, he had seized on a Poniard which he laid by him in expectation
of the fatal News. 'Twas in this I disclosed (and perhaps Altezeera too) the
disproportion of our Passions; for I needed but the bare knowledge of her Death
to act my own; whereas Pacorus to reach his, must have been necessitated to
make use of his Resolution, as well as Love. It may be this knowledge invited
Phraates a while to a silence, which his Virtue would not have kept. Pacorus
and I, who were most concerned in Altezeera's Health, as if it had been by a
sympathetical operation, recovered our own proportionately as she did hers.
This was the cause that the first day I went into the PalaceGarden, upon which
my Appartment answered, Altezeera went thither also ('it was the first time I had
seen her since her sickness, or recovery) I will omit my confusions and my
disorders, whilst I congratulated the latter; which as soon as I had, as if it
had been without design, by degrees she separated her self from the Company:
and after having received some fresh convincements that I was Artavasdes, she
acknowledged no small joy that I was restored from a Sickness, which she justly
considered as a tribute to hers; but being determined not to lose so happy an
opportunity to learn my Fate, which the Authors of it too presented me: I told
her, If I consider, Madam, my recovery with any Joy, it is only because you seem
to do so, and out of a hope that that Life which has by twice preserving
Pacorus's, twice established the felicity of yours, is still continued by the
gods for the same end, though by the same way: Yes, Madam, I am ready not only
to employ my Life, but to lay it down in so glorious an occasion, though it
were as full of Felicities as in those happy days wherein my Princess was as
much mine by Promise, as she is now my Rivals by possession. But, Madam, Did I
not conclude the gods restored my Health upon this, or some resembling-score, I
should esteem it as transcendent a Misery, as I shall a Blessing, if they have
done it for that end: Neither need I, for the only cure of my Miseries, be
obliged to my Resolution, but Reason, which convinces me, 'twere a less
Misfortune to have Artavasdes in the Arms of Death, than to have him see the
fair Altezeera in Pacorus's. The gods shall be my Witnesses (she replied,
pulling down her Vail to cover her blushes) that if I yielded not to my last
Sickness, 'twas more upon Artavasdes's account than my own; who had I known him
still to be what he is, neither the safety or satisfaction of Pacorus,
Artabazus, or Armenia, should have made me hazard his, or recede in the least
degree from those professions, which his Person, and Services, but much more my
inclinations, induced me to make him; but alas, the gods contributed to my
delusion: You cannot doubt, Artavasdes, but 'twas one, and not a Design; for
it is not rational that I should willingly act what turned most to my own
Torment; Yes ( Artavasdes) I say, my own Torment; Judge then what that grief
must be, which makes my being the Wife of so generous a Prince as Pacorus, be
esteemed one by me; I have lived purposely to tell you this, for perhaps you
may resent some satisfaction by knowing, she that has divested you of all your
felicity, has in that very performance done the like to her own. These words,
and some Tears which accompanied them* were so sensible to me, that I could not
abstain from saying in a higher tone than before: Great gods! Have not you
already rendered Artavasde^ sufficiently miserable by the loss of his
Princess's affection, but you must make him more so by the restoration of it?
And are you so inveterately bent to continue me so, that rather than not act
it, you will make contraries produce the same effect? It Is now (Madam) I find,
that the ending of my life, will be the most considerable Service it can render
you; You had never been unfortunate, had not the gods tied your Fate to mine;
remove the cause, and the effect will cease; That which restores your quiet
will settle mine; either of these inducements, especially the former, will give
me resolution and invitation enough to end it: Those powers can have no more
any pretense to afflict you, when you are as single in your Fortune as in your
Perfections: It Is not (Madam) my despair, but (if it be permitted me to say it)
my Love, which makes this Motion; Nor can you give me a greater testimony, that
I am in the blessing of your esteem, than to enjoin or permit me to oblige both
of us in one performance. Can you then believe ( Altezeera replied, with a Look
which had something of resentment in it) that because I have lost my Title to
you, I have lost my concern for you? or, that what will render my sorrow
unconsolable, will suppress it? Cruel Artavasdes if neither of those are your
Thoughts; why by so strange a motion do you invite me to believe they are? The
Death of the Innocent Artavasdes would much more trouble me, than when I
esteemed him the guilty: That was a loss which my then belief would have
rendered none; But that which he now threatens me with, is of a quality, that
if I can receive any consolation in it, it proceeds from the impossibility of
my surviving it. If, Madam (said I) the miserable Artavasdes's Death, could
either prove a misfortune to you or to him, I am convinced by many experiments,
that the gods would have long since acted it; and their having so miraculously
kept me from it, proves abundantly it is a Blessing. But my Princess, What then
will you determine of a Life which you would confine me from ending? Do not you
then believe, that the horror of contemplating you in the embraces of my Rival,
will make my grief act that, which you would tie my resolution from? And having
now manifested my Innocence (which is not only the highest Blessing your
condition permits me to aspire unto, but the only, which made me so long
languish out my time) Permit me (my Princess) to die in your esteem, since I
cannot in a nobler Felicity; and since I can extend my Hopes no higher, why
will you let me any longer extend my Life? He dies not amiss (Madam) that has
nothing to expect, or desire; and your condition, and your Virtue keeps me from
both. Ah Artavasdes, she replied, you are not what your words would make you,
one that considers ^o one's Felicity, but his own; have you then nothing to
hope or desire, when I have told you the continuation of your Life is dear, and
considerable to Altezeera? I have almost as much cause to have spoke those
words as you, and if I declined them, 'twas upon the same score which I
believed would have made you do the like; We must Artavasdes, attend the
leisure of the gods; if there be no cause to hope in Reason, there is yet
reason to hope in a Miracle, for they will not give so pregnant an Argument
against their Providence (which is themselves) as to let so perfect a Constancy
as yours, continue eternally fruitless. I was upon replying, when we found our
selves at the end of a Walk which answered another, where we perceived Pacorus
with Phraates coming toward us; we therefore went to meet him, where he again
began to tax me of that in Railery, which alas too soon lost that Name; for the
next day that Gayety which proceeded from his humor, and which might have much
more from his condition, began to turn into so deep and obscure a Sadness, and
so constantly increased, that to let you know how incapable it was of
intermission, it received none in the fair Altezeera's Visits; who so exactly
sympathiz'd in his distempers, that she even assumed them by deploring them;
and the gods thereby made me know that the cause of Altezeera's Sicknes^, would
prove as transcendent a Misfortune, as the effect. This visible declination of
Pacorus's, made what created it, as visible to Labienus; but his judgment had
been so infinitely deluded by his Sight, that what was a production of
Altezeera's Love, he imputed to one of her shame; and in this Faith so long
continued that Error, that his Princess's Death had like to have proved the
punishment of it. But the gods, who ^ere as much concerned in the preserving
the felicity of Pacorus's Life, as the Torment of mine, made the Princess one
day send for Labienus, who she thought knew Pacorus's heart as absolutely, as
she possessed it; she received him in her Cabinet, which having locked, she
told him; Labienus, That my Lord and yours has some strange distemper, is not
more visible to me, than I am certain the occasion of it is to you, for whom I
am resolved he has nothing of reserve. My Reason would persuade me I am the
cause of his Disorder, did not my Innocence more powerfully do the contrary;
for as often as I have conjured him to tell it me, he has only answered me in
Sighs and groans and thereby increased, instead of resolving my doubts; it is
therefore that I apply my self to you for the latter: and to invite you to it,
I attest the gods, I can no longer be thought criminal, than I am ignorant of
my Crime; the knowledge of my offense, and of my innocence, will be unseparable:
Yes, Labienus, you cannot more certainly absolve my guilt, than to let me know
it. This I tell you, presupposing I may be the innocent cause of his Disorder,
which only his Silence, and the vastness of his grief make me conjecture; but
if it has another Creation, I shall almost be satisfied in knowing he could
grieve as much for something else, as for Altezeera, since in that knowledge, I
shall be convinced she is not the occasion of giving him so much trouble. The
Princess told Labienus much more of this quality, who being thereby convinced,
that he attributed her sorrow to a wrong cause, to obtain a pardon for that
fault, confessed it; and having acquainted her with what I have acquainted you,
added, He was confident Phraates had disclosed all to his Brother, since
nothing but a vast Distemper of the Mind, could have so proportionate an
influence on the Body, and that it was something reflected on her honor, that
he could conceal it from her, or did from him. To undertake to decypher
Altezeera's astonishment, or grief, were to engage my self in impossibilities:
but having a little collected her Thoughts, and suppressed her Resentments; she
told him, I was not then mistaken ( Labienus) when I judged such violent
effects, could hardly proceed from any other cause but his Love; 'twas his
Silence told it me, but I had much rather his kindness had; that would have
relished of confidence, whereas this may of the contrary: I must too (
Labienus) somewhat resent your proceeding; for if you thought me guilty, your
silence to your Lord was an offense to him; and if innocent, 'twas one to me;
but alas, how was it possible you could see us, and not see us fitter objects
for your sorrows, than suspicions? thereupon she told him all that had
happened, only concealing my true Name, and the real cause of her fainting, of
which mine was a consequence. This perhaps was not very difficult to be
believed, for all the Court knew the high affection Altezeera honored Regeliza
with, whose death none imagined she would deplore with less effects; and that I
had in the weakness my sad condition reduced me unto, often fallen into fits of
swounding, was as public, and as known a Truth: Labienus somewhat convinced at
this information, but much more by that just Character he had of the Princess's
virtue, began to suspect this was something of design in Phraates, as well as
of misfortune in us; which he was the more confirmed in, when after he had told
the Princess, that the reason why he had not discovered our faces, was, That
there was but one Lamp in the Chamber, which also Phraates hindered from
shining on our Faces, left (as he alleged) it might waken us. She told him,
That there were at least a dozen lighted when her fainting had seized on her;
and that when all her Women came running in to her assistance, they had
(finding the Lamps had been extinguished, and not gone out of themselves)
admired at it, which she too did, after she had been informed of it. Labienus
having a little reflected on this, confirmed himself more and more in his
former belief; and after a short Silence, asked Altezeera, who had given her
Women notice of her Misfortune? The Princess having till then never inquired
after it, nor had that Curiosity; now observing Labienus was very intent on it,
called in Arismaze her Confident; and having understood from her, 'Twas a young
Courtier whose name she specified; immediately by Altezeera's order she
withdrew her self again, and then Labienus told her; Madam, I am infinitely
mistaken, if I do not render your Innocence as clear as it is, or as evident,
as that malice which has clouded it. Alas (said the Princess) I am more
troubled to have it suspected, than how to have it cleared; and it is something
too near Vice, to be thought to be guilty of it; besides, Labienus, that noble
Virtue, Chastity, is like the Fundamentals in our Religion, the highest are not
to be proved, but believed. Labienus, who burned with impatience to satisfy
his desires, his duty, and his doubts, immediately in order thereunto, withdrew
himself. Altezeera, having a while seriously reflected on the intricacy and
strangeness of the Adventure, and on Pacorus deportment on it; at last formed a
resolution, which was, to go and acquaint him with all she had discovered; and
either suppress his Melancholy, or by not being able to perform it, not esteem
it worthy the continuation of hers. As she was upon the point of executing this
determination, Pacorus came to her all pale and trembling; but the Princess
could not be more astonished to see him abroad, whom she had so lately left
Sick and in Bed, than she was when he told her; (after having first begged, and
obtained her permission to lock the Door) Madam, the apprehensions I have had
lest you might place a wrong construction on my grief, and believe my Jealousy
for your Honor, might be one of it; has forced me to come and tell you, what I
have hitherto denied unto your Commands; thereupon he informed her of all that
Labienus had: and having added that Phraates was his Intelligencer, he thus
continued; I attest the gods, Madam, if I resented any trouble at this News, it
was absolutely upon your score, and not my own; I knew you of so nice a Virtue,
that to be but thought guilty of a Sin, would afflict you as much as any others
being really so; that you would despair of being thought innocent, when your
way of Life could not do you that right; and that you would almost esteem your
Chastity a Misfortune, since it caused as many Sinners, as Unbelievers of it:
This, Madam, by your Virtue, which cannot be greater than my belief of it, only
created my apprehensions; you will do me but right, if you are confident it is
more facile to invite me to believe that Vnchastness is a Virtue, than that you
can be guilty of it; neither do I expect any other recompense from this
Declaration, but that you will conclude I know the fair Altezeera, and
consequently am resolved, that her receding from Virtue is the impossiblest
recession; and that no Crime can equal the believing her capable of any. This
generous and just Declaration, wrought so efficaciously on the Princess, that
she replied, The gods have in some measure repaired the Misfortune they have
imposed upon me, in making it the means of discovering a proportionate
Blessing. Judge, Sir, of the value I place on the Character you have given me of
your affection and confidence, when I can equal in degrees the joys of it, to
the horrors of Siu and Guilt. By this generous proceeding you have laid on me
as strict a Tie for the future, as my Virtue has for the past: Yes, (my Prince
she continued) this Obligation is of so particular a quality, that you have
rendered your self as incapable to oblige me as highly again, as I am of being
so: For this one act of Faith makes another as impossible, as needless; since
it is not Faith, but Reason which will confine you hereafter to conclude, I
cannot be susceptible of any Impressions, but of such as may reward and merit
the cause of these. Whilst Altezeera was making a Thousand such Retributions,
they heard some body at the Door, which being opened, they found was Labienus,
in whose Face they observed some Gayety, Altezeera concluded was not causeless,
and had much more reason to believe so, when she heard him tell Pacorus; I have
(Sir) made use of your Name without your knowledge, but I hope it will not be
without your approbation, since it has produced a discovery that cannot but
restore your health, since it will your confidence of the Princess's Innocence.
Pacorus at those words became as strangely changed, as if Labienus had brought
a contrary manifestation; and having furiously considered him, he interrupted
his Discourse, by saying, Who is it has told thee my doubts of the Princess's
Innocence created my Disorders? I now find thou have tied thy Friendship to my
Quality, not Me; for thou could not have any for one thou esteem'dst capable
of a Sin, which would not only have rendered him unworthy of it, but of Life;
But that thou may not only know, but love me better, I will not so much as
listen to thee; there needs no greater proof that Phraates has ly'd, than his
accusing Altezeera; and the greatest Sin next to that, is to believe she stands
in need of a justification. Pacorus, who found his Choler had somewhat
transported him, begged his Princess's pardon for a zeal which perhaps might
carry its excuse in its cause. Labienus, though he were very much troubled at
his Prince's Rebuke, yet he was much more the contrary, to observe what created
it; and being more satisfied, that Altezeera's Virtue needed no justification,
than he was to have found one, continued in a joyful Silence. But the Princess
observing the latter, told Pacorus, I must beg you (Sir) to command Labienus
to continue what you interrupted: for I am obliged to prove that by
demonstration, which you have already by Faith: the latter ties me to the
former, and the former cannot prejudice the latter, but confirm it: To believe
me Innocent, after I had evinced I was so, could not be more Just, than to
believe I was so before I proved my self so, was obliging: Had you thought me
guilty, I might perhaps have left your Sin, your Punishment; but your
concluding me Innocent, invites me to reward your believing it, by my proving
it. Neither, Sir, is this upon your score: for the way in which you have
conferred your Obligation, renders me incapable of returning it; it is therefore
to satisfy the World, that I beg Labienus may satisfy us: for those that have
not Virtue enough, may believe I have none; and I should be sorry that my
Virtue should be the cause of other Men's Sin; and which was one of your fears,
that your granting my desires, will extinguish. Pacorus opposed this with many
pregnant Reasons, but they ser^'d only the better to illustrate his obedience;
for at length he yielded to Altezeera's Commands, which as Labienus understood,
he told his Prince: After (Sir) I had learned that the Princess's Women came in
throngs to her assistance, I concluded they had received an Advertisement of
her Condition; and knowing as absolutely none knew it but Phraates and I, as
that they received it not from me, I resolved it must come from him, which I
was more confirmed in, when I learned from Arismaze, that both she and her
Companions, understood of the Princess's indisposition from the youngest of the
Palurus's, whose eldest Brother (as you know) waits on Phraates in his Chamber,
and is not little in his favor. The Faith I had, that they were too well
instructed in their Lessons to make a voluntary acknowledgment of them, made me
send privately for the younger to my Chamber, from whom, with some threatenings
and promises in your Name, I drew a confession that he had been employed by his
elder Brother, to give the Princesses Women notice of her Distress; I therefore
immediately sent for him, and retained my Insormer with me; whose Brother
as soon as he came, and saw him with me, fell into some Disorders, which I
determined was an opportunity not to be omitted, and which I did so effectually
improve, that he confessed to me upon my engagement, that Phraates should never
learn it; that by his Orders he had sent his Brother to advertise the
Princesses Women of her condition. This (continued Labienus) I promised,
because in the first place, I resolved 'twould be no small punishment to
Phraates, to perceive you were not moved with that which he was confident would
produce a contrary effect; and that 'twould be no small advantage to you to
know your Enemy, without his knowing that you did so, which might in time
furnish you with an opportunity, not only by standing on your Guard to prevent
the effects of his future Malice, but by surprising him in the attempts, make
your punishing him for this and his other offenses, a public Justice. Labienus
having done speaking, Altezeera told him, If this did as much evince my
Innocence, as Phraates Malice, you would then have satisfied your Engagement;
but alas, this does not the former, but the latter. Madam (said Pacorus) it is
absolutely unnecessary; the gods are too just to let there be any other proof
of your Innocence, than your Innocence it self; it carries its own
justification so purely, that it leaves us no way to suspect you can Sin but by
our committing one, Sir (said Labienus) Though I am absolutely of your opinion,
yet because all have not the Virtue of Pacorus, or the knowledge of Altezeera's;
it is not therefore Charitable, that missing those Blessings, they should be
permitted to endure the Curse of doubting her Chastity; it is only upon that
scor^ I am solicitous to evince it, (which I am confident I have in what I have
already told you) for if Phraates believed, as he told me, that the Princess,
and Pharasmanes were fallen asleep by a stupifaction of their Senses through
the excess of their Joys, what needed he have sent in so many Witnesses, not
helpers, of their condition, which needed none? and if he knew (as both their
succeeding and dangerous Sicknesses manifested) that they were in a mutual
fainting, what needed he so artificially have interposed himself between the
light of that one Lamp (he had left unextinguish'd) from shining on their
Faces, which if they had been asleep, would have the better proved his
Allegation, as their not being so, discovers his wickedness? These, Sir,
(continued Labienus) had I no other inducement but my Judgment to clear the
Princess, would invite me sufficiently to do it; it is now no more Faith, but
Reason, and this discovery makes me suspect who 'twas so lately attempted
against your Life; for that Crime, and this, are so resembling, that perhaps
they may not be erroneously attributed to one Father. Truly (said Pacorus) You
have made some Inferences which I did not, because I was concerned not to make
them: for 'twas more fitting, and (I am certain) as secure, to credit
Altezeera's Innocence without any other proof but the knowledge of her Life,
which has been so immaculate, that her past Actions are the Testimonies of her
future, as those will be of what are past; like Prophecies, where things past,
evidence those to come; and those to come, will ascertain those which are past.
I will not (continued Artavasdes) deduce by particulars all the passages of
this Conference, whose event so clearly settled all Misunderstandings, that
they all three separated themselves with that satisfaction which their Virtues
merited. Altezeera had the contentment too, to receive an assurance from
Pacorus, That had he thought her Vicious, he could no longer have done so; and
they then concluded to keep the discovery of Phraates's Crime from his knowledge
upon those Reasons Labienus had alleged, who undertook so to husband this
Silence, as to make it of singular advantage. But alas, this Calm created a
Storm against the unfortunate Artavasdes; for Altezeera's scrupulous Virtue, by
this accident received so strong an Allarm, that she determined at whatever
rate, to secure her self in the future from a resembling one; but this
determinaton was far more easy to be assumed, than practiced; and I had that
consolation and infelicity to find 'twas with a proportionate trouble to mine,
that she resolved on my Banishment. Two days she was in this conflict, where
(as she told me) the Conqueror had nothing of distinction from the vanquished,
but the Title; Yet alas, that very Title it self produced as powerful an effect
over the Conquered, as perhaps over any which bore that Name. And though
Altezeera judged, that what she was to perform, might create strange
productions in me, yet she determined to moderate their violence, by letting me
know my Fate in some such public place, that the help of Shame should be added
to that of Fortitude: or if both those were not capable to silence them, yet by
the Scene on which they were represented, they might relish more of the
distemper of Body, than Mind; she did this too, the better to palliate my
designed remove, which if acted after any private Conference, might appear
rather like an Agreement, than the contrary. 'Twas therefore one Evening, when
she went to enjoy the fairness of it in the Palace Gardens, she commanded me to
wait on her; and though many others of both Sexes did the like, yet she singl'd
me out so artificially from the rest, that it appeared not to be so; but though
she took much care not to join the Company, yet she took at least as much to
keep in their sight; I observed both, and was not more satisfied with the one,
than troubled at the other. The Princess having walked a while in a deep
Silence, at length interrupted it (having first a little covered her Face with
her Vail, to conceal her Disorders) by saying; But Artavasdes, What end do you
propose to your self by this way of Life? you can expect nothing from me, which
you may not be confident of at a less hazardous distance; and if by your
residence here, you should be discovered, (for though you may disguise your
Person, you can hardly you^ Mind), alas, I shall contract such jealousies
against my self, that to believe me vicious, cannot perhaps be more difficult
for you, than it will be for others to do the contrary. This abrupt beginning,
and the disorders which preceded it, made my prophetic Soul soon fancy to what
end they all inclined; and though I more admired this misfortune did not sooner
arrive me, than that now it did, yet my expectations of it rather prepared my
amazement, than contributed to the suppression of it; I shall not scruple (my
generous Friends) to tell you, that I continued in as long a silence after my
Princess had spoke to me, as she had before she did it; and though (it may be)
my persevering in silence had been my best way of Answer, yet I could not
abstain from telling her; That (Madam) which I propound to my self by this
course of Life is to evince my Fire is immaterial; that which lives without
Nourishment may properly be termed so, and I have no hopes to feed mine with;
Your virtue cannot more absolutely suppress those, than mine does my desires:
The gods too, by your being Pacorus's having left me no greater Ambition than
to enjoy your sight and conversation, it is no small blessing to possess all
that one is capable of, and that the unfortunate Artavasdes does by his
residence near his Princess; who cannot apprehend his discovery, his now
Condition has disguised him better than Art; for whilst the fair Altezeera
affords him the honor of her esteem and civilities, he will be so far from
being known unto others, that he will hardly be so to himself. Altezeera, who
found she would need all her Forces to effect her design; and who esteemed
Pacorus's late proceedings too generous for a concealment, told me, all that I
have told you and then continued; Judge, Artavasdes, if this merits not a
pr^portionate return; and if after this performance I am not obliged by
gratitude as well as duty, to that which I am confident upon either of those
scores you will not refuse me. That, Madam (I replied) which Pacorus has done,
is feigned, or real; if the former, he merits not your care, and if the latter,
my continuance here will not create his; do not therefore my Princess, think
upon a Banishment which cannot more certainly prove the Death of Artavasdes,
than bring no satisfaction to him for whom you intend it. That Pacorus's Action
(she replied) proceeds entirely from the last, is not more certainly my belief,
than my belief is true; neither is there a more handsome way to prove I credit
his Virtue, than to reward it. Ah Madam (said I) can you call that a Reward of
his Virtue which gives a period to the actings of it; when you remove
Pharasmanes, you remove that which presents his its existence, and so rather
kill than oblige it; but it is not Virtue, but Reason, to believe you innocent,
and consequently it is he is obliged to himself, not you to him; neither is
there merit to credit, what not to do so is a torment. Yet (said Altezeera in
recompencing Pacorus's, I do but imitate the gods: for though to believe the
mysteries of Faith in Religion, is only to believe what we cannot do otherwise
without eternal Sufferings; yet the gods have allotted a proportionate
Beatitude for duration as the recompense of it; There are some Virtues, which
to put a period to their manifestation, is to reward them: A General does so to
a brave Commander of some endangered place, when not to raise the siege, may be
the ruin of the defendant; perhaps Pacorus's Gallantry is of this Quality, at
least is an Obligation to my self, to hinder my being perpetually obliged,
which your retirement will perform. Though, Madam (I replied) these Arguments
do not convince the necessity of my removal; yet alas! they do, how intent you
are upon it; for Reason and Faith, which are virtues that only have their
existence in the Intellect, cannot apprehend a suppression, or need a relief,
as that material virtue, Courage, may and does. When any thing is fixed in the
mind, to resolve to maintain it, is to do so; since no Enemy can approach it
there without its own permission: These being spiritual, escape those trials and
dangers, which things whose beings are obvious to sense, are subject to. If
(said Altezeera) I should allow that Reason and Faith once fixed in the
Intellect, are not to be removed, I should not yet conclude, that you are not
to be so; but Chastity is like Happiness, it must be thought so, to be so: and
alas, how few are there amongst the multitude, who have either of those most
noble Prerogatives? and consequently, how few will think me what I am? yes
Artavasdes, it is upon your score as much as mine, that I am jealous of my
honor: I know you are as much concerned in it, as I am; and since it is from
thence I derive your Friendship; do not repine, I am so nice to preserve that
which affords what I so transcendently value. An ill name would more remove me
from you, than my present Condition does, for I should be then as unfit for
your hopes, as now I am for your desires: we must, Artavasdes, we must part; I
judge what a conflict you have in your self at this declaration, by what I had
when I resolved to make it; and though in my sufferings I read yours, yet in my
Conquest I do the like; if my Sex could overcome this difficulty, yours will
much more: for, besides the weakness of it, I lose more by your Obedience, than
you can by acting it. Alas (Madam, I answered) all this proves your Resolution
greater than mine; but my incapability but one way to obey you, proves my love
is perfecter; yes (Madam) I say, I have but one way to obey you, that is by
Death; my Obedience as well as Condition invites me to it; I shall satisfy you
as well as Artavasdes, in it, and shall demonstrate, I merited not the Command
of going from you, by so well obeying it. Is Artavasdes then (she replied) so
much an Enemy to me, as he will elect no way to save my honor, but by losing
that is almost as dear to me? Oh gods! (she continued) why do you reduce me to
commit a Crime, to hinder him from acting another? Perhaps Artavasdes, your
Death cannot be more an offense to the gods, than what I have now told you;
it is an acknowledgment, that considering my Condition, is a sin, which to have
thought nothing can transcend, but to publish: but I hope this assurance will
preserve a life which mine is tied unto, which I enjoin you to keep, and which
if you do deprive your self of, I will not live to lament. Oh gods! (I cried
out) I esteemed you hitherto the greatest cruelty, but now (alas) I find
Altezeera is: those that gave me the necessity of Death, are less Tyrannical,
than she that after hinders it; for they but impose on me a torment, yet allow
me the cure; but she inflicts on me the former, and refuses me too the latter:
you cannot Madam (I continued) condemn this Acclamation, for you are not
reduced to the necessity of Banishing me, but reduce your self to it. Alas!
it is not much Artavasdes implores, it is but your permission to languish away in
your sight an unfortunate life, and a life which you have rendered so; my
sufferings will evince your Innocence; and Pacorus can no more doubt I injure
him, than I desire to do it, or you to permit it: will you then, my Princess,
having divested your self of all power to create my felicity, preserve enough
to make me miserable? so miserable too, that it is as impossible for the gods to
make any so much, as to make me more? Shall the unknown Pharasmanes have
enjoyed a blessing which is denied the innocent Artavasdes; and the discovery
of his being so, must that invite you to punish what you should reward? The
gods forbid! These words delivered with a Tone and Action not ill-suted to
them, had too violent an influence on her, to whom they were addressed; that for
a good while she continued in silence; and I flattered my self with a hope,
that it was a consent to my Petition: But alas, it proceeded from her not being
capable of granting it, and I kept that hope no longer than she did her
silence. Since (she replied) that I have divested my self of all Power to make
you happy, whether it were my fault or my misfortune, I am resolved to punish
it; and it may be your Banishment is as much upon that Account, as on that of
my Honor. If you have not hitherto judged of my Resentment by my loss, you
cannot now but do it by my Penance; and you cannot doubt I acknowledge my self
culpable, when I voluntarily submit to such a punishment; should you kill your
self, you rob me of the noblest part of my penance, and would render the
continuation of it as impossible as just. If what I have told you formerly,
does not convince you how precious I esteem your Life, this that I have now,
will certainly effect it: for I plead for yours, though in doing so, I plead
against my own: Neither ( Artavasdes) can you justly appropriate to your self
what you now did of misery, it is I only that can; for who makes Friend
miserable, is more so. You for your Banishment have the consolation, that it is
to preserve what you love, worthy of that Honor; and though I receive a
resembling one, yet it is you confer the Obligation, whilst I do but receive it.
Believe me, Artavasdes, my sufferings do at least equal yours: but when I
consider for whom I endure them, it gives me the Ability to do it; I cannot
expect less from, than I do for you: I have too a firm belief, that if the gods
have rendered me incapable to reward your Virtue, it proceeds only from its
being of too transcendent a quality for me to do it; and therefore they reserve
it for themselves; since nothing but what is infinite, can satisfy what is so;
and if all recompenses fail, they will gratify your Desires by an extinction
of them: and perhaps it is more fit for their pureness to have them suppressed by
Reason, than Fruition. Ah Madam! (said I, interrupting her) this is rather an
Argument to fortify, than suppress my desire of dying; it is that only, since
yo^ are denied me, can end my desires; which though they were infinite, as that
goodness which esteems them so; yet in the possession of my Princess, they
would find a plenary felicity: for that which creates, is still more great than
what it does create, and consequently you are more than my desires; when the
exquisite variety of my miseries make me so religious as to think the gods
all-powerful, their having but one way to make me blessed, confounds that
belief, and at least renders it Reason, if it be impiety: no, Madam since you
assure me it is upon my score you suffer, and that you know it is upon yours that
I do, which is also accessionally increased by that assurance; permit me to put
a period to both our miseries, by putting one to that wretched life which is
the cause of them. Since (she replied) you tell me, The gods can only by
Altezeera make you happy, why will you seek a Death which makes her miserable?
But I see ( Artavasdes) you will find Reasons to oppose mine; and I hope you
will find none to oppose my Commands, which positively enjoin you to live;
which to invite you to the more certainly, I protest I shall judge of your
Friendship by your Obedience. Madam (I answered) there is a vast disproportion
between being happy, and being no longer miserable: The first is denied me by
your Condition, the last by your Commands, which yet I will obey, having given
you irrevocably up the absolute dispose of my life; this is a Truth you cannot
question, since after your determining of it, I have as little the Will, as the
Power to recall my grant: But, Madam, if by this cruel sentence, my Obedience
cannot prove capable of any long duration, be yet so just as to ascribe it to
my want of the Power, and not the desire of obeying you. The fair Altezeera was
so sensibly moved by the sad teflection on these words, that I esteemed it not
amiss in the Operations of her Pity, to attempt something which might give me a
rise to lessen it: and therefore with confusions and tremblings which made a
more efficacious Apology for my Confidence, than my Words could, I told her;
But (Madam) may not I (without sin) to so many miseries you have laden me
with, retain a hope, That if ever the gods by some strange Revolution, give you
as absolutely the disposal of your Self, as they have of my Fate, that then you
will settle it in a felicity, whose greatness I only now must know, by seeing
of it in another: I forbid you nothing (she replied, with a little Blush), but
the becoming of your own Executioner; Yet (she continued) if ever the gods
should Cancel the Obligations they have now confined me to, I will never be any
ones by C^ntract but by Guilt. The fair Altezeera who by what I had said,
apprehended, That in those dictates, the merit of my Obedience would inspire
her with, I might seek the reward of it; and that by yielding to my request,
she might prujudice her self; or by denying it, bring an accession to a grief
which was capable of none, but by becoming incapable of any thing ^^e;
insensibly led me toward the company, and entertained me all the way with
Consolations for my Banishment, which though exceeding preg^^t in themselves,
yet lost their efficacy with me: For alas! I feared she that could give
Consolations, little needed them. But by that time we were come so near the
company, that she concluded, I could address her no new Petitions, suddenly
changing her Discourse, she told me; if Artavasdes, the merit of your
retirement be susceptile of any addition, it will receive it by your ordering
it so, that it may not appear your Obedience. As soon as we had rejoined the
company, Altezeera staid not long in the Garden but by retiring her self to
Pacorus's Appartment, gave me the lib^rty to do the like to mine. I will not
amuse my self, to tell you all those complaints I made against the cruelty of
my Princess's Commands, which I then began to co^trive how I should obey; in
Prosecution whereof, some four or five days after, I caused a Letter to be
brought me as out of Armenia, from Artav^sdes, to Pharasmanes, wherein the
former invited me into that Kingdom; as being a fitter Scene to Act a
reconciliation between Ventidi^ and me, who had given him some overtures of it,
and who was more troubled I had left him, then at that which was the cause of
it; and that the effecting of this atonement would be very advantageous to my
Friends at Rome, who otherwise would inevitably suffer for a Crime they never
had committed; I filled this feigned Letter with many things of this quality;
and immediately after it came to my hands, I went and presented it to Pacorns,
from whom I could procure permission of going to Armenia without any engagement
(after having settled my affairs) that! would return again; which the better to
persuade him, and the better to secure my self from discovery, I left all my
Equipage and Servants at Seleucia. I cannot omit telling you, that when I took
my final leave of him, he told me; Pharasmanes, I hope you are very confident
of Artavasdes's Friendship; for otherwise, what you have done for me (who I
believe you are not ignorant, have been his successful Rival) might invite you
to suspect he sends for you to act his own Revenge, and not to secure your
Friends from that of the Romans. I made him only an answer of my confidence in
Artavasdes's affection for me; which I knew he would make good; and then took
my leave of him: But as I was going to do the like to my Princess, I inferred
that Pacorus's so sudden and visible recovery, proceeded from his having his
suspicion satisfied by evidence not faith; for if his distempers had proceeded
from what he ascribed them to, her; the same fears being unremov'd* the same
effects had continued but they only ceasing as soon as Labienus by pregnant
evidences had evinc't the Princesses innocence, my opinion of his amendment
appeared to me, to be no irrational one; I am sure it had been no unpleasing
one, had it appeared to me, it had been Altezeera's also; to whose Appartment I
was no sooner come, then I learnt, that for the two preceding days, she had not
stirred out of it, being afficted with an unusual indisposition; I knew not
whether to attribute this to an Antedated grief for my designed separation, or
to a palliating of that forrow which she could not decline, when I came to act
it; for I was so flattering to my affections, as not to impute it to any other
Production. As soon as I was admitted, to my grief, if not to my admiration, I
found the Chamber full of her Servants, and thereby saw my self deprived of all
possibility of expressing my sufferings with freedom, or from receiving any
assurances from her, how sensibly she did resent them; perhaps I had in the
great operations of my disorders, discovered what I had thitherto so
Artificially clouded, had I not attributed so many witnesses at my separation,
to her design of restraining the violent motions it would produce in us both,
as well as to leave no impressions of doubts in Labienus, in phraates, and it
may be in Pacorus too. I shall not trouble you with a repetition of what I said
at my departure, since by the so many Spectators and Auditors of it, you may
conclude, there past nothing but such Civilities as are usually practiced in
resembling-occasions; only I observed that Altezeera invited me not (as Pacorus
did) to continue in Parthia, or to a sudden return unto it; from whence I
concluded he had not begged it of her, either out of a belief it might raise in
her one, that he thought she had a greater influence over me than he had, by
hoping I might grant that to her commands, which I had denied to his; or else
concluding she had really that power over me, he was not very willing to
receive so sensible a mark of it; and thereby contribute to the establishment
of what perhaps he was not a little concerned to remove. I went afterward to
wait on Arsaces, who not only made me the same request his Son had done, but
also procured from me a resembling; engagement: I found my self also obliged by
the Laws of Civility, but much more by those of obedience, to my Princess; And
of dissimulation, to wait on Phraates, who so admirably countefeited a concern
for me, and in my remove, that I concluded from thence, the visible sorrow he
had demonstrated when his Brother was wounded, proceeded from the perfectness
of his dissembling, not of his nature; or if it were real, it derived its being
so, not from the danger he had been in, but from his having avoided it. I
omitted not to take leave of the generous Labienus, and the next morning after
those duties, I left Seleucia, only attended by one Parthian Servant, of whose
fidelity I was not a little confident, having all the time of my residence in
Parthia, been so assiduously observant of my commands, that I concluded it was
as much upon the score of inclination, as duty, that he was so; and to oblige
him by a stricter tie than either of those, to a continuance of his fidelity: I
trusted him with my true Name and Condition, as soon as I was upon the confines
of Armenia; where I learnt that Ventidius with all his Army lay at Corinthia,
in which place he had past the Winter; which was the time of my residence in
Parthia, on which he had made as sharp a Wall, as a season that was so, could
permit. The perfect Friendship I had for that generous Roman, and the
proportionate concern I knew he had for me, made me determine, before I did
either wait on Lindesia, or Vdosia, to do it on him. This I effected in my
disguise, only attended by my Parthian Servant. I found Ventidius ready to
forsake his Winter Quarters, in which he received me with the raptures of a
true Friend; and though they were infinite, yet they could not transcend his
admiration and joy, at his learning the miraculous discovery of my Innocence,
and the strange Arts which had been practiced to conclude it. You cannot doubt
of his concern in my felicity, when it even made him sin against the Laws of
Honor, and curse his Mercy to Pacorus, which had hindered him from removing
the greatest of my obstructions, as the gods had the least; And which by their
having performed the latter, made him conclude he had as much sinned against
them, as my hopes, in not having acted the former. I had much more difficulty
to make him decline those thoughts for the future, than I had had formerly; for
now in his belief, that there remained no impediment in my love, but the death
of Pacorus, he told me, that he would now prosecute the War as much upon that
score as upon the score of Honor or Revenge: I shall not lie, if I tell you, I
was not only seemingly solicitous against this resolve, but really so; which I
did out of a true dictate of Virtue, though it may be the gods induced me to
it, to render my sufferings the more sensible, by still making me contributary
to them* But to be short: I did not cease importuning Ventidius, till I
extorted a declaration from him, that he would not have any more particular
aims against Pacor^s, than any of his party; and that if he fell, it should not
be by the design, but by the chance of War. Two days I continued with my
generous Friend; and the third, beginning his march, I found my self
necessitated to leave him, by an unalterable resolution I had assumed not to
put it in the power of Fortune, to make me act directly, or obliquely against
whatsoever my Princess honored with her love, though thereby I brought an
unimaginable prejudice to my own. I will not trouble you with those expressions
Ventidius made me at our separation, nor those vows he sent by me to Vdosia, to
whom I told him I would go, to qualify a melancholy which I knew would be as
transcendent, as impossible for her to avoid, by the misfortune of his abs^nce,
and of those fresh dangers he was going to involve himself in; since to let you
know how passionate they were, I have but to tell you, they were made by
Ventidus, of whom I took a final leave; he directing his designs for Parthia,
and I mine for Sattala, where Vdosia received me with a satisfaction, which
nothing could excel, but that she would have relisht, had I brought Ventidius
with me. 'Twas there I told her all those admirable adventures had arrived me
since our separation, and by my sad example gave her an indelible instruction
to believe nothing of her Lovers change, till his verbal confession was the
evincement of it. At Sattala I cast off my disguise, which made my Parthian
think I had assumed one; and who thereby knew me to be his Master, only because
I assured him I was so; But I continued not at Sattala, by reason of a violent
War kindled betwixt Artabazus and Antiochus King of Commagena, who had not only
Usurpt upon the Armenian Territories, but had also entirely cast off that
voluntary Subjection he had made unto the Romans; which former, I was
apprehensive might induce my King to invite me to the command of his Armies: an
honor I could not be more unworthy of, than I indeed detested; as indeed I did
all things that suspended my melancholy; and therefore I left Sattala: but
before I did so, because of those fresh distempers, I conjured the Governor of
it to have a particular care of his Soldiers, and of his duty to Udozia; who
having given me a Character of it very much to his advantage, as an effect of
my believing her; and my being pleased with him, I added to his former
Commands, that of the superintendency (under Udozia) of all Affairs, civil and
Martial, within the Province of Sattala;) which the next day I got out of,
determining to lead so fluxible a life, that if Artabzus had any Commands for
me, by the uncertainty of my residence, he should not know where to make me
receive them: Therefore by unusual ways I went to Thospia* and gave Lindesia an
exact account of all that had arrived since our last separation: That excellent
Woman was as much perplexed, as I was satisfied with those Adventures;
apprehending that the discovery of that Affection which the Princess Altezeera
honored me with, after she had disclosed my Innocence, would create in me new
hopes; and that in the expectation of them, I would languish away and consume a
life, she was too much concerned in, to have it so much misspent. After a
thousand disputes upon this Subject; the result of all was, my acknowledgment,
that the justice of her fears could not be greater than the impossibility was
to remove them; and that she might not be by ^ight convinced of those
sufferings (to whose vastness her fancy could hardly attain), I immediately left
Thospia, having extorted the same promise from Lindesia, that I had from
Udozia; which was not to inquire of me the places of my intended residence,
lest they might be necessitated by Artabazus importunity, to disclose them to
him. Some four days Journey from Thospia, there lived an old Gentleman, who had
had his Education with my Father; and who in the progress of his life, had so
exactly evinc't the indelibleness of the impressions of Youth, that to
Annexanders very death, his first contracted Friendship had continued in one
constant height: and the cause why it received no accession, was, that its
first forming was incapable of any. Neither did Euphranor (for so he was
called) after my Fathers decease, enjoy any more life than what he could not
destroy without a sin, and what served to punish his wanting the power of
having concluded his with his friend. This generous man had retired himself
into a strong Castle of his own, though the benefit he expected to derive from
its strength, was, Not to defend against his Enemies, a life he so much
detested, that he esteemed his having none, a Misfortune; but to keep out such
as might have so low an opinion of his sorrows, as to think they were either
capable, or desirous of Consolation. This honor so resembling mine, the
Gratitude I owed him as Annexander's Friend, and the affection as Falintus's
Father, made me address my Journey thither, where when I was arrived, I had
much ado to obtain admittance; neither did I, till I had told my Name, after
which the Draw-bridg was let down, and the Virtuous Euphranor came with tears
and embraces to receive me: I returned him his Civilities in the same payment,
and after by many assurances he had made me believe he could neither think
Annexander dead, or old, so long as he considered me: I inquired earnestly
after his generous Son, who he told me but three days before had been with him,
and was gone in continuance of his search after me; I was not only troubled to
miss him, but also to do it in such a way: I therefore begged Euphranors
permission, and attained it, To employ one of his Domestics to seek Falintus,
and acquaint him, I would wait his return where I then was. Euphranor hearing
this message, told me, I had taken the only course to make him wish for his
Sons Civility: He led me to a Magnificent Appartment, where he conjured me to
live in the same freedom, as if I were in my Hermitage, and not constrain my
self for him, since I could not possibly do him a higher satisfaction, than to
act my own. Never man that was incapable of contentment, relished any thing so
near it, as I did whilst I continued there; for when my Melancholy began to
grow importunate, to suppress that Miracle, I went immediately to Euphranor,
from whose charming conversation I received a satisfaction, which I thought no
words had the power to act, unless delivered from the fair Altezeera. 'Twas
above two Moons that I continued there, in expectation of some News from
Falintus; but at length my Messengers returning, acquainted me, That my
inquisition after him, was proportionately fruitless to his after me; but
though by his search he had learnt nothing of him, for whom he made it; yet he
brought me certain intelligence, that Ventidius in a great Battle had the
second time defeated the Parthians; that Labienus and Pharnabates the two
Generals, had lost their lives with their Armies: That Ventidius's Eagles had
past the Euphrates, and that Mark Anthony had sent a vast Army hefore him into
Asia; he himself remaining as yet in Athens, whither the Princess Octavia (his
Wife) had accompanied him, and jointly Celebrated Ventidius his Victories;
where he had not so long continued, if some fresh jealousies betwixt Octavius
Caesar and him, had not necessitared him to compose them, before his advance
toward Parthia; that they were now fully ended by the mediation of Octavia
(who either to continue what she had effected, or to give the greater liberty
to Antony's Amors with Cleopatra) had been sent back to Rome by him, and that
Artabazus, by several expresses, made a scrutinous search after me, to make me
General of the War against Antiochus. I can truly say (continued Artavasdes) I
was almost as much troubled at the generous Labienus's Death, as satisfied with
that Victory which had caused it. I know not whether my unintermissive sorrows,
the trouble of failing in any thing was I ambitious of, which was besides in a
more sad evincement, manifested in that fresh one of missing Falintus, or else
a concurrence of natural causes, was ti that cast me into a Sickness, so full
of mortal symptoms, that I began to believe the gods would repair their cruelty
during my Life, by the Felicity of a hidden Death. But alas! I found I was more
Charitable than they, since they only showed me the Harbor, to increase the
miseries of not attaining it; for I was miraculously saved, when I had no more
the hopes than desires of Life. But though the danger of my Fever was vanished,
yet my weakness still continued, which was either an effect of a Sickness so
violent, or of grief that it had not proved more so; an excellent Physician,
which the officious Euphranor had sent for in the beginning of my
indisposition, attributed the continuance of mine to the former of those
causes: but so much time as is usually allotted for the recovery of strength
after a sharp fit of Sickness being effluxt, he plainly told Euphranor, That he
suspected mine did not only derive its beginning, but its continuance, from a
distemper of the Mind. As soon as Euphranor had by intent observations, made
this his Faith, he not only came and told it me, but by such pressing
Conjurations implored to learn what created it, that I obeyed him; I cannot
tell whether the strange Accidents I acquainted him with, made him sympathize
in my Affictions: or whether he did it, as believing it the best way to make
his Counsels and Advice more resolutely followed; but I can, that after having
told me a long Story of a Friends Amors of his, so much a parallel to Mine,
that I received from it so much consolation, as to know my self not the most
miserable of Men: he at length assured me, he had derived his Cure and
Felicity, from repairing to the Oracle of Venus at Hierapolis, whither he
advised me to address my self, and then conjured me to believe he was not a
little confident of my Success; since he could as a conducive way unto it, not
only be content to lose my Company, but to make that loss an effect of his own
solicitation. The miraculous Adventure which Euphranor told me, had there
arrived his Friend, and the great Fame I had heard of this Temple, made me to
determine to repair hither as soon as my health would permit me, which it did
not for above three Moons after. I omit purposely all those generous Civilities
Euphranor made me at our separation, and how pressing he was to have me take
some Servants of his in the room of my Parthian; who one Morning after my
recovery and Resolution to come hither, was gone out of the Castle, and had
never returned thither again; which Misfortune, notwithstanding my diligent
Enquiry, I could never learn the cause of. I will conclude all, by letting you
know, That determining to live a Life suitable to my Condition, I refused
Euphranor's offers, resolving, since I could not either at Sattala, or Thospia,
light upon the faithful Philanax (who I forgot to tell you was gone disguised
into Parthia to learn my Fate) to perform this Voyage in no Company but that of
my Thoughts: of which I was as unwilling as unable to divest my self. This, and
the apprehension that if I went not alone, Artabazus might discover, and
thereby necessitate me to disoblige him, or my self, was the cause that I left
Euphranor's Castle unaccompani'd; in which condition I traveled till I came
into that Wood, where the generous Artabbanes found me so unequally assaulted,
that I began to fancy Euphranor's belief was true; and that at the Temple of
Hierapolis I should find my satisfaction. But though his Sword suspended me
from it one way, yet it gave me another, by saving me from a Death, that would
have secluded me from Artabbanes Conversation; which in the condition Altezeera
is now in, is the highest Felicity the Cruel gods have made the miserable
Artavasdes capable of.

The End of the Fourth and last Book of the Third Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA, A ROMANCE*

THE FOURTH PART.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FOURTH PART.
The First BOOK.
THE generous Artavasdes had no sooner finished his Story (which had produced
no common operations in the hearers), than Artabbanes told him, If the sin of
not-believing Artavasdes were not greater, than the vanity of believing my
Sword could contribute to a victory his was acting, I should not make the last
of those my faith; which since to avoid the first I must do, I shall to
extenuate the necessity of that crime, protest, That I will no more exclaim
against the gods for having so extraordinarily preserved me from death, since
now I find 'twas to preserve Artavasdes from it; for whom I am so justly
concerned, that I shall cherish the continuation of my miseries, if they
contribute to the continuation of his life; which, though replenished with many
sensible misfortunes, yet are as far short of mine, as an unhappiness that time
and many accidents may cure, is of one which the very gods themselves cannot.
If (said Artavasdes) my miseries till now were not equal to yours, this
assurance had made them so; for the accession to my past misfortunes, that
yours transcend them, gives mine the Precedence. Callimmachus, who apprehended
this generous dispute would suspend him from learning what would enable him to
determine of it; acquainted them with his fears; to which Artabbanes told him:
Alas Sir, I shall by not obeying you, do it; for by not being able to tell you
what should determine it, you cannot but do it on my side; I am also the more
concerned in this victory, since by the loss of it, I shall be deprived of this
only consolation in my miseries, that my generous friend's are not equal to
them. But the Night being already too far spent to begin a fresh relation, he
not only persuaded them to defer their curiosity till the next morning; but
also to permit Symander to satisfy it; whose fidelity had rendered him an
unsuspected hearer of Artavasdes's Adventures; and whose interest in his
Princes life, and secrets, rendered him a fit Relator of them. Callimmachus and
Artavasdes having expressed a greater sorrow, that Artabbanes was not able to
tell his own story, than that he did it not; and a little time being spent in
discourses of that quality (and of the different opinions they all had, what
could make the Prince of Parthia so intent upon Artavasdes's Death, as to hire
Assassinates to act it, which he had told Callimmachus and Artabbanes one of
them had confessed with his last breath): The generous Priest took leave of the
two Friends, not only to afford them a liberty which he apprehended his company
something limited, but also to perform some ceremonies of his office, and to be
the earlier ready to summon Symander of an e^gagement which he in part had
already so well satisfied, that it gave him a just impatience till he had done
it entirely. The night therefore had no sooner resigned her Empire to the Sun,
than Callimmachus came to Artabbanes and Artavasdes Appartment, where he found
that his fear of Incivility proceeded from a different cause, than from that he
apprehended; for the latter of them was so far from believing it tooearly, that
he had already expected him above an hour, with all the impatiencies of a
concerned friend; and the former having left Symander to satisfy his promise,
was already retired into a Gallary contiguous to his Chamber, to avoid the
hearing of his unparalled miseries, and of observing the influence they would
necessarily have over his generous friends. Smyander by Artavasdes's command,
seated himself between him and Callimmachus, and there being summoned by them
both, to continue the Relation of his Princes Fortunes, having first remembered
the generous Armenian, that by his arrival he had been interrupted from the
prosecution of them at their entrance into Rome, after the victory of Crassus:
from thence thus began his discourse, addressing it to Artavasdes.

The sequel of Parthenissa's and Artabbane's Story.
AFter that for the recovery of your health, and the extenuating your grief for
the loss of a Father, which but too justly merited it, you had retired for a
few days to Ventidius's Palace, and that my Prince was assured by the
Chyrurgeons, his wounds were in such unfortunate places, that for at least two
Moons he should be unable to travel: To oblige the generous Sillaces, who was
then perfectly recovered; and to silence those fears, which so long an absence
had doubtless contracted in the fair Parthenissa, but especially in Lyndadorie,
he conjured him to begin his journey into Parthia, and to leave his cure to the
help of time, and of the Chyrurgeons. Sillaces, though he were too much a
Lover, not to esteem a separation from his Mistress a misfortune; yet he was
also too much a friend, to leave one that was so to him, in so dangerous a
place and condition; and besides, fearing Artabbanes had made him that request,
more to satisfy him, than himself, he absolutely declined it; but when by many
pressing protestations my Prince had removed those doubts, it was not long
after, that Sillaces (taking the benefit of a Roman Galley, which was bound
from Ostia to Tire) left Artabbanes, having first concluded amongst themselves
of what he should say and do in Parthia; and having received from him a Letter
to the fair Lyndadory, so filled with approbations, and extolments of her
election, and of implorings in his favor, and advantage, that had she but only
loved her Brother, she could not but have done the like to her Servant. 'Twas
by my Princes command that I waited on the generous Sillaces to Ostia, where
having seen him aboard, I returned to Rome the same day, and passing by the
Capitol to go to Artabbane's lodging, I perceived at the gate of it, a great
confluence of people; my curiosity led me to enquire the cause of it from one
who told me, it was from a Salapian Lord, who had begged of the Senate the head
of Spartacus, which he was then taking down. This information made me imagine
'twas the generous Perolla, who I soon after perceived all in Mourning, in a
Chariot that was so, and near him the fair Izadora, in the same Livory, like
the Sun in a cloud: I must confess, I had a thousand pains to abstain from
running to acquaint them with a Truth, their ignorance of which, produced such
sad, and noble effects; but the belief that the discovery of it was fitter to
proceed from my obedience, than me, and would in that quality be better
relished by them, I went hastily to my Prince, and having given him an account
of what I have you; with all the impatience which so just a concern could
inspire, he immediately commanded me to go and acquaint the generous Lovers
where he was, and assure them, that had his wounds permitted him to pay them a
visit, no other impediment should have suspended him from that duty. As soon as
I had received this order, I went to obey it; and though I came immediately
after to the place where I had left them, I learnt, that having taken down the
Senate's grant, they were returned with it to their Lodging; which having
inquired out, I went thither, and sent up one of their Domestics to let them
know a stranger desired the honor of seeing them, who had something of
importance to acquaint them with. I stayed not long for an answer, or
admittance; and as soon as I came into the Chamber, I perceived the generous
Lovers weeping many real tears over the counterfeit head of my Prince; but
after that by the little noise I made, they had turned their sight toward me,
and perceived who I was; the fair Izadora by some shrieks, and a more violent
weeping, demonstrated, that her seeing of me, brought some fresh, and more
sensible reflections into her memory, than a disfigured and unknowable part of
Spartacus had done; but Perolla, whose Sex dispensed him from a proportionate
excess in those effeminacies, came toward me, and told me, You see Symander,
that the cruel gods having allowed us no other way but this, to evince our
gratitude to your generous Master, we have not declined it; we have now nothing
but this part of him, and his memory left us, which we will cherish at a rate,
that those which know it, shall be convinced by what we do, what we would have
done, had our powers of gratitude proportionated our cause, or our desires of
it; which last we cannot more highly, or justly illustrate, than by assuring
you they equal the first; and in our transcendent loss we should receive some
little relaxation, if one who Spartacus did so much esteem of as Symander,
would so much esteem of us, as to pass his life with those, who during their
own, will eternally deplore the loss of his generous Master's. Sir, (I replied)
I should be too unworthy so noble an offer, had I survived him in whose
consideration it is made; No, generous Perolla, Spartacus lives, and does so, so
much the more happily, by how much he knows his life is considerable to you,
and will put a period to a grief nothing can repair, or equal, but his, when I
shall acquaint him with yours, and the fair Izadora's.

Thereupon I made them that complement my Prince had commanded me; which they
no sooner heard, than in raptures as far transcending repetition, as imitation,
they both conjured me to bring them to a person, who by the obligations of
gratitude, and virtue, they acknowledged themselves equally confined to admire
and esteem. 'Twas by this time, about the close of the Evening, so that without
any hazard they might give my Prince a visit; which when I had told them, they
immediately went in their Chariot (taking me only with them) to my Prince's
Lodging, where the generous Lovers continued their tears, though for a contrary
cause to that for which they had usually shed them. 'Twas in this interview
(continued Symander) that Perolla acquainted Artabbanes, how that having heard
of his fatal loss at the Battle of the Trenches, and that a Head as replenished
with the gifts of the Mind, as of Nature, was ignominiously fixed on the
Capitol; both he and Izadora dressing their Bodies in the livery of their
Minds, came purposely from Salapia, and had begged from the Senate the
remainder of a person, who could not be more an Enemy to Rome, than a friend to
Salapia and them. The Senate, who always esteemed of Gratitude, as knowing they
had the greatest power to create it in any; and believing those that had it for
their Enemies, would not want it for them; in one action, to reward and create
ours, granted our request; with which we intended to return, and to have raised
such a Trophy to this part of the dead Spartacus, as should have evinced the
just and vast esteem we had of the Living. Perolla further told him, That since
his leaving of Salapia, their Fathers had as much admired at their past
differences and cruelties, as others did at their present friendship, which was
so settled and perfect, that it relished not a little of what had caused it;
and that already virtue was so habitual to them, that it appeared rather an
effect of their nature, than their change. Artabbanes by many embraces to the
generous Perolla, and retributions to the fair Izadora, acknowledged their
virtue and goodness, and protested he was more satisfied with their Father's
friendship to them, than with theirs to him; since he was more concerned in
their satisfaction than his own; which they could not suspect, since he evinced
it in the most pregnant testimony.

But after some other discourses of this nature, Artabbanes, who remembered the
pressing desire the generous Lovers had demonstrated to learn his quality and
life, and that by the discovery of the fair Parthenissa's Constancy, he
esteemed himself disobliged from any longer silence, he acquainted them with
it; who no sooner heard of a Concession his formal denial, and nothing else,
had suppressed their imploring, by fresh impatiencies they invited my Prince to
satisfy their longing. This he did, by telling them exactly all his
Adventures, in which they so justly sympathiz'd, that it invited him to do the
like, in the joy they assumed at that happy intelligence he had so miraculously
received from the generous Sillaces: Neither did they after the knowledge of my
Prince's quality, pay him any more respect, or affection; for their Gratitude
and Virtue, had rendered them incapable of any accessions of that nature.

I will not (said Symander) so unnecessarily entrench on your attentions, as to
inform you how constantly every day the virtuous Salapians visited Artabbanes,
nor of the excellent entertainment their conversation gave him: for it is high
time we should leave that Italy, which had been the Scene of such discrepant
events. To effect this the sooner, I will inform you, that the generous
Ventidius being returned from the Gulf of Tarentum, came to my dear Master,
and there acquainted him of what deprived him of the honor of your Company,
which his Friendship for you, made him esteem a greater misfortune, than the
deprivation it self; and indeed, Ventidius, to render your precipitate
departure the more excusable, rendered it so dangerously necessary, that
Artabbanes had esteemed the Misfortune of your having left him without cause, a
less one. The generous Roman upon your score, or that of virtue, so assiduously
visited, and served my Prince, that his obligations had no unfruitful return,
if their design was to acquire him really his Friendship. At length after two
Moons, my dear Master's wounds were well-enough closed, to permit him to think
of Parthia, and the Night before his designed departure, Perolla (who
apprehended, in a strange Country he might not be sufficiently provided) came
and brought me the richest Jewels I had ever seen, and desired me to carry them
with me, to remedy any misadventure. I was much more satisfied with his care,
than he was with my assurance, that Artabbanes had enough of them to supply his
necessities, and with my protestations (after he had earnestly pressed me to
accept them for my self), that I would carry away nothing of his, but the
memory of his virtue. Perolla immediately after went to Artabbanes, with whom
he had left the fair Izadora, where he conjured him before her to permit his
waiting on him into Parthia, since he and the gods had left him no other way to
demonstrate his Gratitude, and affection. Artabbanes absolutely refused this
offer, ` and was much more troubled at the making it, than ever Izadora was.

My memory not serving me to repeat the generous Lovers final Civilities, I
will not so much wrong their excellence, as to dress them in my own
expressions: The next day after this separation, they returned to Salapia with
the false Spartacus's head, which (either to disguise the Truth, or in honor
to any thing which bore that name) they caused magnificently to be buried, and
ever after lived in the unimitable joys of a virtuous Love; and that those
cannot be transcended by any others, is not a greater Truth than it is, that
never any more justly deserved them. The same morning my Prince left Rome, he
went to Ostia, where the obliging Ventidius expected him, not daring, because
of his eminent quality, to wait on him thither, lest it might have proved a
dangerous Civility. There my Prince by Ventidius's favor found an excellent
Gally, well fitted and Manned, ready to receive him, and his Commands.

'Twas aboard, that these two great Men took leave, and 'twas in that
separation I discovered charms in the generous Roman's Person and Discourse,
which could be no more resisted, than sufficiently admired: At length having
mutually vowed a friendship as unalterable, as that they had for virtue, and
confirmed it by many strict embraces, Ventidius returned privately to Rome, and
the whole Ginge immediately with cheerful shouts and vigorous strokes, made the
Galley run faster than that River it had so lately abandoned; but the Wind
blowing a steady gale at West, exempted the Slaves from much labor, and so
facilitated our intended Voyage, that in twenty days we cast Anchor in the
River Orontes, which washes the Walls of Antioch; whither the same night my
Prince went; having largely rewarded the Slaves, the Mariners and the Officers
of Ventidius's Gally. At Antioch having furnished our selves with two excellent
Arabian Horses, and having learnt that the ways through Syria and Mesopotamia,
were much obstructed by Crassus's Army, which possessed all the Bridges, and
other considerable Passes, Artabbanes to avoid any probable impediments,
determined to leave those two Provinces on the South, and so by the way of
Armenia and Media to get into Parthia. This was by much the more secure course,
and not very much the longer. We had already performed so much of our Journey,
as to the Banks of the River Corindas, which runs through Arsacca, one of the
noblest Cities in Media, and were not past eight Furlongs from it, when from
the height of a little Hill, we discovered a fight; which though not very
considerable for the number of the Combatants, yet it was for those of the
dead; for of above forty, two only remained alive; which by the richness and
beauty of their Arms, but much more by their Courages, demonstrated themselves
to be the Chief of either Party. Not far from the Scene where this Tragedy was
acting, stood a Chariot, whose Horses either by design or accident, were
running up and down the field with their Harnesses broken, and in it was a
Lady, who we thought was the Judge, or Reward of the Victory; and who by what we
could discern of her, when we came nearer (for she was veiled) seemed too to be
a worthy cause of so generous a Dispute. My Prince extremely taken with such
courages, and believing to permit them to destroy each other, would be as great
a Crime in him, as in those which endeavored it; pulling down the sight of his
Helmet, he rid up and thrust himself between them, where having received on his
Shield some blows, which their fury intended for each other, he conjured them
both, by what they valued most, and by those lives which, by what he had seen
of them, were too considerable to be fruitlesly lost; That unless the Cause of
their Quarrel were mortal, they would desist from a fight, which would give
both, or one of them wounds, which would prove so. He that wore the green Arms,
either enraged to lose that dawning advantage he had over his Enemy, or to be
interrupted from acting a Revenge he was very intent upon, told my Prince in a
furious Tone, Whoever thou be, that art so over-officious, know, that did I
not believe thy care of my Enemy proceeded from thy ignorance of his Crimes, I
should by thy defending a Person so replenished with them, leave the punishment
of his, for the punishment of thine; which out of that belief, I will now omit;
but if this declaration be not sufficient to restrain thy Assistance, thou
shall find thy Death in thy mistaken Charity. Then clapping Spurs to his Horse,
and striking my Prince's with the flat of his Sword, he joined again his
Adversary, and so incessantly pressed him, that before my Prince could come to
punish the Conqueror, or defend the vanquished, the former had passed his
Sword through the latter; who by that fatal thrust, let fall his own and his
Bridle, employing both those hands which had held them, to hold himself in his
Saddle: The Horse finding nothing to restrain him, ran with his wounded Rider
up and down the Field. He in the green Armor had doubtless made the Death of
his Enemy, the end of his victory, had not Artabbanes run after him to hinder
it; which so incensed the Stranger; that leaving his old Enemy for his new, he
only said, Since by undertaking my Adversaries defense, thou will partake of
his Crimes, prepare thy self to do the like of his punishment; and then with an
active rage, he discharged some furious blows on Artabbanes, who moved by this
fresh accession to his former affront, received him so briskly, that the
Stranger found he had undertaken a Quarrel far more difficult than that he had
so advantageously and lately decided. I knew too much the Laws of Honor and my
Prince's Courage, to offer him any assistance from Mine, and therefore only
continued a Spectator of a Combat, which though replenished with many admirable
things, yet none appeared so justly so to me, as that Artabbanes was so long a
conquering. I must confess, his Adversary's courage gave me inclinations for
him, that the way in which he employed it, might justly have exempted me from;
and I had longer continued my admiration, had not I by chance, casting my Eye
on the South Side of the little Plain we were in, perceived Ten Horsemen which
came out of a Wood which confined it on that side; two of them having observed
the dangerous condition the wounded Gentleman was in, ran to his Assistance;
one of them vaulting up behind him, upheld his tottering Body in his Arms, and
the other leading his Horse by the Head, retook (with their charge) the way
they had come; but the remaining Eight came a-gallop toward that place where
my Prince and the Stranger were prodigally employing their Valors against each
other, which united were hardly able to secure them: Their being so intent on
each others ruin, made them not consider how near their own was; which to
prevent, I rid up and acquainted them with what their Eyes immediately did;
wherefore the Stranger more concerned in the Ladies safety, than in his Revenge
or hopes of Victory, immediately told Artabbanes, Valiant Stranger, The
difference betwixt us, is not of so high a concernment, but another time may
serve to decide it, and having found in your Sword a virtue worthy to serve so
great a Beauty as these are coming to ravish from me, I shall not scruple to
desire your assistance, or at least your neutrality; but to invite you to the
former, I protest, I present you with a higher glory by the honor of serving
her, than your victory over me can afford you; and perhaps by this concession
you will conquer me a more certain and a more facile way, than that you have
now undertaken. My Prince extremely satisfied with this generous proceeding,
told him, If I receive any trouble from what you motion, it is only left you
might think I grant that to your desire which I would to your condition, or to
the Beauty you so resolutely defend; neither can you doubt by the cause of our
present Dispute, that I would not practice for you, what I did against you.
Artabbanes had not time to give him any other assurances than what his Sword
did; and finding it necessary and just to join with my Prince, I did it; our
Enemies, though they lost at the first charge two of their resolutest
Companions, were not near so much surpised thereat, as to see so strange and
sudden an union against them; but this mystery some of them had not Life
enough left to unriddle; yet the others made so vigorous a resistance, that the
Stranger had lost his Life, if my Prince by the death of one of his Enemies
(which was come behind him) had not hindered it; I had my share in the danger,
and the victory; the first by receiving some slight wounds, and the last by
killing him which gave them me: In brief, our Enemies survived not their
defeat, for the Combat ended not but with their Lives. The Stranger had no
sooner done acting toward, and observed this Truce, than he came to my Prince,
and lifting up his Helmet, told him, Generous Stranger, since I hold my Sword
from you, the gods forbid I should employ it against you; if I have now any
designs upon you, they are not only by imitating you, to preserve your Life by
the hazard of mine; but, if the occasion were offered, by the absolute loss of
it. The Stranger had scarce finished these words, when he found himself in my
Prince's Arms, who by repeating twice or thrice the Name of Sillaces, made me
know 'twas that generous Prince whom he so passionately embraced. You may
believe (continued Symander) this accident produced no small admiration in
Artabbanes, which was raised to a higher degree when Sillaces after knowing my
Prince, told him, 'twas upon his score he had then been fighting, and that it
was against Surena, When Artabbanes considered he fought against his Friend for
his Enemy, it raised in him some just repinings against the strangeness of his
destiny; but as soon as he reflected on his Enemie's being the fair
Zephalinda's Brother, they were immediately silenced; and if any thing in this
encounter afficted him, 'twas, that he had drawn his Sword against Sillaces,
and not that he had done it for Surena. My Prince assured his generous Friend
of this, who could not sufficiently admire at a Friendship so efficacious, as
that it ran in a Blood; when even one of it had acted as much to create his
hatred, as the other was capable of, for the raising his affection and esteem.
But Artabbanes, who was impatient of all discourses, but those which tended to
the learning of his destiny in the fair Parthenissa's condition, earnestly
implored from Sillaces an account of what he knew concerning it: Who replied,
that his absence in his search, had made him but from second hands, and
confusedly learn it; but that the Beauty his Sword had so much injured, and so
much served, could give him an exact relation of all. My generous Master, who
was confirmed by that Zeal with which Sillaces had embraced her Service, that
it was Lyndadorie (though he could not fancy by what strange adventures she had
left Parthia and needed his Sword) went with Sillaces to the Chariot: But great
Gods! what was his surprise when he found the Beauty in it was the fair
Parthenissa! I cannot tell you with how many tremblings and prostrations he
expressed his joy and wonder, before he could do either by his words; nor can I
tell you with what emotions the admirable Parthenissa found her Deliverer was a
more transcendent felicity than her Deliverance. Never (continued Symander)
never did any mortal appear so like those that are not; so that if the gods had
not reserved adoration for what only was a Deity, and not for what merited to
be one, my Prince must have converted a flame of Love into one of Devotion. His
Three years absence had so perfected those morning-Beauties, that the light
which sees every thing, never saw any so exactly accomplished; insomuch that
had the gods given eternity to her then Beauty, they could have given it no
other accession. Artabbanes who received her Flames as fast as her Eyes
inspired them, was so entirely taken up with that employment, that he continued
silent as long almost as I have been speaking; but no sooner had his words the
liberty of utterance, than he told the fair Parthenissa, You see (Madam)
prostrate at your feet, the unfortunate, and happy Artabbanes; the last of
these, in having obtained your Pardon; and the first, in having needed it; you
cannot (Madam) doubt of your power, when as an effect of it, after my Crime, I
dare present my self before my injured Princess: But may I not fear I received
this command from your Revenge, and not your Mercy, since to behold the Virtue
and Beauty I have wronged, is one of the most sensible punishments could be
inflicted on me for having done it; and it had been more just (if you had not
esteemed it otherwise, because it was more easy for me) to have executed your
Revenge, than obeyed your Mercy; Neither is it a small Misfortune, that by a
Crime I come to implore it for one; but yet by having fought against your
Deliverance, you may discover my Sins against the divine Parthenissa, are not
my Elections, but my Fate; for nothing but so unresistable an impulsion, could
have made me either doubt her professions and constancy, or fought against her
Interests.

If (said Parthenissa) the generous Artabbanes hazarded my Deliverance by his
Sword, he has established it by the same weapon, and abundantly repaired a
small injury by what acted it; and if he doubted my professions and constancy,
he was so excellently deluded into that mistake, that it had been a greater
Miracle he had avoided those thoughts, than that he assumed them. I may profess
too with the same Truth, that I feared as much the disclosing of my Innocence,
as he detested my seeming want of it; for I knew the discovery of his error
would but tooabundantly punish it: and I was more concerned in his felicity
than esteem, the latter being an advantage I wholly appropriated to my self,
which also I could not but by his extreme prejudice. Ah Madam, (the ravished
Artabbanes replied) the more you disclose your Virtue, the more you manifest my
Sin in having doubted it; and you increase the punishment thereof, by
endeavoring to extenuate it: It Is upon that score only, that I receive with
joy what you now deliver, as I shall do any thing of that quality with the same
reception, that contributes to a suffering I cannot more deserve, than I am
ambitious to embrace: Yes, fair Parthenissa, if I have languish'd so long a
Life after the evincement of my Crime, 'twas because I esteemed Death rather a
Reward, than a Punishment of it, and because you commanded me to return; which
the more zealously I obeyed, because in that obedience I evidenced I would
decline no other penance could be inflicted on me, this transcending all
others, as much as my offenses does. But now, Madam, that I have effected that
command, let your next be to become the Executioner of your Jnstice; you will
prove your Mercy greater in such an imposition, than in a Pardon, since the
first will end a Life which has lost those hopes which only gave it a relish;
and the last, by permitting me to see that blessing I have lost, and which I
can no more aspire unto without committing as high a Sin by my presumption, as
by my doubts will involve me in torments, that but to reflect on will transcend
the actual operations of all others. If (said Parthenissa) I am satisfied that
you believe your self so great a Criminal, it proceeds only that by my passing
by your offenses, you have the greater obligation to me; I am too-much
concerned in your Life to continue it in Torment, and the gods have rendered me
incapable of that Injustice, without equally participating in the effects of
it: I do therefore with your Pardon, return you your hopes, and give you an
assurance that mine cannot have a more pleasing object, than that you will
believe your Life is so undissolubly tied to mine, that the cares or negligence
you have of your own, must produce resembling operations on Parthenissa's.
Great gods! (replied Artabbanes) you are not so infinite as my Joy, or the
Mercy which has created it; neither of those know any limits, and your Power
does, by being incapable but by them to make me value, or cherish my Life: Yes,
my Princess (he continued, embracing her knees, and printing a thousand burning
kisses on her hand), you have by so obliging a declaration, invited the happy
Artabbanes, almost to approve his Sin, in rendering it the efficient cause of so
transcendent an evincement of your favor; and made him as much in love with
his Life, as with you, or as you are with virtue; and if ever he employs one
moment of it but to celebrate your Mercy, may he repeat that Crime which has so
abundantly proved the vastness of it; or into higher punishments, if the gods
were capable of inflicting on him any that were so. It was (continued Symander)
by an infinite Number of such expressions that these generous Lovers gave each
other assurances of their being so; which being finished, the Princess, who
till then had been so intent upon this admirable Adventure, that she had
omitted to cast her Eyes on Sillaces, (who so prodigally had hazarded his Life
to revenge and break her imprisonment) then did it, and being convinced 'twas
he, by his having lifted up his Helmet, she made him retributions worthy what
created them; which filled Artabbanes with new admirations, for he hitherto had
thought that his Friend, and his Princess (especially by the former having
addressed him to the latter) had seen and conversed with one another before
(which by a rare accident they had not): but during the Combat, my generous
Master had received some wounds, which by the emotions of so passionate a
conversation, were so inflamed, and had so much bled, that he began to give
some symptom of fainting, which cast Parthenissa into one; the care of whose
recovery, created Artabbanes's: but as soon as she was restored to her self
because of Sillaces wounds as well as my Prince's, and that it was late, we
resolved to go to Arsacia, which we esteemed a Place of security against the
attempts of Surena's Partisans, should they have any desires of revenge, whilst
Sillaces and Artabbanes wounds facilitated their acting it; I omit (said
Symander) purposely, those favors the fair Parthenissa honored me withal;
which I had no sooner received and acknowledged, than I went to a
Countrey-house in sight of the place where all that I have told you happened,
and there by good fortune lighted on a young fellow, who by often driving a
Wagon, had some little skill in driving a Chariot; with his help we got
together the Horses, and mended their Traces; but because my Prince's and his
Friend's wounds made it dangerous and painful to ride, by Parthenissa's
reiterated invitations, they went into her Chariot, and in that manner came in
the close of the evening to Arsacia, where by the help of our young Peasant
(who was liberally rewarded) we got into a private House, the Gates being
already locked; and because my wounds were so favorable as to permit me to pay
my duty to those my condition and inclination owed it, I went and got a
Chyrurgeon who lived in the Suburbs, from whom I understood that the then
Governor of Arsacia, was Zenophon, which was no small satisfaction to
Artabbanes, whom he had learnt from Moneses, had ever been a faithful servant
to all his Family. I must acknowledge my satisfaction at it was not inferior to
his, for my Father and Zenophon were CousinGermanes, and yet had been more
united by Friendship, than by Blood; which obligation never ended but with my
Father's life. But before my Prince would permit his wounds to be dressed, he
waited on Parthenissa to her Chamber.

'Twas there, by a world of reiterated and passionate expressions that he
acknowledged his Crime, and the Mercy that had produced it; which latter gave
him a less ill opinion of the former, by finding experimentally there could be
something that transcended it, which till so obliging an evincement, had never
entered into his Faith. Artabbanes and Sillaces were no sooner retired, than
they went to the woman of the House, who they found had been blessed with an
education different to her present quality, and of no common Beauty; they were
not a little pleased with both, as knowing they rendered her the fitter for a
Service which she joyfully went to pay the fair Parthenissa. 'Twas after this,
that the two Friends made use of the Chyrurgeon, who found how great an Enemy
their civilities had proved to their healths, and that the paying of their's
(unseasonably) two hours, would render them incapable for many to do the like.
Artabbanes was much more troubled at this assurance, than at the danger which
caused it. The Chyrurgeon being retired, I told the two generous Friends (who
lay both in one Chamber) that perhaps it were not amiss, if the next morning I
went to Zenophon, and acquainted him with their being in his Government, which
obligation of Trust would not only in some good degree recompense his past
fidelity, but invite his future, and thereby procure a powerful Assistant, in
case Surena's being alive, should thrust him into desires of revenge, and of
recovery of Parthenissa; or if dead, should infuse resembling ones into his
Friends and Partisans. Artabbanes, though he knew exactly the merit of
Zenophon's fidelity, yet he consented as much to what I motion'd upon the score
that his Princess would be thereby removed to a place, and Attendance less
unfit for her, as upon any other. This resolve being assumed, they endeavored
to take their rest, which the joy of Artabbanes, and the sympathy Sillaces had
in it as much hindered, as the pain and inconvenience of their wounds. The day
at length appeared, and I had no sooner informed my generous Master, that the
Princess was awake, than he sent me to the woman of the House to enquire of her
Health, who returned me word from Parthenissa, that he might know hers by his
own. Artabbanes found a misfortune in so much kindness, by finding himself in a
fever. This made me hasten to Zenophon, whose power and care I feared my
Prince's sickness would need; as soon as I came to his Palace, I desired one of
his Domestics to bring me where he was; who being my Guide, I passed
unexamined through his Guards, and came into a large Hall, where I found him
environed by a throng of his Officers, and though with Moneses I had left Media
in a very green Age, yet I had still some impressions of Zenophon, which the
seeing him revived; 'twas with some difficulty I got near-enough to be observed
by him; which when I perceived I was, I looked on him so fixtly, that perhaps
it made him the more hastily dismiss the greater part of his Officers; who were
no sooner gone, than presenting my self to him, I desired to know if he were at
leisure to hear a Stranger, who had some things of moment to inform him of, and
which it was not improbable but he might be satisfied with? I know not whether
he read something in my Face which made him guess or suspect who I was, or
whether the Times which then began to be strangely confused, made him believe I
came to give him some important advice; but whatever was the Cause, without any
ballancing, he commanded me to follow him into a Cabbinet, which was contiguous
to the Hall we then were in; whither being come, and the Door locked, I asked
him, if he had never seen any thing that resembled me? After having considered
me narrowly, he replied he had, but that he could not suddenly recollect where
it had been. I thereupon told him my name, which he had scarcely heard, but I
found my self in his Arms, as a reward of that discovery; and though by many
testimonies of joy he acquainted me with his, yet they were infinitely short of
those demonstrations of that Passion with which he celebrated the news I told
him of my Prince's being so near him, and in a place under his Power; after I
had convinced his belief of that Truth by many protestations he necessitated me
to make him of it, lifting up his eyes and his hands to Heaven, he cried out,
Great Gods! you could not create my acknowledgments in a way I should more
willingly pay them, than by granting me the happiness of serving any of
Monese's blood; and if to this blessing you will add that, of permitting me to
see his Son seated in the Throne of Media, I shall esteem my self abundantly
satisfied for your having denied me one. 'Twas by many resembling expressious
that the generous Zenophon evinced to me his fidelity to Artabbane's Family,
was not at all impaired; neither did his desire to the gods in my Prince's
favor relish any thing of an ill subject; since Tygranes the then King of
Media, either by Nature or choice, was so averse to the fair Sex, that
Artabbane's Passion for one of them, could hardly transcend his aversion for
all. Zenophon having put a period to the evincements of his joy and gratitude,
conjured me pressingly to conduct him, to him which had raised them; This I
obeyed, having first desired him it might be with privacy, for that my Prince's
condition if it did not already need circumspection, yet it might; it was
therefore by water that we went to his Lodging, which (as the Governor's
Palace) stood upon the River Corindas. It Is as impossible as needless, to
repeat all that past between them of civility; it is sufficient you know,
Artabbanes received him with all the demonstrations of satisfaction and
respect, a person so replenished with virtue and fidelity could either desire
or hope; and Zenophon's joy at the reception was nothing inferior to the
greatness of what created it. My Prince afterward informed him of the quality
of Sillaces, whom he saluted, and complemented with much humility: Those
ceremonies finished, Artabbanes, who could not but admire at any man's
possessing so high a Government as that of Arsacia, who was so declared a
Partizan of his Father's, as Zenophon informed him of it. To which Zenophon
replied, Though you are (Sir) ignorant of this present Government, yet you are
not, that the past was so unequal and Tyrannical, that your generous Father
quitted not only his interest in it, but in the Kingdom; and not to be an Enemy
to Tygrane's Quiet and his own, voluntarily confined himself in Parthia. It was
long before we knew what created such ungrounded jealousies in our King, and so
strange a way of suppressing them in his Uncle; but now the Mystery is as
visible as his dissembling that has so long hindered it from being so.
Merinzor, the first Prince of the Blood (after Moneses) aspired by Art and Sin,
to acquire that pre-eminence which Nature had denied him; and having by
admirable insinuations made Tygranes as much his Subject by inclination, as he
was his by duty; he so successfully represented to him the danger of having the
next and certain Heir (by Tygrane's aversion, or disability for Women) to be in
the Government or Kingdom; that at length the King by some usages which neither
were consistent with Monese's quality or disposition, necessitated your
generous Father to an Exilement: This was no sooner effected on which
Merinzor's designs were founded, than he appears publicly the Favorite of his
King, yet so artificially, that many believed his condition but from thence
bore date; whereas some others (though indeed but very few) concluded Monese's
Banishment was an effect of his having been so before. Merinzor (as Tygranes
has since told me) assured him he might now Reign by no Law but his Will, since
the discontented had no head to give their Body; and that Moneses by being kept
out of Media, would be deprived of anticipating his Title to the Crown of it;
but to leave as little to Fortune as the nature of humane things would admit,
he humbly begged his King's permission to allow him in public to be an earnest
Solicitor for your Father's return, which (as he said) would insinuate him in
all the Designs that would be laid to effect it, and consequently enable him to
prevent them. The deluded Tygranes condescended to this; by which concession,
Merinzor not only cast the odium of Monese's Banishment entirely on the King;
but also acquired to himself those of your Father's Friends, who had not wit
enough to discover Merinzor was his Enemy; whereby many designs for his
restoration became unfruitful, and by the frequent Execution of the
Conspirators, so weakened his Party, that now there are scarcely enough left to
act a design, though not prevented by Intelligence. My Fortune, or my
suspicions, kept me out of all those unsuccessful Plots, and thereby I find my
self (and some few Friends, who I had acquainted with, and made approve of my
jealousies) in a posture able to serve our generous Prince; for not only this
City, but Ecbatan, Cyrapolis and Europus, are in the power of those, who are
resolved, they cannot more justly employ theirs, than against Merinzor, and for
Moneses and Artabbanes. But Sir (continued Zenophon), Tygranes being convinced
that your Father being removed, all causes of his Fears were so too, abandoned
himself so absolutely to those vices which unlimited power is aptest to
inspire, that partly those exorbitant disorders, but more particularly his
assuming to himself Monese's Banishment, from whence all our miseries took
their original, has so alienated his Subjects Affections, that Merinzor by
obliging all, by permitting Tygranes to oblige none, and by a seemingly
soliciting your Father's return, having gained those Hearts he made his King
lose, began lately so much to unvizard his designs, that I discovered and
disclosed them to Tygranes; but I had much difficulty to free my self from
being thought dishonest, for endeavoring to evince Merinzor was so; which I
had not effected, had not the gods (concerned in the discovery of so black an
ingratitude), miraculously evidenced it: For the Court being then at Ecbatan,
there came a Packet to Merinzor out of Parthia; but the day before he was gone
to a House of Pleasure not above 200 Furlongs off; where under a pretense of
passing away his Time, he employed it in gaining of Partisans, and in
establishing a fortune for himself, which should ruin his King's. The belief I
had, that in that Packet there was something of concernment; and the knowledge I
had, that it lay not in the Power of inferences, but of demonstrations, to make
Tygranes revoke that unlimited Authority he had so fatally trusted his
Favorite with, made me determine to hazard my own ruin to prevent my King's:
I say, hazard my own ruin; for if in that Packet I resolved to open, there had
been nothing which might have apologiz'd for my doing it, by my inclinations to
your Family, and Merinzor's Power, I could not have avoided resenting the most
violent effects of it. In brief, I seized upon those letters, and having by the
admirable Art of a Secretary of mine decypher'd them, I found they came from
Surena, and discovered palpably a strong and dangerous conspiracy, which was
partly to be acted by some Parthian Forces that Prince had promised him. I
believe Sir (continued Zenophon) you are not ignorant of Surena's Person, and
Power with Arsaces, which hinders me from giving you a Character of either.
Alas (replied Artabbanes) I am but too-perfectly instructed in the latter,
which has cost me so many troubles, that it is no small one to remember them;
but I will another time give you their relation, in the mean while I shall
beseech you to continue yours. After (said Zenophon) I had so successfully
disclosed what Tygranes, not I, disbeliev'd, immediately I presented him with
what he found a misfortune then to know, but had found it a greater to have
longer ignor'd. Never did I see so sudden and so strange an alteration; that in
his looks was much inferior to that in his Government, for he perceived 'twas
not now by the Title, but the Virtues of a King that he must continue one; and
that Merinzor had but for a time cast away his fears, that afterward he might
eternally cast him out of his Throne. Tygranes in Tears told me this truth and
many an other, and by great favors convinced me his gratitude for my
faithfulness and vigilance, was proportionate to them; I told him 'twas not
enough to discover Merinzor's infidelity, but he must prevent it; that nothing
was more conducive to that end, than without any respite to place men of high
fidelity, and no less resolution, in the principal Towns, which would not only
hinder Merinzor's possessing them, but deter his Partisans from a conjunction
with him, by so prejudicial and pregnant an evincement, that his Conspiracy was
disclosed, and partly prevented; that if yet the despair of Merinzor's Faction
flung them into Arms, yet the possession of the Towns would so protract the
time, that before all of them were lost, He might raise an Army not only to
recover them again, but to punish those that necessitated him to do it. That
one of the best advantages in a Civil War, was to secure the Cities, they being
not only Sanctuaries for small Numbers against great, but the Banks and
Magazines of a Kingdom, and without which the Country cannot subsist; for it is
those which take off the fruits of the Earth, and return to the Country those
of Industry and Art; that possessing them, he would gain the ablest men, which
commonly make their residence there, or at least hinder the Enemy from that
advantage, which is one of the highest in a Domestic War. I told him many
things of this quality which he approved; and because by what I had done, he
was also confident of my fidelity, he instantly gave me Commissions to place
such Governors in the four chief Cities, for whose Honesty I would answer. In
Ecbatan (which you know is Metropolis of this Kingdom) I placed Patafernes,
Symander's Uncle; Arsacia I elected for my self; and for the other two, Men of
whose inclinations I am satisfied, and for whose abilities I will more answer
for, than my own. This I did with that celerity which accompanies those actions
we embrace with duty and inclination. Ecbatan by reason of the King's presence
and Guards, we secured without delay or hazard, and thrust out Merinzor's
Governor and Creatures: the other Three with some little difficulty we
effected; but the first thing of all that we attempted, was the seizing on
Merinzor's Person, whose intelligence of my taking his Pocket, came immediately
to his knowledge, and so he escaped me; but so narrowly, that had he been as much
hurt as feared, he had not now been in so promising a condition. I believe
(continued Zenophon) you may think it strange that in the heat of Tygrane's
apprehensions, and of his hatred to his late Favorite, I did not embrace so
obliging a conjuncture for soliciting your Father's return; I do confess, I was
a thousand times upon the point of motioning it; but that which suspended my
doing so, was, left it might create some jealousies of me, and in them, recall
the power he had conferred on me, which I intended to make use of, to place
Partisans of your Family in the most important Governments; which once being
effected, would probably render my solicitation less unsuccessful, by rendering
it more dangerous to deny, than to grant my request. This reasoning of mine,
the event but too evidently evinced was not groundless; for after I had secured
the chief Cities with Governors, declared Servants to Moneses, which I
palliated to Tygranes, by assuring him I knew none but your Father's Friends
that were Enemies to Merinzor; I implored of him by many reasons and reiterated
Prayers, to invite Moneses to return; from whose Courage and Judgment, he would
doubtless derive those good Services, which by Merinzor's infidelity he needed,
and which thereby he had been so long hindered from receiving: I added to this,
that had Merinzor's infusions of your Father's designs of aspiring to the
Crown, been as true, as they were false; yet by his loss of Artabbanes (for
alas (Sir) we then were confident of that misfortune, by your being so long
concealed to the world) there was no danger of any attempts, since by the
course of Nature, Moneses was much nearer his Grave than he, and by the course
of the Median Laws, the Princess Lyndadory was excluded from the Crown. But
though Tygranes had cast off his affection for Merinzor, yet he still retained
those impressions he had planted in him when he possessed it; and consequently
either as a Complement to our fidelities upon his own score, or as an
unremovable maxim he had established, not to admit of your Father's return,
(for if guilty, he must thereby invest him with too ample a power to act his
designs; and if innocent, to act his revenge) he not only positively denied me
my request, but enjoined me never to revive it; and in expressions so violent,
that instead of making him Monese's friend, I once apprehended he was no longer
mine. Judge, Sir (said Zenophon), if to motives of justice, having added that of
his interest and fear, I could not prevail; how much more certain I had been of
that misfortune, if I had attempted my request upon the score only of the
former: I was necessitated notwithstanding so sensible a repulse, to make no
public demonstration of it; yet I was often determining to betray my King into
his advantage, by sending for your Father; but the apprehension I then had,
that such a proceeding before the effect was evidenced for which I acted it,
might cast Tygranes into an eternal ruin, by occasioning him to cast himself
into Merinzor's power, hindered me from it; which latter was but too probable:
for what Merinzor did perform, he was resolved Moneses would, had he but the
Force; and of two Enemies, 'twas a rational faith, he would elect him whom he
had so recently honored with his favor, than him, who had never had any share
in it. 'Twas upon many as pregnant reasons as these, that I determined to
expect the leisure of the gods, for the restoration of your Family, and in the
mean time to act what I could for the ruin of the greatest Enemy of it, which
I esteemed much conducive to that end. In pursuance whereof, the King having
honored me with the title of his Lieutenant General, reserving to himself the
Superiority over all (as a King that desires and merits victory, determining to
Court her in Person) I came by his Command to this City, to raise such forces
as voluntarily would fight under the Royal Ensigns; Merinzor too, having
already so far advanced his preparations, as to have marching out of the
Northern parts of this Kingdom, a Body of 30000 Men, which daily increases and
with which he hopes to settle, what my successful doubts has so much shaken and
endangered.

Zenophon had no sooner done speaking, than Artabbanes by many fresh Civilities
congratulated his Command, and his deserving of it; and by particular
expressions, made him many signal retributions for the care he had of Moneses,
and his Family. My Prince then let Zenophon know that Surena was in Media, and
near Arsacia, how miraculously he had avoided the generous Sillace's Sword; and
at last, that the fair Parthenissa, the Authoress of his sufferings and
desires, was in the same House with him. Zenophon was much amazed at the
intelligence of Surena's being in Media; but he was much more satisfied to
learn his Prince's Mistress was in a place where he might serve her, and where
he might see a Perfection, which he concluded could not be but transcendent, by
making so generous a Captive; he went therefore with Artabbanes's and her
permission, to the Chamber of that excellent Beauty, which he saw with
admirations and confessions, that my Prince's desires and sufferings could not
equal in degrees that perfection which had occasioned them. After Zenophon by a
silent wonder had complemented her Beauty, by many pressing and humble
implorings, he invited her to his Palace, which he said would be less unworthy
of her, than the Chamber she was in. Parthenissa acknowledged this civility in
expressions which acquainted him with hers; and after the Chyrurgeons had
assured her, that the two Princes might without any danger, be removed by Boat
to Zenophon's, she condescended to accompany them thither, where they arrived
undiscovered; which my Prince was much intent upon, lest his accidental coming
into Media, might by the conjuncture of Affairs, relish more of Design than
Chance, and consequently prejudice Zenophon, who by the Laws of Hospitality and
Gratitude, he was confined to oblige. As soon as the Princess was retired to
her Appartment, Zenophon presented her with the fair Emilia, his Daughter and
only Child, who he begged her to accept till she could recover one that was
more capable to serve her; or if she esteemed none could be so, then he
conjured her to accept of her for ever. Parthenissa was exceedingly satisfied
with so obliging a Present; and though Emilia at first sight absolutely gave
her self up to the Princess, yet she could not more do so to Parthenissa, than
I did the like to her. I cannot, Sir (continued Symander), but acknowledge a
Truth, which if you saw the cause of, you would perhaps upon her account excuse
this digression, whose Character I would give you, did I not know that in such
attempts, either the Lover thinks he speaks too little, or is thought to speak
too much. There is no doubt, had not Artavasdes been too deeply concerned in
the hearing of his Friends Loves, and in the infelicities of his own, to act
any thing of mirth or suspension; he had at Symander's cost, given himself no
small divertisement; for that faithful servant had been so little one to Love,
and so contemned the two Princes assurances, that it was a Fate as certain as
Death, that now this acknowledgment had furnished his generous Hearer with an
ample Theme for Raillery, had not those former considerations silenced all
thoughts of that quality. Symander in expectation of this little war, had
continued a while silent; but at length perceiving, and troubled at the cause
that he mist it, thus prosecuted his Narration.

Zenophon leaving Parthenissa in her Appartment, went to see the two Princes's
in theirs; who, though his Palace was capacious enough to afford them distinct
ones had determined their Lodgings, as their Friendships, should admit of no
division. The residue of that day and the night, was dedicated to Rest; but
Artabbanes took so little, that the next morning his Princess being informed of
it, came to visit him; and perceiving by his indisposition, and the loss of so
much blood, that he was very pale, she became so too, and what misfortune had
created in Artabbanes, Sympathy did in his Mistress, who by the eloquence of
her words as well as looks, acquainted him with her sufferings, which she said,
recived no small accession, that his proceeded from the service he had done
her. If (Madam, said my Prince) my present condition ought to produce any
operations in you, they should be of a contrary quality to those you ascribe
them to; for my Crime upon its own score abundantly merited a higher punishment
than these unconsiderable wounds; I have therefore much more cause to rejoice
than repine, that what I should have suffered as an expiatory Penance for my
Sin, I do, for the duty of serving you; your goodness having rendered my
punishment needless, 'twas just my services should impose on me what your Mercy
declined the doing; and that a part of that blood should be shed for your
safety, which was all preserved by your forgiveness; but Madam, (continued
Artabbanes) may I not again stand in need of it, when I have taken the
confidence humbly to beg the knowledge of your Adventures, till my wound permit
me to acquaint you with mine? This entertainment will be the best Charm against
their Pain; for whilst I can hear and see the fair Parthenissa, my other
Senses will resign their functions to those. If (she replied) the relation of
my Story can produce so ambition'd an effect, I shall find in it an ample
recompense for all my sufferings; which the sooner to receive, I will obey you.

The Sequel of Parthenissa's History.
After (said Parthenissa) that the generous Sillaces by an attempt to silence
our fears for you, had raised them for himself, by engaging in so dangerous and
unpromising a journey, wherein he evinced the vastness of his Friendship; (for
there is hardly any of so perfect a quality, as to undertake that upon
certainties, which his did but in hopes.) I continued for a while free from all
troubles, but those which both your absences created, and those I sympathized
in of your excellent Sisters, and the fair Zephalinda's; for Surena, nor
Arsaces on his score, did not renew their persecution; I admired at it, as much
as I was satisfied with it; for though Surena's words assured me not of his
Passion, yet his languishings did; and in all his visits he so pressingly
implored my pardon, that I found he was but too much concerned in the obtaining
it; which having granted to his condition, and not to him; that being altered,
I had also altered my concession; this I did as a necessary justice, though he
gave it a contrary Name: For those prayers which by that proceeding he employed
for obtaining of my Pardon, he would otherwise (as I apprehended) have employed
for obtaining my affection; and the obstacle of his Crime being removed, it
would have left Arsaces none, whereby he might have continued his solicitations
for his Favorite. It was above six Moons that I remained in this condition;
which, though but too full of infelicity by your absences and Surena's
presence; yet it seems the Gods thought it not full enough; for by the folly of
his Passion he was finally reduced to as dangerous a condition, as your Sword
had done: 'Twas then that Orodes passing over all considerations, but those of
his Favorite, came to visit me, and not only implored my Pardon, but my Love
for him. I represented to him, that one which could stand in need of the
former, could hardly merit the latter; that he was a Person whose Treachery
rendered him as unfit for his Friendship, as Mine; and that his actions rather
called upon his Justice, than Protection. Madam (said Orodes) that infidelity
you reproach him with, is that which you should esteem him for; the least
production of a common Passion, is to endeavor the having it rewarded by
sufferings, and by submissions; but one that could not but prove extraordinary,
by the Beauties being so that inspired it, you cannot admire at an effect,
resembling its cause; and that your perfections are not common, is not a
greater Truth, than that a Crime in Surena is the like. Your Artabbanes himself
I believe durst not have done so much; he loves his Reputation more than
Parthenissa; and who dares do most for her, merits most from her. I know (Sir,
I replied) that the generous Artabbanes is more a friend to Virtue, than to
Love; and I am confident he knows I am so too; it is therefore only on that
account I believe he durst not have done what Surena did; neither is it any
glory, that he transcends Artabbanes in nothing but Vice; which is a
pre-eminence he will as certainly resign him, as surpass him in all actions of
an opposite quality; but (Sir) I hope you cannot seriously expect my affection
for a Person, who pretends no title to it, but by one which renders him
unworthy of it. I am (said Orodes) so serious in my request, that to deny it
me, will cast me into as bad a condition, as his whose preservation I solicit;
my Fate and Surena's being unseparable. But Arsaces finding I was as constant
in my resolves, as his Favorite in his fruitless passion, at length converted
those Prayers for my Affection, into some, for giving him a visit; and that at
least I would preserve his life, if I would not render it happy. The King's
importunities forced that from me, which his reasons could not; and taking me
with him in his Chariot, he brought me to Surena's Palace: I found the Master
of it in a condition that convinced me. Pity is none of the ways to Love; for
had it been, Surena could have been no longer denied mine. You know (continued
Parthenissa) that his good mien yields to none but to Two which are in this
Chamber; and yet I found it as remarkable for the change, as it had been for
the perfection. As soon as Arsaces had acquainted him I was come to give him a
visit, he raised himself faintly up, and with a languishing voice told me, I
know not Madam, with what design it is you do me this honor; is it either to
see the effects of your Power, or to increase them? It Is (I replied) purely
from my King's Commands, that you derive this visit; and if mine have any
influence over you, do not I beseech you, by continuing so ill, necessitate him
to command from me another. Alas Madam (said Surena) why do you then by your
sight give me so great a dis-invitation to obey you? who can see your Beauty,
and resolve to banish himself eternally from it? your Eyes destroy what your
cruelty makes me elect; and had I not had the felicity of beholding you now, my
sufferings in few days had made me obey a command, which your words has not now
more plainly told me, than your usage has. Yes Madam (he continued) since it is
impossible to decline my Flame but with my Life, I am taking that fatal and
only way of extinguishing it; and I hope in a short time so to change my
condition, that it shall render me as worthy your Pity, as my ill Fate has
rendered me unworthy your esteem. That Death (I replied) which you seem to
imply, is not to obey, but injure me; and I had rather endure your
importunities, than avoid them at that rate; it is your change, not your ruin I
desire. Ah Madam ( Surena answered) the impossibility that any Beauty can
transcend yours, is not greater, than whilst I live, that I can decline
adoring it; and if I vowed your Eyes could act all things, I excepted the
impossibility of their quenching fires, which they themselves inspired: that
miracle is denied them by a power, which renders that deficiency a greater: so
that if you command me to live, you consequently command my Passion to live
with me; and you must resolve to suffer the effects of the latter, if you
enjoin the continuance of the former: I tell you (Madam) ingenuously what you
must permit, if you permit me to live, That either I may put a period to my
Torments, by putting a period to my Life; or not be deluded into fresh Miseries
by fresh Expectations, which will vanish as soon as my sickness does, and add
to the Miseries of losing my Cure, that of losing my Hopes. So resolute a
demand (continued Parthenissa) was so far from inducing me to say more in his
favor, that it made me repent I had said so much; which I had no sooner told
him, than Arsaces demonstrated as great a despair, as what I had said, did
involve Surena in. And truly the King by such moving conjurations and
humblings, so far transported me beyond my resolution, that the conclusion of
our visit was a promise I made Surena of a pardon for all was past. But le^t
this might invite him to actions that might need it again, to qualify my
forgiveness, I told him, he derived it only from Arsace's commands, and his own
condition. He pressed me extremely before I left him, to say he derived it
immediately from me; but that I was so far from telling him, that it made me
profess, if he was not satisfied with what I had already spoke, I should rather
recall my concession, than any way increase it. Surena (as he said) by this
visit, was in few days able to pay me one, which he did, and entertained me
with retributions, not desires. To invite him to a perseverance therein, I used
him with much more Civility and Freedom than either his offense or my
resentment for it had made me formerly practice: Neither was I out of hope, but
that receiving favors, when he desired none, and none when he desired any, his
reason might invite him then to what it should have done before. I must
acknowledge, I could hardly have been civil to him upon any other score; and I
had had no small difficulty to persuade my modesty to listen to such constant
expressions of Gratitude with satisfaction, but that I found it less troublesome
to hear his thanks, than his request; and to have him acknowledge obligations,
than desire them: For a quarter of a year Surena gave me no other troubles, but
those of his Visits; but then he began to add to them, those of his accustomed
importunities; I know not whether he believed, what I had elected to suppress
his addresses, was to invite them; or whether those Civilities I did him to
reward his silence, was to solicit the breaking it; but I know, if these were
his Thoughts, as soon as he revealed, he had no reason any longer to retain
them; for I gave him so resolute a reprehension, that he found I had been kind,
but to keep him from imploring my being so; and that he could not elect a more
certain way to be denied my affection, than to solicit it; I cannot certainly
acquaint you whether this usage, or some internal infirmity which then began to
manifest it self, was the cause of his Sickness; but I can, that suddenly
after, he fell into a very dangerous one; and though it were equally so to his
former, and that Arsaces did me the honor constantly to visit me; yet he never
desired I should do so to Surena: But the satisfaction I received thereat, I
soon observed, was too dearly purchased; for in some four or five successive
visits, I observed Orodes had so incessantly his Eyes fixed on mine, and uttered
such disordered and disjointed discourses, that I began to doubt what his next
seeing me made me but too certain of: for after all the Court which waited on
him, were retired into a Gallery contiguous to my Chamber, Arsaces spoke these
words, with as much trouble as I heard them. Madam, Though you should
infinitely admire that I do not now solicit you for my dying Friend; yet I do
as much, that I have done it so long, and that I should employ those prayers
for another, which your Beauty makes me stand in need of for my self: I believe
fair Parthenissa (he continued) you cannot so much admire at my making now this
declaration, as that I did it not sooner; and the greatest wonder next your
Beauty, is, that I have so long declined adoring it: whilst my Love was
kindling, my Friendship transcended it; but now it burns, it has consumed my
Friendship, and I fear will consume me, unless you afford me as much Love, as
you inspire. This assurance cannot be more confident than true; and I esteemed
I had no higher motive to induce you to save your King, than to acquaint you
that you have the power to do it. I believe (said Parthenissa, to her generous
Auditors) by your own surprise, it will not be very difficult to persuade you
of Mine; but as soon as the first disorders of it were a little mitigated, I
turned my Eyes toward the King, and sound those I had so lately suppressed
could not transcend those which were visible in him; and though this gave me
too palpable an assurance of a Truth, which none could have been more ambitious
to have discovered, than I was troubled to have done it; yet I told him: This
discourse (Sir) which you have made me of your Love, is doubtless to revenge my
not conferring mine on Surena; and I consider this Raillery with joy, as my
belief, that it is the only penance you will impose on the necessity of my
disobedience. I rather hope ( Arsaces replied) that your esteeming that a
Raillery, which I now tell you in so much earnest, is the only penance you will
prescribe me, for not having told you of it sooner: or if you esteem me so
unworthy the honor of your Conversation, as in it to speak any thing
unserious, your Beauty might more justly have made you assume that thought,
when I did implore your bestowing it on another, than when I do, your
conferring it on me: But Madam, if you believe it as great an injury to your
modesty to acknowledge your conquest, as I know it is to your Eyes to decline it;
yet your reason cannot be but convinced of your victory, when I assure you I
have seen Surena languish with as little reluctance, as you have done it; when
even his silence pleaded for him, as much as his conditition: for I suspected
he kept it, out of a knowledge that I was become his Rival, which he has
discovered either from my not persevering his Intercessor, or my sighs, which
are now more inflamed than those of grief used to be, has told him, what I had
not the confidence to do. This proceeding, fair Parthenissa, affords you no
low, nor perhaps unpleasing Character of my Passion; for at the same instant
that I but implore your affection, I act your revenge, which gives me a hope
that what obliges you, cannot be detested by you. These words he animated with
so passionate a tone and action, that even those did also speak: but as I was
about to do so, I was relieved by the fair Zephalinda, in whose presence
Arsaces entertained me a while in words of a contrary quality, either that he
would conceal his Passion from all, or particularly from Surena's Sister; and
though the King continued a while in my Chamber; yet by the disorders and
disjointedness of his discourse, I found how much he was troubled, that
Zephalinda had interrupted him. But he could not be more offended thereat, than
I was satisfied; for thereby I procured some time toward the forming my
answers, and the course I was to follow in this new emergency; for I was
hopeful to improve his passion to a better end, than that for which he had
assumed it; and make it the means of bringing Artabbanes to Parthenissa, which
was designed to deprive him of her. As soon as Orodes was retired, Zephalinda
told me, At last Madam, I believe I shall make my visits prove what hitherto I
fear they did not, a satisfaction to you, proportionate to that I receive in
paying you them; for but even now I have had the effect of my incessant
solicitations: Surena has given that to my Prayers, which he should long since
have done to Reason and Virtue: Yes ( Madam) he has protested to me by what he
adored, as much as now he does but admire, That if he has any Passion for you,
it is only to serve you, and that he will employ as much Care and Art for your
union with Artabbanes, as he has done to binder it; and I am come to implore
you from him, to give him a visit, that he may give you those demonstrations of
his conversion, which may induce you as much to believe the reality of it, as
already I do. I know not (said Parthenissa, prosecuting her discourse) whether
it be the nature of all my Sex, to fear the Truth of what they most desire; but
I am certain it is mine; and consequently I had many pregnant jealousies, that
Surena but seemingly yielded that to his King, which he really preserved for
me; and that what he now did, was an action of Policy, and not Conversion: I
was often about to tell Zephalinda my doubts, but left they might be an offense
(which mine own defects, and Arsaces letting me know Surena did not know his
Passion, made me the apter to fancy), I did at last, (more convinced by
Zephalinda's Prayers, than Reasons) condescend to visit her Brother, into whose
Chamber I was no sooner come (for yet his indisposition made him keep it) then
staying his Sister, and sending all the rest out of it, he told me, with a
confidence which I believed nothing but Truth could put on, at least that a
Lover could not, speaking to his Mistress: That I have had a Passion, Madam, for
you, is not so strange, as that I now divest my self of it; and those hopes
which despair should have made me lay down, I do now, by way of reparation for
their having been so offensive and dangerous; I am also so sensible of having
interrupted a Passion, which I now as much esteem as I have envied; that I find
as transcendent a satisfaction in having mist my desires, as I should in having
obtained them: Those Prayers therefore which I hitherto employed for your
affection, I do now, Madam, for your Pardon, which is now as necessary to my
Life, as that was to my Felicity; which you may establish without being
obnoxious to your own; formerly you were to be vicious to make me happy, now
you are but to be virtuous to do it; your Inconstancy then could only be my
cure, but it is your Mercy now that only can be so; which to obtain, I protest
by all the gods, and by those which are more particularly concerned in the
punishment of perjury, I will never have any desires for you, but to see you by
an Hymeneal union in his embraces, who now, and never but till now, I esteemed
the least unworthy of you. What need I tell you more (said Parthenissa), than
that Surena by such expressions and vows gave a beginning to that Faith, which
in progress of time he so well improved and settled, that his change was as
absolutely my belief, as desire. But what the Favorite declined, the King
assumed, and I read the greatness of his Love, by the conquest it had obtained
over his Friendship; he gave me besides some signal evincements of it every
day, though I was not a little diligent to retrench all opportunities, that by
my actions I might acquaint him with my intentions, which I esteemed the
civillest and certainest way of denial. I must acknowledge I was both satisfied
and troubled at a Passion so replenished with respect, as that of Orodes was;
for though on the one side, it secured me from those violences, his power and
flame might inspire him with; yet on the other, it hindered me from suppressing
his hopes and importunities. Surena being recovered of the indisposition both
of his Body and Mind, gave me as many visits under the notion of a Friend, as
he had done under that of a Lover, and as a fresh evincement he was no more the
latter; he told me one day, Certainly, Madam, the gods are not a little
concerned in the having me lay down my Passion, by ordaining two things for the
reward of that performance, which I most ambitioned, That of obliging you, and
Orodes; who has this morning disclosed to me a Flame I should have wondered at,
had he not told me, 'twas you that inspired it: By the experimental knowledge I
have had of your Beauty, I was not so much surpised at that declaration, as
when after he had made it, that he could conjure me to pardon his being my
Rival, and that I would no longer continue his: I esteemed it strange, that he
which resented the influence of your Eyes, could think me capable of not doing
the like; and that I should decline the power of a God, to obey that of a King;
I told him this, but to indear an obligation I had prophetically conferred on
him; but after I had cast him into Troubles, great enough to let him know those
my obedience would involve me in, I assured him of it. Truly Madam, he
contracted a joy so great at the promise I would lay down my passion, that I
believe nothing can transcend it, but an assurance that you will accept and
reward his. I did this readily, that he might conclude 'twas with willingness,
that thereby convincing him I was no longer his Rival, I might become his
Confident, and pay you those duties, which one more concerned in his Interest
than yours, would never do; I had also this farther hope, that since out of a
respect to him, I could divest my self of my Flame, it might upon the generous
Artabbanes's return, take from Arsaces all excuses of continuing his; since it
manifested there was actually a Power in your Adorers to decline that Title,
which without this President, he might have alleged was an impossibility. I
knew not (continued Parthenissa) whether I had cause to resent this as an
obligation; for though as Surena stated it, there might be some possibility of
its success; yet that was so small, as it left it disputable whether there were
any, or no; for examples of virtue are more often commended, than practiced by
those, who promise themselves a higher satisfaction in declining their
imitation; especially too, when the quality of the Person preserves him from
suffering, but in Men's opinions; whereas if Surena had still pretended an
Affection for me, it might have denied Arsaces a liberty, which this Concession
absolutely afforded him; and thereby, by having two Lovers, have been preserved
from having one: I let Surena know this was my opinion; but he was so wedded to
his, that he assured me, were he to act his part again, and had only heard
those reasons, and not that they were Mine, he had followed his own, which
nothing could induce him to believe, were the worst, but my thinking them so.
At length Arsaces, convinced that Surena was not his Rival, made him really his
Confident, who so artificially acted his part, that he satisfied us both; and
to make his King the less solicit me, he gave him still better answers from
me, than ever were given him by me: I yielded to this Proceeding by Surena's
advice; who pretending the greatest knowledge in Orodes's humor, made me esteem
him the fittest to manage it: But whilst the Court of Parthia was in this
Condition, the Kingdom was engaged in a bloody War: For the Tabienians knowing
their Crimes merited no Mercy, neither expected nor implored the King's; your
unfortunate difference with Surena, having rendered you incapable to command
the Army, and the generous Sillaces having declined that honor to restore us
your Company, it was conferred on Ariobarzanes, who you know is a Prince merits
that Title, and wanted success in nothing, but in what you had too much; I
cannot tell whether his desire to serve his King, or his hopes to become more
fortunate in the fair Zephalinda by the Oratories of Honor, than he had been
thitherto by those of Love, made him accept that Command; but I can, that he
did: and though by the situation of the Country, and the despair of those that
inhabited it, the War was protracted; yet Ariobarzanes had that consolation,
that he never lost an opportunity to fight; and never did fight, but he was
victorious: In the end his Courage and Conduct made him entirely so over the
Tabienians; but at his return from that victory, he found thereby he had
nothing facilitated another, which he a thousand times more ambitioned; for
Zephalinda was as incapable of having a Passion for any, as all that saw her,
were, of declining one for her. This internal War concluded; by the advance of
Pompey, an exterior one began: Orodes, and the Prince Pacorus, with a vast
Army marched to the confines of Armenia, and the Prince Phraates with another
into Syria, to infest the Roman Colonies, hoping that by making two Wars
abroad, they should hinder any to be made at home. I purposely omit telling you
what Complements Arsaces made me at his departure; and how he protested, if he
ambition'd Laurels, 'twas only to lay them at my feet. But by the as strange,
as sudden Peace Pompey made with the Armenians, he found himself necessitated
to advance with a part of his Army into Syria to fortify that of Phraates,
which abundantly needed it, by the Roman General's being more concerned to
relieve his Friends, than to make any new acquisitions. Pompey by this
re-inforcement of his Enemies, or called home by the dawning confusions in
Italy, settled his Affairs by Treaty with Orodes, and so returned to Rome, and
the King to Nineveh, where he was received in Triumph, his Flatterers alleging
he had obtained a victory, by not losing one to the Romans; Pacor^s had not so
much as this pretense to a triumphant reception; for he was entirely defeated
by the generous Artavasdes; who used his success so handsomely, that his very
Enemies did hardly envy, or deplore it. Surena, who amongst many others enjoyed
the benefit of his Civility, assured me it had produced the effect I mentioned.
The winter of this year, the Court constantly resided at Nineveh, and Arsaces
as constantly persecuted me, though I must acknowledge I avoided many
importunate days, by Surena's Art and Friendship. About this time there
happened an Accident, which though for a while it exempted me from Arsace's
Addresses; yet soon after it afforded him a Liberty to continue them with more
assiduity and hope: 'Twas the Death of his Queen; who having been in some
danger whilst she was in labor of Phraates, had solemnly protested, if Juno
Lucinia (who you know we acknowledge Guardian of the Genial Bed) would free her
from it, she would wholly sequester her self from the World, and dedicate her
the residue of her Life. This the goddess granted, and this the Queen
performed; and though the accomplishment of this vow was esteemed a great
misfortune; yet it was a greater, that she had not made it after the generous
Pacorus Birth. The solemnity of the funeral being celebrated for one Queen,
Orodes attempted to make another, by offering me that Title in such earnest and
pressing words, that I was as much troubled to find they were real, as another
would have been to have doubted it. Whilst the Queen was living, I had some
pretense to decline his Addresses, and to render that an impossibility from his
condition, which really was one from mine: Though he often told me, That his
Queen by having voluntarily banished her self from his Bed, had given him
provocation enough to make another assume her place: That though it were a
custom amongst the Kings of Parthia to have but one wife, yet it was not a law;
which though it had been, yet the cause of his infringing it, would
sufficiently apologize for it, and that my Beauty would render the preserving
that practice a stranger thing, than the violating of it. To this I answered,
That it was a pregnant evincement Bygamy was extreme odious, since custom
without law had so long hindered our Kings from it: That there was a sufficient
determent in the very act, since no penalty was imposed on the committing it:
That I should receive more horror from being the cause of violating so sacred
and ancient a Practice, than advantage by the honor I might thereby derive;
and that that custom of our Kings having but one wife, was so ingrasted in the
Hearts of all the Parthians, that I should not only be considered by them, but
by my self, as his Concubine, rather than his Queen: 'Twas with many
resembling-reasons, and as many pressing conjurations, that during the Life of
the Queen I preserved my self from that Title: But now the gods having removed
that pretense, they left me without any, especially since I had always
represented her as the greatest, and indeed as the only obstacle; which I had
done, not only by Surena's Counsel, but by that of my Reason; for I found none
so civilly unanswerable, nor so long like to continue so, as that. Orodes when
he made me the offer of a Crown, told me with it, that doubtless the just gods,
who knew the vastness and clearness of his Flame, had purposely removed all
obstructions that might hinder my rewarding it. This unexpected accident, and
his so resolute and pressing demands, cast me into great perplexities, which I
may justly term so, though they were created not from what I was to resolve,
but what to answer. At length, lest he might esteem my silence a Concession, I
told him, By giving me (Sir) too great an opinion of your Passion, you may
create in me a proportionate fear to receive it; for if as soon as your Queen
is in her Grave, you take another into her Bed, you will demonstrate how little
esteem you make of a Wife, and consequently make me apprehend being yours;
besides (Sir), so precipitate a proceeding, may induce the World to believe
'twas not the gods, but the King that removed his obstructions; I shall
therefore (Sir) conjure you, as you esteem my satisfaction, or your Kingdoms,
protract your desires till I may without prejudice receive them. Arsaces told
me I might rather create inferences of the greatness of his Flame, than Fears
of its reality, by his passing over all considerations which came in
competition with it; but since I did not decline, but suspend the recompense of
it, he would to satisfy my nice scruples, endure some days of Torment; for so
(he said) he must term all those, which he was to spend in the condition he
then was in. He withdrew himself not long after, and gave me leisure to reflect
on the cruelty of my condition; for if on the one side I resolutely
acknowledged my affection, and unalterable resolution for Arta^banes, I should
thereby not only eternally confirm his Banishment, and consequently not only
deprive my self of Him, but also of that deliverance which I solely and
absolutely expected from him, and so exasperate Orodes, that it would
inevitably (as Surena protested to me, who was perfectly versed in his Nature)
make him run to those extremes, which he could not think on without Horror; and
to prevent which, I had treated him with so little cause of disgust: and on the
other side, if I disclosed not my affection for you, I left my self by the
Queens unfortunate Death, not many days of disguisement, which would no sooner
be effluxt, than I must absolutely fall into one of those extremes I so justly
apprehended, and thithetto I had so artificially and painfully avoided. These
sad reflections, though they were much extenuated by the constant visits and
consolations of Lyndadory and Zephalinda; yet at length they had so efficacious
an operation on me, that by degrees they cast me into an indisposition, which
increased as the allotted-time for the King's mourning expired. The gods shall
be my witness, I implored them with constant Tears and Prayers, to send me some
such Sickness as might ruin this little and unfortunate Beauty, which was so
likely else to ruin me: I did this (generous Artabbanes) out of a true
character I had contracted of your virtue, which I concluded could not despise
one that wanted Beauty, but by having lost it for you; and who apprehended not
the losing your affection, in giving you an evincement as great as unfortunate,
of her own. Artabbanes by an action altogether humble and acknowledging,
interrupted his Princess, to make his words do the like, which to the best of
my remembrance were these: Though there are not any things I so passionately
ambition as the transcendent felicity of receiving testimonies of my Princess
esteem, and of satisfying her, I adore the Beauty of her Mind at least as much
as that of her Face; yet I had much rather be resolved of the former, and
convince her of the latter, by assurances and by vows, than by so fatal a
manifestation; neither would the gods give so undeniable a proof of their want
of omnipotency, as to destroy a perfection they cannot restore or repeat; 'twas
better a thousand times the criminal, Artabbanes, should lose his hopes, than
the world so unimitable a Beauty; and Arsaces could not be so unjust in having
so persecuting a Passion for it, as you, Madam, in wishing it so dear and
criminal a cure. I did not only (said the fair Parthenissa) with it that cure,
but rather than he should want it, I would have conferred it on him by my
Death; and 'twas but fit I should act that for the preservation of my
affection, which only can put a period to it. My Prince would have made her
some proportionate retributions to what had made him esteem it necessary, had
he not esteemed it more so, to obey his Princess, who imposed on him the
keeping of silence; and as a further confinement to it, she thus continued her
discourse: Whilst I was languishing away a Time which yet I thought much more
too short, than Arsaces the contrary; the generous Pacorus never left
soliciting his Father, till he had procured a second Army to repair the
disgrace of having lost the first; which he had no sooner obtained, than he did
too a Victory against the Armenians; which had wanted nothing of meriting that
Name, had it been won against the same General, to whom Pacorus had lost one;
but perhaps had he been present, who should have perfected his success, it
might have hindered it. Artavasdes thought he derived this Civility from
Symander, till he had protested he did that Truth from Parthenissa; whose words
and Story the Faithful Servant thus prosecuted. My indisposition (the Princess
continued) proceeding absolutely from that of the Mind, had a languishing and
slow operation on the Body, which the Physicians said nothing but time could
render dangerous. Arsaces having assumed this belief, the less inconveniently
to pass away the remainder of the Morning Year, or to usurp the Glory of his
Sons success, or (as he protested to me) to avoid seeing my indisposition,
which his sympathy would make him assume; with an Army raised in haste, he
marched so to the siege of Tygranocerta, which Pacorus the next day after his
Victory had besieged. Artabbanes to exempt the fair Parthenissa from an
unnecessary trouble, acquainted her how he had from the generous Ventidius,
received at large the relation of all those transactions in Armenia, which he
promised that night to Communicate to Sillaces. I have then (said the fair
Parthenissa) but to inform you, that Arsaces came to Nineveb before Pacorus and
Altezeera; which though he alleged was but to render her reception the more
considerable, was indeed to summon me of my inferred engagement, the last day
of his mourning, being that of his return. The continuance of my indisposition
gave me an accepted excuse, which I would have constantly purchased at the same
rate. Neither did I despair of both; and that which gave me those hopes was,
the having lost all Mine of your returns; for now 'twas above two Years, since
we had remained in a perfect ignorance of your Fortunes; which made me
apprehend Orode's affection for me, and his knowledge of mine for you, had made
him destroy what I wanted but the certainty of, to do the like unto my self:
But Surena by passionate Oaths of Arsace's innocence, removed my jealousies of
him; but nothing could my fears for you, which I hoped would have so impaired
my small Beauty, that by my loss of it, you had not suffered the loss of me:
But not long after I found the flattery of those imaginations, which Arsaces by
a visit entirely banished; for after he had commanded (having first obtained my
permission) all the Company to retire, he told me, That indisposition (Madam)
which I did hitherto consider as my punishment alone, I now do as yours also,
for the just Gods have imposed it on you, to revenge your not rewarding a Flame
as bright and pure as those Eyes, and that Virtue which created it. The year of
mourning, my fair Princess, is now expired; Your so long declining to be my
Queen, made my Mind wear that Livery, as much as my Body did, for the loss of
my other: let not your coldness make me any longer carry it; neither, Madam,
can you do it without publishing you have not delayed, but refused to reward my
Passion; for since to deny me my cure, you decline your own, that belief will
be with more reason assumed, than it can be rejected. Sir (I replied) you might
rather infer from the strange continuance of my indisposition, that the gods
are not a little engaged to prevent an union so unworthy the great Arsaces, and
consequently so apprehended by me: Therefore (Sir) you cannot consider that as
my punishment, which is both the gods and my desire; but could my receiving
your affection be as efficacious as you alledg, judge then, I beseech you,
thereby, how much I am concerned in not committing that fault, since to prevent
it, I decline not only my own cure, but my King's. You may, my fair Princess
(said Arsaces), rather conclude that your indisposition, if not sent you as a
punishment from the gods, is at least sent you as an evincement my Flame is
confined to you, more than to your Beauty; and that they are not a little
concerned in the manifestation of this truth, since they elect so dear a way to
evince it; and rather than not prove the greatness of the one, impair the
greatness of the other: If, Madam, I had the power to obey your Commands of a
longer expectancy, I should not implore their revocation; for the highest
honor next to obeying, is receiving them; do not therefore, fair Parthenissa,
expect a testimony of my respect, from what will give you an ill one of my
Flame; and believe it, Madam, that must be an impossibility, which your
commands and satisfaction cannot make me obey. He entertained me with many
professions and requests of this Nature, before he left me: And a little after,
Surena came to visit me; but with a Countenance as full of sadness, as my
Heart, which he brought no small accession to, by assuring me he feared our
Griefs had the same source: Alas, I found his apprehensions were but too justly
grounded, when he further assured me, that at his meeting Arsaces as he came
out of my Chamber, he had told him, that he now found what he had considered as
a delay, was a refusal; but that he was determined to make all those that meant
to delude him, find in the end that they did delude themselves. He said this
too (continued Surena) in one of those Tones which he uses when he is
unchangeably in earnest; which makes me conclude, he will shortly make use of
Power, to obtain what he cannot by Entreaty. Alas, Surena (I replied), is there
no way but Death to avoid a Tyranny I more justly detest? Truly, Madam, he
answered, I am confident there is no way of prevention left by Flight; for
under the Title of his future Queen, he has already given you a Guard, which is
not so much to defend, as to detain you; and could we deceive their
intelligence, or corrupt their Faith, what retreat could you propound? for all
the Kings of Asia would fear the receiving a Beauty, which unavoidably will
carry a War after it as great as it self; and by making a while their Kingdoms
a Sanctuary for you, render them in a short time none for themselves; for
Arsaces will employ all the forces of his Empire, to repossess what he values
more than it; which will hinder any Prince from so dangerous a Charity. I must
then (I replied) be my own Sanctuary; and the first insolence Arsaces offers
me, shall be the last; for when he loses the respect due unto my Sex, I will
lose that due unto his Quality, and let him know I lived only for Artabbanes,
which when I may no longer do in this world, I will go and expect him in
another, where all Power is employed to preserve, not persecute a generous
Passion. But, Madam (said Surena) should the gods call unto them the blessed
Artabbanes who is the cause of this Constancy, would not the effect then cease?
and might not Orodes expect your Affection, when you could no longer confer it
on his Rival? If, said I (much offended at so strange a question), the gods
call Artabbanes to a fitter residence for him, I shall esteem it so for me, and
soon after give him my Company, either by the help of my ^rief, or Resolution.
I had scarce ended these words, when I found Surena at my Feet, where in
expressions as humble, and moving, as his posture, he implored a fresh pardon
for having persecuted and injured a Flame so pure, that it showed him he had
acted a Sin, in only adoring the possessor of it; which to repair, he would
leave no means unessayed; and if all others failed, he would involve the
Parthian Empire in as great troubles, as the King of it could involve me. This
proceeding made me change those words into retributions, which I intended to
have employed in reproaches; which his seeming solicitation for the King, made
me esteem him worthy of Surena was as much satisfied with my Gratitude, as I
was with the cause of it; and to misemploy no time, he went immediately to
Arsaces to search further into his resolutions. All that day, and the next, I
heard nothing either from him or the King; the last consoled me for the first;
but the night of the Third, Surena came into my Chamber somewhat late, and told
me, That the cause why he had not so long visited me, and why he then did it at
so unseasonable an hour, was to do me service, and to bring me the News he had
done it. For (said he) at length, Madam, I have persuaded Orodes that your
coldness proceeds from your indisposition, of which you might be soon
recovered, did you but change the Air: That the Castle of Eden (which stands in
the Island that bears the same name) is a place whose strength and situation
was as fit for your cure, as safety; and that if with your Sickness, you did
not cast off your disdain, there would be then no excuse left you, and a
sufficient one given him to act his desires by those ways he should imagine
soonest feasible and conducive to them: I was, Madam (continued Surena),
necessitated to give him hopes of success, to hinder him from acting it; and
'twas thereby that I have procured your license to go into this Castle, where I
shall have more opportunities to act your security, than I can have here; for
the Garrison (as the Castle) is mine; and if Orodes should continue his Passion,
I hope so to order your affairs, that you shall never be the Sacrifice of it. I
made Surena many retributions proportionate to the obligations. The next day I
had the honor to receive a visit from the Princess Altezeera, who was newly
come to Nineveh; in whose Person and Conversation, I found almost Charms enough
to suppress that dissatisfaction I had contracted for her inconstancy to the
generous Artavasdes, who I knew could not but deserve her Love, because he did
possess Artabbanes's Friendship. I was disenabled from making her my
Retributions at her own Appartment, or making a greater acquaintance with her,
which my first seeing her gave me a passionate desire of; for the King, intent
upon every thing which might probably contribute to my health, the succeeding
morning gave me a visit, and conjured me, as he condescended to every thing for
my satisfaction, so by a resembling return I would reward his care and passion.
I was exempted from giving him any reply, by the arrival of Lyndadory and
Zephalinda, to whom I had given advice of my sudden remove, and whose companies
in my retreat I had desired, and obtained: Arsaces observing by their presence,
he could neither continue his discourses, nor expect any returns to them, led
me to a Gally which was provided for us, and then, as a civility, accompanied
us to the Castle of Eden, only (as he said) to see if there wanted any thing
for our reception. We had not many Furlongs thither; yet our ascending the
Current (because the violence of it) took up the whole Day; so that Arsaces
continued there all the Night, which (as Surena told me) he spent in giving the
Captain of my Guard (that followed me) instructions to prevent my escape,
should I have any such design; and promising to his care, recompenses, such as
nothing should transcend but his punishments, should he neglect it. The day
following, Artabbanes (taking away Surena's Garrison, alleging it unfit they
should be where his Guards were) after some assurances of his Passion, and
desires to receive and reward it, returned to Nineveb; which perhaps he did the
sooner, from a belief, that his absence would be as contributary to my health,
as any other prescription. The Isle of Eden is a place so replenished with all
the Beauties of Art and Nature, that doubtless the Jews (a Nation not very
remote), have some reason to justify it the situation of the Earthly
Paradise; for I believe it is as difficult to find in it a defect, as to wish it
an addition. For some Moons in this pleasing residence, we past a Life that had
no Clouds, but what our fears and sufferings for the absence of you two,
created; but to these not long after we added that of Orode's Company, who one
day told me, he could no longer deprive himself of Mine, and that I must
prepare next morning to return to Nineveh, to assume a Title I had but too long
declined. Though I made many pressing implorings to suspend a little longer my
return to a place which had so much endangered my health, and my leaving one
had so much restored it; yet he was as deaf to my Prayers, as I had been to
his; for immediately he gave order for my removal next Day, and the same went
to Nineveh (as he said) to make my reception the less unworthy of me. Surena
begged his permission to remain in Eden that Night, to do the last honors of
his House, and to wait on me in my return; but Arsaces, either from wilfulness,
or suspicion, would not permit it. They were no sooner gone, than Zephalinda
and Lindadory came to my Appartment to consult on so great an extremity, which
was the more so, by Surena's necessitated and unexpected remove; on whose
advice and promises, I had established my greatest confidence; but alas, we
found in our consultations rather subjects of despair, than relief; for the
more we reflected on my danger, the higher we always found it. At length I told
them, that what confined me from hopes of escaping, taught me what to elect;
and though the cruel gods hindered my being Artabbanes's; yet they had not the
power to hinder me from not being any others. This I spoke with a Countenance
which did speak my resolutions, and this immediately drew some tears into the
Princesses Eyes, which more troubled me, than to have acted the design that
caused them; whilst I was giving consolations, where it may be another had
needed them, there came a Stranger hastily into the Room, whom we no longer
thought one, than whilst he kept this disguise; for as soon as he had cast it
off, we knew him to be Surena, who in a disordered haste told me, Madam, the
concern I have in your Interests, makes me decline my own; for only to offer
you my service in keeping you from your Enemy, I have made the King
irreconciliably mine; for I have not only violated his Commands by leaving
Nineveh, but am resolved to repeat my disobedience, if the honor of yours
enjoin it me: In a word, Madam, Arsaces told me he can no longer decline a
blessing he has as much power, as will to invest himself in; and since to
evince the greatness of his respect, he has so long delayed it; to evince the
greatness of his Passion, he will no longer do it; that the next day after you
return, he will make you his Queen, or if your coldness do decline so
satisfying his desires, you will thereby invite him to the same end, though by
a much differing way. These, Madam (continued Surena), were his very words;
which he accompanied with so many horrid oaths, that he has rendered it a less
crime to act his sin, than to decline it. I am therefore come to offer you a
Life for the preservation of your Loves, which has been too much employed to
distract, and ruin them; I present it you as much to repair my crime, as to
hinder my King from acting his, which nothing but some sudden and brisk
resolution can prevent; were we but out of this Island, I durst promise you a
retreat in a Kingdom, where I hope you may one day Reign; for Merinzor, the
most considerable Person in Media, now Moneses and Artabbanes are out of it, is
so much my friend, and so much more one to virtue, that were we but there,
Arsaces must take that great Empire, before he take you: This I dare engage my
self for; though I have practiced the obtaining Merinzor's affection, but only
since I apprehended the violence of my King's, would render it useful and
necessary to you. We had (said Parthenissa) after Surena's assurance of a
Sanctuary, a thousand propositions how to recover it; and that which gave me
the greatest approbation for that which he propounded, was, that Media could
not but have many servants to Artabbanes, who by the Laws of it, and Nature,
was one day to wear that Crown; Zephalinda advised, that by some device or
other, Orodes might be again drawn to visit us, and then that Surena should
seize upon him, and make his liberty the ransom of Mine, and her Brothers; with
whom, and with her, I might retire into Media; Lyndadory approved this advice,
so she might be of the Company; which she alleged might perhaps bring some
security to it, by her being Daughter to a Prince, whose memory there, was in
as great as just veneration; she added too, that by my taking some Physic,
whose operation should be visible when Orodes came to visit me, I might not
only confirm him my remove was dangerous; but purchase time enough for Surena
to draw in force enough to secure us from the King's: We had doubtless elected
this design, had not Surena said, That 'twas a thing impossible to delude a
jealous Lover; that the effects of an indisposition manifested in that
conjuncture of time, would appear rather a Sickness assumed, than befallen me:
That to take the King Prisoner would raise him an Army, which might make me
his; since many would fight for his liberty, which would not for his obtaining
forcibly his Mistress; and if I counterfeited an indisposition, Arsace's Love
or Jealousy, would keep him perpetually near me, and so render my Flight as
impossible, as desired; but (said Surena) if all these Reasons were disputable,
yet this is not, That by violating my King's Command in coming hither, I have
so exasperated him, that he will never trust himself in a Place, where I have
both the Power and Provocation to repeat my Disobedience. Therefore he
concluded there was no other way, but immediately while the Night contributed
to their assistance, under a pretense of giving the Guard their
farewel-entertainment, to give as many of them Wine, as had not reason enough
to refuse it; then to fall upon those who were able to resist, and by their
Deaths force a passage to our Freedoms, which having obtained, to make Media
the feat of it. There was nothing (said Parthenissa) I scrupled at in this, but
the destroying those Persons, whose Fidelity to their King was their only
Crime; but the necessity of my condition, made me at last condescend to what
(next being false to Artabbanes) I most apprehended; only I passionately
conjured Surena to spill no more blood, than was of necessity to be shed for
our deliverance. To be brief, Surena without his disguise, went to the Captain
of my Guards, to whom (he said) Arsaces had expressly sent him from Nineveh, the
next morning to wait on me thither, which the other easily credited, knowing
his King's Passion for me, and his Friendship for Surena; who entertained the
deluded Officer, till some of his Servants had made all those of the Guard
drunk, that had a mind to be so; about Midnight when all was buried in sleep
and silence, but those which knew the Design, and those which had the Guard,
Surena with all his Domestics fell upon them, and though his Numbers exceeded
theirs; yet their Captain, who knew how certain a Death his defeat would be
from his Enemies or his King, so briskly disputed his Fate, that Surena began
to doubt his own; which to decide, he resolutely Charged the Captain, who he
found was the Sold of his Party, and whom, after a long and bloody dispute, he
left dead upon the place; all the Soldiers Courages fell with their Officers,
so that Surena remembering my pressing desires, saved their Lives; Surena
covered with Blood and Victory came to my Chamber, and begged me so to employ
the latter, that before Orodes could know his action, we might be where he
could not revenge it. I told him, this was a request fitter for me than him,
and that I left the ordering of my liberty to the Bestower of it; he desired me
then by the dawn of day to be ready, by which some Chariots, and my Equipage
should be; to hasten which, he left me. We were too much concerned in our joy
to lose the solemnizing of it by sleep; and whilst Surena was contributing to
convert our hopes of safety into an actual one, his generous Sister, yours, and
I, entertained one another with the rare and high effects of his Friendship;
and with the proportionate obligation I had unto him for them.

Symander was in this place of his relation, when it was interrupted by what
made his Auditors think it no misfortune; For 'twas by the confused running in
of diverse Priests of Venus, who came to acquaint their Superior, that the Dome
of the Temple was filled with Lightnings, as bright as ever their Goddess's
Eyes did shoot; that the foundation of the sacred Vault trembled; and in a
word, that all the symptoms of the Oracles being restored to the liberty of
speaking, were so visible, that none with reason could apprehend the contrary.
Callimmachus by an erection of his eyes and hands, acknowledged his gratitude
to her, and his concern in our Hero's, whose Pardons he begged (for Artabbanes
by this time was come out of the Gallery to participate in the News) that the
function of his vocation would not permit him to wait on them again till the
morning; to which he added, that he hoped they would the sooner grant it him,
since his absence was necessary to the learning of their Fate, which the next
day he told them infallibly they should. With this flattering assurance, he
left the generous Lovers; who, whilst Callimmachus was employed in preparing
the Sacrifices, were in discoursing what effects they could produce.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FOURTH PART.
The Second BOOK.
OUR Hero's, who that Night had slept as little as the Sun, were too as early
up; and he had not long gilded with his Beams, the Pinacles of the Temple, when
the Chief of it, came to advertise them, That within an hour the requisite
oblations would be ready: He brought in with him the Chyrurgeons, who assured
the Princes, that they had made their danger the greater, but to render so, the
certainty and suddenness of their recovery; and that they might not only go and
receive the Oracle themselves; but if it commanded them a journey, they might
too perform it: Neither did they only make these assurances, but by taking off
their Plasters, evinced their truth; which as much surprised as pleased those
that had received the wounds, and Callimmachus, who was no less concerned in
them, who conjured our Princes to reflect on the cure of the Body, as an
earnest of that of the Mind. Artabbanes, who was the most desperate Patient in
that sickness, gave Callimmachus such a reply, as he was forced to tell him,
Your condition (generous Prince) cannot be worse than Mine has been; for I have
adored a Beauty with a Passion, both which never knew any Superior; and though
the gods called her to them in as fatal a way as every they could the fair
Parthenissa; yet those powers have demonstrated theirs, in giving me afterward
a quiet, which made me envy no ones else: They cannot be gods were they not
Omnipotent; and being so, to doubt their goodness, were to invite them not to
manifest it. Artabbanes and Artavasdes were both extremely satisfied to learn
an assurance of so strange a truth, from a mouth they could not doubt; which by
demonstrating there were ways of felicity in Love without fruition, made them
no longer believe That an impossibility, which their having till then done, had
created their greatest Torments: And doubtless they had then obtained from
Callimmachus a Story which was so requisite to the ease of their sufferings, as
the relation of his, would probably have proved, had not the Sacrificers come
in at the same instant, to tell Callimmachus, That they now expected but his
presence and Commands, to begin their Duties. This Summons placed a suspention,
though not a period to our Hero's curiosities; which they had no sooner told
Callimmachus, than he promised, having heard their Adventures, to acquaint them
with his own. Immediately afterward he retired himself to put on his
Pontifical Habit; which having done, he returned to our Princes; who then
perceived in his Mien, that Grace and Majesty, which till his having acquainted
them he was of the Noble Society of Lovers, they had not observed; and indeed
they were so entirely taken up with that contemplation, that not only they
esteemed him worthy the high Title he possessed of Prince to the Priest of
Venus; but they had even forgotten in that employment, how that by the duties
of his, they were then to learn their Fate. But Callimmachus himself put them
in mind of it, by conducting them down a large Staircase, built of Marble,
which delivered them into a broad Walk, bordered on either side with five Rows
of Cypress and Myrtle Trees, promiscuously planted, which were watered by two
Springs, whose pretty murmurings pleased the Ear, as much as their clearness
did the Eye, or their coolness the Taste: And though the sides of this Walk
were so well adorned, yet the extremities of it were much better; for at the
East end, stood the Temple it self: and at the West the dwelling of the
Priests, which in a Cressant extended its two Horns to each end of the Myrtle
and Cypress Trees. 'Twas in this vacuity that our Princes found all the
preparatives of a Sacrifice, which was to procure them an Oracle they had with
so many impatiencies expected. The Prince of the Priests was no sooner seen by
the rest, than immediately they directed their steps to the Temple: The first
that moved, were Two hundred Religious Men, with Garlands of Roses and Myrtles
on their herds; and in each hand the Effigies of a Flaming Heart, to evidence
the Goddess they adored was the Queen and Inspirer of Love. After these
followed Fifty white Bulls, and as many white Heifers crowned with Garlands of
Annemines, in celebration of Venus's changing her fair Adonis into that flower:
These were led by a Hundred young Men in clothes as white as those Nature had
given the Beasts they held; Fifty Maids in the same Livery carried in their
hands as many pair of Turtles: And after these, Fifty others carried in Silver
Cages as many Swans. These were followed by the Augurs and Victimares; the
former, bearing a Celestial Globe as a Badg of their Profession; and the
others, some Sizers of Gold, some Sacrificing Knives, and some Axes of Silver,
as a Badg of theirs. Those Youths which carried the Wine and Milk, followed two
and two, in their places and order; and last of all, some Ten paces before
Callimmachus (who was followed at that distance by our Hero's), there went the
Virgin who was to deliver the Oracle. She was blessed with so much Beauty, that
she appeared a fit Servant for the Queen of it; her Robes were as white as her
thoughts; the tresses of her Hair were so bright, and long, that they merited
better to be converted into a Constellation, than Berenices did; they were tied
up with Delphian Laurel, and wreathed Garlands of the same crowned her Head:
'twas in this order the generous troop arrived at the Temple, whose Front
extended it self from North to South a Hundred and fifty Geometrical Paces; at
whose extremities were two Pavilions, whose Pinnacles seemed to lose themselves
in the Clouds. The Walls both of these, and the Curtain, were adorned with
great Branches of Foliage carved in the stone; and in a large Compartiment
composed of Groteskery, were seen Sphynxes, Harpyes, the Claws of Lions, and
Tigers; to evidence, that within inhabited Mysteries and Riddles. Over the
Portal was a table adorned with a larger Compartiment, wherein there was in big
Letters of massy Gold, inchased into a great square of Porphyre, this
Inscription: THE TEMPLE OF THE GODDESS OF LOVE, AND OF WHAT INSPIRES IT. On
each side of the Portal, there arose from the Earth two square Basements, the
Plinth of each of them was beautified with Sculptures of great Relieve; one of
them was crowned with the Statue (in Pharian Stone) of the Boy the Goddess
brought into the world: And the other in Corinthian Stone, of the Boy she loved
best in it: Our Hero's had hardly leisure to consider these few exterior
imbellishments amongst so many others, because Callimmachus having given the
Signal, the Sacrificers and Victimaries stopped their march; and having ranged
themselves and their victims on either side the way, made a large one for their
Prince, who still followed by Artabbanes and Artavasdes, went into the Quire of
the Temple; which immediately ecchoed with such diverse and harmonious voices,
that for a while all their faculties resigned up their Functions to their
hearing; but that Sense at length resigned its empire to the Sight, which
wanting Parthenissa and Altezeera, could not more nobly be entertained, than in
the adornings of the Temple. The first Table was Venus ascension out of the
Sea, much more white than that froth the Poets say she was composed of. Near
this was a much larger, where the happy Paris stood Judge of those Beauties,
whose perfections came in competition, by that Apple given at Peleus wedding,
by the Goddess of Discord. Never any Beauties more justly merited that name,
than those the Painter had exposed to the judgment of the happy Son of Hecuba;
but yet the Artist had so much given the pre-eminence to her, to whom Paris
did, that he could not have declined doing so, without being as blind as her
Son. Opposite to this Picture was the Goddess's falling in Love with the fair
Anchises, who grazing his Herds, little thought how near he was possessing so
much Beauty, and being Father to a Son, whose Sword was to conquer as many, as
his Mothers Eyes. Near to this last Table, was the Beautiful Son of Cinyras,
who Venus more admired, than he did her; and in the same Picture was contained
all their Amors, how she wept his being killed by the Boar, or his being
drowned contemplating his own Beauty in the stream; for of both those some
learned Poets have sung. Lastly, her converting his dead body into an Annemine,
which she watered with her tears, and who by death being rendered incapable to
reward her weepings by kissing them away, seemed eternally to blush at so
unfortunate an impotence. In a word, all the real or imaginary Loves of that
bright Goddess, were so well represented by the Artist, that if she had no
cause to blush for her electing the originals, she had as little for avowing
them in the Copy; only indeed her unfortunate surprise in the Arms of Mars,
occasioned by a Passion as ugly as the Possessor of it, was there purpofely
omitted; but the wound she received from the cruel Diomed was not; esteeming it
perhaps a greater glory to evince, her blood gave a being to the lovely Rose,
than a shame or prejudice that a Deity could bleed.

But all these representations being rather evincements she was the Subject,
than the Goddess of Love; in other Tables were the illustrations of that truth.
There our Princes saw the volatile Jupiter, courting and possessing the fair
Io; the strange Metamorphosis the God made of her to conceal his Amors from
the jealous Juno; how in spite of his disguise she discovered them, then begs,
and obtained the transformed Io of her Lord, who grants what he durst not
refuse; how the Nymph was committed by the suspicious Goddess to the care of
Argus, whose hundred Eyes were too vigilant for the offended god, who to make
those Sentinels sleep eternally, that would not momentarily, sends down
Mercury, who by the charms of his Music, ends his vigilance, then with his
Sword ends his Life; how Juno, having first adorned the train of her own Bird,
with the Eyes of the unfortunate and faithful Argus, to let her god understand
she not only knew, but could revenge his Murder, makes Io as frantic as her
jealousy had made her; who yet runs with the same celerity over the world, as
she would to the embraces of her Jupiter. The Painter in another side of the
same Table showed, how the Heifer flew to her Father Inachus, into whose
trembling stream she leaps to quench her heat, and thirst; from thence he makes
her run into Egypt, where she resumes her former shape by the permission of
Juno, who had then received an assurance from Jupiter to abstain both from the
desires, and acts of love; the grateful Io in her true shape returns to let her
Father see it, that he might participate in her joy, as he did in her
affliction, which latter had so operated on him, that he had wept himself so
big, he was unknowable to his Daughter, as she had been to him; but at length,
maugre their new disguises, they knew each other, and Io having performed this
charitable duty, returns again to the Banks of Nyle, where her exterior and
intrinsecal Beauties, made the People which drink of that Flood, elect her for
their Goddess, under the name of Isis. In another Table was the same inconstant
God fallen in Love with the fair Daughter of Lycaon King of Arcadia; but
knowing that wars of Love are different from all other, since in those, the
conquest by yielding, is more pleasing th^n that by force; the god lays aside
his power, and finding one day the fair Calisto reposing her self after the
chase, under the friendly shadow of some Myrtle Trees, he assumes the shape of
Diana, whose Nymph she was, and in that Metamorphosis enjoyes felicities which
do more Metamorphose him; nay, he seems to esteem his power of altering his
shape, more than that of being a god, since the former afforded him
transcendenter delights in the fruition of his Calisto, than the latter in the
most powerful effect it could otherwise produce. In the same Table was
demonstrated how Diana discovered the loss of her Nymph's pudicity; how she
banished her from her Society; how the unfortunate Calisto was delivered of
Arcas; all which the suspicious Juno at last discovered, and in revenge
converted her Rival into a Bear, which Arcas once had killed a hunting, had not
Jupiter (taking pity of both) caught them up into Heaven, and converted each of
them into a Constellation. It seemed that the Goddess of Love took delight to
have exposed to the Eyes of Men, how much, and how often the great Jupiter was
her Votary; for there was another Table of his Loves with the Beautiful
Daughter of Acrisius, King of the Argives; who was so strictly imprisoned upon
her Father receiving an Oracle of his Death by her Son, that the amorous god
was necessitated to convert himself into a Golden shower, to quench his flame.
There was displayed in the same Table, Acrisius exposing his fair Daughter with
the young Persons to the mercy of that Element, from whence the Queen of that
Passion which created her fault, had her original; how she and her Son were
cast upon the Coast of Daunia, and how Pilumnus the King of it married her:
There was in another end of the Pictures, the three Gorgons, Medusa, Schenio,
and Euriole, with their Tresses of Snakes, and with their one Eye, with which
they Metamorphosed into stone all they beheld: In the same Table was Mercury
and Pallas, arming the valiant Perseus against these three Sisters; how he
found the eldest of them, and all her Snakes asleep, whose head he immediately
cut off, and placed in his Shield, with which he turned Atlas King of
Mauritania into stone, for denying him entertainment. In a word, there were all
the actions of this demi-god, how he conquered the Monster that would have
devoured the beautiful Andromeda; and how he himself was conquered by her; with
all those other Fables the Poets have so amply sung on this Subject. Two other
Pictures contained the Passions of the same god to the fair Europa; and his
assuming a Beast's shape, to act the sensual part of Love; and of the Platonic
Moon, who to posses Endimion, rendered him incapable to possess her but by
dreams: There was in other Tables the Amors of Aurora and Cephalus, with the
Death of the unchaste and jealous Procris; and to show the power of Love
indeed, and that the Sea it self cannot quench its flames, there were also
manifested at large, how the god of that cold Element fell in love with the
fair Amphitrite; how she fled his Passion, and how he sent a Dolphin after her,
who proved a successful Ambassador. And though all those Tables were so
admirably represented, that to know the Story, you needed but to see the
Pictures; yet there were two others which so entirely took up our Hero's
contemplation, that after the sight of them, they esteemed none of the
remaining ones worthy of theirs: The first was of a Beauty which could not but
be excellent, since in Artabbanes's own opinion she resembled the fair
Parthenissa. 'Twas that of the lovely Psiche, she that captivated the god of
Love himself; and was so long taken for Venus, that had she been immortal, she
had eternally (as she had for a time) robbed her of her Votaries and Altars; the
Artist had so well represented this Nymph, that it Authorized Venus's Envy, and
Men's mistake. There was in this representation, how the King of Milesia her
Father, by the command of an Oracle, abandoned her to the gods upon a Mountain;
how the Zephirs carried her on their wings into the fortunate Island, to the
Palace of Love, which till then, nor ever since, could boast of so admirable an
Adornment; how the fair Psiche's two Sisters, at her request were brought
thither by the Zephirs, who envying their Sisters felicity, persuaded her 'twas
not a god, but a serpent she blessed with her embraces; how the credulous
Nymph, contrary to her engagement, concealed a Lamp by her Beds side, with
which when the little god had stupify'd his Senses by too much satisfying them,
she resolved her doubts, but by so unfortunate a way, that a drop of Oil fell
upon Cupid, who immediately waked and flew away: There were further represented
the tragic Death of the fair Psiche's Sisters; The Miseries which after that
fatal Night befell her; her descent into Hell, and at length her ascent into
Heaven, to marry her god, who now had pardoned her crime, and thereby derived a
more sublime satisfaction from his mercy, than he could have had in his
revenge. The last Picture, which took up Artavasdes as much as the other had
Artabbanes's attention, was that of the lovely Leucothoe, who as much resembled
the fair Altezeera, as Psiche's did Parthenissa. This Table evinced, that Art
or Nature were admirable; the last, if it presented the world with such
originals; or the first, if it could fancy or describe them. This was the
largest representation of any there; for it first contained the Amors of
Phoebus and Clittie; how that the former having extinguished all his Flames in
the fountain of Love, lighted them again at the Eyes of the lovely Leucothoe;
well did that performance prove, that light, like virtue, loses nothing by
communication: for her fair Eyes possessed still as much light, as they had
given the Sun; Leucothoe seemed to have something of felicity in her
Countenance, which was derived, not so much from having ravished such a votary
from such a Nymph; but that Phoebus, who every day beheld all the Perfections
of the world, gave hers by his adoring them, the precedence: 'Twas admirable to
observe how the envious Sun, which fades all other Beauties, did but enlighten
hers; how his perpetual kissing her Breasts, and not melting them, abundantly
proved they had only the color, not the nature of snow; how it was a perpetual
Summer wherever Leucothoe was; how, if she flung her self under the protection
of Trees, they soon lost their treasure, for hindering the Sun from beholding
his; and how that Lover evinced by their immediate withering, that he could
burn all but her that did burn him; so constant, and so bright a Servant, could
not eternally be denied; Leucothoes coldness at length was dissolved, and
Phoebus in her embraces* received more joys, than the world does in his Light;
but alas, those felicities which fruition could not quench, weeping must; for
the abandoned Clittie assumes a rage proportionate to the loss which inspired
it, and in the dictates of that Passion, acquaints Orchamus (Leucothoe's
Father) with her stolen Amors; and though the betrayed Nymph in a posture as
moving as her tears, represented the glory of such an Alliance, and that to
please one of the gods, could not be a sin against the rest; yet the cruel
Orchamus buries her alive with her Crimes; the Sun frighted at such a Prodigy,
hides his face in clouds, and weeps such showers of tears, that the world by
his sorrow knew his Love. 'Twas well for Mortals that he was confined eternally
to his Ecliptic; otherwise, to act his revenge, he had descended on the earth,
and reduced all to the same Ashes, his dear Lucothoe was; which the Fates
having rendered him incapable of, he immediately converts her dead body into an
Incense-tree, whose sweetness seemed to reserve something of its first
principle; and though dead, as much to charm the smell, or when living, the
sight. In another place of the Picture was Clittie, who Phoebus now hated as
much as he had adored, running from one top of a Mountain to another, to
overtake and be near her Lover; who to deprive her of his sight, as well as
Company, or perhaps having put on mourning for the fair and unfortunate
Leucothoe, traveled still in a gloomy Cloud, which he had perpetually worn in
revenge and grief, had not mortals by incessant sacrifices, but especially by
those offered of the new Incense, obtained the gods command to assume his
former brightness, which at least he did; but then Clittie found her self
doubly burned by her heat, and by his; you might have seen her sometimes
threatening, sometimes imploring her Lover; now invoking his power, then his
justice; and finally, crying out, Either stay thy course, or give me the wings
of thy Inconstancy to overtake thee; her Prayers, her Tears, and her Cries,
operating no more on Phoebus, than that Nymphs she had betrayed, did on
Orchamus, she fixed her Eyes incessantly on her Lover, and by that Posture, and
her unmoveableness in it by degrees took root, and by the gods were converted
into a Marygold; who all day constantly gazes on the Sun, and all the night
turns her head toward the Earth; as if she strove to force a Passage with her
Eyes through the Center, to the Antipodes, not to be at any time deprived of
seeing her Lover. Our two Hero's found not only a resemblance in Beauty, but in
Fortunes, betwixt those two Nymphs, and their two Princesses: * For Artabbanes
was confident the gods had taken his Parthenissa from the Earth, but to marry
her to one of them in Heaven, as the lovely Psiche was; and in that Faith he
almost apprehended to go thither, since that could not but be Hell, where he
should see his Princess in another's Arms. And Artavasdes thought, that what
Orchamus had done to his Daughter Artabazus, or misfortune had done to
Altezeera, who he considered as buried alive in Pacorus's embraces; the gods
having deprived our Hero's of seeing their Princesses, the best felicity they
could allow them, consisted in seeing what so much resembled them; on which
they had as constantly, and perhaps as eternally fixed their Eyes, as Clittie
did hers on her Ph^bus, had not Callimmachus acquainted them, 'twas time to
offer the sacrifices of Perfumes and Turtles; which ceremony being ended, they
all went out of the Temple; and immediately the Prince of it having given the
signal, the essusions of Wine and Milk were made; some small tufts of hair
which grew between the Horns of the Bulls and Heifers, were cut with golden
Sizers, and flung into the Flame; which had no sooner consumed them, than in a
moment all the Beasts were knocked down by the Victimaries, and their Entrails
torn out, and presented to Callimmachus; who considered the Prophetical part of
them with so sublime a joy, that it forced him to whisper to our Princes, that
the gods without a Miracle, and without ruining the Laws they themselves had
established, could not long delay their felicities; for never were greater
promises in Victims, than in those. This assurance brought our Hero's different
Hopes, Artabbanes was joy'd in a belief that the gods would command him to act
his own Death, since he could not fancy any other way to quiet. And Artavasdes
interpreted he should derive his satisfaction from their removing Pacorus, and
placing him in his Felicities: but they were both diverted from any further
reflections, by the Augurs giving liberty to the Swans out of their silver
Prisons, who immediately directed their flight to Heaven, as to acknowledge
their deliverance from thence; and were intended thither as a sacrifice of
quicker ascension than that of Incense. All these solemnities being finished,
those which assisted at them, returned again into another Isle of the Temple,
where stood a Statue of Venus, which took up as much, and as justly the
Beholders admiration, as the Deity could which it represented; it was all of
Mosaic work, and the pieces cimmented with such excellent Art, that the most
critical Anatomist could not have missed so much as a Vein, a Sinew, or an
Artery. The Beauties of colors, of Air, and of Features, were as exact, as
those of Cimmetrie; and for Eyes, the Statue was imbellished with two such
refulgent Diamonds, that their very luster, like that of the Suns, hindered
them from being considered, but by reflection: and thereby rendered the boldly
contemplating the Deities face, as great an impossibility, as a Sin. 'Twas at
the feet of this admirable Statue, that Callimmachus prostrated himself, having
in the same posture on either of his sides, one of our Princes, who with
perfect attentions, and equal devotion, heard him deliver this short Prayer.

Fairest of all Goddesses! thou who first derivest that Title from Nature, and
then from Justice; Thou from whom all other gods receive their votaries, since
only by thy sweet influences, Mankind is created and continued, and sacrifices
too; behold prostrate before thee, two of thy votaries, who have never offered
on thy Altars, False, or double Fires, but have so constantly preserved those
wounds thy Son first made in their hearts, that ever since they were, and are
fit examples for thy subjects to continue such; Though even their sufferings
have at least proportionated their Constancy; do not great Goddess so justly
deterr Mortals from that virtue, as to render it the ruin of those who most
perfectly possess it; nor give those who already doubt thy Power or Justice, so
much provocation to continue their Sin, as thy continuing the misfortunes of
these Lovers will amount unto; but by investing them in felicities, as great as
the Beauties they adore evince, that the trial of Constancy, is not the
punishment of it.

Callimmachus having ended his Orizon, gave the Tripos to the Virgin, who on it
was to deliver the Oracle; and then with her and our two Hero's only, went to
the Vault, where they were to receive it; which was adorned with a Dome, That
shot it self so high into Heaven, that none which doubted not, that was the
residence of the gods, could doubt they inhabited in it. The Virgin at the
mouth of the Vault leaves those three which accompanied her thither; and, after
her devotions were finished, and that she had settled her self on the Tripos,
immediately the capacious Temple and sacred Grove were covered with obscure
Clouds; from whence strange Lightnings and Thunder derived their Birth; a
surious Earthquake shook suddenly the foundation of the Temple and Grove; the
Delphian Laurel which crowned the Virgins Head, fell off it; her Hair stood an
end and star'd; her Eyes rolled wildly; her Neck in a thousand turnings kept it
self in uncessant motion ^ her Heart beat against her Breast, as if it would
have forced a passage there; her Mouth foamed; and in a word, all the symptoms
that the Deity inspired and possessed her, were visible; but that which
rendered it no longer capable of doubts, was a shrill voice which filled the
sacred Vault, and delivered these words: From Parthenissa's Ashes I will raise
A Phoenix, in whose Flames thou shall be blessed:
Wait then about this Temple a few Days,
And all thy Torments shall be crowned with Rest.


Then after a short silence, the voice thus continued the Oracle: Despair not
Artavasdes, since the time
Predestined for thy Sufferings, is but brief:
Fortune unto thy virtue shall resign;
And perfect joy, succeed to equal Grief.
Go both and sacrifice to that fair Boy,
Who did inspire my highest Grief and Joy.


Callimmachus by a short but passionate ejaculation, acknowledged his joy and
concern in so favorable an Oracle, and then in repeated Sacrifices did the
like; which being finished, they returned from the Temple the same way they
went unto it, and in a deep silence; which the virtuous Priest observed no
more, when they were entered in our Prince's Appartment: For there by a
Thousand embraces he congratulated so clear promises from the Goddess of their
future felicities. It seems (said he) they knew your despairs were too pregnant
to give you dark and ambiguous answers; they have now left themselves no power
to continue your miseries, but by giving men a full liberty to suspect their
Justice; so that next the being possessed of your desires, you have the blessed
security of being so. The Oracle ( Artabbanes coldly replied) is very clear;
and it is as much so, that the Death the gods hitherto hindered me from acting,
they now promise me, by saying, Parthenissa is reduced to Ashes: They would too
have said, that all my Torments shall be crowned with joy, not rest, had they
designed me any blessings in Life; and the Phoenix they promise to raise from
that dead ones Ashes, is clearly the constancy of my Passion, in which I shall
be blessed by being consumed in the flames of it; and you are not ignorant, but
so unalterable and efficacious a love, is as rare as that Phoenix to which the
Oracle alludes. Callimmachus and Artavasdes both, admired at so strange an
interpretation; but the first of them, left their silence might seem to
authorize it, told him, If he which serves the Deity can best interpret her
meaning, or rather her expressions, I can find nothing in the Oracle, but what
is much advantageous for you: before this answer, you wronged but the mercy of
the gods in doubting your Joys; but now you must their Truth in any longer
doing it; for they promise a blessing to your waiting for it about this Temple:
If they meant your Death should be that Blessing, they would have permitted you
to act it, and not have contradicted themselves, by making your languishings
the way unto it: That word of Rest evidently implies a cessation from
sufferings and fears; and that Phoenix for ought we know, may be Parthenissa
her self, who perhaps is but dead to your Belief. Great gods! ( Artabbanes
cried out) she is but too certainly dead, Symander saw her so; and therefore if
you have no other interpretation of that Passage, I cannot but determine mine
to be the true one: They cannot accomplish their promise of Rest but by Death;
it is that only after the loss of Parthenissa, can give it me; they do not
assure me rest as the way, but as the end and Crown of my Torment; so that they
do not falsify, but perfect their Oracle, in giving me no cessation from
sufferings, but by that which confers it upon every one. Callimmachus, who
observed Artabbanes's despair did but increase by his attempting to qualify
it, only replied; I have seen those who built their Faith on a more firm
foundation than you do yours, and yet have been (as I hope you will be) happily
mistaken: The Oracle, I am convinced, promises those blessings to you, which we
must leave to Time and the gods to disclose; in the mean while, I esteem it
absolutely requisite, that you both obey their orders, by sacrificing in the
Temple of Adonis; They would not enjoin you that performance, were it not
conducive to that end they have promised. Artavasdes having given some
additional Arguments to the silencing of his Friends despair, and the creating
of his Faith in the best construction of the Oracle, at length extorted an
engagement from him, That without any prejudicate opinion of it, he would
expect the interpretation. The generous Armenian extremely satisfied with this
assurance, began to acquaint him that made it, and Callimmachus, That as soon
as he had performed his devotions at Adonis Temple, he was determined to make a
voyage into Parthia; for one of those Assassines which had been destroyed by
Artabbanes's Courage, had confessed as he expired, that the Prince of Parthia
had hired them to that attempt. This (he continued) makes me confident, Pacorus
esteems Altezeera guilty, when he esteems me fit to be so punished; and
believing her so, she may have occasion to employ my Sword and Life, both which
I will go and offer her; the gods too seem to invite me to it, by not confining
my residence about this Temple, as they have done Artabbanes's, who I am as
much troubled to abandon, as at that which makes me believe my doing so,
necessary; but as soon as I have found whether my suspicions be rightly
grounded, I will not fail to return hither, to be instructed in a Fate, I am
nothing less concerned in, than in my own. The gods (replied Artabbanes) cannot
but destine me some transcendent advantage, by enjoining my residence here, if
they but intend thereby to recompense the Misery of confining me from waiting
on, and serving Artavasdes in his intended voyage; but I am so well versed in
their inclinations for me, that if he will permit it, I will rather embrace the
assured blessing of accompanying him, than out of some ambiguous hopes, decline
so advantageous a certainty. Artavasdes found this as civil, as Callimmachus
irreligious; and Artabbanes found by their returns, that these were both their
beliefs. The generous Friend having absolutely declined the offer, and the
generous Priest having induced him which made it, to acknowledge he had been in
it as uncivil to the gods, as the contrary to Artavasdes, they began to think
on their intended journey next morning to the Temple of Adonis; which
Callimmachus said was not above Forty Furlongs from Hierapolis; and because the
day was not a little wasted in the precedent Sacrifices, and that some part of
it must be employed in preparatives for the future ones, both he and Artavasdes
conjured Artabbanes to enjoin Symander (who all the while was present) to put a
period to the relation he had begun. Artabbanes being satisfied, that in one
performance he could oblige himself, and those he as much desired to do the
like unto; to effect both, retired to the entertainment of his thoughts, and
left them to Symander's, who to obey their Commands, having first remembered
them, he was interrupted after Surena's success in the Castle of Eden, and that
still he spoke the fair Parthenissa's words to Artabbanes; thus prosecuted her
Adventures.

The sequel of Parthenissa's and Artabbanes's Story.
THe day (said the Princess) began but to expel the obscurity of the Night,
when Surena according to his promise, came into my Chamber, to let me know all
things for our intended journey were ready; but he was so pale and weak, that
Zephalinda, Lyndadory, and I, began to consider that strange alteration, as the
effect of a new Misfortune; but he assured us it only proceeded from some loss
of blood in his late Combat; that he found himself better able to perform a
journey, than he seemed to be; and that by riding in a Chariot, he should feel
no inconveniency, but what proceeded from being in a less fitting posture to
serve me. I must acknowledge he appeared in so sad a condition, that I not only
thought it less dangerous for him to endure a siege, than a journey, but told
him so; and though we jointly and pressingly conjured him to reflect on his own
safety, and that we would hazard ours by a residence with him, rather than so
much endanger his; yet Solicitations were fruitless; for he protested 'twould
be more hazarded by the danger of my continuing in Eden, or by his not waiting
on me out of it, and fetling me in a secure residence, than any other way: His
Chyrurgeon too assured us, he might without any great hazard travel in a
Chariot. This last operated more with us than all the rest; for we knew the
Laws of Surena's Civility obliged him to contemn all danger; but we knew those
of the Artist, as much obliged him to preserve his Patient from any; we
therefore descended into the Court, where we found all things in a desired
Posture, and some fifty Horse for our Convoy. Zephalinda and Lyndadory rode in
one Chariot, and Surena (by my reiterated desires) and I, rid in another; there
was a Third for our Women: but alas, we were not gone a furlong from the
Castle, when some Scouts came in, and with frighted looks, commanded the
Chariot-Drivers to turn back, if they had a mind to preserve themselves, or
those they drove. Surena at this Allarm, inquired the cause of it; which those
that brought it, told him, proceeded from 500 of the King's Horse, which were
come a round Gallop from Nineveh, had seized on all the Boats were to ferry us
over the Tygris, and were by their help transporting themselves into the
Island. Surena amazed at so fatal a Disaster, and as much, how what he had done
could already come to Arsace's knowledge, told me, We must, Madam, return;
unless you will rather endure the Siege of Orodes's Love, than that of his
Force: He had hardly said these words, when we perceived a cloud of dust, which
some of our Convoy that were most advanced, came running to tell us was the
Enemies Troops: this made us retire hastily to the Castle, into which we were
scarcely entered, when Surena fell into a Swound, and his wounds appeared so
inflamed, that a Chyrurgeon of our Convoy, who first at my cries ran to his
assistance, protested to me, our return was the happiest accident could have
arrived his Prince, for he could not have continued his journey, and his Life;
we had him therefore brought with great care, and no less haste, to his
Appartment, from whence we saw a Body of Horse, which came a full Gallop near
the Castle; where they drew up, and by waving their bright Swords, seemed to
invite those in it to a Combat which might change their color. There was in
Eden a young Gentleman called Arzimin, to whom Surena, as soon as he was
restored to his senses, committed the care of the Siege, till his own health
would permit him to assume it. Four days were spent in preparations for
defense; and the night of the last, there came into the Castle 500 Horse, and
as many Foot; who told us, That more by Art than by Force they had passed the
King's Army, which next morning faced the Castle, and sent a Herald to Surena,
who not being in a condition to receive his Message, sent Arzimin to do it; who
brought his Prince word, That Arsaces had sent purposely to know what
provocation he had received that could invite him to so precipitate and
dangerous a design; That though the highest Revenge would be but a
proportionate Justice for abusing his Authority and Favor; yet if he would
submit himself to the former, he would restore him to the latter. Surena
turning his Eyes toward me, seemed to implore the answer he was to make; but I
told him, I had referred all things, as well as my protection, to him; he
therefore commanded Arzimin to let the Herald know, That by reason of an
indisposition which rendered him incapable of making any return to the King
with his own hand, he was determined not to send any till he could so do it.
This he did to protract the time, and not to thrust Arsaces on extremes, till
Vixores (who Surena then told me was raising an Army of his Partisans) came to
his relief. The Herald delivered the King the Message he received, which
Arsaces considered rather as an affront than a respect; and immediately by a
Trumpet sent to know where our Appartments were, that he might prohibit any
shooting of Arrows at those parts of the Castle; which having learned, he began
by approaches to attempt the winning of a place, which contained in it the
objects of his most predominant Passions, his Love and Revenge. Above a Moon
was employed in bloody assaults and defenses, by which time Surena was so well
recovered of his old wounds, that he was in a condition to receive new ones;
which before he did, by a Trumpet, and a Gentleman, he sent the King a Letter,
which he first communicated to me, and which contained these words:

Surena, to his Sovereign Arsaces.
IF I have been so unfortunate, as seemingly to take up Arms against my King;
yet I am so happy as to be satisfied they are really for him. Your resolves
(Sir) to make Parthenissa yours, and hers to decline a Crown of Empire, for one
of Constancy, creates my performance, which I cannot call a crime, because it is
to preserve you from one. This only being the cause of my Arming, I esteemed it
not fit to divulge it, but rather appear a Rebel, than manifest your Passion is
one to you; when you can command it, you shall command both me, and those with
me; but till then, I must preserve you from what virtue should; and thereby
merit the honor of your favor, if I possess it not.


Arsaces detained this Messenger till he had formed a Reply, which he was not a
little troubled to do; for if he continued his Passion, he must the War, and
perhaps the despair of taking the cause of it; and if he seemed to decline his
Passion, he must violate his engagement, or what it may be he valued more.
Whilst this Dilemma was debating, the Army and Garrison were so too; for there
was during the Treaty, no suspension of Arms; and the Arsacians stormed an
Out-work, from whence they were beaten with loss and shame: Surena to let his
Enemies know he was well, and could use his success so, With the greatest part
of his Garrison, and himself at the head of them, made so resolute a charge upon
three great Squadrons of Horse and Foot, who were to justify the Assaliants
retreat, that he forced them all to a precipitate one; and doubtless had
carried his Success to a sublimer degree, had not Orodes in person with 3000
select Horse, first put a suspension, and then a period to his victory. We saw
all this from off the Castle, and that Surena did miracles in his person to
regain the victory, or it; but at length most of his Forces being cut in
pieces, or taken Prisoners, he followed the fate of the latter, which he
received from a Gentleman in black Armor. But we had hardly the leisure to
deplore so sensible a loss, since he that imposed it, did redress it too, by
not only giving Surena his liberty again; but by securing it, till he came to
the Graffe of the Castle: Surena had but few wounds for so many dangers he had
been engaged in; but of 1000 Horse and Foot which made the Sally, only two
hundred returned alive, and half of those by their wounds continued not so six
days. Our impatience to learn from whom both Surena and we had received so
signal an obligation, made us go meet him in the entrance of the Castle; where
he told us privately, that it was from the Prince Ariobarzanes, who upon his
knowledge of him, desired no other ransom for the restoring his freedom, than to
grant him his Pardon, and procure him Zephalinda's, for having deprived him of
it. This Gallantry both the Brother and Sister extolled, in terms as great as
it self; and the latter perhaps esteemed her necessitated ingratitude to him as
high a misfortune, as Artabbanes's was to her. The great loss we sustained by
his Sally, reduced us to a condition so deplorable, that Surena himself began
to apprehend it, and to confess his best consolation was, He should lose his
Life in a Service, in which he had vowed to spend it; and thereby if he could
not prevent my misfortunes, yet he should not live to see them. The morning
which succeeded this sad day, there came a Gentleman from the Camp attended by
a Trumpeter, who telling the Guards he was employed from the King to their
Prince, was admitted and received by him in the Court, where to conceal our
deficiency, all the Garrison but the Centries on the Line were assembled. The
Express presented from Orodes a Letter to Surena, which without opening he
immediately came and presented me in my Chamber, where Lyndadory and Zephalinda
were, to learn the effect of it; having there unsealed it, we found 'twas all
written with Arsaces's own hand, and contained these words:

Arsaces King of Parthia, To Surena.
THough the condition the gods have reduced you to, might invite me by
resentment, as well as justice, to employ my Power, rather than my Mercy; yet
because you attribute your crime to a service to Parthenissa, I shall esteem it
one to me, and not only pardon your having given her so bad a character of my
Passion, as what you have acted must make her assume; but to divest her of
Fear, and you of Excuse, I do hereby engage my self by all those obligations I
esteem most sacred, I will be so far from forcing her to be my Queen, that I
will not solicit it; and I would even give her leave to seek a Sanctuary under
some other King, did I not know that would but too much cloud the Government of
her own, which could not but be abhorred, when so much Beauty and Virtue should
be necessitated to implore a Foreign Protection.


This Letter gave me joys which were incapable of accession, but by both your
returns; I told Surena, that the cause of the War being taken away, the effects
ought to cease; that doubtless Arsaces was real in his promises, since he had
(when they were freely made) as much the power to violate them, as he could
have when I was in his; that probably my coldness had extinguished his flame;
which though it were no common operation in Love, yet it was (as Surena
experimentally knew) a possible one; and therefore since Arsace's taking the
Castle, which he had as much the power as the will to do, might inspire him
with intentions, our submission and reliance on him would suppress, I esteemed
it the best course to accept of what we could indeed no longer decline. Surena
was about to have replied, when one of his Servants advertised him, That the
Gentleman employed by the King, had a Message to deliver him, which he desired
might be without witnesses. I observed him a little surprised at my motion, and
it may be he was glad to cloud his disorder by this opportunity, which he
begged me to permit him to accept, since it was not improbable, but it might be
much conducive to the forming our resolutions. I know not whether he thought
the making his request was sufficient toward the granting; but he had no
sooner desired my permission, than he took it, and whilst he was entertaining
the King's Express, the fair Zephalinda was entertaining me with some fears she
but then had assumed; which were, That I had avoided being a Prey to one of my
Lovers, but to be one to another. This free declaration made me conclude she
had but too pregnant evincements for the making it; and that it was her
knowleg, not her suspicion, which gave me one of her Brother. I acquainted her
with this belief, with as much clearness as she had me with hers; but when she
protested to me her apprehensions had only their being from the minute of
Surena's disorders, and at the overture which had created them: I began to hope
her affection for me, made her suspect her Brother's having too much; which the
better to determine, we jointly resolved to press the accepting the King's
offer. Surena by his return, gave me leave to execute what we had resolved;
which after I had by the pressing'st reasons I could disclose, he told me, The
just gods, Madam, who know how unfit it is for you to put your self into the
hands of one who prefers his Lust before his Faith, have sent me an
Intelligence, which may so far absolve their Providence, that if that
misfortune must be yours, it shall be your fault, and not theirs: For the
Gentleman sent by the King, is employed by the generous Ariobarzanes; who
knowing all Intelligence both by Land and Water, is debarred me; lets me know,
that Arzimin, who I thought in the last Sally had lost his Life, has lost but
his Liberty; and that Vixores is hastily raising an Army of 30000 Horse, and as
many Foot for my relief: so that, Madam, you have but to assume a few days
patience, and you may derive that real security from my Sword, which will prove
but an imaginary one in Arsace's protestations. The gods forbid (I replied,
much more confirmed in my Fears, by this answer), that so many thousand Lives
should be sacrificed as Victims for the suppression of my doubts; but allow
they were of so criminal a quality, as that nothing but so much blood could
wash them away; yet what advantage could we propound unto our selves by a
Battle, which we are not more certain of without one; for you must either
resolve to expel Arsaces out of his Throne and Empire, or at length you must
trust him, and that too when the resentments of his losses, and our opposition,
may give him a rise and provocation to evince the justice of our Fears, by his
acting them: which a Confidence in him may as much deter him from, as his very
oaths; so that since of necessity we must, to prevent his Crime, act a greater,
or put our selves into his Mercy, when it may be the world may esteem his
conferring it (by our provocation) an injustice; I do not only approve of
embracing his offer, but conjure you we may do it: and this I desire the more
pressingly, because that having a power to oppose his, our submission may
appear our election, not our constraint, and thereby have two obligations on
him, that of Religion, and that of Trust; which latter will confine him, if he
considers his honor; and the former, if he considers the gods. Are you then,
Madam (he replied), so little versed in the Maxims of Kings, as to think your
self secure under him, when you have demonstrated you have a Power of being so
without, or against him; by showing that Truth, and then divesting your self of
it? we do not only show him he is not absolute; but provoke, and which is
worse, enable him to become so: the folly of yielding to an offended Prince, is
greater than the Sin which made him so; and if we must at length submit, it is
better doing it when our necessity is the motive; for the extending his Mercy
then, is a greater, as well as safer virtue: Do not, Madam (I beseech you)
tempt Arsaces's honesty, by prejudicing his Power and Love: There is no
necessity of ending the War by either expelling him his Throne, or submitting
to his Mercy; a successful Battle may procure us such conditions, as it shall
not be in his Power to infringe them; or when he sees his Passion or Empire
must cease, he will relinquish the former: which were it founded on Virtue,
would be as permanent as the reward of it; but being on Lust, and meeting such
dangers and obstructions, it will as soon expire, as would the pleasures of it.
I confess this discourse made me tremble, and I could not abstain from
replying, Certainly, Surena, there are Passions of another quality than you
have now given me a character of, or else you have given me an ill one of
yours, or of your self; for if those which are built on Virtue never expire, I
must conclude, yours had not that foundation, or else is still existent.

Surena found himself as much surprised at my inference, as I was at what gave
me the rise to make it: But after a short silence, he told me, There is (Madam)
no general Rule but has some exception; and it is I only make it in this:
Neither, Madam, should I tell you an untruth, if I assured you my love for you,
makes me not love you; I esteemed it but an ill effect and character of my
Flame to oppose and injure yours; and since the gods have made the perseverance
in my Passion as great a misfortune, as your not rewarding it; I transplanted
that permanency the gods had given me for a virtuous affection, on a virtuous
Friendship, and they will not so much lessen their obligation in this change,
as to evidence it no miracle; which it would neither prove nor appear, did they
produce in Arsaces a resembling operation. I told him, that to repeat was not
to annihilate a Miracle; That I could not esteem a production of reason, to be
one; or if there had been one in his affection, it was in that he had assumed,
and not declined it; since he could not be more powerfully invited to
relinquish his addresses from the unworthiness of their object, than from her
preingaged Love; which she resolved as eternally to cherish, as his Friendship,
that had so generously contributed thereunto. I further told him, That since
the extinction of his Flame evinced a possibility of Orodes doing the like, and
that the hazard in trusting his vows, could not be greater than that of a
Battle; I conjured him, if 'twere upon my score, and not his own that he drew
his Sword, that he would sheath it again, and not so far engage himself in
hazards, as to find both our destructions, in what he intended as an argument
of a Friendship, I could not be more desirous, than satisfied of. I began my
request again ( Parthenissa continued) to retrench all discourse of his
Passion; which like a Relic, might lose its respect by becoming common. To
this Surena replied, By what I have done, Madam, I know what will be done unto
me; and that Orodes when ever he has the Power, will make use of it to render
me a sacrifice for the fair Parthenissa. This being both my faith, and my
ambition (so it may be in a handsomer way, than on a Scaffold) permit me to
stand upon my defense; if that succeeds, you may command your own desires; and
lest it should not, let me publish, I did but conceal, not suppress my Passion;
and do you assure the King it is your constraint, not your inclination detains
you here; and that you will accept of his offer, as soon as I permit you. This
(Madam) will secure you against all misfortunes, for Arsaces cannot decline his
Concessions at the very last, because your not receiving them at first was your
misfortune, not your fault. All the while Surena spoke, I blushed, and
sometimes trembled, in apprehension what he said, was not his motion, but his
resolve; but not to let him know my fears by my disorders, I told him, The
generous Surena has already so much obliged me, that if he is capable of doing
it more, it must be by preserving, not hazarding himself: The latter, he will
but too abundantly do, by performing what he propounds; since Orodes will be a
more dangerous Enemy on the score of Love, than Power; and will be too
suspicious we will delude him, not to conclude we do it, in so palpable a
Fiction. It is not impossible too, but such a proceeding may lessen the heat
and affections of your own Partisans; who though they take up Arms to defend me
from being the King's Prisoner, will hardly employ them, to continue me yours;
which they must believe, or Arsaces cannot long; from whose power you shall not
need create any apprehensions, since before you put your self into it, I will
extort as much for your security, as I receive for my own. In brief (said
Parthenissa) my requests, or my reasons were so moving, that Surena assured me,
if at the end of Four and twenty Hours his arguments could not appear
convincing ones to me, mine should prove so to him; and then he withdrew
himself, to let the King's Express know, That then he might return for his
positive answer, whom (he said) he would not so long detain in the Castle, lest
it might look rather like an imprisonment, than an attendance. I will pass by
the joys we all three assumed at Surena's engagement, and those reasons we
deduced for and against the accepting Arsaces Concessions, since those for the
former, were so many, that they had exhausted all from the latter. I passed
that afternoon and the night, in as much rest, as the thoughts of suppressing
so dangerous a War and Lover, could permit; and the next day I was hardly
dressed, when I heard a great noise in the Castle, and observed most of the
Soldiers running to the Battlements of it: The two Princesses, and I, did the
like; where, when we were come, we might perceive all those Plains toward the
Sunrising covered with Troops; we concluded 'twas Vixores's Army, because we
saw the King's under their Ensigns in the Camp. This made me apprehend Surena
had taken those 24 hours of delay, to put affairs beyond a capability of
reconciliation; and that he had dispatched the King's Express, but to
accellerate Vixores's march: As soon as I had told Lyndadory and Zephalinda my
fears, they became theirs; and because by the help of a Perspective Glass we
perceived a Herald go from the King's Army to the other, and that in all
probability he was employed to let Vixores know, how that Arsaces expected a
return from the Castle, which might put a period to all disputes, till which
were come, he would begin none: we determined in a conjuncture of time so
pressing, to be so with Surena for his positive resolve, since a longer
protraction might engage us in those miseries I was so solicitous to avoid.
Surena's coming to us, seemed to contribute to so necessary and just an
intention: 'twas therefore I immediately acquainted him, That the longer I
reflected on my Arguments for relying on Arsaces's vows, the more pregnant I
still found them: that the resolution I had then assumed, would be so far from
receiving a change by the effluction of a few minutes, that it would a
confirmation: That before the 24 hours were expired, such misfortunes might
arrive, as we might deplore all those of our Lives: and therefore 'twas, I
conjured him by that Friendship he had for me, and by the just value I placed
upon it, to permit me to go out of Eden; and that if he could not silence his
suspicions, with what I did Mine, that at least I might receive the
satisfaction of not being the Authoress of shedding so much Blood, and of
involving my Country in a Civil War, Surena having commanded all the Soldiers
to their Posts, prostrating himself at my Feet, told me, It Is now, Madam, no
longer time to dissemble a Passion which I clouded, but could not extinguish; I
had too unresistable a Rival in Arsaces, to continue and declare my self his; I
was necessitated therefore by Art, to supply the defects of Power: neither did
I, Madam, delude, but serve you in this disguise: I believe you will find I do
so too in this discovery, since without it you must have put your self in the
hands of one, who would be satisfied with nothing but possessing you; whereas
you are now in ones, that if he cannot from a perfect Passion enjoy that
blessing himself, he will never pretend higher, than to keep all others from
it. I go now, Madam, to take from Arsaces as absolutely the power of making you
his Queen, as the just aversion you have contracted for him, has already taken
away all means of becoming so, but that; and I hope before the Sun sets, to
evince, by the sacrificing of so many Thousand Lives for your preservation, how
precious it is unto me. Surena had no sooner done speaking, than he rose up; and
having saluted me, went hastily away: I had neither the design, nor the power
to stay him; the first proceeded from my aversion from seeing, and the latter
from my disorders of having heard him; which were so transcendent, that the
consolations of Lyndadory and Zephalinda, were so far from silencing my
trouble, that they created it, by believing Mine was capable of being
suppressed. Oh gods! what did I not utter against so black an infidelity! and
how I quarrelled with my self, for having trusted my protection to him, who
made me need any! But whilst I was in the highest resentments those reflections
inspired me with, they were interrrupted by many shouts and cries; and turning
about to learn from whence they proceeded, I perceived it was from a great Body
of Vixores's Army, which were fallen upon one of the King's Guards, that was
most advanced toward the Castle, which after a bloody dispute they beat up,
and thereby gave Surena the liberty of joining with him, which he omitted not,
for we saw him immediately row over the Tygris, and recover his Army: soon
after the Kings was drawn out of their Camp, which we learned, proceeded from
Surena's having assured him in a Letter, of all that he had me; which so filled
Arsaces with fury, that finding he could not end the War by continuing the
Siege, he resolved to attempt it by a Battle; and because his rage was of a
quality that could not admit of delay, and there being light enough left for so
bloody a decision, they instantly began it, but it ended not till the day did,
which proved a glorious one to Arsaces, whose Victory was witnessed by the
death of 40000 of his Rebels; which number yet had been much increased, if the
obscurity had not hindered it. The two Brothers, better followed in the Flight,
than in the Charge, took several ways; Vixores to raise a new Army, and bring
their Fates to another experiment; and Surena, who had secured that Post upon
the Tygris which his Army had recovered before the Battle, made it the place of
ralliment; where finding too many for the Siege, and too few for the Field, he
selected 2000, and dismissed the rest; who by several ways found several
Fortunes, some scaping, some losing their Liberties, and others their Lives.
Surena employed all that night to ferry over his Men into Eden, which he did,
though with the loss of a Fourth part of them, who being left to justify their
Post, were killed in it, by a successful assault of the King's; so that all the
advantage Surena derived from the Battle, was to get a Garrison to maintain a
Siege. The day after this troublesome one to him, he made it a resembling one to
me, by giving me a visit: but as soon as he came into my Chamber, without
permitting him to speak, I told him, Traitor, with what Face can thou present
thy self before me, when thy actions, and the gods by thy defeat, have bestowed
on thee that Name? it is doubtless to increase thy Crimes, by the continuing of
my Punishment, which the seeing thee but too abundantly does: Madam, (said
Surena) I do now no longer wonder the gods denied me success, when you denied
me your Prayers for it; 'twas the want of them gave our Enemy the Victory;
which it may be if he had entirely the Power, he would employ it to act worse
designs than you can esteem me capable of thinking; but I have so many fresh
recourses of Men, that before you fall into Arsaces hands, he must leave
himself as few Subjects, as now he besieges; and it may be rather than cause
the ruin of your Country, you will hinder Mine. Yes, Madam, you will see
Armies again in the Field, which shall invalidate your Prayers; and the gods,
who know how much fitter it is to give you your security, than your revenge,
will confer the victory on him, who will less offensively employ it. If the
gods (I replied) should take so strange a Course for the punishment of Orode's
Sins, as to let one of his Vassals act it; yet the end to which thou believe
that Victory conducive, shall be denied thee: I have resolutions which no
material power can so much as reach, much less conquer; and if I were not
confined to love Artabbanes as his reward, I would do it as thy punishment.
Certainly, Madam ( Surena coldly replied), if you love Artabbanes still, you
sufficiently evince you are confined to it; his jealousy else had made you
deny him afterward that honor: and it cannot be but Fate, which makes you
have a Passion for one who suspected your virtue, and an aversion for him who
adored it, though it has proved as cruel to the Latter, as kind to the Former.

Here (said Symander) my Prince who had hitherto listened with a wonderful
silence, was necessitated to break it, by telling his Princess, I hope, Madam,
you gave him no other reply, than what is the only and the true one; which is,
that 'twas not my jealousy but my reason made me apprehend the fair
Parthenissa was too great a Blessing ever to become Artabbanes's. Parthenissa
blushed a little to have spoke what had necessitated Artabbanes to interrupt
her Story, and to make so flattering a justification; 'twas therefore she
hindered the continuance of it, by telling him, I had but too much truth to
alledg in your vindication, to make use of a return, which had nothing of that
virtue in it; wherefore the answer I gave him was, It would rather appear an
effect of Fate, did I decline a Passion for Artabbanes, to confer it on one
whose manifested Treachery so Artificially made him doubt mine, that the
Offense of doing so could not be so great, as the impossibility of avoiding it.
Thou can not therefore mention Artabbanes's seeming crime, but thou must
publish thy real one: But to take from thee all fresh occasions to injure the
gods, as well as me, I protest by them, That if their power know any
limitation, it is in the impossibility of making me receive thy Passion, or so
much as listen to thy addresses with Patience. There is, Madam (he replied)
nothing impossible but to him that believes it; it is only the Faith of
apprehension, not reason; or if there be impossibilities, my declining the
ambition of possessing you, or permitting any other the doing it, are the only
ones.

He spoke something else, though I did not hear it; for I withdrew, and locked
my self up in my Cabbinet, which for six Moons was my only sanctuary from such
importunate visits: But his generous Sister assumed at his change so exorbitant
a grief, that it even brought an accession to mine; the fair Lyndadory by hers
did the like; and though I both conjured them to lessen the cause of their
Tears, by removing themselves from the subject of them, yet they would never
consent to my request: neither had they, would Surena have permitted it, who
one day let me know so much, when I motioned their removal to him, and who
transferred his denial upon the indecency of wanting some of my own Sex to be
near me. Zephalinda a thousand times fruitlesly essayed to let Ariobarzanes
know the truth of our condition, which she suspected her brother had kept from
his knowledge, and thereby made that seem an effect of his Art, which was one of
his Treachery: This she was the more intent upon, knowing that every
opportunity Ariobarzanes (who was Lieutenant General to Arsaces, and condemned
his desires on me, which by the infusions of Surena, he considered through a
false optic) sent him constant Intelligence, under pretense of concluding an
exchange of Prisoners, mutually made so by fortunate and unsuccessful Sallyes,
whose retail I decline telling you, since it is sufficient you know they were
frequent and bloody. I believe you are confident, that I was so of Surena's not
attempting against my honor, since I solicited the removal of those, whose
presence might have restrained any desires of so criminal a quality; and truly
I must do him that justice, as to acknowledge he had nothing offensive in his
Love, but his Love, which was as civil, as unsuccessful.

Though the violence of the Winter were great, yet it lessened not that of the
Siege, which was so active, as it left no time to feel the rigor of the
Season. But the Spring, which brought weather fit to continue the War, brought
Surena news of his impossibility of doing it: for by the return of a Prisoner
(purposely made so) for that end, he received from Ariobarzanes the certainty
of Vixores's repeated defeat, which was given him by the Prince Phraates,
expressly sent by his Father to interrupt his levies, or destroy them; which
latter he effected, though much of the Glory, and more of the Danger fell to
the young Phraataces, illegitimate Son to Phraates, not then above 16 years of
Age, whose Mother by her excellent Beauty had been Concubine to Caesar, and who
by him had been presented to Phraates, as another was at the same time of
resembling Beauty, and profession, to Pacorus: But he returned her again to
Caesar, as a fitter present for his restitution, than acceptance. Surena at
this fatal Intelligence, found as small hopes to preserve me from his King, as
to obtain me for himself; and I began to assume some, that what he had denied
to me, he must grant to his necessity. But Vixores, though he had lost the
possibility of raising the Siege, yet he had not of enabling his Brother to
continue it; which to effect, with the relics of his broken Army, of which he
had lost 22000, he advanced by long Marches and unfrequented ways, with 2000
Foot, which he had mounted, and by his admirable celerity and silence, came so
unexpectedly to the Banks of Tygris, that the King's Eyes gave him the first
intelligence of his being there; which was no sooner received, than all the
Boats upon the River were drawn to one place, for the ferrying over some Horse
to cut off this relief: Surena to facilitate the entry of it, made a furious
Sally; and Vixores, the better to palliate his fiction, made a brisk one
against the Arsacians, with Two thousand Horse, with which he had conveyed the
Two thousand mounted Foot, who all this while having quit their Horses, lay
concealed in a Grove two Furlongs above Arsaces's Guard, which was next to the
Castle; from whence during the Allarm, they sent over some excellent swimmers,
who fastening Ropes on that side the River, by Ten Flat-bottom'd Boats, which
as many Dromedaries had brought, and which for the convenience of carriage,
were made of Wicker, covered with Hides, without rowing, or driving down the
stream, in one hour, they had transported over all the Soldiers; but as they
were beginning to do the like to the Provisions, which Surena wanted more than
the Men; some of the Kings Horse, who by a Prisoner taken from the Convoy had
gained intelligence of this relief, came, and by a furious charge rendered
themselves Masters of the most necessary part of it. The Soldiers who were in
the Island, seeing the loss of their victuals, and knowing it irrecoverable,
lest a longer delay might render the Castle so too, by a hasty march under the
Banks of the Tygris, which by a continued frost had left a large strand, and by
the obscurity of the Night (which then had for above two hours covered the
Heavens) they safely arrived in Eden; but Surena's joy at it immediately
vanished; for by the loss of his Provisions, he found his Brother had sent an
increase, rather than a relief of his wants; who concluding he had given time
enough for the entry of the supply, by degrees began to diminish the violence
of the Combat, which finally an hour after, absolutely ceast. Vixores in this
performance showed himself so much a Soldier, that none which was so, could not
but conclude his precedent defeats proceeded not from his not being one. That
night by a long March, he put himself out of the necessity of making a second;
for he had so far out-gone those Troops which followed him, that by easy
journeys he reached again the Province of Hircania, which though Phraates had
much destroyed, yet Vixores despaired not, but from those warlike people, and
that provocation, to bring again a third Army into the Field, which might
render him Master of it. Surena was constrained by his little Victuals, and
many Soldiers, to make frequent and furious Sallies, where to lose of his own
Men, or to kill of the Kings, were equal advantages. One Evening as the two
Princesses and I, were walking on the Battlements of the Castle, we heard a
noise in the Court, which we learned proceeded from the arrival of Arzimin, who
having deceived, or corrupted his Guards, had then fled from the Camp, and
recovered the Castle. Surena assumed a visible joy at the escape, and return of
so considerable a Friend. Three or four days successively after, I fancied
Arzimin by his looks had some desires to speak with me; but apprehending he had
taken them up upon Surena's score (whom I never after our first discourse,
permitted to make me a second) I declined all opportunities of facilitating his
design; but at length, having acquainted the Princesses with my belief, and
suspicions, they were jointly of opinion, That I should no longer defer giving
Arzimin an opportunity I had hitherto denied him, since if he had any thing to
act for me (which his strange escape from the Camp rendered no irrational
belief) by retrenching all discourse with me, I did too, all possibility of
serving me; and if what he had to deliver were on Surena's account, I ought
speedily to give him one Audience, to have a just ground for denying him for
ever another. Their opinion was my resolution, which immediately after I had
assumed, I had the opportunity to put it in practice; for the same day, as we
went to take the Air in the Gardens of the Castle, which because we frequently
did, Arsaces had given an obeyed command, that no Arrows or Darts should be
shot or flung that way; Arzimin, who waited for me at the Door, came and
presented me his hand to lead me down, which I accepted; and which I had no
sooner done, than he told me softly, I have something, Madam, of concernment to
inform you of, but I must humbly beg it may be without witnesses; I told him in
the same tone, That I would give the opportunity he desired as soon as we were
in the Gardens; whither being come, we insensibly lost the two Princesses, and
those that followed us; which Arzimin being convinced of, by looking diligently
every way, he flung himself upon his Knees, and presented me a little Note,
which I opened, and found was all of Arsaces's hand, and only contained these
words, Madam, I beseech you believe all he shall tell you, and be satisfied of
his Fidelity, on my engagement for it. After I had read these few words, and
assured him they had all that efficacy both the King and he could expect, I
made him rise, lest being surprised in that Posture, it might raise a
suspicion, which continuing our walk, would prevent; when he was up, he told
me, I believe, Madam, you are not ignorant I was dangerously hurt, and taken
Prisoner in that unsuccessful Battle Surena fought against his King; and that I
might not have so noble a fate as that of dying by my wounds, they were
diligently cured, and then my sentence was, That that Life I had employed
against my Prince, I should lose upon a Scaffold; whither when I was brought
and expected the fatal stroke, I received a Pardon: Arsaces making a
distinction between those which fought against him, and those which fought for
surena; of which latter quality he was assured I was, from the Prince
Ariobarzanes, This grace which I as little expected as deserved, produced so
just an effect in me, that I determined to employ my Life for him that had
given it me; in pursuance whereof I obtained a private Audience from the King,
without so much as the knowledge of Ariobarzanes, who I knew too much favored
Surena's designs to be trusted with mine. There 'twas, Madam, I told the King a
Truth, of which I believe you are yet ignorant; which is, That Surena having
long formed a design of carrying you away into Media, and of living there under
the protection of Merinzor, (of which you may be partly convinced, by his
having declared himself to you to be, what he never yet but was) finding by
those unexpected wounds he received, when he made your Guards your Martyrs,
that he was unable to fly with you thither, and as unable to trust you there
without him; the better to delude your belief, he caused one of his Chyrurgeons
to tell you, and the two Princesses, he was in a condition to perform the
journey, when he had not the power to do it; and which to prevent, he caused
five hundred Horse, he had covertly drawn together, to be his and your Convoy
into Media, to appear as so many of the KIngs; and thereby made you return
hither, as if it had been by misfortune, not design; and if you remember,
Madam, a Chyrurgeon of the Convoy, who knew nothing of his Prince's intentions,
told you when he fell into his fainting, that he could not continue his
journey, and his Life, I remembered that passage (said Parthenissa) very well,
and from thence concluded Arzimin told me a Truth, I had but too many pregnant
Testimonies no longer to doubt. Orodes, Madam, (continued Arzimin) was as much
surpised at this intelligence, as I perceive you are; and those Troops which
were your seeming besiegers, till those of Arsaces were really so, then became
your defenders; and when Orodes sent you an assurance of attempting nothing
against the Laws of Honor, in obtaining that of your Affection, Ariobarzanes
(as you know) sent Surena word, that Vixores with a numerous Army was ready
speedily to Attempt his Relief: 'Twas then, Madam, to avoid the spilling of so
much blood, and of not demonstrating any diffidence in the King's so solemn
engagements, that you pressed Surena to permit you to rely on them; who finding
your desire was your resolution, begged you to consider of his Arguments for 24
hours, and then he would obey your election. He did this only, that in the mean
time he might engage both Armies, that if the victory inclined to his side, he
might keep you in his Power as an effect of his Friendship, not his Love; and
if it inclined to the King's, he might ascribe the Battle, by his being so
strictly besieged, to the impossibility of his preventing it; and then by
accepting the King's, offer, reserve the disclosing his Passion to a more
promising opportunity. This, Madam, was the Cause, that under a pretense of not
detaining the King's Messenger so long, he immediately dispatched him to
Ariobarzanes, whom he pressingly desired to let Vixores know, That if within 24
hours he brought not their Fates to a decision, no misfortune could be greater
than that delay. Ariobarzanes did this to serve Surena, who has promised him
his Sister; and to end a War, which would as long as it continued, deny him the
felicity of seeing Zephalinda. This design had doubtless succeeded, if the gods
(who cannot more convincingly manifest themselves to be what they are, than by
punishing infidelity) had not necessitated Surena to disclose so criminal a
fallacy: for though Vixores with all his Army came early enough, and by a
Thousand provocations solicited the King to a Battle before the 24 hours were
effluxt; yet Arsaces, though equal in forces, would not accept it, hoping by
the return then promised, without blood to end the difference: Surena by this
delay concluded of the cause of it, and thereby observing he could not any
longer cloud himself, and that so powerful an Army might justify his Crime,
boldly confessed it to you, and then went to punish in his King what he
practiced in himself; but he soon found in his defeat, how the gods disavowed
his Quarrel; which (said Arzimin) I am now conviced of, and consequently will
no longer defend. It Is therefore (Madam) as an expiation for having done it so
much already, that I have engaged my self to Arsaces to deliver you out of this
Captivity, or to lose my Life in attempting it; and as one of your Protectors,
become your Keeper; so to make one of your Keepers become your Deliverer: The
two Princesses, if they know of your escape, must not accompany you in it;
neither is it necessary, for being Prisoners but upon your account, your
liberty will restore them to theirs. I found this rational, but not kind; and
therefore determined, if 'twere not their desire, as well as opinion, I would
repay them the obligation of continuing a Prisoner with them, as they had with
me; but this I told not Arzimin, who thus prosecuted his discourse: To morrow
Night (Madam) I have the Guard, and I have ordered it so, that those which
compose it are my Creatures, especially such as are of the watergate where the
Galley which belongs to the Castle is at Anchor: In her, Madam, I design to
carry you away, which Arsaces approves; and because I suspected Surena has so
many Partisans and Spies in the Army, that if the King should give orders to
any of those Guards upon the River, to receive the Galley which should come out
of the Castle as Friends, it would inevitably come by the multitude of
Surena's, to his knowledge. I have persuaded Arsaces under the pretense of an
intelligence, to draw all the Boats on the River to the upper end of the
Island, so that none of the Guards being able to follow us, we need not trust
their Faiths with so dangerous a secret. And the Tygris is of such a breadth,
that in the obscurity of the Night, keeping under the Island-shore, they can
hardly discover us; or if they do, not reach us with their Arrows: I am
necessitated too to let the Galley drive down the stream under the Banks of the
River, lest crossing over it, some of our own Centries on the Towers, might
discover and offend us; for they will know by the smallness of our Numbers, and
by Surena's not seeing, or acting in our attempt, that it is not a Sally; but a
flight. The King, Madam, will expect you at a little Village some Twenty
Furlongs below the Castle; and to secure you from any fears, that you do but
avoid one Imprisonment to fall into another, he has commanded me to protest in
his behalf, by all the tutelary gods of his Empire, and by whatever else he
holds in highest veneration, He has banished all those Thoughts from him, which
have so long banished you; and to take from himself the power of a relapse, if
ever he should have the will, he has already given order for the revocation of
Artabbane's exilement; and to repair his having sent him into it, he will with
the restoring him to his Country, restore him too to his Princess. Arzimin had
more particularly acquainted me with the residue of what he was to deliver, had
not he perceived (afar off) Surena coming into the Garden, which made him
desire me to hasten my joining with the Company; which whilst we were doing, he
told me, That the Night appointed, four hours after the close of the Evening,
he would not fail to come to my Chamber with my disguise, and to have all
things so exactly prepared, that it must be Fate, and not Chance if his design
succeeded not. I had hardly assured him there should be no omission on my Part,
but we had recovered the Company, and suddenly after Surena appeared in the
same Walk we were in, which made me quit it, and retire to my Appartment; where
having shut our selves up, I told Lyndadory and Zephalinda, all that Arzimin
had me: To be brief, those two admirable Women, for all my reiterated Prayers,
would not be sharers in my escape, lest they might prejudice it; and if I
condescended to their commands of going away alone, it was purely from a
confidence, that as soon as I was out of the Castle, Surena would yield it, and
consequently the Princesses would be restored to a liberty by me, which they
would not accept of with me; Zephalinda too, by not going with me, could leave
her Brother nothing but suspicions that she knew of my Flight; and Lyndadory
was so apprehensive, that her accompanying me in it, might convince Surena,
'twas the craft, and not the ignorance of his Sister, detained her, and so
pleased with a recluseness, which both your absences made her cherish, that
upon those scores as well as the former, she determined to remain with the fair
Zephalinda, who conjured me I would employ that Power I had with Arsaces, to
procure a Pardon for her Brother, who had no other Title to my Mercy, than that
he deserved it not: I assured her, that what should now be my obedience, had
been my design: and that one so near in blood to Zephalinda, could not but be
so, in my care. At length, the so impatiented night and hour came, and with it
Arzimin, who brought me one of his Pages Clothes, which he said was necessary
for me to wear, and that I should do it no longer than till I were out of the
Castle; I joyfully put on that Livery of Freedom, and having a thousand times
embraced the Princesses, I took my final leave; and only with Arzimin, whom I
followed as his servant, came to the Guard of the Water Gate, where I found the
Soldiers sleeping on the Ground, and in so wretched a way, that I have never
since esteemed it courage, but to judgment, to cast themselves upon whatsoever
hazard may finish such miserable Lives, Arzimin immediately put me into the
Galley, and taking seven Men to row, and steer her, without any noise got out
of the Water-percullis, and in the same silence descended the Current for above
Three hours; during which, I had again put on the habit of my Sex in the
Cabin, in which I had locked my self up: when I was dressed, I came out, and
found of our Seven, but Three in the Galley, of which Arzimin was one, of whom
I asked, what was become of the rest, and how soon we should land? he told me
the other Four were gone in a little Skiff which belonged to the Galley, to
tell Arsaces of my approach, and that it would be an hour before we should go
ashore, because he durst not make use of his Oars: I retired my self satisfied
with that reply; and at the expiration of the hour, Arzimin came to let me know
I was safely arrived where he intended; immediately after, one of the Galley
carried me out of it in his Arms to a Chariot, which with some Thirty Horse
expected us. I thought it something strange that Arzimin himself did not do it,
or that he commanded not some other fitter for the employment than he which had
undertook it; but I thought it much stranger, when I saw him too, come only
into the Chariot with me, and when I found him by the help of the Light, which
then began to dawn, to be Surena: Oh gods! as soon as I knew him, I knew my
self betrayed: I had only force enough to say so, for all my Senses were so
obliging as to cease their actings, rather than by continuing them, so
extremely to afflict me: But Surena, who had more care of my life, than me, by
powerful Cordials brought me to my self; I paid his care with a Thousand
Injuries; and if my hate were as great a torment to him as that Life he
restored me to, was to me, I could neither have desired, nor acted a more
sublime revenge. 'Twas either his respect, or his guilt, which all that day
kept him in a deep silence; and if he any way evinced how much my discontent
was his, it was only in sighs. The first Night (after a very long Journey) we
lay at a Castle which was situated in so solitary a place, that I believe it
was only built for that end to which Surena then employed it: He led me to a
Chamber that wanted nothing but his absence; and that convenience it soon
enjoyed; for without speaking one word, he saluted me with great humility, and
left me to the company of my Thoughts, which in the condition I was in, was the
worst I could keep, but his. I had not long the liberty to entertain them, for
a young Gentle woman came into my Chamber to offer me her Service then, and if
I pleased for ever; I accepted of it in the first limitation, but declined it
in the latter, lest she should have served Surena, and not me. An hour after,
Supper was brought in; and that being ended, my new woman resigned her place to
Surena, who kneeling at my Feet, told me, You see (fair Parthenissa) prostrate
before you, one who should not have the confidence to do it, did he not believe
the not imploring your pardon a greater misfortune than any, but the not
obtaining it: If I have deluded your hopes, I will not your belief; for though
I have not given you into Arsace's power, yet I protest by your self, I will
employ mine to defend and serve you, which I am confident is your Faith, and
which I assure you cannot be more so, than it is my inviolable resolution;
'twas necessity, Madam, and not election, made me draw you from a place, where
I had no longer the means to preserve you from abandoning a Servant, who is as
much concerned in your honor, as you are to put your self into the power of
another, who would have employed all his to destroy, not defend what you value
most; I do not accuse my King, that you may the less condemn me; I am so far
from desiring his crimes, that I would give my Life he had none; for thereby
you had been exempted from inconveniences, which would be unsupportable, were
they not in order to the preventing of greater. Your residence, Madam, with
Arsaces, I am convinced, would make you wish, when perhaps too-too late, that
you had prevented it by greater troubles than I hope you will suffer in your
journey; for I have so well deluded him, that you may take your own hours of
travel; and that which will end yours, will be a Castle of Merinzor's in Media,
the first place to which we intended our flight, had not an unhappy accident
prevented it; and Media, Madam, being the Kingdom your Artabbanes must one day
possess, I elect to wait on you thither, that your Reason, if not your justice,
may be secured of the innocence of my designs; for had I any which were
criminal, I would not have chosen that place for the Scene to act them, where
your happy servant cannot want hands to act his Revenge. Surena (said
Parthenissa) told me many things of this quality, and so protested, his
ambition was to solicit, not force my Affection; that I determined, since I
could not prevent the former, not to provoke him to the latter, which the
uttering of my just resentments, I apprehended would; 'twas therefore I told
him, Though your past Crimes might invite me rationally to conclude you capable
of any, yet I will not disbelieve your vows and professions; which if ever you
design to violate, I have the power and the resolution to prevent: Do not
necessitate me to owe that safety to my self, which I am not unwilling to
derive from you; nor attempt to practice that which you so justly condemn in
another, and which you esteemed so foul a Sin, that to prevent it, you esteemed
Rebellion None. Madam (said Surena) did it not too much wrong the Beauty of
Truth to arm it with many protestations, I should by reiterated ones, bind my
self by Religion to that which I am sufficiently confined unto without it; and
were it lawful for Surena to repine at any thing the fair Parthenissa says, he
had now but too abundant an occasion to do it; for she must believe him as
wicked as unfortunate, to conclude he stood in need of any other Argument to
deter him from attempting against her honor, than the greatness of the Crime;
but Madam, my deportment shall be so innocent, that you will in the future
esteem your doubts as great an injury to your self, as I can now esteem them to
me. I found, though his Expressions were humble, that he was highly moved at
the cause of my fears; 'twas therefore I replied, I hope, Surena, you will not
much condemn me for running into an error, where the discovery of its being
one, will prove my satisfaction. Your satisfaction Madam (said Surena) shall be
still more considerable to me than my own; and since I have that invitation, as
well as that of virtue, I shall as much apprehend any criminal designs, as the
fair Parthenissa does detest them; thereupon having wished me but as much rest
as I could confer on him, he withdrew himself to leave me to mine. But I took
none, out of an apprehension that I had done amiss in acquainting him with my
fears; for 'twas not impossible, but to think him capable of that Sin, was to
provoke him to it; since the very performance could not raise in me a worse
belief of him, than that was of fearing he would perform them. This reason, and
many another of a resembling efficacy, made me conclude, that my having
declared my doubts was a greater prejudice, than those assurances I had from
thence derived, was an advantage. You may believe, in such disturbances of the
Mind, the Body could not but participate; so that I was earlier up than he that
was more concerned in my being so; and I quitted my Bed, not only because I
could take no rest in it, but that I resolved to add to the obligation of
virtue, that of trust, and to go freely to what else I knew I should be
constrained unto; Surena therefore found me dressed when he came to tell me all
things were ready for our Journey, if I was; which having told him, he led me
to the Chariot, that had all the Journey the same 30 Horse for Convoy, that it
had at first: Surena begged and had my permission to ride with me in it.

The Fifth day after we had left the Castle of Eden, we came into Media, which
we learned was all involved in a Domestic War. This made Surena travel with
more caution than he had thitherto observed; so that constantly he left a
couple of his Guard some four or five Furlongs behind, and sent half a score
before, that he might not be surprised. The third day after he had settled this
order, one of those to whose care all Intelligence which should happen in the
rear, was left, came full speed to acquant his Prince, that his Companion had
been killed by a Party of Horse which followed him a round Gallop. Surena at
this Intelligence leaped out of the Chariot, and whilst he was arming himself,
made me many apologies for so rude a proceeding; but he was no sooner fitted to
receive his Enemies, than he perceived them, who without any cheapening,
charged him so roundly, that he found he might need those Ten Horse for the
Fight, which he had sent for Intelligence; one of his Pages went therefore to
call them; but two of the unknown Party having charged through all Surena's,
came to my Chariot, and having begged me to pardon a rudeness which was for my
service, one of them immediately killed the Driver of it, and the other with
his sword cut the Traces asunder; but this performance cost them their Lives,
which they lost by Three of their Enemies, who feared those came not to hinder
my flight, but to contribute to it. The Combat being performed by Men of
singular valor, was very bloody; and in less than half an hour, were reduced
to so few, as only the chief of either Party: He of the unknown one, by his
unimitable courage, had reduced his Adversary to a condition which needed help,
when the generous Artabbanes interposed himself for their reconciliation, and
then, from an Intercessor, became a Party, not knowing he that was vanquished
was guilty; but he abundantly repaired that mistake, by defending (after the
return of those Ten Horse which were recalled) a Life, I am much more concerned
to have preserved, than to have Surena's destroyed.

'Twas thus (said Symander) that the fair Parthenissa put a period to a
relation, which had as much taken up Artabbanes and Sillace's wonder, as
attention. I will not tell you how infinitely the first of them exclaimed
against the perverseness of his Fate, for having rendered the acting his Revenge
as great an offense against his Friendship, as the omission of it was one
against his Love. But the fair Parthenissa, who desired no greater punishment
for Zephalinda's Brother, and who indeed could wish him no greater than to be
out of his protection, and under his Rivals, conjured him to be contented with
that Revenge with which she was. Artabbanes was not sorry, that to the
invitations of Friendship, he had that additional one of obedience, for the
silencing his designs of vindicating his wrongs; but they being of too sublime
a nature absolutely to be forgotten, lest his disorders might discover he
disputed whether he should obey Parthenissa, with her permission he conjured
the generous Sillaces to acquaint them, by what strange adventure he was
presented with the blessing of serving her. Sillaces, who received as sublime a
satisfaction in his obedience to Artabbanes and Parthenissa, as he had in
hearing her story, began his own short one, in these terms:

From the time I left Rome, till I came to Nineveh, there happened nothing
worth relating; but that there happened nothing that was so: But alas, this
calm was but too severely interrupted, for there I understood, how that both
the Princess Lyndadory and Parthenissa could not more want my service, than I
did the power of paying it them: My duty to Arsaces, and hope, that by being
nearer the Castle of Eden, I might be so to an opportunity of what so extremely
and justly I ambitioned, made me immediately repair to the Camp, where by the
King I was received with such demonstrations of affection, that I thought
Surena's past favor, and present condition, had thitherto deprived me of that
usage, and then conferred it on me; but my ignorance, whether this proceeded
from his goodness, or design, made me keep him in a perfect one of your
condition and resolutions; and though I endeavored all imaginable ways to
serve you, and my self, in the Princesses; yet the only one in which I did it,
was, in persuading the generous Ariobarzanes to do Surena no more services,
unless he received an assurance from the fair Zephalinda, that in doing them to
her Brother, he did them too to her: This I did out of a confidence Surena had
deluded him; and this Ariobarzanes did, not to show me in that confidence, that
I was so; but when to many Letters of his to Zephalinda he never received any
return, he began to disclose a Truth which his so long ignoring had rendered
obstructive to his King's ends, and his own: I believe this proceeding hastened
Surena's; for with his Intelligence, he lost his hopes; but whilst I lay
languishing in desires and fears, a Packet came from Merinzor to Surena and by
the Carrier of it was delivered to Ariobarzanes; but by what I have related, he
was become from his Confident, his Enemy; wherefore opening the Letters, he
found in them a black conspiracy of raising a mutual Rebellion against their
Kings, and of affording each other reciprocal assistance. This I esteemed our
duties to acquaint Arsaces with, and this Ariobarzanes did so too, as an
expiation of having formerly convoyed some of Surena's Letters to Merinzor,
when he knew not what they imported, and when he was made believe they only
were to preserve a Correspondency, which might preserve the latter a sure
retreat; but the difficulty was, how to let Orodes know of these Letters, and
not to let him know we had seen them before; this at length we did, by causing
a Confident of ours to bring them hastily into the Camp, as having taken them
from one who by the River was stealing into the Castle, and which by his Death
he had prevented. Orodes having perused them, found Surena's Rebellion the more
dangerous, and that a Forraigner fomenting it, would render it as long, as
hazardous. 'Twas therefore he immediately called me to him, where after having
told me, That since Ariobarzanes had the next Command under him, all others in
the Army would be under me; and that therefore till he could find me out a fit
employment, he desired I would take upon me that, of being his Ambassador to
the King of Media, to acquaint him with this fresh Treason, and to procure a
League between them, That as two of their Subjects had reciprocally bound
themselves to ruin their Kings; so that they should do the like, to ruin
them. This (continued Sillaces) I obeyed, partly because I had no employment in
the Army, but chiefly that my hopes were less, of serving the Princesses in the
Siege, than in my Embassy: For I had understood 'twas Merinzor's Power in
Media, which hindered Moneses from having any; and I had more than a belief,
that this favorite having rendered himself incapable of becoming so again, you
might assume his place, or at least your Right, which I was confident to
advance, being employed as a public Minister. I was also but too certain the
Siege would last longer than the journey, which six days after I began, that
time being effluxt in giving me my Commission, with my private and public
Instructions: but because I designed so short a residence in Media, I took only
Twenty Gentlemen, and some Servants to wait on me; and being informed on the
Confines of this Kingdom, that it was freshly involved in a Domestic War, I
sent a couple of my Company before the rest, to avoid Surprises: These it
seemed saw those two of Surena's, who fearing Mine, began a round Gallop to
recover their Companions; but they were so briskly followed, that one of them
was overtaken, and so wounded by a Javelin, that he not only lost the hopes of
his safety, but almost of his Life; you will believe when I came up, that I was
not a little surprised, when I found this wounded Prisoner was Palurus, who had
the same employment under Surena, that his Brother had under Phraates; I
concluded by the Servant, that the Master was not far off: and by threatening to
torture him if he acquainted me not where his Prince was, and by promising to
have a care of his Life if he did: he told me, How you, Madam, had been deluded
by his Prince, and that you were both but a few furlongs before us. Oh gods!
how was I surprised at this strange intelligence! and how many oaths did I
extort from the dying Palurus before I could believe him! but as soon as I did,
leaving him to the care of some Peasants which were present, I ran full speed
upon the Traces of Surena; two of my Troop I commanded to kill the
Chariot-Driver, and to cut the Harness, lest during the fight I might lose the
reward of it; with the rest I charged my Enemy, in which, the first that fell
was the false Arzimin. You were, Madam, a Spectator of the residue of my Story,
and so was Artabbanes, who came in when all my Company had killed Surena's; and
when they had had the honor to sacrifice all their own Lives, in an employment
which rather deserves my Envy, than my Grief.

Sillaces (continued Symander) having finished his Discourse, all those which
had heard it (and he himself) were of opinion, the fair Parthenissa's
deliverance, was replenished with so many strange conjunctures, that it
relished more of Providence than Chance; and that this effect of it, was but an
earnest of a more sublime and obliging one. I know not whether so pleasing a
belief, by having so high an influence on Artabbanes's Mind, had a
proportionate one on his Body; or whether so long a charming of his Prince, as
that was whilst his Princess and his friend were speaking, did qualify the
violence of his Fever; but I know, that after some discourses upon the
precedent ones ( Partheniss^ being retired) he found so sensible an amendment,
that he not only acquainted us with it, but convinced us of it; and from that
day, so uninterruptedly recovered, that when the generous Sillaces was fit to
continue his Embassy, my Prince's condition was so promising, that no just
apprehension of his Friend, needed any longer to have suspended it: 'Twas
therefore that the fair Parthenissa came to Artabbanes's Chamber, he not being
able to wait on her in hers; where she found already Sillaces and Zenophon; and
though this meeting was to consult upon the managing of their designs, yet I
was not excluded. I shall pass over their debates, to acquaint you with their
results; which were, That Zenophon, with those Forces he had then raised,
should no longer protract his advancing, since Tygranes stood so much in need
of them: That Sillaces, as the Parthian Ambassador, should accompany Zenophon
to his King, to treat and conclude on that league, which was so requisite and
necessary to the ruining of my Prince's Rivals both in Empire and Love: That
Sillaces should employ all his Power as public Minister, for the restoration
of Artabbanes, as being Nephew to his King; which he might the more safely
negotiate, since Arsaces had really revoked his Banishment, whether to increase
Surena's Fears, or to silence Parthenissa's: That if he found any inclinations
in Tygranes to receive him, he should then, and not otherwise, acquaint him
where he was: That Zenophon should depute (during his absence) such a Governor
in Arsacia, as was entirely to receive and obey Artabbanes's commands, and as
much to conceal his so doing. The next day after this resolution was assumed,
it was put in a way of being practiced; Sillaces accompanied with Zenophon,
whose Troops consisted of near 10000 Horse and Foot, began their March toward
Ecbatan, against which Merinzor with 15000 Horse and 25000 Foot was advanced,
and Camp'd within sixteen Furlongs of her Walls, under which the King's Forces,
which were near 10000 Horse, and as many Foot, were entrenched. The Governor
left in Arsacia, was called Cloriman, and had received his education even from
his Cradle under Zenophon, who having found him replenished both with Courage
and Judgment, had given him a large participation both in all his Commands and
Fortunes. This young Gentleman was so assiduous in this duty of his employment,
and to Parthenissa and Artabbanes, that they could not but commend Zenophon's
Judgment in his Choice: I must confess, I had done so too, had I not observed
he was as assiduous in more than his respects to the fair Emilia; but her
carriage was such, that it gave me rather a satisfaction than an Allarm.
Artabbanes, soon after his being left alone with Parthenissa, never left her
so, at least when he could do it with civility; and my Prince could not be more
intent in increasing Parthenissa's affection, than I was in obtaining Emilia's;
so that all that time my generous Master employed in his Loves, I did in mine:
but whether it were a punishment for having so long contemned the power of a
god, of which I then was sufficiently convinced; or whether it were the fair
Emilia's disposition to behold the effects of her own Power, which could not be
more visible, than in continuing my Passion without any demonstration of hers,
for above three Moons; though I could not obey my Reason, I found more than I
had thitherto known, for my detesting of Love; and though at last I received
the felicity of an assurance from the object of my Flame, that she approved of,
and would reward it; yet it was accompanied with the misfortune that I derived
that declaration from Parthenissa, and Artabbanes's prayers, as much as from my
own; yet the belief I had, that Emilia's Judgment, not want of affection, made
her elect to oblige Three sooner than one, gave me a satisfaction which her
words had denied me; but my Prince, who had already obtained the victory over
those tedious formalities, now happily pretended to a more transcendent one, by
successfully imploring from his Princess, in an Hymeneal Crown, to give his
Passion the lowest, and highest satisfaction it could ambition: But as Emilia's
grant was accompanied with a qualification, so was Parthenissa's; for my Prince
derived it from his reasons, as well as from her affection: Those he made use
of were, That he could no more repine at the gods, but at her, if he were
perpetually miserable, since she might hinder his being so, by a Concession of
his request, which would not only prove a reparation for his past misfortunes,
but a preservative from his future: That then the gods could neither make his
Life short, nor unhappy, since the excellency of the felicities would repair
their want of duration: That he concession would put a period to his external,
as well as intrinsecal sufferings; for though his Rivals might have some hopes
to conquer her Constancy, yet they could have none to do so to her Virtue. Here
the fair Parthenissa interrupted him, by saying, Take heed Artabbanes, lest
what you imagine will silence the fury of your Enemies, do not render it more
fatal; for when they find you are from but a probable obstacle, become a
certain one, they will no more scruple to take away your Life, than I will to
take away my own, after such a loss. Madam (said my Prince) you may banish
those apprehensions, for you have by pardoning my criminal jealousies, so
abundantly evidenced the Immutability of that esteem you honor me withal, that
when to that you shall add a religious obligation, the known Truth, That
thereby we can have but one destiny, will make them have the same care of mine,
which they will have of yours; so that, Madam, to secure me from danger, as
well as unhappiness, what I now implore at your Feet, is absolutely necessary.
Parthenissa, more satisfied with his Arguments, than his motion (though she
esteemed it not fit to mingle felicities with fears, nor to be in the embraces
of her Prince, whilst those who had been her Companions in her sufferings,
could not be so in her joys) yet at length she yielded to it, that her
Artabbanes might not say, she denied him any thing with reason. Oh gods!
(continued Symander) it is impossible I should tell you my Prince's transports,
how often he prostrated himself before her, how many thousand times he embraced
her knees, and kissed her hands: It Is sufficient I assure you, his joy was
proportionate to what created it; and that it was impossible the Sense could
relish those felicities, his Mind did: He blessed a Milion of times the privacy
of their then condition, which admitted no other preparative but a Priest, lest
the celebration of the Nuptial solemnities might have so long protracted the
celebration of the Nuptial delights: Artabbanes, after he had by innumerable
testimonies of his satisfaction, convinced Parthenissa of it, retired to his
Appartment, whither immediately he sent for Cloriman, whom he acquainted with
his joys, and of whom he desired a Priest against the next day, to put him in
the way of consummating them. Cloriman, by an erection of his Eyes and Hands,
seemed to participate in my Prince's satisfaction, which yet he somewhat
clouded, by telling him, there was never a Priest in Arsacia to whose fidelity
he durst trust so important a secret; but that within two days he would procure
one, for whose secrecy he would answer. Artabbanes was so transported with his
desires, that he not only esteemed the Trusting of any Priest could not prove
so high a prejudice, as a days protraction would amount unto: But even would
have sent for any one, and have ventered on his fidelity, had not both Cloriman
and I, by many allegations dissuaded him from it. But at length, those two days
expired, which he continually spent in Parthenissa's company, earnestly
offering the gods as many years of his Life, for the cutting off those two
days. The Night of the last he spent in as little sleep, as he would have done
the succeeding one, and as he did the succeeding one, during one half of which,
he was kept waking by his desires, and the other by his fears and danger; for
some Three hours before day he heard all the City in an high Allarm, which made
him immediately dress and arm himself to go and learn the danger, or prevent
it; but as he was running to his Princesse's Appartment, which his Love and
fear made him resolve to defend, and made him resolve was the place would most
need his Defense, he heard the Palace Gates forced open, and by that time he
was come to the top of those great stairs which lead to the fair Parthenissa's
Chamber, he saw a Company of Armed Men, which were hastily ascending them; he
was not near so much astonished thereat, as to see at the head of them the
perfidious Cloriman; who lifting up his Helmet, told my Prince, It Is not my
Treachery, Artabbanes, but my Love, has forced me to undertake what I should
condemn on any other score: The fair Emilia was not content to scorn my
Passion, but to receive Symander's, and even to confer hers on him; I had the
heart to do any thing rather than to see this; and my despair only has made me
listen to Merinor and Surena's solicitations, with whom I have agreed to
deliver up this City, and from whom I have received a solemn engagement, that I
shall have the fair Emilia, and that your Life shall run no hazard, unless by
your own resistance you cause it. Traitor (said my Prince), my life has not
been so bred up in Crimes, that whilst it has a Sword to defend it, it should
derive its preservation from Infidelity. No, I had rather lose it to punish thy
sin, than live by it; and either by thy death, and Surena's, I will hinder both
your designs; or by my own, your Triumphs. My Prince's blows began where his
words ended; and finding my self obliged both by duty, affection, and revenge,
to become Artabbanes's Second, I assumed that noble employment, and being
assisted with some of Zenophon's Domestics, we soon drove before us into the
Court, those which were come to assault us in the Palace. 'Twas in this
retreat, that the false Cloriman had the honor to fall by a hand, which rather
rewarded than punished his infidelity. In my Life I never envied any of my
Prince's actions but this; for I esteemed it but just, that being the Author of
Cloriman's Crime, I should have been of his punishment. Never did Artabbanes
purchase more glory by his personal courage, than in this fatal Night; and
never the Sun beheld so admirable a sight, as then he lost, in not seeing the
prodigious effects of it. The name of Surena, and the apprehensions he should
again ravish from him the fair Parthenissa, made him act things, which if
Surena had seen, he could not but have as much admired, as feared. The place
where my generous Master and his little Troop, had already made that of his
Enemies less, was under Parthenissa's window, which soon after was hastily
opened by Emilia, who cried out, they were forcing the Princesse's Appartment.
Artabbanes had scarcely heard that voice, when he flew from a victory to a
fresh danger, with more celerity than the greatest Courages could to the
former, or the greatest fears from the latter; I followed him as fast as my
feet could carry me, and yet before I could overtake him, he had engaged
himself in Parthenissa's out-Chamber, amongst as many Enemies as he had already
killed* All the service I could do him was, by defending the Door, to hinder
their increase, which I did as long as I could use my Sword; but I lost that
and my senses together; yet to hinder that with my Body, which I could not with
my strength, I fell cross the Door, and there lay as some little impediment. In
the mean while Parthenissa hearing a strange noise at her Door, every moment
expected when it would be broke open; and having a while fruitlesly attended
that misfortune, she began to apprehend she was freed from it by a greater; her
fears gave her no time to consult her safety; so that immediately opening it,
she discovered they were but too-too-well grounded: For alas, my Prince, who
thitherto defended it, had received so many wounds, and lost so much blood,
that he was constrained to lean his back against it; so that missing his
support, he fell backwards into the Princesse's Chamber, weltring in a Sea of
blood: Parthenissa lost not her judgment, though she did almost her hopes, at
so fatal an object; for in the twinkling of an Eye, she thrust to the Chamber
Door, which by good fortune having a spring-Lock, was as soon locked as shut;
our Enemies admired that their advantage was so soon turned to Artabbanes's;
but Parthenissa, who apprehended they would immediately force so weak an
impediment, conjured Artabbanes to permit her to lead him down a back-stairs,
which at least would preserve his Life from the fury of those whom he had so
extremely incensed, till the arrival of some of their Superiors, of whom (as
she said) she made no question to obtain it, when she implored it with Tears.
No Madam (said my Prince, sometimes reeling, sometimes leaning on his Sword,
and all his Clothes dropping with blood) I can but suffer Death by fighting
against your Enemies, but I may deserve it by avoiding them: Neither, Madam,
shall you pay to Surena so precious a ransom as your Tears, for a Life, which
by your being in his Power, is far better lost than saved: Do not (fair
Parthenissa) deny me the glory of dying at your feet, and for your defense;
since it is the highest and pleasing'st I can (by your present condition) now
aspire unto. My generous Prince spoke these few words with as much trouble as
the fair Parthenissa heard them; who so abundantly deplored his danger, by this
fresh additional information, that she had lost the very thought of hindering
it; neither indeed could she have done it, for the weak Door was instantly
broken, and above a dozen armed Men came to rob Artabbanes of a Life that he
then was but too desirous to lose; yet not to die unlike himself, recollecting
that little strength he had left, he cast himself on the nearest to him, and
with his Poniard (for he had flung away his Sword, as a weapon his weakness
rendered him unable to use) with two or three stabs, deprived him of Life; but
my Prince fell with his Enemy, and all the rest taking that advantage, had
doubtless acted the revenge of their Companions, if the generous Parthenissa
(by flinging her self on Artabbanes's body) had not become his Armor, and
preserved him, when he was no longer able to preserve himself; for as the gods
would have it, Surena had given such universal and strict order for their
respecting of Parthenissa, that his Soldiers could not be more careful of her,
than she had rendered it impossible (they being so) that my Prince should
receive any father harm; for she so covered his Body with hers, that thereby
she had rendered their Fates as inseparable as their affections; but one of
Surena's Soldiers more intent upon revenge than obedience, threatened the
Princess, that if any longer she became his Sanctuary, she should be so far
from hindering his Fate, that she should share in it. Parthenissa with a
disdainful look, told him, What he said was rather an invitation to prosecute,
than to desist from what she had begun: And though so generous a reply should
have rather created the barbarous Soldier's admiration than rage; yet it did
the latter: for he began so uncarefully to thrust at my Prince, that
Parthenissa had then no more hopes, but to dye with him. The fai^ Emilia moved
with so horrid a proceeding, and with her Princesse's skreeks, immediately, as
if Artabbanes's Soul (which all this while seemed to have abandoned his Body)
were flown into hers, took up his Sword, and guided by a divine influence,
passed it through that Monster; yet the thrust was not so mortal, but that he
had strength enough left to do more mischief, than if Parthenissa, Artabbanes,
and Emilia had been out of his power, he could have done in all the world
besides; and doubtless had effected it, if a Gentleman all covered with Arms
and Blood, had not come running into the Chamber, and made an end of that
Monster, who otherwise had made an end of Perfections, which even in degrees
equalled his Crimes. All those that were present, knew him by his Armor to be
Surena, and Parthenissa did so as soon as he had lifted up his Helmet, which he
did to let her know who 'twas, that prostrate at her feet begged her Pardon for
his Soldier's horrid insolency, whose Sins he could not be thought guilty of,
since he had so signally punished them. Parthenissa, who till then had esteemed
Surena's Passion as great a misfortune, as he had the unsuccessfulness of it,
now began to hope that the gods would repair the injuries it had done her, by
making of it save a Life, which it had so often endangered; and the sooner to
try her power in so ambitioned an essay, she implored from Surena a Life which
she more apprehended was not in his power to grant, than in his will. Surena
with much humility protested, he was come to receive her Commands, not her
Entreaties; and to evidence he would never decline any of them, he would not
that; which by how much she did appear concerned in it, by so much did the
desert of his obedience do so. The Princess having not only received his
promise, but his protestation of his Concession, ris from that Posture, which
did not preserve Artabbanes from more wounds, than it did give Surena; which he
endeavored to conceal, lest the greatness of his Merit, might have made
Parthenissa question the reality of it; so that with a Countenance which
rellish'd more of trouble for his Rival's present condition, than that he was
going to improve and mend it, leaving the Princess weeping on her knees by
Artabbanes's body, he ran and called his own Chyrurgeon, and in her hearing
commanded him (the first thing he did) to dress my Prince's wounds, and with
the same care as if they had been his: But alas, that order was suddenly
changed by Surena's perceiving some blood dropping down Parthenissa's Arm,
which proceeded from a slight hurt she had received in the shoulder, defending
Artabbanes. Oh gods! what did not Surena say, when he saw that precious blood
spilt by one which had been under his command! he caused that dead Traitor
immediately to be carried out, and hung in Chains in the Allarm-place; and by
presenting his Sword to Parthenissa, implored, and gave her the power to shed
all his, as an expiation. But she (more concerned in Artabbanes's, than all
things else) only enjoyed Surena the Penance, That his Rivals wounds might be
dressed before hers; which she assured him did not so much trouble her, as he
seemed to be troubled at it: Parthenissa could not have imposed a more severe
Penance on Surena; and doubtless he had not submitted to it, if it had been
unaccompanied with that assurance; besides, imagining she would not expose such
beauties to his sight, as were to be the reward of the Chyrurgeons Art, he
hastily caused his Rival to be dressed in the Princesse's bed, which he
apologized for, by beseeching her to remove unto another Appartment, and out of
so much blood and confusion. Pathenissa neither heard his excuse, or desires;
for the Chyrurgeons, by giving Artabbanes strong Cordials, by stopping his
blood, and by binding up his wounds, made him by some deep groans testify he
was not dead. Never was any of his Addresses or Professions so pleasing to that
fair Princess as were those groans; and never could she have believed till
then, that the gods themselves could have made her take so much delight in
Artabbanes's; whose recovery the Chyrurgeons assured her would be infinitely
prejudiced (if not worse) if he were, in so weak a condition, any way
disturbed. Parthenissa therefore begging, and obtaining from Surena, that her
Appartment might be the next to my Prince's, continued immovable by him,
expecting till it were made ready, and till he should give some fresh and more
pregnant testimonies, of a Life, she could not be more joyed to recover, than
if it were fled, she was resolved to follow.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FOURTH PART.
The Third BOOK.
WHilst the Princess was bestowing her Care and Tears on Artabbanes, the fair
Emilia stole from her to do the like on me, and found I was not far from the
place in which my strength had so injuriously abandoned me: For Surena's
Soldiers by believing I had lost my Life, took it not away, but contented
themselves only with dragging me from that place in which I had prove some
little impediment to them. There 'twas that Emilia perceived me; and though it
were in so forlorn a condition, yet it was in as good a one as I could have
ambitioned, since it equalled my Prince's; for whom my concerns were more
transcendent, than for my Passion: Emilia by a faint beating of my Heart,
discovered some hopes of Life, at which she assumed as sublime a satisfaction,
as mine would have been, had I been capable of seeing hers; which received no
small accession by the accidental passing by of one of her Father's Domestics,
whom she knew to be a Chyrurgeon of as much Fidelity as Art, and who perhaps
had derived his own preservation, from the Enemies knowledge of the latter. To
his care the fair Emilia committed me; but in terms so pressing, that he found
my recovery no indifferent thing unto her. With both their helps I was carried
to a Chamber contiguous to hers; where, whilst those Cordials I had received
were operating, she returned to Parthenissa, who she found in the continuance
of a Charity as perfect, as either her that conferred, or he that received it.
She had longer engaged her self in that employment, had not the Chyrurgeons
protested to her it was a fruitless one; and that as soon as ever Artabbanes
was in a condition to know, or receive the honor she did him, they would bring
her advice of it. Parthenissa having had a reiterated assurance of this
engagement from those who had made it, immediately went to her Appartment,
which was joining to my Prince's, and was waited on thither by Surena; who more
concerned in her Recovery, than her Company, to evince that Truth, immediately
retired himself into an out-Chamber, from whence he sent in the Chyrurgeons to
dress a Hurt, which though slight to her that had received it, was almost
mortal unto two that had not. As soon as they had performed their Duty, Surena
came in to perform his, which he did in these terms: If, Madam, the greatness
ness of the Crime of shedding your blood, does not sufficiently illustrate I am
innocent of it, I do protest before all the gods, that had I known my
unfortunate Flame should have had so unfortunate a way of recovering you out of
my Rival's Power, I had rather eternally have been denied that felicity, than
purchased it at so criminal a rate: Yes, Madam, my Respect, and my Passion know
nothing superior to them, but the Beauty to which I pay the former, and which
does inspire the latter; whose perfections are such, that they necessitate me
to things which would be unpardonable, had they a lasser attraction; but my
Sins have so ample a one, that none (except you and your Artabbanes) but by
seeing the cause of them, will rather commend than excuse their effects. I
speak not this, Madam, to invite you by Reason to pardon my unhappy
performance; I had much rather receive mine from you, than from your justice;
that what invites your Mercy, may prove a more transcendent blessing than your
Mercy it self. I should be (said Parthenissa) too unjust, did I esteem you
guilty of a Crime which you have so exemplarily punished; but I must tell you,
had you been innocent of all others, you could not have suspected your self
guilty of this, nor been necessitated to protestations, of whose reality you
have yet a more persuasive way to create my belief: For if (as your vows would
persuade me) your concerns are more for me than your self, you may obligingly
evince it, by restoring both Artabbanes and me to a Freedom, which will make us
much more yours, than your force has done or can do; and create those
resentments in me, which nothing but such a performance is capable to inspire.
Oh gods! (said Surena, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven) you cannot (Madam) be
henceforth offended at my Passion, when in spite of your Modesty, you confess
you believe the power your perfections give you over me, to be infinite, by
making such a Motion: Alas, Madam, was it not enough that you made me save my
Rival's life, but that you must command me to render my self almost as
miserable, as I make happy? For to give away my hopes of the fair Partenissa,
is almost to be cursed as much, as to possess her is to be blessed. I tell you
this, Madam, that you may forgive my justifiable disobedience; nothing but such
a command could make me give it such a name: and I cannot but esteem my self
excusable, if having so truly professed an unimmitable passion for you, I
decline an obedience, which would but too fatally bring that truth in question:
Do not, Madam, I beseech you, invite me to gain your favor, by what will make
me eternally lose the hopes of it; nor condemn a disobedience, in which you may
discover a Flame, greater than the Sin which discloses it. If (said
Parthenissa) I had that high opinion of my self, that you would infer my
request seems to import, I should not then have made it: but the little
invitation you have to continue an illplac'd Affection, both for the Choice and
the Success, and the great propensity you have to generous things, made me
believe, by representing to you the latter, I might dissuade you from the
former; and in one performance invite you to act both according to the Dictates
of Reason and Gallantry. The first of these, Madam (said Surena), I cannot more
indisputably do, than in continuing my adoration for the fair Parthenissa; and
the last it may be I have already done, in giving a Life to her satisfaction,
which has deprived me of any. But Surena, Who took as little delight in these
requests, as Parthenissa did in the condition which rendered her making them
necessary, immediately withdrew himself; and he was searcely gone, when one of
Artabbanes's Chyrurgeons came running into her Chamber, to let her know, that
his Senses being restored, to indear his Patients preservation, he had told him
from whom, and how he derived it; but that had been so far from producing the
expected effect, that it had done the Contrary; for immediately after the
Information, he had employed that little strength he had left, to the tearing
off his Plasters, and to the acting of such extravagancies, that his
Companions had been, and were necessitated to hold his Arms by force, till he
were run to implore her to do it, by her commands. Parthenissa had hardly the
leisure to hear so fatal an information, for her sudden running to my Prince's
Chamber, whom alas she still found violently held by the Chyrurgeons and their
Servants. Great gods! (continued Symander) what did not that fair Princess do
at so sad a spectacle! she could not see her generous Servant all pale and
bloody, and with looks as full of horror as his Thoughts, but she melted into
Tears; and kneeling by his Beds-side, she told him, Is Parthenissa then become
so odious to Artabbanes, that rathen than not become her Murderer, he will
become his own? Have the gods been so miraculously your Preservers, to make you
become as miraculously your own Destroyer? Have I endangered my life to save
yours, and is this the return you make me? Are we not miserable enough by our
Destinies, but we must make our selves more by our Despair? Cruel Artabbanes!
if Death only can give us ease, was there ever any such disproportion in our
Judgments, as should induce you now to believe a disproportionate Fate shall
create a resembling satisfaction? Or do you detest my Constancy, that you take
so sudden and ^atal a Course to avoid beholding it? Great gods! (she continued,
raising her voice and her hands) if already my afflictions have not evidenced
my fidelity, give me Trials of it as great as it self; and let the residue of
my Life be spent in such sufferings as may manifest that immutability, which it
seems my past ones could not. My Prince (said Symander) more wounded with these
words, than he was with his Enemies Swords, having first obtained from
Parthenissa that she would sit upon his Bed, with as many sighs as words, told
her, It is time, my Princess, it is now time, if it had not been before, to act
what you are come to interrupt; Can I live but in a higher Crime than to become
my own Murderer, after you interpret a production of my Flame and Care, to be
one of my hatred and jealousy? Alas, those are both equal and impossible Sins;
That I can hate the fair Parthenissa is so egregious a misbelief, that but to
name, is to confute it; and to doubt her Constancy, is to doubt what by a sad
and happy experiment I have found is as transcendent in perfection, as to
suspect it is the contrary in an opposite extreme. No Madam, what I was doing,
proceeded absolutely from my love to my Princess, and from my knowledge of her
Constancy: The first of these made me esteem it both just and rational to set a
period to an unfortunate Life, which experimentally I found had hitherto
rendered hers so; and the last, made me esteem it as just and rational, since
her Constancy (by what she had so often and so recently performed) would
confine her to a Fate, which the gods had confined to eternal misfortunes, to
cut off the cause of their Cruelty, and leave them thereby as little excuse for
the continuation of it, as while she so infinitely misplaces the blessing of
her affection, she affords them too much. In brief, Madam, I was prectising but
what you approved in Surena; for I was but taking away a Life, that had
endangered yours, which is so great a Duty, that without a proportionate
Injustice you cannot hinder it. Are you then Artabbanes (the Princess replied)
so ignorant of my affection, as to believe I can survive the object of it? the
gods by what they do, but endanger our Lives; but you by what you design, will
inevitably end them; can an evincement that I love you more, induce you to love
me, and your self the less? We are not miserable enough to despair, when we can
make our selves more so; and what you so fatally design, will abundantly do it:
The gods, as they have hitherto tried our Constancies, will in the future
reward them, if what you intend prevent it not: Do not therefore, my
Artabbanes, doubly injure them, by doubting of their Mercy, and by hindering
them to act it; I do not tell you this, that I decline bearing you company; no,
I am ready to do it: By killing your self, you cannot more certainly go before
me to another life, than I will the same moment follow you; neither can you
suspect, that she who has been your Companion in the sufferings of Virtue, will
decline being so when you go to receive the reward of it. I should never finish
my Relation (said Symander) did I particularize all their discourses: I will
therefore only tell you their, result, which was, That after many reasons,
Parthenissa's prevailed; but then my Prince's retributions had almost proved as
fatal as his Despair: for forcing himself to make them in a posture fitting
their condition, not his, a great wound he had received in the side,
unfortunately opened, out of which there issued such a flux of blood, that the
Chyrurgeons could not be more troubled at it, than they were to stop it; and
one of the remedies they prescribed for that end, was, that Parthenissa should
leave the Chamber; which she obeyed after she had received many reiterated
protestations, that Artabbanes did leave off all violent designs against his
own Life, and consequently against hers. I will not (continued Symander) any
longer usurp upon your patiences, which I fear my just concerns in every
particular action of my Prince's, has already made me do too much: you shall
therefore only know, that my wounds by the fair Emilia's care, were recovered
before my Princes, whereby I was freed (by being enabled to wait on him) from a
greater trouble than they themselves had been. Surena not only knew what
belonged to a Gentleman, but practiced it by a constant visiting of Artabbanes
and by demonstrating as much care in his recovery, as if it had been to have
restored him to hopes, and not to have deprived him of them. And truly, except
his Crimes in love, I never knew him guilty of any, nor never act what was
unworthy the noble Title of Zephalinda's Brother; but in his Flame, he was as
criminal as unsuccessful, though his Partisans alleged, that only therein
being so, it was not his Nature, but Passion which offended. During my Prince's
danger, Surena permitted Parthenissa unrestrainedly to visit him, either out of
Civility, or Revenge; the first, that he might be denied nothing conducive to
his health; and the last, that she might see that he wanted it; but as soon as
that was restored, he lost a conversation which made him think it a misfortune;
but this was so handsomely carried, that it was only in Surena's absence, who
went to the Frontiers to receive his Brother, and his Army; and perhaps he
elected that course to induce Parthenissa to with for his return; as also in
his absence to hinder an union which had so narrowly been interrupted. The fair
Emilia, and I, were the constant Ambassadors between the generous Lovers, and
by the excellent example of their Passion, learned to form our own. Surena
having met Vixores, sent him and his Forces to join with Merinzor; but being
himself more concerned in Love, than Glory, returned to Arsacia, where he
received the intelligence, that Tygranes (before sillaces and Zenophon were
joined with him) being impatient at M^rinzor's, in some manner besieging him,
had put his Fate to a Battle which he had lost, and with exceeding difficulty
recovered the walls of E^batan, under which it had been fought; that when the
king was reduced to the last extremity, the Parthian Ambassador, with 5000 of
Zenophon's Army, had forced the Guards of the Camp, and flung himself into the
City, which he despaired not to defend, till Zenophon, who with the residue of
his Army was retreated to Crisapolis, could so recruit it, as to bring the
Destiny of Media to a second Field. Surena acquainted the Princess with this
intelligence; but so unconcernedly, as if the dissatisfaction it brought her,
suppressed the contentment it afforded him. But as soon as Parthenissa had
desired the permission of visiting Artabbanes, which during his absence had
been denied her, he not only waited on her to his Chamber, but sent for the
Governor thither, whom he reprehended for his incivility, and punished also,
by discharing him from the Government of Arsacia, which made many believe,
their separation had been his fault, not Surena's; though at least as many
concluded, Surena practiced the common Art among Princes, of disgracing
Servants for committing of obliging (and sometimes commanded) offenses. That
too, which almost turned this belief into a certainty, was, that he was sent to
a command, which was rather a Preferment than a Punishment; and Surena never
permitted the Lovers to converse but in his presence; yet so artificially, that
none which had not been exceedingly concerned in it, could have taken notice of
it. One Evening, when Surena was in Parthenissa's Chamber, there came into it a
Gentleman of Merinzor's, who presented him a Letter from his Prince, which he
read with often starting, and change of color, and which he had not sooner
perused, then he presented it to Parthenissa's who found in it these words:

Merinzor to the generous Surena.
Our Rival in Love and Empire must die, both for your security and mine; and
that you may enjoy with felicity what I shall with Envy, I have given one the
charge of his Execution, who you shall not be acquainted with, but after he has
done you an obligation you have hitherto declined conferring on your self,
though I am confident you disrelished nothing in the performance, but that you
were to act it.


As soon as the fair Parthenissa had received this fatal Letter, he that
brought it, and was the Person mentioned in it, went out of her Chamber into
Artabbanes's, whom he found all alone, and in so deep a Melancholy, that he was
almost desiring that Death the other was come to give him: My Prince, who
thought him some Gentleman sent from Surena to visit him, ris from the place he
sat on, and went to salute him; but the other first locking the Door, drew his
Sword, and having told him he was come to revenge his Brother's Death, or to
follow him, ran with it at Artabbanes, who by the resemblance this Traitor had
to him he had killed in Parthenissa's Chamber, concluded, and that truly, 'twas
him he meant. But this as unexpected as dangerous an adventure, which would
have disturbed a less Resolution than my generous Master's, raised his; for
stepping two or three paces back, he put by as many thrusts, and snatching up
the Chair he had sat on, made use of that as a shield; the noise which this
scuffle made was so great, that it was easily heard in Parthenissa's Chamber,
which was contiguous to my Prince's; and observing that he which had brought
the Letter was gone out of it, and suspecting the noise she heard proceeded
from the cause it did, and which she so much apprehended; immediately with the
wings of Fear and Love, she flew toward the scene where this Tragedy was
acting, and Suren^ after her; but finding the Door locked, the Princess cried
out, Will you then, Surena, permit Artabbanes to be murdered? You shall derive
no advantage from it: for I attest those gods (who cannot be so, if they punish
not this Sin) Whatever by my Artabbnes's fate, I will make it mine. Surena
heard not these words, for he was then running against the Door, which he did
so violently and successfully, that he broke it open, just as Artabbanes was so
tired with his unwieldy shield, that his weakness was giving his Enemy an
advantage, which his courage would never have conferred on him. Surena with his
naked Sword, and by a great Cry, made the Traitor turn about; who finding by
his new Adversarie's Posture, his Design, resolved to prevent it, and by a
furious thrust, passed his Sword through Surena's body; but not ossending any
of the noble parts, he had strength enough left, not only to interpose himself
between Artabbanes (who was fallen down) and his Enemy; but by a happy thrust,
to deprive the latter of his Life. I cannot (said Symander) sufficiently exalt
this generous performance; for it was as much above description as expectation,
and almost equally divided Parthenissa's Tears and Charity between the generous
Rivals, who both by their wounds lay weltering in a sea of blood at her feet:
But the Princess, who feared there might be more in the Conspiracy, believing
she might defer her Gratitude to act her Care, and thought the latter somewhat
expressed the former, ran out to call for assistance: The first she met was
Emilia and I, who had been walking in the Palace-Galleries, in a conversation
almost as pleasing as the action she told us of Surena's, was generous. Emilia
instantly ran to call the Chyrurgeons, and the Princess and I, to see what we
could do in their absence; we found Surena in a deep swound, and my Prince on
his knees by him, neglecting his own danger, and stopping with his hand the
orifice of that wound which had cast his Rival into that condition; and which
had hindered my Prince from being in no worse a one: Doubtless this Gallantry
was the more so, by being conferred on one insensible of it, and who could
hardly repine at his being in so dangerous a condition, since it evidenced how
precious his Life was to the most accomplished of Men. Parthenissa, in
expectation of the Chyrurgeons arrival, tore all the Linen she wore, and had
the strength to tear, with which she somewhat stopped the generous Rivals
bleeding, in a confidence, that what was Artabbanes's design, could not be his
trouble; neither indeed was it: for the first thing for which she had his
retribution, was, for her Care of Surena; who suddenly after Emilia's and the
Chyrurgeons coming, was carried on Artabbanes's bed, who would not permit his
own wounds to be touched till Surena's were dressed; and then having more
strength than he, by the help of some Servants, he exchanged their Appartments.
Surena (as I have said) having none of his vitals offended, gave his
Chyrurgeons no other trouble than to stop an internal bleeding, who being
perfect in their Art, they successfully did it: 'Twas then they acquainted him
with my Prince's care in stopping his wound; and protested to him, 'twas from
thence he derived his Life; and that if Artabbanes's ran any hazard of his own,
it would proceed from his not having done that to himself, which he had done to
him. Surena magnified my Prince's gallantry in such pressing terms, that all
those which heard him were convinced, 'twas as much his Truth, as his Civility
which spoke; and having learned he had resigned his Appartment to him, he was
almost as much troubled at it, as at the cause of it; and sent to implore his
pardon for a fault, he had permitted, and not acted. Neither did Surena's care
extend to the formal, but even to the essential parts of it: for out of an
apprehension, Merinzor might perform what he had but attempted, he commanded
his Guard of an hundred Partisans, to become my Prince's, and each of them to
answer his Life with their own. It is almost impossible (continued Symander) to
tell you how equally Parthenissa divided her visits, and how proportionately
gratitude and affection governed her; but it is absolutely so, to express with
how much satisfaction Artabbanes observed it, and perhaps as much so, for any
which knew him not, to believe it. Some three or four days after this accident,
Parthenissa (as she usually did) went to visit Surena, who the Physicians
protested might then speak to her with less prejudice than his silence would
bring him. 'Twas then after some other usual Civilities, and that Parthenissa
began to deplore his condition, that he told her, The gods (Madam) which knew
how fit it was you should know that transcendency of my Passion, and how unsit
it was you should know it by that fatal way in which you desired to be
convinced of it, have (I hope) so demonstrated that Truth, that you can no
longer doubt it; which consequently I shall never deplore, since 'twas a
manifestation I would not only have purchased with the hazard of my Life, but
even with the loss of it, had not that loss carried with it a greater; and
knowing, Madam, that you are perfect in all your attributes, I cannot doubt,
but the highest Passion may aspire to the highest reward; and that mine is so,
cannot be a greater certainty, than your not believing it so, is an injustice.
Parthenissa, who expected reproaches instead of requests, listened to the
latter with satisfaction; and indeed it was the less troublesome of the two;
for it is so, to have requests made, than to make them: Her criminal suspicions
of Surena's being accessory to, or at least permitting Artabbanes's intended
Murder, merited a higher penance than she then suffered; and concluding it
better not to discover her offense, than to obtain a forgiveness for it, she
elected the first of these, and therefore only answered him, That the generous
Surena has as infinitely obliged me, as he has his Rival, cannot be a more
indisputable Truth, than that the strange way in which he has preserved
Artabbanes for Parthenissa, is an evidence how much the gods are concerned in
his being so preserved; so that there wants in the obligation to render it
perfect, but that you will make the same construction of the same performance.
Oh gods (said Surena)! it is high time to despair, when even those very
arguments which evince the height and pureness of my flame, are perverted to
inferences that I should extinguish it, or resign my hopes to him that has not
so legitimate ones. Parthenissa, who perceived by this reply, that she had
touched him in a place he was more sensible of, than of his wounds, began in
her subsequent discourses to give him her resolutions in such terms, that
though Surena evidently read her intentions, yet he could hardly quarrel at
those expressions which acquainted him with them. Whilst affairs were in this
condition in Arsacia, those in Ecbatan were strangely altered, since Syllaces
had cast himself into it; that generous Prince by his Courage and Conducts, so
raised the Defendant's resolution, that their Fears of preserving the place*
were much less than Merinzor's of not obtaining it; neither was this the only
production of his virtue; for by the unintermitted and visible effects of it,
he had won such an Ascendent over the King of Media's inclinations, that
neither the affection he had given Merinzor, nor the present hatred he paid
him, could in degrees either equal the esteem or Friendship he had so justly
contracted for my Prince's Friend; who so well improved this acquisition, that
he had no ungrounded hopes to render Artabbanes at least an equal sharer in
this good fortune. And though Merinzor, who had learned from whence so
successful a resistance proceeded, did allege, That Sillaces by taking up
Arms, had violated and infringed the duty of an Ambassador; yet it hindered not
Sillaces from proceeding in what he had so far advanced, but induced him to
offer Merinzor the Combat for the clearing this aspersion; which he declining,
his allegation was answered by a large Manifest; whose effect was, That being
employed from his King to negotiate a League for the mutual destruction of
their Rebels, he did nothing against his Commission or Employment, if he
contributed to what he came to treat of. But at length, all the joy of his
frequent successes were extinguished in the fatal news of Surena's surprising
Arsacia, which was brought him by a Spy he had sent into the Enemies Camp, who
only could assure him of that misfortune, but not of any particulars which
succeeded it: Sillaces to make his Enemies wear his Livery, by Tygranes
consent, drew out all the Forces of Ecbatan, but those which were upon the
Guard, and in the dead of Night, made so furious an attempt on Merinzor's Camp,
that he sent some Thousands to sleep eternally, and doubtless might have raised
the Siege, with the Garrison, had not an unfortunate Dart given him so dangerous
a wound, that his Soldiers converted their care of victory into one for him;
and the former he himself had so far advanced, that the latter, forasmuch as
concerned his bringing off, was not difficult; he was met at the Gate by the
King, who gave to the Danger of his Protector, as many Tears as to his own, by
so fatal a deprivation. Sillaces, who (as well as his Physician) thought
himself in the state of Death, desired that his Chamber might be emptied of all
but Tygranes, of whom he implored, That he would confer that high affection he
had honored him with, on Artabbanes (if living) and Lyndadory; for whose
resentments, fidelity, and esteem of it, he would give his dying breath for
security; and that if he might receive an assurance of this Concession, he
should leave the World with as much satisfaction, as the leaving it in so ill a
conjuncture for his affairs, would permit. Tygranes, whom adversity had set
into the ways of Virtue by the dictates of it, and by being sensibly touched by
the last request of so generous and dying Friend, first granted it by Tears,
and then by Protestations; which gave Sillaces a satisfaction his present
condition seemed to be incapable of: But the gods had reduced him to this
extremity, but in order to their acting a double Miracle, that of restoring him
to Life, and Moneses's blood to Tygranes's favor and good opinion. I cannot
tell whether the joy of that grant contributed to or acted the former; but I am
certain from the Minute he received it, as if the body had participated in the
satisfaction of the Mind, it began to amend; but yet so slowly, that Tygranes
had but too many experienees, that his success, under the gods, was derived
from the generous Sillaces: Neither was the good Fortune of Merinzor's without
some Clouds: for as he computed the business, he apprehended before he could
reduce Ecbatan to his Power, either Syllaces recovery, or Zenophon's increasing
Army, would cast him into the same despair which that generous Prince's
performances had involved him in already; but when to these apprehensions, the
intelligence was brought him, that not only his design on Artabbanes was
destroyed, but that it was so too, by Suren^; he was almost as much troubled at
the manner, as at the thing; but yet at the arrival of Vixores, and the
Parthian Forces, he began to hope, 'twas out of too^much affection for
Parthenissa, and not of too^little for him, that he had saved my Prince; and
therefore 'twas, he determined no longer to delay an execution which Surena
could not well suspend without wronging as much his Ambition, as his own Love.
But whilst Merinzor was employing himself to obtain his designs, Artabbanes and
Surena did their Healths, and Emilia by a seeming spy to the last of them, but
a real one to her Father, had learned that Cloriman had only taken those two
days respite for the sending for a faithful Priest, but to purchase so much
time for his unripe Treachery. But (continued Symander) to hasten my relation,
I will no more replenish it with any things but those so essential, that you
shall be convinced, I am as much concerned in the speedy finishing it, as my
hearers can be. It was but half a Moon, after the Ryvals recoveries, that one
day walking in the Palace-Gardens, a Captain of the Guards presented Surena
with a Packet, which the better to read, leaving Parthenissa with my Prince, he
retired himself into another Walk, where opening the Letters, he found the
first was directed to him from Merinzor, and contained these words:

Merinzor to the Prince Surena.
WEre not that esteem I pay you, built on a very firm foundation, by having so
preserved one Enemy, you might have raised your self another, and it may be as
dangerous a one as him you protected: Neither could I but conclude, if I
consulted with reason, not friendship, that I have a very considerable share in
yours, since to confer on me the highest disobligation you are capable of, you
use your self at that rate. Do not, I conjure you, break with your Friend, to
preserve your Enemy; nor evidence how little I may expect from you, when to the
obliging me, I only desire you to sit still, and cannot obtain it: I have sent
those who will infallibly secure and revenge us, if by way of reparation, for
having hitherto hindered it, you do not undertake it your self; I hope you will
not by neither acting, nor permitting this, give me so much reason to be your
Enemy, that I must find a Misfortune in the too-much justice of becoming so.


Surena having read this high Letter, opened the other, and though it were
without address or name, yet by some private mark he was not ignorant that it
came from Merinzor's Secretary, whom he had corrupted both by large Gifts and
hopes; it contained these words:

YOu can no longer have Merinzor, and Artabbanes your Friends: neither indeed
can you undertake to defend the latter from death, but you will more than
hazard participating in his Fate by endeavoring to hinder it; for there are so
many engaged in the Design, that your desire of preventing it cannot be
greater, than the impossibility: believe it Sir, as a certain truth, that the
first attempt you make for your Rivals defense, will be your last; and that he
which is Merinzor's Enemy, and he which endeavors to hinder his destruction,
will be considered under one netion.

Parthenissa and Artabbanes (who concluded by Surena's leaving them alone, that
what invited him to so unusual an action, had an unusual motive) did not walk
away from the place he had left them in, but from thence had fixtly considered
his actions, and gestures, as things in which they might discover his thoughts,
which they found were very perplexed: for having ended his two Letters, he
walked three or four turns, then read them over again; and after the third time
he had done the same, pulling down his Hat over his Eyes, and folding his Arms
one within the other, he conntinu'd with as little outward disquiet, as the
inward was great. At length, after an hour so spent, he came again to the
Princess and his Rival, and to the first of them presented his Letters, telling
her withal, by whom the last was written, and that he had sent it in his
Prince's Packet, as the least hazardous conveyance. Parthenissa whilst she was
reading, both in her looks and gesture, expressed no small disorder; and Surena
as soon as she had ended, having received his Papers, saluted her with as much
humility as sadness; and then went to the Garden door, where his Guards
expected him, and where he commanded their Captain immediately to seize upon
Artabbanes, to carry him close prisoner to the Castle, and to keep him there in
that quality, 'till he received further orders. Surena having given him these
Commands, went immediately to the Citadel, whither he removed his lodgings,
and from whence he sent two hundred Soldiers to guard the Place, and to permit
none either to enter into it, or to come out of it, without a Pass under his
own hand. The Captain who had received direction make Artabbanes his Prisoner,
being a Parthian, and consequently reverencing the high blood of the Arsacides,
came even in tears to do his duty, and protested, he had much rather have lost
his own Liberty, than become the Instrument of depriving my Prince of his; who
judging by Surena's abrupt departure, and by those of the Guards coming toward
him, what their intentions were, went to his weeping Princess, and implored her
to support her Faith on the many precedent deliverances the gods had sent him;
that Surena had so dearly purchased her esteem, and so justly valued it, that
it was improbable he would by any Criminal performance destroy what was so long
a perfecting; especially since his fall herein, would be like a Statesmans,
which admits not of a second. He saw in his Looks a reluctance to his action;
and that he was too much a Gentleman to be guided by considerations opposite to
reason and honor; or for the satisfaction of Merinzor's hopes, to ruin his
own. Artabbanes had further enlarged himself in consolations of this quality,
had he not perceived, that already Parthenissa's color began to abandon her,
as her senses did suddenly after; and by falling in his Arms seemed to tell
him, she expected no consolation but from Death: my Prince, that had given her
hopes for his own condition, could give himself none for hers, which lasted not
long in that extreme: for by that time that he, Emilia and I, had carried her
in our Arms to those Stairs which lead to her Appartment, her breath, but not
her words, were come to her again, so that Artabbanes by pressing, and kissing
her hands, took, as we all thought, an eternal leave; and in whispers conjured
Emilia to hinder her Princess's despair, from making her the sharer of his
Fate, as she had but too much been of his Misfortunes. Emilia neither answered,
nor indeed heard his request, for all the faculties of her Soul had resigned
themselves to grief: My Prince having spoke those few words, with a languishing
look took a second farewell from his Princess (who by being then insensible, was
more happy than if she had been otherwise), and going to the Guard, returned
them thanks for their Civility, and desired them to do their Duty. The Captain
moved with so sad a separation, told him, Would to the gods, Sir, I durst; for
then I should carry you to Liberty, not to Prison. Whilst this little discourse
past between them, I had represented to Emilia, that 'twas fit I should wait on
my Prince; and had obtained not only her permission, but commands to do it.
'Twas therefore that I came to the Captain, and desired his leave for it; which
he more readily granted, than my Prince, and accompanied his Civility with this
Protestation, That nothing which could be condusive to Artabbanes's
satisfaction, and which was not positively forbidden him, but should still find
the same return. By this time we were come to the Garden-Gate, where we found a
Chariot ready, into which my Prince made me follow him; the same Officers, and
the same Guard, brought us to the Castle, which is a place as impregnable as
Art and Nature can render any; the Appartment allotted for my generous Master
was very large and magnificent, to supply his being denied the liberty of the
Gardens; and finding he was to be a close Prisoner, he commanded me to get a
Palate, and to lie in his Chamber; where he resigned himself to so
transcendent a grief, that I knew by the greatness of it, 'twas not for
himself, but Parthenissa, who Emilia told me afterward, had assumed a
proportionate sorrow, both for the quantity and the cause. My Prince found
nothing in his Imprisonment, no not the very end in order to which it was, so
intolerable, as the being denied the sending to, and hearing from his
Princess; who as soon as she had learned, she was under a resembling
misfortune, concluded Surena's design was exceeding criminal, since rather than
permit her to know his actions, he elected to give an exact Lover the fears
such a relation unavoidably inspires, and thereby contracted a worse opinion of
him, than his very worst performance could almost create. Ten days after
Artabbanes's Imprisonment, (during which time, he never saw or spoke with any,
except the Captain of the Guards and me) finding so long a suspense as bad as
execution, he earnestly conjured him to learn what Surena's intentions were,
and if possibly, what his usage was to Parthenissa. The Captain promised to
endeavor both; and about four hours after returned, but with a Countenance
that spoke his intelligence, before his words did; which acquainted my Prince,
That for the last of his Commands, so strict a watch was kept in the Palace,
that thereby all his endeavors therein had been fruitless; but as to the first
of them, he came into Surena's Chamber, when some of Merinzor's Partisans were
disputing with him, not whether you should be put to Death, but of the way of
it; he alleging, that in regard of your quality, especially in Media, you
ought to have so much respect, as not to be a public Spectacle on an infamous
Scaffold; and that to execute you in your Chamber, would be of as much
advantage, less scandalous, and more secure; for (the Captain continued) the
Inhabitants of this City are so great Reverencers of either the Arsacian blood,
or of Moneses's Family, that Surena has sent for a thousand Parthian Horse out
of his Brothers Army, to keep Arsacia from Tumults, which he apprehends it will
fall into, let the execution be never so private; on the other side Merinzor's
servants alleged, that since you were the first Prince of the Blood, the
execution ought to be public, that the Medians might be convinced of the
reality of your Death, and thereby cut off their hopes, with your Life: for it
has been no unusual thing from the obscure Death of Princes, to set up
Counterfeits, which have proved as dangerous as the real ones could; that it
would look rather like a Murder, than an execution, were it done in private;
and that by so covert a proceeding, it might give the Arsacians an opinion we
want either Justice, or Power; the former will make them believe it is honest to
relieve him, and the latter, that it is safe. Though (said the Captain) I heard
the debate, yet I was commanded to withdraw when they were to form the result;
but yet I learned that whatever it were, it would not be put in execution 'till
the arrival of the thousand Parthian Horse, who are hourly expected. Any
(continued Symander) that had heard this Relation, would have thought he that
made it had spoken of himself, not of my Prince, who found more satisfaction in
learning his destiny, than trouble in learning 'twas so fatal a one; and
doubtless, had not his just apprehensions of the fair Parthenissa's despair, or
at least excessive grief, tied his hands, he had by one generous stroke,
exempted himself from the infamy of d^ing on a Scaffold, or composing a public
Trophy for his Enemies: but that Parthenissa might be convinced his Life was
dear to him, since it was to her, he determined, if it were his fortune to be
put to Death, not to act it himself, that she might not condemn, but deplore
his Fall. To the Captain he gave such eloquent and admirable consolations, that
he went away full of satisfaction, but I cannot say whether it proceeded from
an assurance he thereby received of his going into a better world, or that the
brightness of his virtues rendered him any longer unfit for this. We had not
been two hours alone, which we heard all the Streets of Arsacia echo with
Trumpets, which we knew proceeded from the arrival of the Parthian Horse, who
were immediately distributed into several advantageous Posts in the City, the
better to suppress all disorders. Artabbanes was advertised of this by his
former Intelligencer, who told him withal, that a Scaffold was erected before
the Palace-window; and though some said it was for his execution, and that
Parthenissa might be a Witness of it, yet he had been assured in private, the
execution should not be so, and that the Scaffold being raised there, was but
the more, artificially to delude the people; and that Surena's opinion of doing
the business obscurely, had at length been assented to. My Prince was a little
surpised at the first part of this intelligence, not upon his own score, but
on his Princess's, whose grief and despair he apprehended would receive no
little accession, by becoming a Witness, or a hearer of his suffering: neither
could he in so sad an exigent have told how to have behaved himself; for if he
had di'd without emotions, as on the one side it had eclipsed his Enemies
revenge, so on the other it had done the same to the evincement of his
resentments for so sad and fatal a deprivation: and should he manifest the
latter, he could not but have contributed to a satisfaction, the greatness of
which would have proportionately created his own trouble; but the Captain's
assurance was so probable, that he believed it: for though he esteemed Surena
would be vindicative, yet he could not think he would be barbarously so. The
Commander of the Guards knowing how little Time Artabbanes had left, thought it
unfit by * his Company, to rob him of any part of it, and therefore withdrew
himself, but he made me a sign to follow him into the next room, which I did;
where he told me, that for certain the following Night was destined for my
Prince's Death, and that he had declined acquainting him with it himself, as
believing it an information fitter for my discovering; I had only words enough
to thank his care, for my grief stifled the rest in the very birth. My generous
Master at my return into the Chamber, knew some new Misfortune was come to my
knowledge, and constrained me, though in as many sighs, as words, to acquaint
him with it, which I did; and which I had no sooner done, than he only told me,
I had obligingly deluded him; since by the excess of my sorrow, he thought I
had assumed it for some fresh danger of the Princess's. Whilst things were in
this posture in the Castle, those in the Palace were in as sad a one; for
Parthenissa's ignorance of my Prince's condition was more deplorable to her,
than the knowledge of it was to him: she expected every minute the Messenger of
her Death in the messenger of his; and her affection was so high, and perfect,
that it needed not the help of her resolution, to follow his fate; and though
Emilia gave her very pregnant consolations, yet they were too weak for so
strong a Melancholy, which necessitated her to keep her Bed, whereby she was
ignorant of that fatal Theater which was erecting within sight of her Window,
out of which Emilia unfortunately looking, discovered it, and in the
consequences that sight inspired her with, she sell into a fainting; the noise
of her fall made the Princess look what was the cause of it, which when she had
discovered, she called some of the Servants to her assistance, which proved so
effectual, that it gave her strength enough to tell Parthenissa what deprived
her absolutely of hers. Emilia soon repented what she had said, and had much
more cause to do so, when after an hours trial of her prescriptions for ending
a swound, she found them all fruitless. But Nature at length did what Art could
not: and the first sign the Princess gave of her recovery, was a sign of her
affection to my Prince, of whose condition she pressingly asked the ignorant
hearers; their silence was not ascribed to that cause, but to a more dangerous
one, out of which faith Emilia removed her, by protesting they knew nothing of
what she demanded, neither of the cause of erecting the Scaffold, which none of
those were about it could tell; and therein she spoke the truth, for though she
often asked out of the Window for what end those Men were set a work, yet she
could never lear^ it. Artabbanes in the mean time had taken me into a Closet
contiguous to his Chamber, whereby the pressingest conjurations he was capable
of, he enjoined me not to give him so pregnant an evincement of my disa^fection
to him, as to deplore his going to a better place. That I would co^cern'dly
endeavor to console the fair Parthenissa for the like grief, on the same
cause; and that whilst she would do me the honor of retaining me near her
person, that I would not decline it. 'Twas only in Tears that I answered these
impossible commands: and if he thought I promised to observe them, he derived
that belief from my silence, not me. The hour of rest being come, Artabbanes
laid himself down on his Bed with as little disorder, as if he had been as near
his ordinary, as eternal sleep; only the fair name of Parthenissa stole
sometimes out of his mouth, but never unaccompani'd with some sighs, to
demonstrate for whom he breathed them: Oh gods! (said Symander) it were almost
as hard to describe the fears I was in that fatal Night, as to believe how free
my Prince was from any; who about the dawn of day was awakened by the noise of
some who opened the doors; and guessing at their design by what I had
acquainted him with, he rose up and told me, Come Symander we must part; but
this one Testimony of my Enemies power and malice will eternally free me from
resenting another; let the rememberance of so high an advantage extinguish all
repinings the purchase of it may inspire: Do me too, I conjure thee, this last
obligation, as to tell my Princess, I di'd with Parthenissa in my Mouth; and
that my breath expired in repeating the fair name of her, for whom only I drew
it. These words were hardly spoken, when Surena (waited on by some of his
Guards) came into the Chamber, whom he commanded out again, and then came to my
Prince and told him: Artabbanes, I must acknowledge I have twice received my
Life at your hands; the first, when you had taken from me the Victory; and the
second, when you had taken from me what I valued a thousand times more; and
though some have represented to me, that the former proceeded from your
Revenge, and the latter from your Ignorance; yet I hold it fit to make my
acknowledgment, the giving you both your Life and Liberty: I am confined unto
this, if that information be true, by the dictates of virtue; and if false, by
those of gratitude. I know you are not only my Rival, but even successfully so;
and I know how vast a prejudice this will bring both to my passion, and my
affairs. I tell you thus much, that you may be convinced I am not ignorant of
what I do: and I tell you no more, lest I might lessen the merit of the action,
by repeating it. Great gods! (continued Symander) you only know my joy at so
unheard of a Gallantry; and you do consequently know, that it was greater than
his on whom it was conferred. The time, and the strangeness of the thing, made
me suspect I did dream; but it was so pleasing a one, that I apprehended the
doing of any thing which might tell me whether I did so, or no; I esteemed it
too great to be real, yet was loath to interrupt what gave me more satisfaction
than ever any received in that which is the foundation of dreams. You will
pardon (said the faithful Servant to Artavasdes and Callimmachus) my
transports, when you remember what gives them a being; but not to need your
pardon a second time, I will break off what I hope has made me as much deserve,
as need it. Artabbanes as soon as Surena had done speaking, with a look which
seemed to be as much pleased with the manner of the obligation, as with the
obligation it self, told his Rival, Surena is too generous to give me my Life
and Liberty, thereby to confine me from employing either in a service, for
which only they are considerable to me; if that were to be my Ransom, 'twere
such a one as I would never pay: for it is a more pleasing fate to die for the
fair Parthenissa, than to purchase my Life at the rate of being tied from
serving her. I speak this (said my Prince) not that I have so low an opinion of
Surena, as to believe he is capable of selling a generous performance at any
price; or that he could think I would buy it so; but only that those who
hereafter understanding from whom I derive my Life and Liberty, and how I
employ them, may not condemn my so doing, since I declare when I am in your
power, what I intend when I am out of it. It Is no ill payment to acquaint you,
I can make you none, since thereby I publish the belief I have of your virtue,
whose highest operation is to confer obligations not only where there is no
hopes of a return, but even where there is a certainty of none; my condition
makes me more grateful, than any other way my fancy could, and were I to judge
who has the happiest share in this performance, I should conclude, the Giver
has. In what I do (replied Surena) I never expected so much as I have already
received; to have made what you mentioned the purchase of my performance, had
not been to have given your Life and Liberty to you, but to me: no, Artabbanes,
if I confine you unto any thing, it is only to believe my action is as free
from design, as it is; and if to that obligation you will add this other, of
excusing my disputing Parthenissa with the Arms of Honor, as I will not
disrelish your doing the like, I shall receive a satisfaction my condition any
other way cannot afford me. Your performance (said my Prince) cannot be more
generous than I believe it; and what you mention, should be rather my desire,
than my grant; and if in it I resent any trouble, it it proceeds from a
latitude I thence receive, of drawing my Sword against one, for whom when
Parthenissa comes not in competition, I would as joyfully employ it, as for
her. These Rivals (said Symander) by several passages of this quality, gave
each other but too pregnant evincements how unfortunate they were in being so;
and spent so much time in this employment, that the Sun found them in it.
Artabbanes doubtless had interrupted it sooner, to beg a permission of kissing
his Princess's hands before his departure, had he not apprehended, his Rival
would have esteemed the increasing of obligations, an uncivil way of paying
them. Surena, who it may be knew my Prince's impatiences by his own (for he had
been as long deprived of seeing Parthenissa, as Artabbanes had been; and knew
how unwelcome his visits would prove, did not he accompany him in them) made
that overture to my generous Master, which he would not to him: The transports
in which he received it, were much greater than those with which he received
the late gift of Surena's, which evidenced he was more concerned in his
passion, than in his Liberty and Life; which it may be invited Surena to
commend what he disliked. Artabbanes suddenly after went out of the Castle with
Surena, and in a Chariot from thence to the Palace, where he sent in a Page to
Parthenissa's Appartment, to beg the honor of seeing her: She was much
surpised at the request, but much more when having granted it, she found her
fears so obligingly deluded; Surena, whilst her joy confined her to silence,
broke his own, by telling her; If Madam, I have been seemingly faulty, 'twas
only to avoid being really so; and if I have hitherto occasioned your hate,
'twas but to avoid deserving it. I was, Madam, by Merinzor's Partisans, so
narrowly observed, and so much overpowered, that had they but suspected my
design, they had both punished and prevented it. You cannot doubt but to
counterfeit was absolutely necessary, when I made your sufferings my disguise;
I know that you were too-too much concerned in Artabbanes's safety, to let you
know I resolved it: That might have proved too dangerous a discovery; and your
not being sad enough, might have given you cause to have been so; but as soon
as I procured a power to resist Merinzor's, I acted that which only the want of
it has hitherto hindered; and I was necessitated to secure the happy
Artabbanes's liberty, with that with which I pretended to secure his Execution:
Yes, fair Parthenissa, such power the gods have given you over me, that when my
satisfaction and yours come in competition, I consider the loss of the first,
to be the acting of the last; and find I cannot quarrel with them for rendering
me unfortunate, since thereby they make me preserve you from becoming so; but
(Madam) I am too injurious to entrench on that little time your Artabbanes has
to entertain you in; which that he may the more unconstrainedly, I shall leave
him to a liberty I believe you do as much desire as he. Surena having ended
speaking, withdrew himself, and that so suddenly, that Parthenissa in the
operations of her joy and wonder, could make no returns to him that had created
them: but when that eloquent silence was expired, she told my Prince, Surena
may attribute that to one civility, which I consider as intended to another;
for the pretense of his withdrawing, was to give us the liberty of discourse:
but I believe the real cause is, that he knew mine (if he had stayed to hear
it) would have come as short of what it ought to be, as this performance excels
all his others. But Artabbanes who knew how little time was allotted him, and
how much was allotted Surena, acquainted his Princess with all those
particulars I have so largely deduced and magnified his Rivals Gallantry, in
terms which resented their truth in their delivery. This just duty being
finished, he told her: This (Madam) is the first time that I thought I could
leave you without regreet; the hopes, that by going from you now, I shall be
the sooner incapable of repeating the like misfortune, is my consolation in it;
neither can you doubt your deliverance is less my ambition than duty, when in
order to the acting of it, I can without reluctance employ my Life and Liberty
against the Bestower of them. The world must be convinced your freedom is more
dear unto me than both those, by making it a higher consideration; yet in that
action of ingratitude I shall evidence my self grateful, by proving I decline
the lesser obligation, but to satisfy the greater. Alas (said the Princess)
are you so low reduced, that an act of unkindness must be an argument of your
Love? must I endure a real misfortune, for an imaginary good? when I consider
those innumerable dangers my condition will engage you in, and those many more
which your courage and impatience will, I could esteem Surena more obliging, if
he were less; and if he converted your liberty into an imprisonment, my trouble
then would extend but to pity, now it does to fear, it may be to despair.
Believe me, my Artabbanes, I find more subject for sorrow in the way you
undertake my liberty, than if I had eternally lost it: that misfortune would
but relate to Parthenissa, but the other does to Artabbanes, who is much more
precious to her, than she is to her self. Ah Madam! (my Prince replied) can you
then believe, whilst I have an existence, that your perpetual imprisonment
would but relate unto your self? And can you think the gods have so
miraculously given me the Power to use my sword, to render the Will a sin? No
my Princess, these strange and intricate obstructions, are not to suppress, but
try our Faith; neither can we think them what they are, and believe we shall
continue as we are. I go with a belief of success proportionate to my desire of
it; and if I have any doubts, it is not of your deliverance, but that I may be
thought unworthy the acting it; if I be, I will find my Martyrdom where I
expect my felicity; and die in that service, in which I ambition'd to live.
These words made Parthenissa look pale, and drew some tears into her eyes,
which to take him from considering, she replied: If the gods should esteem
Artabbanes unworthy the title of my Deliverer, I will assume it my self; my
hand shall act my liberty, if in so fatal a way it be denied to his: Do not
think I shall need any invitation to follow you, but the knowing you are gone
before, and therefore flatter not your self with a belief, that the breaking my
imprisonment can be reserved for any other; for it is like my inclinations, and
consequently entirely for Artabbanes. Madam (said my Prince) I, consider not
this declaration is to make me less hazardous in your service, but to invite
the gods that I may perform it: I have now an internal assurance of that
blessing; for since your liberty cannot be acted but by me, and since not to
have it acted, were too great a sin to be believed, I must be as confident of
the way, as of the end. 'Twas above half an hour (continued Symander) that
these generous Lovers entertained themselves in resembling-discourses, which
had not so soon received a period, but that they considered Surena was in an
Antichamber expecting their separation, which was so passionate, and sad, that
the relation of it would rather prove your trouble, than the omission. My
Prince in the same Room he found his Rival in, would there have taken leave of
him; but he did not permit it, and accompanied him to a Pass some 20 Furlongs
from Arsacia, lest the Treachery of Merinzor's Partisans might have rendered
that place the Scene of a Tragedy he was so concerned to prevent. After many
Embraces and Civilities, Artabbanes told his Rival, If the employing my Life
and Liberty against the generous Surena for Parthenissa, may be excused, by my
employing them for him, where her service comes not in competition, I dare
truly profess, I shall deserve to be so: For I will out of Gratitude repeat
dangers as high as those obligations which confine me to mine: neither can I
but be convinced by what you do to Parthenissa, of what you will do to
Artabbanes; for your Passion makes you think it sit (at least pardonable) to
act against your Inclination; and your Love for the Princess, makes you do
things which might even call that Love in question, did not the knowledge of the
cause seemingly apologize for the effect. That Adoration I have for the fair
Parthenissa, has the same production in me: I know I should give you that Life
and Liberty I receive from you, but I have no concerns above my flame, and the
inspirer of it: that which causes my fault, does yours; neither can you
consider what I must do in the future, but if you reflect upon what you do at
the present, you will acknowledge, we are both innocent, or both excusable. This
is all (continued my Prince) that I beg of Surena, unless it be to furnish me
with an occasion of serving him, though as full of danger as my resolution is
of contemning all; which may evidence a gratitude, whose greatness hardly knows
any thing equal, but my desires of manifesting it. Surena was ready to give my
Prince a reply, when about two hundred Horse came a full Trot toward the
Rivals, as they were in each others Arms. This unexpected accident broke off
their Civilities, and made them gallop to the head of a hundred Parthian Horse,
who were Surena's Guard; his Servants, and some of my Prince's (for then I was
not come up, having stayed sometime to kiss the fair Emilia's hands, and to
settle a course for a future Correspondency) made themselves a reserve to this
little Body, which resolutely advanced to give those a Charge who were coming
precipitately to give them one. Surena as they marched, told Artabbanes, I have
too good an opinion of you and of my self, to think it fit to give you an
assurance that I am innocent of this Infidelity; but if what I have done, has
not raised in you that belief, what I am going to do will. My Prince had only
leisure to tell him, that what he had really done was of so clear a quality,
that what he was now going to do, would not justify, but increase his
obligations: For the Enemy was come so near, that one of those Two which lead
them, cried out, It Is not Surena, but Artabbanes we seek. To which Surena
replied; Traitor, in seeking the one, thou seek both; and in attempting the
one, thou shall find the revenge, or act the death of both; and thereupon
piercing like Thunder through a Battalion of the Enemies, he made so lage a
passage for those which followed him, that they found it as easy, as others
found it strange. My Prince made a proportionate charge, for the resolution and
the success; and twice that day saved a Life, which had not been hazarded but
for him, nor preserved but by him. The inequality of the numbers rendered the
Dispute equal; but by my continuing behind to kiss the fair Emilia's hands, I
had weakened our Party of a small force, on whose arrival with me, the Enemy
that were then wavering, fled; and found that death in their flight which they
had endeavored to avoid by it. The two generous Friends and Rivals celebrated
their victory and deliverance by many embraces, which were given with so good
grace, that it created a general quarrel to Fortune, for having so long deferred
it, and which in the future was to break it again: One would have guest by my
Prince's retributions, that his Life had been precious to him; but those that
knew Parthenissa was in Surena's hands, knew withal, that it was to his
Gallantry, not his own safety, that he paid them. I amuse not my self to
particularize those signal expressions those two generous Enemies made one
another before their separation, which was performed by eithers contracting too
good an opinion of his Rival for their unfortunate condition: But Surena's was
at least silenced, if not suppressed, by his return that day to Parthenissa, to
whom my Prince by a private Messenger gave so ample and handsome an account of
that days proceeding, that his reception relished more of having assumed
Artabbanes's felicity, than of having been his Protector; and his ignorance
from whence so obliging an usage was derived, inspired him with hopes which
could not have a more flattering than false foundation. My Prince in the mean
time, with a Guard Surena had fore'd him to take for his Defense, continued his
journey by a hasty Travel toward Chrisapolis, where he heard Zenophon was
levying Forces to relieve his King, and to bring the Fate of Media to a more
equal dispute, than Tygranes's precipitation had already allowed it. Artabbanes
was no sooner arrived at Chrisapolis, than he discharged Surena's Convoy, with
rewards more proportionate to the Giver, than Receivers. He made his entry into
the City by night, only waited upon by me; and having taken up a retired
lodging, inquired of the Master of it, the News that was then stirring: who
told him, That Zenophon but six days before had received an express from
Tygranes, which told him, their chiefest Magazine of Victuals in Ecbatan, had
been destroyed by a Traitor that had the Care of it; which had reduced him to
such extremity, that if not immediately relieved, his hopes were not to live,
but die a King; that he despaired not but by a small accessional relief, to
revenge his former disgrace in the same place in which it had befallen him; and
that therefore Zenophon with whatever Force he could make on the place, should
advance by incessant Marches toward Ecbatan. This was so true and pressing an
Intelligence, that Zenophon having formerly appointed a general Rendezvous, too
late for this necessity, took of his Army about Eight thousand Horse and Foot,
which were the nearest and readiest Forces, and with those two days since
advanced to the relief of his King, having left order that the residue should
follow with an expedition, which might evidence the cause from whence it
proceeded. My Prince was very pensive at this information, and much more sorry
the destiny of Media should be decided without him, he being in it. Whilst he
was engaged in such thoughts, mine were employed how to remove their cause; and
at last resolving that in so emergent a necessity, he ought publicly to avow
himself to see what influence Moneses's blood had over the Medians, and to have
Arms in his hands to oppose Merinzor, should the gods make him the Instrument
of punishing Tygranes's Ingratitude to my Prince's Father; as also to dispute
Parthenissa with Surena with more equal Arms than those by which he had lost
her: I concluded too, that Zenophon would not entrust so considerable a concern
as Chrisapolis into any hands but those whose inclinations he was as confident
of as of his own; and therefore Artabbanes ought not to apprehend the
disclosing himself to the Governor of it, and to head those Forces which were
embodying, as Seconds to Zenophons's flying Army. These reasons were so
pregnant to me, that I acquainted my generous Master with them, to whom they
appeared the same, and who therefore immediately commanded me to invite the
Governor to give him a visit, which he would have then paid him, had he not
esteemed it fitter to receive his advice in private, than go and perhaps render
himself incapable of observing it, by desiring it first in public. I went with
joy to obey these orders; and being without much difficulty admitted into the
Governors Chamber, I drew him aside, and told him the cause of my doing so. He
received the Intelligence with great astonishment, but I soon found his was
derived from an obliging, not a dangerous Cause, for 'twas in eloquent and
passionate returns, that he thankt the gods for sending, and me for bringing
him such News; he went therefore (followed by all the Gentlemen and Officers
then about him) to my Prince's Lodging, but by the way the Flame being diffused
over the City, there was hardly any in it but those that waited on the
Governor, or that went upon the same employment. I purposely omit the
exceeding deep submissions, and the proportionate acclamations this throng of
Friends made my Prince, and uttered for his return. The Governor (an old and
unalterable friend to Moneses and his family), told him, The gods, Sir, have
doubtless reduced this Kingdom to so low an ebb, to evidence your restoration
was of more concernment, than the quiet of it, since they have deprived it of
the last, to act the first; and it is more than probable that they will
acquaint us 'twas your absence involved us in Wars, by making your return give
a period to them. We are therefore come, Sir, to offer you our Swords and
Lives, which we doubt not under such a General will vanquish greater obstacles
than your courage will now encounter, which has already acted too many things
to leave us the least pretense of doubt it is incapable of performing any.
Artabbanes in words and actions altogether sensible and obliging, made them
find their affection and civilities were not unfruitfully placed; and to let
them know he ambition'd nothing more than to engage his Life in that Country,
in which he found so many willing to adventure theirs with him; as also to give
Merinzor's first infusions the lie, in a way which also should punish it; he
conjured them that the next Morning all such Forces of Horse as they thought
fit to honor him with, and as could be rendezvouz'd by then, might be so, with
which he despaired not to overtake Zenophon, and to share in his Countries Fate.
The Governor immediately commanded all the Officers to see those Orders
obeyed, and in the future to receive theirs from Artabbanes, who that night he
permitted not to continue in those Lodgings, but brought him to the Castle,
where his reception spoke the heart with which it was made. The Sun the next
morning was not risen, when all the streets of Chrisapolis echoed with the
noise of Trumpets and Clarions; and not above an hour after, a great Plain on
the North side of the City was covered with Three thousand Horse, whereof a
third part were Volunteers, which the only Name of Artabbanes drew under his
Colors: The other two parts were of such as had been drawn together by
Zenophon's orders before his hasty depart: The Body (though small) was not
unconsiderable, having my Prince at the head of it; and this they were all so
sensible of, that Artabbanes found they were so by their very looks. After a
short speech, rather to let them know he knew their resolution, than to raise
it, he embraced the Governor, whose age dispensed him from the field, and
began his March toward Ecbatan: Three days with wonderful celerity he followed
the traces of Zenophon's Army without overtaking it; but the fourth from the
high mountain of Dormus, he discovered afar off the Walls of Ecbatan; that
sight refreshed his almost wearied Troops, and made them so to accelerate their
pace, before the Sun was five hours from his set, they were come near enough to
perceive both Armies were joined, and were disputing their hopes, and desires
by the Sword; on which they were so intent, that his arrival, nor his little
Armies saluting their Friends by a shout, and their Enemies by a menacing cry,
could not in the least measure so much as suspend, or lessen the fury of either
side. My Prince was much more pleased with the resolution of his friends, than
with their number, which with the addition of his Forces, did not equal the one
half of the Enemies; whose multitudes he observed were so long hindered from
prevailing by a Gentleman in blew Arms, whose Helmet was shadowed with a Plume
of Feathers of the same color. This generous Warrior carried victory to his
side where ever he was, but his friends lost it where ever he was not; so that
not being ubiquitary, the Armenian Royal Army was giving ground before my
Prince could join it. I design'dly pass over the pa^ticulars of this great day,
to tell you the conclusion of it, which was, that though Artabbanes did like
Artabbanes both in courage and conduct, yet by the fall of the Gentleman in
blew Armor, and by being necessitated twice to save the King of Media's life,
and remount him, it was almost dark before the gods had put a period to the
Battle, and he to the Execution; in which the Traitor Merinzor fell, and above
Twenty thousand of his side; so that my Prince's Revenge and his Victory were
both concluded in one action: such signal events could not but produce
resembling joys in him, who returned from the pursuit with his victorious
Troops, to present them and himself to Tygranes, whose Tent he found environed
with tears instead of acclamations, which was occasioned by a fatal wound the
King at the conclusion of the day had received by an Arrow shot at random;
Artabbanes (by an excess of generosity) at the news, assumed a grief as real,
as great; and learning the faithful Zenophon was by Tygranes, he went without
any interruption where he lay. The King (though extreme ill, no sooner saw my
Prince's Arms, then he cried out, It Is to that generous person that I owe twice
a Life, which the gods are resolved no longer to lend me; but I desire that the
last action of it may be to embrace and acknowledge my Deliverer. Artabbanes at
these obliging words pulled off his Helmet, and Zenophon no sooner saw his
face, then he cried out, It Is Artabbanes, it is Artabbanes: Who prostrating
himself before his King, told him, The gods (Sir) are my witnesses, that I had
long since the ambition to pay you those services, which you are now pleased so
much to overvalue, had not the Traitor Merinzor by false suggestions brought
you into so great a diffidence of that truth, that the danger of coming to
manifest it, was almost as great as were my desires to do it; but those Powers
which vindicate Innocence, have at length brought Merinzor to that Fate he
would have imposed on Moneses, and have made one a Contributor to that Justice,
which has hitherto suffered by his having occasioned the suspending of yours.
This free and generous declaration made Tygranes believe 'twas my Prince, as
much as Zenophon's naming him; for he had never known him but by that Character
the faithful Zenophon had given of his Person and Mind. Tygranes, who found the
hand of death upon him, believed he could not more excuse the Crimes of his
Life, than to silence that hatred which had been the highest offense in it, was
beginning to manifest a Conversion which had nothing of imperfection in it, but
that it had not earlier shined; when some Gentlemen brought in one into the
Kings Tent (for there was never a one set up but his, neither had that been,
but for the danger of carrying him to Ecbatan) who though almost covered with
blood, yet some internals disclosed that his Arms before they had been so
fatally stained, were of Azure; which made Artabbanes not only know 'twas that
gallant man, the want of whose assistance had so long suspended his Victory,
but deplore his loss at a rate which even countervail'd his success. These were
the dictates his inclinations to generosity inspired him with; but as soon as
the wounded Gentleman's Helmet was taken off, he saw in his dying-looks the
charming features of the Prince Sillaces: Oh gods! what did not my afflicted
Master utter at so sad a sight! without so much as considering Tygranes, (whose
tears were so obliging, as a while to interpose between his sight, and the
object which created them) he fell on his generous friend, and expressed by
groans, when his words failed him, such signal and pressing sorrows, that it
even divided those of the spectators, and made them think him as just an object
for their grief, as he had esteemed his friend for his: I will not determine
whether the air which Sillaces received by the opening of his Helmet, or
Artabbanes's tormenting him, or the mercy of the gods, who thought it unjust to
separate two so exactly united, that restored the generous Prince to life; but
this is most certain, that before the Chyrurgeons had given him a Cordial, he
was almost in a condition not to need one; and had been entirely so, if after
having a while faintly opened his Eyes, and discovered Artabbanes, he had not
embraced him so passionately (fearing perhaps never to do it again) that all
his wounds opened, and by a second flood of Blood cast him into a second
fainting, Tygranes, whether out of sympathy, or a precedent weakness, fell into
the same condition, which so divided the care and tears of all that were
present, that never any Victory was esteemed so dearly purchased, or so ill
celebrated. It was about half an hour before the Chyrurgeons brought either the
King or Sillaces to that life which had seemingly abandoned them; but the last
of them returned to it much sooner than the first, for his wounds were of a far
less dangerous nature; and being bound up, as also forbidden any more such
unfortunate demonstrations of his friendship, as his late embraces had proved,
he began to ask of Artabbanes his Adventures; but in so confused a way, that
the disorder could not be greater than his concerned in them, thereby appeared:
The ones curiosity, and the others obedience, were a time suspended by
Tygranes's temporary recovery, this was but a lightning before death, which
made such violent and rude approaches, that he needed not the Chyrurgeons Art
to learn his Fate; which he first told the two friends of, and that with a
constancy which equaled their sorrows. The generous Sillaces, whether as a
friend to my Prince, or Tygranes, so successfully made the latter sensible of
the wrong he had done Moneses and his whole Family, that he seemed more
afflicted for that, than for his present condition, which received no small
refreshment by Artabbanes protesting he was extremely afflicted that his first
service should be his last; and that he would wrong Moneses more than he ever
had, if he believed not to have found out his mistake, was the greatest
reparation he ever expected for it. Tygranes confused with many such flattering
expressions, publicly declared, Moneses was his legitimate Successor, and
Artabbanes after him, which was received with more joy than there were open
expressions of it. Then turning a languishing look toward Sillaces, he told
him, And you generous Prince cannot you furnish me with some occasion before my
death to evidence the esteem I have of your friendship, and of those signal
obligations you have conferred on me? Sillaces was so struck at that fatal
question, that he had not the power to make it any return; which Tygranes
observing, he commanded all in the Tent but my Prince and Zenophon, to leave
it; which being obeyed, addressing his discourse to my generous Masters friend,
told him, It was with no small satisfaction, that I learned one of my blood
could captivate Sillaces; though I have seemed ignorant of your affairs, yet I
am not so much a stranger to them, but that I know Lindadory is honored with a
passion you have for her; and her Father has declined making her the reward of
it, upon considerations which will more extenuate my usage toward him than any
thing I can say in my own justification; I conjure you therefore ( Tygranes
continued speaking to Artabbanes), that you let your Father know my last
request, which I even deliver with my dying breath, is, That your Sister may be
allowed the liberty of her own election: and that he may not be entirely
disprovided of what is requisite for the maintaining of both their qualities, I
hereby confer on Sillaces all the false Merinzor's forfeited Estates, and the
Estates of all those who have adhered to him: Had the gods been pleased to have
given me the fair Lindadory, I would thus have given her: Moneses cannot
suspect a counsel I would my self have practiced, and in which he will receive
as much satisfaction as I should, were I confident he would observe my desires.
The generous Sillaces at the end of these words, would have flung himself at
Tygranes feet, as some expression of his satisfaction, which could hardly
exceed the Kings, when Artabbanes assured him in Moneses name, of an exact
obedience to his Commands. Never was there a Tent at once so replenished with
tears and joy as this, and perhaps never was there more cause for either. It
seems the gods had protracted the King of Media's life, that the expiration of
it might repair the faults in it; for, some two hours after, he died, in
discourses so constant, that the manner of his death consol'd the beholders of
it: Artabbanes and Sillaces having given their tears to so great a fall,
Zenophon took care to have Moneses proclaimed King throughout the Army and
City, which was received with acclamations so loud, that in the largeness of
them there was evidenced a proportionate joy. The Funerals of Tygranes were the
next day celebrated with a Military pomp, his body being afterward Interred in
the Tomb of his Fathers, over which my Prince erected so proud a Monument, that
his goodness was known in his Magnificence. Whilst these requisite duties were
paying, Sillaces's recovery was so much advanced, that the doubt of it was no
longer Artabbanes's fear, who every day with Zenophon acknowledged him the
Protector of Media, and restorer of Moneses, who by a solemn Embassy was
invited from a Solitude to a Crown, the greatest and least extremes. Neither
did Artabbanes omit the Gallantry of his Friend, nor Tygranes's last request
for him, and his engagement on it. Things of a civil concernment put into this
posture, the forming of a considerable Army was my Prince's next care; which he
was more troubled how to employ, than how to raise: for his interest, and the
many peoples hopes which depended on him, and served under him, were very
rational inducements immediately to march and cut off the roots of so dangerous
and so near extinguished a Rebellion; but the going to attempt Arsacia, and to
force Parthenissa from Surena, were more powerful inducements to fly with his
Army to so glorious and ambition'd a design: for the undertaking of which he
fortified his inclinations with these reasons, That no consideration should
transcend that of a generous and fruitful flame; That an occasion of conquering
a Kingdom might every day be offered; but that of releasing the fair
Parthenissa, seldom or never; who could not be more troubled at the cause of
the continuance of her sufferings than at the sufferings themselves; and that
thereby he would more injure her than Surena had: That entirely to extinguish
the Rebellion, there needed not a War, but a progress over the Kingdom: That
Zenophon with such forces as the joy of this Change would draw under his
Colors, would be more than sufficient to finish what was so far advanced; and
that by the dictates of Reason as well as Love, he ought to employ his courage,
where it was probably to meet with the brightest resistance; and that was where
Surena was in person, who was not only the most considerable enemy for power
and resolution; but being a foreigner, and having Parthia to befriend him,
ought first to be attempted, and dislodged. The generous Sillaces's opinion and
reasons concurring with my Prince's herein, he assumed the resolution, and that
too firmly to admit of the least shadow of variation. The next morning
therefore in a general Assembly of the Officers, my Prince acquainted them with
his design, which he fortified with such pregnant reasons, and delivered in
such an accent, as made many believe he rather summoned them to approve his
Counsel, than to receive theirs; so that partly out of judgment, partly out of
compliance, the result of the meeting was an unanimous approving of the motion.
Artabbanes therefore immediately gave Zenophon Commission to Command an Army
for the reduction of Media to Moneses's power; and three days after had a
general Rendezvous of all his Forces under the Walls of Ecbatan, which he
divided into two equal parts, giving Zenophon the one, and taking the other to
himself. Sillaces was yet so ill of his wounds, that he was not capable of
undertaking the Command of Zenophon's Army, nor of so much as accompanying my
dear Master in his: I omit the sad words at their separation, which was no
longer delaid, than that time took up which was employed in the last embraces,
and in Artabbanes's leaving his generous friend the Command of all things
behind, and of the whole Kingdom, in case the fortune of the War drew him out
of it. My Prince too, found some consolation in Sillaces continuance in
Ecbatan, That being the Metropolis of Media, and consequently the place which
Moneses would reside at; whereby he might not only have the opportunity of
being near the King, and it might be of Lindadory, but that also by the
inevitable charms of his conversation, procure from the former the latter. My
impatient Master having thus disintangl'd himself from all obstacles, which
might any longer protract his so passionately ambition'd March, began it the
next day with an Army, which though not consisting of above Fourteen thousand
Horse and Foot, yet in the quarrel it had assumed, he thought unresistable. The
next day after we had left Ecbatan, our spies brought us in word, that Vixores
( Surena's brother) had safely recovered Arsacia, with all those Parthians that
had escaped Merinzor's defeat, which with some other Relics of that Party,
had so encreast Surena's Troops, that learning the weakness of ours, he was
determined to bring the dispute to a Field, and had dispatched away Vixores for
all those Forces, which yet continued an in^estine War in Parthia; that if the
gods blasted his first hopes, he might not be divested of all, Artabbanes with
unequaled satisfaction received this advice, for he thought every thing a
felicity which avoided protraction: And lest Surena's second thoughts might
prove less obliging than his first, my generous Master so precipitated his
March, that in eight days he discovered those happy and fatal Walls within
which the fair Parthenissa made her involuntary residence; not far from whence
he discovered Surena's Camp, which was situate in a most advantageous and
convenient place. Never (continued Symander) did I observe in my Prince's looks
so much of contentment and sorrow intermingl'd; the first was derived from his
vicinity to his Princess, and from the power he had to dispute her by Arms; and
the last was from the reluctance he had contracted for the necessity of
employing his life against one, from whom he had so often received it, and for
whom he had a Friendship so great, that nothing could come in competition with
it, but the passion he had for Parthenissa. Whilst his Army was drawing up, he
resolved to write to Surena, to whom he sent a Trumpet with this ensuing Letter.

Artabbanes to the generous Surena.
THat Passion which forces you to act against the object of it, and yet is your
Apology for that performance; must be mine for employing my Sword and Life
against him from whom I derive them: Would to the gods your flame were not so
great that it self should prove its crime; but that you would give the fair
Parthenissa the freedom of her election, and submit to what we cannot, nor
ought not to oppose. That if we cannot find out our happiness in her making of
it, we would make our own in the making of hers; I should then carry Arms for
the generous Surena with a much more transcendent joy than I could obtain a
victory against him by them; and he should then suddenly learn, that though my
Love be infinite, my Friendship is proportionate; and that if I give the former
the precedence, the difference proceeds as much from my Fate, as my Inclination.


This Letter was sent by a Trumpet to Surena, who received and read it to
himself at the head of his Army, which was then drawn up to decide their
difference. He went a little aside, and after a short consideration returned
this Answer.

Surena to the generous Artabbanes.
HAd ^ot the gods esteemed it just, that Passions as immortal as themselves,
should have none but them for judges, they had not now furnished us with what
will bring it to their decision; which their having effected, though it makes
my friendship for you esteem it a misfortune, yet it makes my flame for
Parthenissa consider it as a Providence, and so signal a one, that I must not
decline it; We need not fear partiality before such a Tribunal; he that least
deserves Parthenissa, will have it this day demonstrated by a Divine Sentence,
which cannot deliver a higher truth, than that in all occasions but this, I
will employ my Sword for you with as much satisfaction, as in this I do it with
Reluctance.


My Prince at the same time he received this Letter, saw Surena's Army march
from their Camp into a Plain, which he judged the General of it had elected for
the Scene of the Battle. I cannot tell you the confusions he was in at his
Rivals Resolution, which forced him to evince his Love by the suspension of his
Gratitude. This noble trouble resigned its Empire to his joy of having brought
the redemption of the fair Parthenissa to so immediate a trial. Artabbanes
having viewed Surena's Army, found by his Computation, that their numbers and
strength were resembling to all judgments but his own, who thought any force
inferior to his, when he considered the occasion and recompense of his quarrel.
Neither was Surena void of the like belief; and in those dictates both the
Generals began the Battle, which though it merits a retail'd Relation, yet I
shall only acquaint you, That the two Rivals having a hundred times rallied
their broken Troops, and as many times turned the Victory, that the reward of
it could hardly transcend the courages which disputed it; at length they met,
which as soon as Artabbanes discovered, he ended the Combat by avoiding it.
'Twice that day he repeated the same action on the same score. Oh gods
(continued Symander) what an influence has a transcendent Gratitude on a
generous mind? Artabbanes flies from an enemies sword, when even that enemy was
as much so to Parthenissa as to him, or rather more so the the latter, by being
equally so to the former; but fate forced my Prince to what his Inclination
would have avoided; and indeed Surena so solicitously courted my generous
Master to the Combat, that it may be what did induce him to avoid it, now did
to embrace it, since 'twas Gratitude to act his friends desires. Never, never
was there a Combat resembling this; for it transcended all others as much in
the effect, as it did in the cause. Here Artabbanes by so fighting, evinced
what was not the cause of his having so often avoided it; and Surena by the
largeness and unintermissiveness of his blows, what had made him so ambition
that decision, and what he hoped would be the reward of it. Artabbanes was
mounted upon the proudest Horse in Media, who seemed to know whom 'twas he
carried. Surena had under him a Parthian Horse, which yielded nothing to my
Prince's; and indeed both of them seemed not only to know, but act their
Princes design. The Rivals, whose Armors in the beginning of the day were of a
different color, now began to wear one Livery by the many fountains of blood
which sprung out of them. If Parthenissa had beheld so fatal a sight, she could
not but have deplored a Beauty, which at the same time that it evidenced,
destroyed Courages as great as it self, and perhaps a friendship too. Twice
already the generous Combatants had grappl'd, because their Horses grown
furious with Heat, made many of their blows only wound the air, which to avoid
in the future, they closed so strongly, that their Bridles being abandoned, and
their Horses left to their own dispose, the Riders forced each other out of the
Saddle, and fell on the dust in those cruel embraces; as their design was, so
were their advantages, for they saluted the ground with their sides, only
Surena's Sword falling between his and the earth, inconvenienc'd him, but so
little, that Artabbanes had only the internal satisfaction of resolving he
would take no advantage of it: for before he could manifest that generosity,
his enemy was in a condition not to need it. Their Horses (as I have said)
sympathizing in their Masters concerns, were no sooner eased of their burden,
then they also began a furious sight, which ended not but with the life of
Surena's; but then the survivor fetching two or three groans over his dead
enemy, fell down eternally by his side. You may think it strange (continu^d
Symander) that any could so misimploy his sight, as to be able to give this
relation; but it is certain, that the rareness of the spectacle, and the
general belief that the Riders fates would be seen in their Horses, drew the
eyes of many from the dispute of the former, upon the latter. The two Generals
already so weakened by those streams of blood they had mutually lost, that 'twas
no more their strength, but their resolution which continued the Combat; this
being observed by many of both Armies, they advanced to separate them, as they
were leaning on the Hilts of their Swords to take breath. Those which came to
my Prince, had only these words, Do you fear my Courage, or my Quarrel? But
they had a look which told them more. Surena's had a resembling entertainment;
and to take from their Armies the opportunity of the like offense, they renewed
the fight again with so much strength, that those which feared they had too
little left, now did, they had too much by the fatal way they employed theirs
in: You will dispense with me, generous Hearers, (said Symander) if I tell you
not every blow in this fatal relapse, since I know so well your concerns for
Artabbanes, that in so relating the Combat, I should almost act it, by wounding
him afresh in your sorrows; it is enough you know, that both of them so
prodigally spent the treasure of their Breath and Blood, that if Parthenissa
had been a spectator, she must have confessed her self too well disputed; and in
brief, our Heroes having performed actions even as worthy our wonder as grief,
Surena fell, and afterward Artabbanes; but then their knees served them for
feet, as if their hearts, the throne of their Courages, had been strong forts,
and were to be won by approaches. Who can tell how much Parthenissa was hated
for being so much loved? and how many a Curse was uttered against her, for that
which was the greatest to her self? and that which she more participated in,
than any of her Blasphemers? To finish this fatal Dispute, I shall acquaint
you, that their knees being not so active as their feet, only served them to
receive wounds, not avoid them; and their mutual weakness made them so
apprehend they scarcely should have life enough left to act their deaths, that
it extinguished all thoughts of avoiding them. Surena like a blaze before the
extinction of a Lamp, united his expiring forces with a design in one blow to
perform what so many had but too far advanced; but as his Sword was in the air,
his body fell on the ground, and thereby seemed to tell him, that his life was
more just than he, by abandoning him when he intended so fatally to employ it;
his eyes also, as needing no more the light, after the gods had decreed
Parthenissa from him, shut their lids, as if they intended to impose on
themselves an eternal night. Artabbanes employed not that moment of breath
which was left him, to ascertain a success which he feared was too much so
already; but he resolved, since Surena by his Letter had left the least
unworthy title to Parthenissa, to the gods decision, that he would employ his
fading strength to declare, not act his victory; so that having waved his sword
over his dead Rivals body, he fell down on it, and by embraces seemed to beg
pardon for an insulting, which his own declaration had necessitated him unto;
and which he could not have performed in a less criminal way.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FOURTH PART.
The Fourth BOOK.
OH gods! (continued Symander) who can tell you with how many acclamations and
tears this fatal Victory was celebrated in by the Median Army; which being
filled with those two most predominant passions of joy and grief, in the
dictates they inspired, flew on the Parthians, who being possessed only with the
last of them, which rather stupisies than enflames the Courage, lost the
Victory with their General, and left his body as one manifestation of it. For
my part (said Symander) I contributed nothing to it; for taking with me an
experimented Chyrurgeon, I ran to my Prince's body, which I found too large a
subject for the evincement of his Art; his wounds being bound up, though with
no signs of life; we erected his Tent over his body, and laid him on a Palate.
And because I knew if the gods would restore him to life, that nothing would
more accelerate his recovery than my assurance that Surena had wanted nothing
for his; I caused the care of them to be as equal as their danger, and carried
Surena's body to a neighbour-Tent, left their being in one, might have been
prejudicial to both. It was at the least three hours that Artabbanes continued
in his Swound, for his recovery out of which he had no water but my tears; at
length the gods were pleased by the opening of his eyes, to dry up mine; which
joy was increast by his speaking, and the first occasion of it was (though with
pain equal to the generosity which caused it), to enquire after Surena. I gave
him a true account of what I had done, for which he embraced me; one part of
his strength being employed to enquire after his Enemy, and the other to reward
the care of him. The ensuing night was given entirely to rest; by which he
received so high a refreshment, that next morning he had perfectly recovered
the use of speaking. The first employment he sent me upon, was to visit Surena,
who I found (by resembling miracle to my Prince's) had no one wound that was
mortal, and health enough recovered to acknowledge that civility which sent to
enquire after his. When Artabbanes knew this happy truth, he asked of his
Chyrurgeons whether the removal of Surena to Arsacia might be effected without
any hazard or inconvenience? to this he was answered affirmatively; whereupon
commanding all but me out of his Tent, he told me, Go Symander from this step
to Surena, and tell him, That his Liberty which the gods have given me as a
punishment for having denied Parthenissa hers, I do restore him; and had not
continued that Combat in which he lost it, had not our dispute been so equal,
that any overture of ending it by words, might have relisht more of a care of
my self than of him; but now that I can evince my solicitousness for him,
proceeds from a clearer principle, I embrace this way of serving him with more
joy than I assume at what gives me the power of doing it. Tell him withal, that
he must now offend the gods if he offends any longer Parthenissa; and that the
former have so miraculously preserved his life, to give him so large an
occasion to repair the errors of it. But I fear (said Artabbanes) I speak so
much of this, as it may invite him to believe I am grateful, but in expectation
that he will be more so; therefore convey him to Arsacia, and tell him only, I
am at least as much troubled that I cannot pay him that duty, as at what
hinders me from it. I was (continued Symander) as much astonished at this
Command as Surena was when I went to obey it; who in generous retributions
accepted of an obligation, he could neither have desired nor hoped. Surena's
being conveyed from the Army to Arsacia couldnot inspire the last with more joy
than it did the first with wonder. When he came to the gates, which was the
place where I took leave of him, he made me many Appologies for not having been
able to wait on my Prince, to have acknowledged a Gallantry which nothing could
proportion but the value he placed upon it, and his ambition of repaying it.
Five days Artabbanes continued in more trouble from Surena's silence than from
his own wounds, which had closed themselves much faster if the distempers of
the Mind had not hindered the cure of the Body. I must acknowledge I did not only
believe that Surena had conveyed both himself and Parthenissa into some more
remote place, but told my Prince so; which thought of mine he resented as ill,
as he could have the performance; and though I told him, that by what Surena
had formerly done, my now conclusion was not irrational, yet I could not make
my opinion his; but the sixth day all our suspicions and doubts were resolved
by a Letter which Surena sent by a Trumpet. The words, to the best of my
rememberance were these:

Surena to the generous Artabbanes Prince of Media.
THough I had written as soon as I had received my wounds, they could not have
proved a higher trouble to me than my friendship and gratitude now do; for the
clearness of what I ought to perform, cannot be greater than the impossibility:
I have pleaded your cause with my self against my self, and have said so much
for you, that could I but do half as much to you, you would have admired what I
fear you will condemn. But alas, I cannot resign up Parthenissa but with my
Life. The gods knowing this Truth, have put me into a posture of evincing it,
and I shall conclude they never mean you her, whilst they perform not that to
me. Come then, generous Artabbanes, to the assault, and you shall see how
willingly I will put my self in the only capacity, by which I can present
Parthenissa to you, who perhaps the gods have not yet adjudg'd from me, since I
can dispute her in a way in which I may find my felicity, or be incapable of
resenting the loss of it.


My Prince read these lines with as much grief as they could be written in; he
found, to have the reward of one Victory, he must act another; and yet the end
of the last could not be more pleasing, than the way was the contrary. After
the disorder these reflections infused, were vanished, he returned this answer
to his Rival.

Artabbanes, to the Prince Surena.
THat construction which you make of the gods preserving you, is so mistaken a
one, that your repeated Crime will force them to a repeated Judgment: it is not
your Death, but your Life which offends them; and therefore they will not
punish you in the first, but the last; which they have only lengthened, that
what committed the Sin, should repair it: and to evidence this is my Faith, if
the gods make me a second time the Master of it, I shall use you at the former
rate; which you may be as confident of, as I am that they will shortly put me
into a capacity of manifesting, and you of making that use of it.


Artabbanes having returned Surena's Trumpet with this Reply, immediately
ordered Arsacia to be environed with his Army, which was so numerously
increased with the Nobility and Gentry which thronged to his Ensigns, that his
hopes had now no Cloud, but the protraction of them. I believe I need not tell
you that my Prince when he was recovered, performed hourly the part of a
General, an Engineer, and a Pioneer, leaving no function unpractised, which
might accelerate his approaches, and put him into a felicity, for which he had
lost so much blood, and fought so many Battles. In brief, one Moon had so far
advanced our hopes, that we had strong ones, another would convert them into
Certainties; and though Artabbanes gave many an assault to taste the resolution
of the Defendants, yet he always returned with such pregnant evincements of
their greatness, that he concluded the reduction of Arsacia was not more a work
of Courage, than of Time. And though this knowledge did often suspend his joys;
yet the remembrance, that only a few days separated him from Parthenissa,
hindered them from being suppressed. But, great gods! (continued Symander) how
fallacious are the Thoughts of Man? and how often do you take delight to act
things improbable, and to destroy those which are not? For my Prince, who to
hasten the Siege, made the Soldiers work at the approaches, so assiduously
solicited their Labor, that by the excess of it a raging Fever invaded our
Camp, and at length the Pestilence, and that in so fatal a way, that it turned
Epidemical; and to add to this misery, at length it seized on my Prince too,
and so dangerously, that I apprehended the loss of his Life, in that of his
hopes. Oh gods! (continued Symander) what Prodigies did you perform in that
poor Army? and had you no way to manifest your Power but by your Cruelty? Yes
(generous Hearers) never was there a greater Mortality, than that in which the
offended Deities visited the Median Camp: Our Ensigns were no longer guarded by
those, which notwithstanding did not abandon them; the Living had no employment
but to bury the Dead; and our Trenches had no other Defense, than what had
rendered them void of any: In the horror of this Condition, the remaining
Commanders appointed a Meeting, where whilst they were advising of what course
to elect, their Intelligencers came in with reiterated assurances, that Orodes
with all the Gallantry of Parthia, was come within 300 Furlongs, purposely to
raise the Siege, which Surena had invited him to: This assurance taught us what
to do, so that the ensuing Night, whilst Artabbanes was so weak that he knew
not what he did (which was a happy ignorance) we put him into a Litter, and
with the Fragments of our Army, conveyed him so far before Day, that we only
feared his safety from his sickness, not his Enemies. The first of these
continued, till the arrival of the generous Sillaces, who being in more pain
not to be near his Friend, than his wounds gave him, came from Ecbatan to my
Prince's retirement; this was a happiness we owed not to our own precaution,
and yet we knew none but such a Friend durst disclose to him how much the gods
were his Enemy. And had we ignored that Truth, we might have discovered it by
inference; since if being acquainted with it by Sillaces, accompanied too with
reasons as much as the Subject could bear, he fell into such expressions and
actions of Despair, that we thought his very grief would prove both his
Misfortune, and his Cure; what would it not have amounted unto, if neither the
Speaker, nor the things spoken, had been what they were? These miseries had
this accessional one, that our intelligencers brought us certain advertisement,
Orodes had been received at Arsacia with as much joy, as he received Surena
within it, whose invitation had brought him thither, having lost all hopes in
his precedent Battle, but of continuing the Siege till this Relief came, which
he solicited by so powerful a Reward, as the Resignation of Parthenissa; only
with this Limitation, that Orodes should oblige himself by solemn oath only to
implore, not constrain her affection; to which was added, that Surena should be
restored to his former Power and favor; and both he, and his Partisans have a
plena^y Act of oblivion. My Prince at this Intelligence cried out, Ungrateful
Rival! could thou divest thy self of a Flame for Parthenissa, but to repair
the injuries thine had heaped upon her? Can Fear and Allegiance make thee
abandon what a higher Duty and Generosity could not? and could thou hope
relief from an action, which rendered thee unworthy of any? Whilst Love was thy
fault, it was thy excuse: but now thou art as criminal in the very abandoning
thy Passion, as in the assuming and continuance of it. I should never finish,
did I particularize all the evincements of my Prince's despair, which truly was
so transcendent, that I believe we could hardly desire his recovery so much, as
he detested it. Sillaces, by what Surena had done, concluded of what he had not
done, I mean not abandoned his Passion, by his having deposited the object of
it in the hands of so unsuccessful a Rival, and one who would unavoidably
continue that Name, if he performed his engagement to him. Artabbanes at length
found so much Reason in what was his Friends, that he began by little and
little to qualify a hatred he then thought he had assumed upon a wrong score;
for he could find his Rival no way excusable but by that, in which his Friend
accused him, which was, that his Passion had the Ascendant. Whilst Artabbanes
and Sillaces were reasoning upon the mutation of their Condition, and how to
act thereon, there came certain deputed Citizens out of Arsacia, who being
admitted, told my Prince, That Surena had procured for them from Orodes, a
Liberty to dispose of themselves, and their City, as their Interest and
Inclinations should lead them; which as soon as they knew, they had acquainted
Surena, that both those bound them to offer up themselves to their legitimate
Prince; to which Surena replied, that had he not concluded they would have so
employed the Concession, he would never have obtained it; and that since they
were so well determined, he had nothing to impose on them, but his desire to
assure Artabbanes, that to evidence 'twas not ambition, but Love, which made
him disturb his Kingdom; as soon as the latter had ceased, he designed by the
restitution of so considerable a Place as Arsacia, to evidence the former; and
he further begged, that his leaving Media in a perfect Quiet, might apologize
for his having broken it; which if any other should attempt, he would return
with more considerable Forces to restore her peace, than ever he had brought to
interrupt it. The Arsacian Citizens, having thus performed Surena's part, on
their Knees did their own, by presenting Artabbanes with their Keys, and by
imploring him to believe, they had been long since so disposed of, had they had
the disposal of them. My Prince having raised them up, granted them a Pardon
for a fault which indeed others had committed, and promised them in the Future,
an affection which should recompense their Present. He then enquired of them
how Surena had disposed of himself, since he concluded by the interest he
himself had now in Arsacia, that 'twas no longer the place of his residence.
The Arsacians replied, That both he, Orodes and Parthenissa were returned with
the Army into Parthia; and though many had advised the employment of it against
an Enemy whose wrongs and Power would inspire him with Desires and Actions of
Revenge; yet by Surena's persuasions, all preventative thoughts of hostility
were silenced. The Arsacians having a Governor given them of their own
Election, were dismissed: And then the Two Princes after a private debate,
resolved, that Sillaces being now perfectly recovered, should return into
Parthia, both to act his own Interest, and countenance my Prince's; who
concluded, nothing by way of force, but a Conquest of Parthia could recover
Parthenissa out of it; and that such a way was both too tedious, and uncertain;
that therefore as he lost his Princess by Arts and Slight, so he should attempt
the recovering of her; the very way of his loss, instructing him how to repair
it: and therefore as soon as his strength would permit, he would follow his
Friend in a Disguise, that if he regained not Parthenissa, yet at least he
might see, and converse with her, which was the next Blessing. The Prince
Sillaces, having his Friend's Interest mingled with his own, did that with joy
upon both those scores, which he could not without reluctance have undertaken
upon his own; and before he began his journey, he had the satisfaction of
hearing from Zenophon, that though his Army had found little resistance, yet
the benefit and largeness of his Progress, repaired the little Glory he
acquired in it. Sillaces was safely arrived in Parthia two Moons before my
Prince could leave Media; which forced, and necessary continuance there, gave
him time to settle that Kingdom, which his Passion otherwise would not have
allowed him: And learning that his first Ambassadors to Moneses were
miscarried, he employed others, who passing successfully in their going, and
return, through various Dangers, the very same day my Prince was beginning his
so ambition'd Journey, they presented him with this ensuing Letter, whose
Address was as strange to him, as the Contents was to us.

Moneses, to Artabbanes King of Media^
THat Solitude which discontent led me to embrace, now Reason does: for in it I
have found so serene a Felicity, that all the trouble I am capable of in it, is
an apprehension, you may suspect my Affection to my self, not to you, makes me
present you with the Crown of Media. All the advantage I derive from the gods
conferring it on me, is to evidence how little I value it, or how much I value
you. Believe me, Artabbanes, I cannot better illustrate the greatness of both,
than by resembling the one unto the other. I could almost ambition I were a
friend unto Power, that by resigning it I might manifest I am more so to you;
who have so great a burden to undergo, that the not beholding it is none of
the least blessings I promise my self in my retirement. It Is my ill Fate that I
must pity you, in giving you Testimonies of my affection; for it is the misery
of Kings to derive their happiness from other men's opinions, not their own; the
unlimitedness of their power, makes their failings their designs; and renders
them guilty of not intending the best, as well as of not acting it. You will be
envied by all but your self: men's ignorance will render you as unhappy as your
own knowledge; the gods it seems being so intent on the felicity of Monarchs,
that to effect it, they make contraries produce a resembling event: But though
these be some of the inconveniences of Government, yet the whole must suffer
more for want of one, than any particular can by undergoing it; and be that
knows the trouble of a Crown, and yet dares wear one for his Countries good,
may in the merit of the performance find some kind of Antidote against the
miseries which attends it. Fear nothing, but to do Injustice; then you will
have this consolation, That what misfortunes you undergo, do not belong to the
person, but the function. Go, Artabbanes, and rule a Nation, whilst I ambition
but to rule my self; give Lyndadory your affection and care: and the gods give
you as much happiness in the wearing a Crown, as they do me in the power of
declining one.


This generous Letter was no sooner finished, than my Prince found how true the
contents of it were, by losing a Father the first hour of his putting on a
Crown: He gave to that loss those retributions which the best dispositions are
capable of: And learning from those which brought him the occasion of his
sadness, that Moneses was unalterable in his resolves, and contemned the World,
as much as now it courted him: as also, that they had brought Letters thereof
to the Nobility of Media; which too, imported the resignation of his Crown to
him, and his desires and Commands to them, of accepting him for their King; He
resolved to defer his Coronation, till things of a higher concernment were
brought to some issue, and till he could present that Crown which was presented
him, to her who in his Judgment better deserved it, and for which end only he
rejoiced to have it. This new alteration suspended his journey, but it was only
so long as the deputing the generous Zenophon Chief Governor in his absence
did take up; so that the next morning abandoning the glories of a new Crown,
and so many thousands of people who ambition'd to invest him in it; he set
forwards for Parthia, only taking me with him, and both of us so disguised that
we were hardly knowable to each other. All the time of our long journey, my
King entertained himself in designs how to accomplish his Princess's liberty,
and if at any time he interrupted his own silence, 'twas to communicate some
stratagem to me, or to enquire if I had found out any other worthy his
knowledge. This being our only employment, we thought on so many Plots, that we
hoped all of them would not be fruitless. We had already so far conquered our
Voyage, that we were come to the top of the Mountain Taurus, when from thence
we might discover the adjacent Plain covered with Armed Troops: some of the
wild Inhabitants of the place from whence we took our Prospect, told us, they
were Parthians, which was the utmost of their knowledge. Artabbanes therefore
sent down one of the least irrational amongst them to bring him a more clear
information. This Messenger, about the break of day returned to us again, with
this assurance, that two Parthian Princes, Sillaces and Surena, were
joint-Generals of that vast body, which was going to fight the Roman Army,
which lay near the City Charres, and was commanded by one Crassus. This news
surpised us, and made us believe our intelligencer was mistaken, by his
joining Sillaces and Surena in one Commission, which we concluded Orodes could
never do; but he was so positive in his repeated relation, that my Prince
resolved to mingle himself with the Parthian Army (who were then pulling down
their Tents for a March), and learn the truth of what he had so much cause to
doubt. This was not difficult for us to effect: for going a little aside in
those rude places, till some of the first Troops were past us, we joined the
others without being suspected, or examined. We had not rid a quarter of an
hour in that manner, when we perceived the generous Sillaces riding from one
division to another, animating the Soldiers against the difficulty of the way,
and making of them keep their Ranks as much as the illness of it would permit.
Artabbanes thinking this was a ^it time to disclose himself to his Friend, and
to learn from him his own Fate in the fair Parthenissa's, took the opportunity
to do it, when he was gotten on a little hight to view his Armies march, and
only attended by a couple of his Domestics. Sillaces had well-nigh, at my
Kings naming himself, discovered who he was, by a passionate embracing him; and
'twas with no small violence that he kept himself from doing it; but having
sent on some employment those that were near him, and gotten into a retired
place, he there permitted his Arms to take with usury, what he had till then
suspended them from. Here the generous Friends having finished that part of
their entertainment which might have been dangerous if visible, and as
troublesome if not performed; lest Sillaces absence might be observed, he put
himself at the head of his Army, where all out of respect kept themselves at so
great a distance, that calling Artabbanes to him during that days March, they
had ample and secure leisure to acquaint each other with what had happened
since their separation. Sillaces, who knew my Kings impatiency, told him, that
at his return Orodes had received him with large and open demonstrations of
affection, and with many acknowledgments for what he had acted for Tygranes,
and against Merinzor: That he assiduously visited the fair Parthenissa, which
both his duty and affection obliged him to, since that after her escape out of
the Isle of Eden, the Princess Lindadory and Zephalinda returned to Nineveh;
and since Parthenissa's coming thither, they three had been inseparable; That
Orodes continued his Passion for my Kings Mistress with as much violence, and
unsuccessfulness as ever. That he was daily more and more confirmed in a
confidence, that Surena had not extinguished his flame for Parthenissa, but
resigned her to Orodes as being a less dangerous Rival. That the King of
Parthia, being told of some misunderstanding between Surena and him, had
publicly desired, and enjoined their reconciliation; and to perfect it, had
made them joint-Generals against Crassus; who having spent too much time in
robbing the Jews Temple at Jerusalem, was now come laden with Wealth, and
Sacriledg, to invade Parthia, and was not distant above three days march.
Lastly, The generous Sillaces told my Prince, that the fair Lindadory was
constant in her blessings to him, which left him no shadow of fear, but that
the King of Media would think (what he confessed) that they were too-unworthily
placed. The King of Media (said my Prince) thinks they are so justly, that if
his love to Lindadory were capable of accession, her choice and constancy would
inspire it. Oh Gods! (replied Sillaces) am I then in so transcendent a
condition! You are (said Artabbanes) if the truth of what I tell you can make
you so; and that you may no longer doubt it, Lindadory is at my dispose, and
consequently at her own, and yours: Thereupon he told him of Moneses preferring
a Solitude before a Crown, and of his having conferred that of Media upon him,
with the care of his fair Sister. These extacies of joy made the March not
tedious, though the way might have rendered it much so: This was the cause that
before Sillaces thought the Sun had run half his course, he was near his set.
Those therefore which were trusted with the Camping of the Army, came to
advertise him they had found a fit place for that end, and desired his Orders:
For he and Surena commanded the Army by days, after the Consullary manner.
Sillaces having viewed and elected a fit Camp for so large a Body, and given
the Orders for that nights discipline and security, withdrew himself to his
Tent, that he might the better enjoy an entertainment which he valued much, yet
not more than it deserved to be so; but having the place emptied of all but
Artabbanes, Surena came to visit and acquaint him with a design he had put in
execution, of drawing Crassus out of the Straits and Mountains of Ballissus,
into the Plains of Mesopotamia, where the Parthian Horse would have an
advantage, which gave him more than hopes of a Victory. I cannot tell you (said
Symander) with what emotions and surprises my King considered himself so near
Surena, and how many times he had his hand upon his Sword, to demand a final
reason of him for all those miseries he had involved him in, and (which was
much more sensible) the fair Parthenissa. But the respect he paid Sillaces,
and the apprehension he had, how great a hazard the quarrel of his Country
might run, by so unseasonable a decision of his own, which probably would
engage an Army too-much against it self, that had already but too-much against
it; suspended his resentments: but lest his looks might one way occasion, what
he had suppressed in another, he withdrew himself till Surena by returning, had
left Sillaces alone; who told my Prince, that his Colleague had so well deluded
the Roman General, by the Arts of Ariamnes, a Parthian of excellent dexterity
in such negotiations, that Crassus elevated too by the fresh arrival of Publius
Crassus (his Son) with one Thousand men at Arms, sent him by Julius Caesar, had
quitted the fast Countries where his Legions were invincible, and was marching
so precipitately to the Plains of Carres, which he had elected for the General
Field, that if we make not haste, he will possess himself of all the advantages
of it before our arrival, which makes us (continued Sillaces) resolve so to
accelerate our march, that the Roman Courages by their attendance, shall not
cool. This News stirred Artabbanes's blood, and made him determine before he
presented himself to his Princess, to let her know, the Arms with which Crassus
had beaten him, were not by those of honor. Sillaces with raptures of joy,
received this assurance, and could not doubt of the Victory, since my Prince
would solicit and court it. In brief, two days after the Parthian and Roman
Army saluted each other by sight, but the day was so far spent, that they both
concluded there would not be left enough for a decision, which would be so well
disputed. That Night then was given to rest, and preparation for the ensuing
Day; which no sooner dawned, than Surena, whose turn it was to Command, drew
out his Army, and the better to delude the Romans, he covered the Armor of his
Men at Arms (which were all of pollish'd Margian Steel) with the Skins of
Beasts; which made Crassus say, he was going to a hunting, not a Battle: His
right Wing was led by the generous Sillaces, who was accompanied by my
disguised Prince, richly Armed, and advantageously mounted; but the first
concealed by an obscure Coat: The Battle Surena led, and the left wing Vixores,
who as his Brother, was restored to Orodes's favor. Publius Crassus had the
conduct of the right wing of the Roman Army, Marcus Crassus of the Battle, and
Cassius of the left: The Nations of which these Armies were composed, was
evident by the first encounter, which was so furious and bloody, that one might
have concluded of the Progress by the beginning. Publius Crassus routed
Vixores's wing, whose Horse unfortunately going to the Charge, had rendered him
incapable of performing it; which fall, more inconvenient than dangerous (for
it but amazed him) gave Crassus not only the liberty of acting what he did, but
also of hindering them from rallying; this unhappiness arrived at the same time
that Marcus Crassus gave a bloody impression on Surena's Battle, and so much
disordered it, that Artabbanes casting off what covered the beauty and richness
of his Armor, flew where his Courage and Conduct were but too necessary. His
first relief was given to his Rival, who till it came, fought more in despair,
than hope; but my King having metamorphosed his condition, went to relieve
Vixores's Troops, who were both the Romans Chase and Quarry. The heat he was
in, made him lift up his Helmet, which being shaded with Carnation Plumes,
brought so large an accession to his natural good Mien, that those which beheld
it, were as much pleased with it, as with his assistance; which he then
afforded those of that routed wing, by heading a small party, with which
despising all Enemies but the Chiefest, addressed his main charge to the young
Crassus, who at the head of his Troops he killed with his own hands; and some
Parthians according to their barbarous custom, cutting off his head, and
carrying it on the point of a Lance, it brought as much Terror to his Party,
as so lately it had success. This was the first dawning of the glorious event
which that day shined upon the Parthians; and this was so generously followed
by him which begun it, that though some fatal wounds he received in the
Triumvirs own Battalion, rendered him incapable of finishing what he had made
so large a Progress in; yet the Victory remained entirely to the Parthians; by
which you may imagine how far he had advanced it, when they could conclude it
without him. In that bloody day my Prince so repaired the wrongs of Treachery,
that he wanted nothing of an entire satisfaction, but that Crassus knew not he
had done so. The generous Sillaces, who with his Sword had made many ways to
Glory, in the pursuing of it, received from me the fatal News, that my King was
able no longer to do so, which made him abandon all designs, but those of
returning to serve Artabbanes; whom I had carried into his Tent, where he found
him in a condition too-too sufficient to cloud, and make him deplore that days
success: For alas the turning of the blood after the dressing of his wounds,
had cast him into a swound, which Sillaces had like to have accompanied him in:
But the gods by restoring him to himself, did the like to his generous Friend,
who gave such signal demonstrations of Joy for that blessing, that had not the
high performances of my Prince that day, rendered them only upon that score
legitimate, by the greatness of the effects, those which were present might
have judged to whom they were paid. But Sillaces, that he might not be
separated from Artabbanes, sent Surena word, that some hurts rendered him
incapable of prosecuting the success, which therefore he left entirely to his
care; neither indeed was this an absolute fiction, for he had received five
wounds, yet none so dangerous as to have produced that detention which a nobler
impediment did. In this great day there fell above 20000 Romans; and the next
we learned, that Surena by many slights had first gotten Marcus Crassus out of
the City of Charres, and then into his Power, by promises of Life to him, and
his remaining Army, if they would embrace Orodes's mercy. Though the Roman
Soldiers forced their General to this, yet he repayed their great Crime, with a
proportionate Generosity: For as he was going to Surena, turning about, and
addressing his speech to some Patricians; he told them, If any of you, O
Romans, survive this ruin, tell the Senate, 'twas not my Soldiers necessitated
me to go into the Parthians hands, but my Fate; which being confident to
receive from them, I go to embrace with joy, as believing my blood will prove a
Ransom for the rest of my Contrymen; who, if they saw me die by my own
hands, might have as much provocation to imitate, as they will have to revenge
me. These words, when contrary ones were both deserved and expected, drew Tears
into many Eyes, and drew Octavius and Petronius along with their General, who
as the Romans say, being brought before Surena, was immediately murdered with
those which accompanied him; and as we say, some high language passing between
Surena and him, Octavius drew his Sword to vindicate the Triumvir, which
occasioned all their Deaths: howsoever it was, Crassus's head was cut off and
sent to Orodes. I may not omit (continued Symander) to let you know, that the
Parthians, who had unanimously observed they derived their Glory from the
ubiquity of the Courage and Conduct of one whose good Mien and Arms rendered
him also exceeding remarkable, came to Surena, and implored the sight of their
Deliverer; which he also acknowledging him to be, to satisfy Justice and Them,
made a diligent but fruitless enquiry after my Prince; but this ignorance of
whom he was, and where to find him, conferred on him an honor greater than
their knowledge of both would have produced: For the admirable effects of his
Courage, his abandoning them when they no longer needed it, and the declining
of a Glory which no Mortal could have so great a resignation as not to own, led
some of them to think it might be the Tutelary Angel of Parthia: This
particular opinion being published, became the general Faith, in the dictates
whereof, collecting together all the combustible Arms of the Romans, the
Parthian Army casting themselves into a Ring, set Fire to the Pile, and
accompanied the ascension of the Flame with loud shouts of acknowledgments and
Gratitude to his residence, who was the cause of both. This high retribution of
the Parthians to my Prince's Valor (whose ignorance could not render them so
much as suspected of partiality, and whose enjoying the benefit of it, made
them the more competent Judges of its greatness) brought not near so much
satisfaction to him, as his wounds (which rendered him incapable of paying his
Duty to his Princess) did the contrary. The generous Sillaces gave him all the
consolation he was capable of, by begging him to believe the Glory of the Cause
ought to apologize for the effect, and would even in Parthenissa's own
judgment, though perhaps not in her affection. My Prince, who protested it
could do it in neither of his, conjured Sillaces to return with Surena to
Selutia, there to receive and participate in a Triumph, which he deserved
entirely to engross, and to supervise their mutual affairs; as also to have a
Care lest this accession of Glory to Surena might not thrust him into attempts,
which Sillaces himself was of opinion he wanted but the Power and opportunity
to undertake. That generous Prince, who by this time (which was fifteen days
after the Battle of Charres) found Artabbanes in a mending condition, and
himself in a traveling one, obeyed Artabbanes's incessant solicitations,
having first received a reiterated assurance of his following him as soon as he
was able; he would have also left him some trusty Domestics; but my Prince
would detain none but a Chyrurgeon, of whose fidelity he was as confident as of
his Skill. Sillaces and Surena being gone to Selutia, we transported Artabbanes
from the Camp into a Neighbor Village, where there was less ill-accommodation
than in the Field, and where we remained two Moons before he thought himself in
a posture fit to make use of a Horse: During our residence there, we heard
frequently from Sillaces, whose Letters were still confirmations of his
believing Surena had silenced but not extinguished his Passion; and that that
was Orodes's Faith as well as his, who therefore seemed to be more troubled
than pleased at his success, and who every day disclosed some such symptoms of
his being not well satisfied with him, that it was generally thought those
signs would turn into effects, which Surena's high Carriage would not a little
contribute to the accellerating. Artabbanes, who knew Surena had almost as much
discretion as Love, concluded he would not so far incense his King, as that it
should be publicly taken notice of, unless he were prepared for some high
Design, and sought but a provocation to begin it. This rational belief put the
possessor of it upon an irrational resolution, that of beginning a Journey to
Selutia, before he was well able to walk in his Chamber, and against the advice
and Prayers of the Chyrurgeon, who protested it would at least more than hazard
a Relapse, longer than his first indisposition: But my King, though he were
deaf to us, yet after his first days journey, he could not be so to his Pain
and weakness, both which told and made him believe what he would not from us.
And indeed his Indisposition was so great, and so long like to continue so,
that we removed him to a private Countreyhouse that we then were in, being too
common of it self, and seated in a Road that was so. Artabbanes's removal from
his first residence, and his then taking so retired a One, made him justly
apprehend he should be denied the satisfaction of his Friends Intelligences; he
therefore commanded me to go to Selutia to acquaint Sillaces with his removal,
and perfectly to learn all the transactions and intricacies of the Court, which
he said, he thought could no way be safelier nor better effected, than by
employing me. To obey this Command immediately I took Post, and upon the Third
Day toward the Close of the Evening, I came to the end of my Journey; but as I
past along the Streets to a Friends House, whom I durst only, and whom I did
entirely trust, I saw strange murmuring Crowds of People, and amongst others so
deep a consternation, that I concluded 'twas no common Cause which had so
extraordinary a production. On my arrival at my Friends, whom I happily found
at home, I enquired what created these unusual effects. He was as much
surprised at my Question, as I was at his Answer, which was, That Orodes having
assumed some high Jealousies of Surena, either upon a score of Love or Power,
had that day seized on him; and after a short hearing and Sentence, had but
even then put him to Death, which so strange and sudden a proceeding was the
cause of those unusual Crowds in the City, the very Commonalty admiring the
vicissitude of Fortune, which in few hours produced so strange a revolution,
that he for whom so recently Scaffolds were built to behold his triumphs, now
had some to behold his execution. Neither is this the only cause of what you
enquire the reason of, since it is firmly reported, That even in this moment
Orodes is forcing a Felicity from Parthenissa, which her Constancy has so
resolutely denied him; but this is so improbable a Crime, that many believe
it is divulged by Surena's Partisans, to make his Martyrdom appear the clearer,
and the more certainly to have it revenged. You may believe I was not a little
surprised at this relation, which the more I reflected on, the more I found
cause to conclude, that the latter part of it was true, because the former was;
and that Arsaces would not so precipitate his Favourite's Execution, but for an
end which was more considerable than that loss: and I knew nothing could appear
so to him, but the satisfaction of his Flame. 'Twas therefore, that hastily
abandoning my Friend, I went up so to the Palace, resolving by my own Death, or
by Orodes's, to prevent a Misfortune I much more justly apprehended than
either. But oh gods! as soon as I came within the Guards of the Court, I found
them melting in tears, from whence I concluded, 'twas some strange thing which
had so proportionate an influence. This general Grief produced so general a
neglect of all things but of the celebrating it, that without so much as being
questioned, I came (by the knowledge I had of all the Palace) to Parthenissa's
Antichamber, from whence I heard in the Room where she lay, so many and so
high evincements of sorrow, that I concluded, that which then invaded me, was
but too-justly grounded. The first operations of mine being a little mitigated,
I took the confidence to look into that sad Chamber: But great gods! I had no
sooner done so, than I fell into it, my spirits abandoning me at the sight of
the fair Parthenissa's being dead on a Couch, and Zephalinda by her. The fair
Emilia too, with disshevel'd hair, drowned eyes, and wringed hands, acting
grief so passionately, that I concluded 'twas more easy for her to have been
dead, than to live in a Misfortune which rendered the being so, so necessary.
The noise I made in my fall, made some of the Princess's women run to learn
from whence it proceeded; one of them in charity flinging some water on my
face, washed off that color with which I was disguised, and thereby discovered
who I was, having formerly known me: My senses being returned, she that had
been my Physician, went and told the disconsolate Emilia of my being there; who
in a languishing pace came toward me, and with a voice which was so, told me,
At length, Symander, at length the gods have wearied themselves with having
persecuted a Virtue as great as the Cruelty which has done it; and made the
Tyrant Arsaces know, that when they deny a sanctuary to Innocence, Death will
afford it one. His not believing this Truth, has forced the Divine Parthenissa
to act it; the effects of whose high Constancy for your Prince, is yet clouded
by a performance of the fair Zephalinda, who thought Death so unconsiderable,
if it came in competition with her Friendship, that not to have the last
suspected, she has embraced the first. Here the fair Emilia's sighs performed
what they had so often attempted, I mean, cut off her relation, which yet was
as efficaciously continued by her tears, which spoke both the sadness of the
Story, and evidenced what was due unto it. The faithful Symander, at the
remembrance and repetition of these fatal passages, so sympathiz'd in the grief
of which he was making a description, that it hindered him from continuing it,
which was a performance both Artavasdes and Callimachus could not condemn,
because they sympathiz'd in it. It was almost a quarter of an hour before the
Auditors could beg the Speaker's continuance of his Narration, or that he could
obey them; which at length he thus did: My impatience (said Symander) was too
high to continue any longer ignorant of the Cause of our Loss, especially when
what was the impediment as to me, was the aggravation of it: I did therefore
conjure the fair Emilia to acquaint me, by what strange ways the gods had
effected so strange an end: To which she told me; Arsaces, since the delivering
up of Parthenissa to him by Surena, so augmented in his Passion, and she in her
Resolves of declining to reward it, that many foresaw such extremes could not
but produce proportionate effects. The News of the Romans defeat divesting
Orodes of Fear, Desire took so absolute an Empire over him, that in the
criminal dictates of his, he so importunately pressed the Princess to reward
his Flame by a Hymeneal Crown, that she declining it, he vowed by all the Oaths
his fury could invent, That if in five days she altered not her inclination, he
would satisfy his in a way so fatal, that she should be convinced, 'twas not
for want of power that he so advantageously persuaded her to his bed. This he
esteemed a modest warning; for amongst his Domestics he solemnly protested, He
would have that by Force, which he could not by Composition; and to evidence
this was his resolution, immediately he sent all his Guards to inviron the
Princess Appartment with this strict Injunction, That none without a license
under his own hand (but his Menial Servants) upon pain of Death should speak
with her: And lest her Resolution might frustrate the designs of this, he
permitted not any Instrument which could act Death, to be either in her, or any
of her Domestics power. Three days of the five were expired in the punctual
observance of his Orders, when toward the evening the Princess Zephalinda, by
the permission of the Guards, came into Parthenissa's Chamber; and after she
had acquainted her with her Friendship, and her own sad condition, by her
tears, she told her, The permission, Madam, I have obtained of paying you this
duty, is upon a score I am so far from making use of, that could I fancy you
capable of listening to it, I would employ it to an opposite end: for Arsaces,
but upon the pretense of my coming to solicit you to be his Queen, would not
have permitted it; I was forced to promise what I never intended to perform;
though it is probable, by that Friendship he knows I pay Artabbanes, which too
it may be he mistakes for a Passion, he thought my interest concurring with his
in depriving you of that generous Prince, might render me a fit Agent for such
an end: but that, Madam, of my coming to wait on you, is to know which way I
may prevent it: there is no difficulty which my Zeal will not deprive of that
Name, and I shall find none in my own condition but to live to behold you any's
but his. This generous declaration ( Emilia continued) had a proportionate
retribution, and this further Answer: I have not, fair Zephalinda, so
misemploy'd the time of my confinement, as not to consider it is secured with so
much force and care, that I am not now to seek an election, but how to act
mine; your assistance, in which is the only and the highest obligation you can
confer either on Artabbanes, or me: I find Abstinence is a Sanctuary I cannot
reach: if I had known it earlier what I am fully convinced of now, I should not
have implored from you so dangerous an obligation: but my ignorance which
causes this Desire, will I hope procure your Pardon for my making it; and my
condition will invite you to grant a request, which you cannot deny without
being accessory to a guilt nothing can equal but your Repentance for not having
prevented it. Madam (said Zephalinda in a Flood of Tears), I conjure you to
suspend any violence against your Life, till my next visit, which shall
doubtless present you with your deliverance, or with the power to act it. I
will obey you ( Parthenissa replied); but remember, if you violate this
engagement, you assume Arsaces's Crimes. Which if I do (she answered) may I
suffer the punishment due unto them. Zephalinda immediately left us; and from
the time she did so, till her return (which was the morning of the last day)
Parthenissa employed it all in finding some expedient to extinguish her life,
should her friend by some strange accident be hindered from bringing of her
one; and at length elected that fatal and only remedy, of stopping her breath
with her Linen, which by the countenance Zephalinda put on at her then
entrance, she concluded would be absolutely necessary: and in those resolves
she told her, I observe (Madam) by the sense you have of my condition, that
Death only can change it; the necessity of the performance will I hope invite
the gods to pardon it, they would not leave me but one way to avoid a
transcendent sin, if that it self were a proportionate one: A Martyr acts his
own death, and yet thereby acquires that glorious Title. My affection for
Artabbanes has been confirmed by as many vows, as my zeal has been to the gods,
who might too justly suspect I would decline these, were I capable of declining
those. I alledg not these reasons to confirm my self in my resolution, but you;
that you may receive as much consolation in the Cause, as I shall in the acting
of it. These fatal words were delivered with much less emotion, than they were
heard with; and the Divine Princess evidenced the certainty she had of another
Life, by the little disorder she resented at the abandoning of this. The fair
Zephalinda having silenced her tears and sighs (too just retributions not to be
repaid either to Parthenissa's condition, or the resolution with which she
bore it) thus replied, Since I last had the misfortune of leaving you, time has
been strangely active; and if I gave you any hopes of your deliverance, 'twas
because I had assumed some pregnant ones of it. For Surena, who had some few
days past taken up a firm belief that Orodes would more than solicit your
affection, began some private levies of men to prevent it; which Arsaces having
discovered, either by intelligence, or by the probability of the thing, took so
short a space for the reception of your positive Answer, that it prevented your
intended relief, with that certainty with which it was designed: yet when I
informed my Brother of the Kings resolution, and yours; in the Dictates of Rage
and Pity he went to him, and told him, with a countenance which spoke his
heart, as much as his words did: When I resigned up the Princess Parthenissa to
you, 'twas, Sir, upon terms you confined your self to by so many solemn and
reiterated vows, that though it be the common Faith you intend to violate them,
yet it cannot be mine, till it be confirmed by your own avowing it. Arsaces,
who had then but one of his Domestics about him, and who judged by Surena's
countenance and abrupt Question, he was in a temper fit to attempt any thing
that was desperate, if your condition appeared to be so, returned him this
Answer: I believe so many's assuming that faith, proceeds from the as many
knowers of Parthenissa's usage of me, which is such, that it may with too much
reason persuade them to believe, I am sooner capable of any thing, than of such
a neglect. I hope, Sir ( Surena replied) though this may be other men's belief,
yet it is not your resolution; for that sacred contract you made with me, was
not conditional, but absolute: so that no ill usage of hers to you, can render
legitimate a resembling return of yours to her. The knowledge I had of your
Passion, and of the impossibility of her receiving and rewarding it, made me
intently careful to leave you no way of violating your engagement, but by
violating your oaths, which will raise more to revenge such a performance, than
your Power can to hinder it. This resolute and true reply, so incensed the
cruel Orodes, who (by the then coming into the room of many of his Guards and
Courtiers, to learn the result of their meeting) now no more apprehended to
disclose what he was confident could not be prevented, and which he only feared
the discovery of; upon that score, told my Brother with a furious Look and
Tone: Traitor, that can have reason enough to make thy Kings actions appear
as Crimes, and want it when thy own are more undeniably so. The Ties thou
have to Parthenissa, are but accidental; and those thou have to me, are
natural: yet in thy late Rebellion, thou could with lesser scruple violate
thy Allegiance, than thou now reproachest me with violating my Promise. Thou
did in thy performance leave me a latitude for the acting of mine, and can
not reproach me but with that for which thou art my Example: Nay, that Contract
thou have so often mentioned, and by which thou would tie my hands, sets them
at liberty, especially to the punishing of thee for having attempted it: For
'twas thy Rebellion gave thee that seeming Power of making one of my Vassals
confine me from acting my pleasure upon another; now that force being dissolved
by which thou did this Crime, I have much more reason to punish thy having
extorted such a promise, than thou have to demand the performing of it, since I
but assume a Power I indisputably had before thy Treason eclipsed it: but thou
can not exact the performance of a forced engagement, but thou must remember
what thou did to procure it, and that will vindicate me for not observing it:
Thou, by cancelling the first obligation, have taught me to punish thee in the
repetition of thy fault; and by making Force to be Justice, thou have rendered
that Art which destroys Thine, to be much more so. Surena sensibly wounded with
this language, replied: You reproach me, Sir, with your own Fault; for 'twas
you, not I which cancelled the first obligation; and though this was but then
evident to a few, yet by what you have since menaced the fair Parthenissa with,
you have rendered it now so to all, and made my performance as clear to the
world, as it was then to me. The obligations between you and your subjects are
mutual; they promise you obedience, and you them protection; you then first
broke your Engagement, before I did mine; and I never drew my sword against
you, but to keep you from a greater Crime than that it self was. And though you
alledg my confinement to you was natural, and to the fair Parthenissa
accidental; yet when you consider upon what score I tied my self to her
Interests, you will find it was derived from a Duty, unto which that you
challenge is much subordinate. It Is the Duty I owe the gods; and that obliges
me more to preserve the Innocent, than my birth does to obey you; especially
when your commands are of a quality that carry in my disobedience the
justification of it. Whilst you governed within your own Laws, I gave you that
observance due to you in them; and was more prodigal of my blood to defend and
increase your Power, than when you misemploy'd it, I was to oppose it. Nay,
after you were seemingly converted, I brought you home a Victory from a people
that hardly ever knew what it was to lose one: I was in hope the gods, by
showing how successful my Sword was for you, would have invited you to Actions
which it can only be employed in. But I now fear you will render me unavoidably
guilty: for drawing my Sword against you, for her, cannot render me more
criminal in your esteem, than the not doing it will render me so in the
judgment of the gods, and of men. Here (continued Zephalinda) Arsaces's fury
was incapable of a longer silence, which made him interrupt Surena, by saying,
Traitor, Thou have not only the wickedness to run into a Rebellion, but to
declare that performance a greater Duty, than the not having acted it. That
Power which thou shall know and feel is absolute, thou would make
conditional, that it might not punish thee: but that Sin thou shall be
convinced is one, even in the punishment of it. And because thou alledgest thou
never drew'st thySword against me, but to keep me from a higher crime than that
it self was; I will repay thy kindness in the imitation of it, and by thy Death
hinder thee from a greater Sin than the commanding of it is: yes, I will punish
in thy intended Rebellion, what thou tiedst me from in thy acted Rebellion; and
the gods, who knew how unjust that concession was thou extortest from me,
involve thee in new Crimes, that thou might be rewarded for the old. My
Justice only is clouded with this misfortune, that thou have but a single Life
to appease it with, since thy relapse deserves the deprivation of that, and
consequently thy first Sin will continue unpunished. Orodes at the end of these
words turned to the Captain of his Guards, and commanded him to seize on
Surena; who seeing his Life was lost, and consequently yours, or your Honor;
resolved whilst it lasted, to act some such performance as might repair the
shortness of it, and the length of those Miseries it had so unfortunately
involved you in: Therefore as the Captain of the Guards came to take his Sword,
he drew it, and past it through his Body; then crying out to Arsaces, You shall
go with me, Sir, into another World, to learn this great Truth, That to kill
you is a less Sin than that you intend against Parthenissa, or the permitting
it; he ran furiously at him, and though so many hands endeavored to stop him,
yet all they could do, was to put his thrust so much aside, as that what was
intended to the Body, only pierced his Clothes^ Surena more troubled that he
had mist his design, than at the punishment he knew attended his having assumed
it, was returning; and though with a fury but equal to his former, yet
certainly had had a superior success; when all that were present flew upon him,
and forced his sword out of that hand, which if any longer left, had doubtless
acted a greater piece of Justice, than the Guards did in preventing it; and
that which so much contributed to this easy Victory, was the deep
consternation amongst those few friends of Surena's which were present; who not
fancying he would have put things to so precipitate and high an issue, fell
into an amazement, which proved as fatal to him, as if it had been their
Treachery. The pale and trembling Arsaces, observing Surena was disarmed, and
that some of his Guards were going to revenge his danger, and their Captains
death, by the acting of Surena's, cried out to them, Hold; I command you on
your Lives not to touch him: for the inflicting of a sudden Death will relish
more of Passion than of Justice; and his Crimes make him a fitter Sacrifice for
the last, than the first. Then commanding a Gentleman (who he made in that
instant Captain of his Guards in the room of him that had freshly lost that
Office with his Life) to look to Surena, as he would answer it with the loss of
his own; he forthwith gave order for a Scaffold to be erected before the
Palace-Gates, and solemnly protested, That on it, before the Sunset, Surena
should lose his Life. He heard these last words as he was carrying away, and
therefore turning about with a Countenance altogether quiet and serene, he told
Arsaces, I thank you Sir, and I conjure you to keep your vows; for the next
satisfaction to the prevention of Parthenissa's dishonor, is not to survive
it. Arsaces only replied by a shaking of his head; and by a second Command
having made Surena to be carried away, forthwith sent to the chief Tribunal of
Justice in Selutia, to sit and condemn him. This Order was no sooner published,
but a Proclamation was also, That whosoever appeared in the Streets with Arms
(except those of Guard) should dye without Mercy: and those that any way
related to Surena, which were found in Selutia after the expiration of one
hour, should be liable to the same penalty. This so precipitate and brisk a
proceeding, with the securing of Surena's person, and the placing of Soldiers
in every convenicnt Post, so terrified those Partisans of his already in the
Town, that wanting a Head to employ their Swords, they paid an exact Obedience
to the Proclamation, and involved such of their Companions as they met coming
to Selutia, in the same Crime. Surena therefore was tamely brought before his
Judges, before whom he only would say, That all the ill he was guilty of, was,
That he had not acted what they were condemning him for having attempted. This
short Reply made the Trial the like; so that immediately he was adjudg'd to
lose his Head; and by Orodes's command, who all the while was present, was sent
to the Scaffold to have the Sentence performed, This advertisement being
brought me, I went to the cruel King, not to beg Surena's Life, but only the
permission of seeing him lose it. Arsaces granted my request, either not to
disoblige his pretended Solicitress, or to punish my being so, in the sight of
so fatal a spectacle. I found my poor Brother on the Scaffold, who seeing me
there, assumed a joy I thought his condition incapable of: but I soon observed
from whence it proceeded; for immediately he told me, You see, Sister, I am now
going to lose my Life for her, to whom I had given it: and if the now cause of
my Death could but extinguish the just provocations she has had so often to
wish it, I should esteem it at a higher rate than she can deplore the loss of
it. Tell her, I conjure you, that with joy I embrace my present condition,
since I consider it as inflicted on me for having obstructed her desires; and
from thence I cannot but conclude, That since the gods so exemplarily punish a
Passion which never had any other design than to be voluntarily approved of,
and rewarded; they will doubtlesly act much more to the magnifying of their
Justice upon a Flame which already is burnt into desires of Lust; and they will
as certainly perform it while Arsaces's desires are but desires; lest if once
they were turned into action, they might be as incapable of a fit punishment,
as he of a resembling sin. Conjure her, Zephalinda, to make this use of my
Death, that it may bring both her and me a satisfaction, which it may be any
other way will be denied to both. I confess the gods have made me so miserable,
that all my performances have hitherto evidenced my adoration was not a debt to
her, but to my self. I do therefore beg you by that Friendship and Relation
which is between us, and by my last Breath, That upon my score you will pay her
all the services you are any ways capable of; that one of the Family may in
some degree repair the Sins of him that was the chief of it; that parthenissa
may thereby know (what my unfortunate performances have not clearly manifested)
that my Care of her was for her; which I hope she will not doubt of while I
lived, since the effects of it will continue when I am dead. My last Request
is, If ever you see the generous Artabbanes, beg him, when he remembers what I
have done, that he would also remember what 'twas invited it; and then he
cannot judge the fault greater than the inducement of it: he will be too
generous to hate me in my Grave; and I more than hope his resentments will dye
with the object of them. Surena having thus spoken, embraced me, and took his
eternal leave. Then going to the other extremity of the Scaffold, he conjured
the people to prevent their King's Sin, since they could not but participate in
the punishment of it: for the gods would consider every Accessory as a
Principal; and esteem those as guilty which hindered not Parthenissa's
dishonor, as him that acted it. This was all he said to them, lest a longer
discourse might have been interrupted. His Soul, after she had thus
disburthen'd her self, seemed to have more than a knowledge of those happy
Fields whither she was taking her eternal flight; for when he was laying down
his Life, he did it with much more resolution than he had that took it from
him, who performed it by separating the Head from the Body at one stroke. The
Spectators at that fatal blow gave one common groan, and by killing the
Executioner, showed how much they detested the Execution. Their Grief too had
not contented it self with so mean a Sacrifice, had not Orodes in person at the
head of a thousand of his Guards, come, and by killing some of the Multitude
dispersed the rest. The poor Surena's Body I carried away with me in the same
Chariot I came in, and laid it in the Sepulcher of our Family. Here (said
Emilia) the fair Zephalinda's weepings put a period to her words; in which just
duty the sad Parthenissa kept her such faithful company, that one might have
concluded she reserved no Tears for her own misfortune, she gave so many on
Surena's. Happy Surena, that in one single performance could so efface the
Crimes of thy Life, as to have the deprivation of it so nobly deplored, and
even by her which had most reason to rejoice at it. The first that interrupted
the silence, though not the weeping, was Parthenissa, who told Zephalinda, I
have (Madam) been so unfortunate to your Family, that if you will not grant me
on the score of Charity, the means of that Death which I implored, confer it on
me at least on that of Revenge; my Misfortune and my Condition do equally
require it; and you cannot in the performance more oblige your resentment, than
you will me. It may be that the greatest misfortune Surena relished at his
Death, was, that he left me behind, and the eminent danger too he concluded I
was involved in by Arsaces's Lust. The extinction of my Life will also redress
those apprehensions in him, and it may be afford him a proportionate joy, when
I shall carry him the news how faithfully you have observed his Desires. It Is
not Madam (said Zephalinda) upon these invitations I am come to pay you my
engagement; It Is upon your own and Artabbanes's account that I do it: for I
find your condition is incapable of all remedy but by that which will in the
future exempt you from needing any other: Thereupon taking out a little vial,
she presented it to Parthenissa with more Tears than would have filled it; and
told her, In this, Madam, you will find that Sanctuary the gods have denied
your Virtue; which I should have offered you sooner, but that my Brother's
Physician, who composed it, was so near death himself at the hearing of
Surena's, that he could not earlier give me this effect of his Art: He assures
me it is of a nature so subtle, that it conquers the Vitals as soon as it
touches them; and will afford you as little pain in the operation, as you will
resent after it. This is a Present (said the fair Parthenissa, wiping away her
Tears, and kissing it) which I have too little time remaining to acknowledge
sufficiently: but if in the other World our Condition admits the paying of
services, I will present you with those there, which mine here denies me the
power of retributing; and as a signal earnest of this Truth, I leave you the
generous Artabbanes as a Legacy: she deserves him best, that does most for him;
and you in this last performance have so clearly done so, that the very Party
is also the Judge and Acknowledger of it. You, that when the gods cannot
preserve Parthenissa fit for him, can do it, do become more so your self; and
it may be those Powers had no other way but this, to absolve Artabbanes's
Constancy from becoming so much his punishment, as to prefer Parthenissa before
Zephalinda, who in all perfections is as much my Superior, as in a perfect
Flame I am at least her Equal. The fair Zephalinda was about to reply, when one
I had placed to discover when Arsaces was coming, came running in to tell me
so, which set a period to the discourse they were engaged in, and made
Parthenissa uncover the little Glass, and say, It Is now no time to think of any
thing, but by Death to prevent what is much more to be feared. With these words
in a moment she drank the fatal Poison, with a Constancy great as our Grief. I
was (continued Emilia) so drowned in Tears and Sorrow, that though the fair
Parthenissa spoke many things as remarkable as her very performance, yet all I
can remember she said, was, a deploring the invitation of her death; which was
such, that her hate for the infamous Arsaces might seem to have an equal share
in it to that of her Passion and Constancy for your Prince. Zephalinda in the
mean time went to a window, as if it had been to discover how near Orodes was,
but alas it was more undisturbedly to pledge Parthenissa in a resembling Liquor,
which as soon as she had performed, she returned to her, but with a serener
countenance than that with which she had left her; and holding up the empty
Vial, told her, This, Madam, will be my witness, that I served not my self, but
you, in acting what the gods had left you but one way to perform. Your Virtues
shine so clear, that whilst I have them for my Guides, I can neither be
mistaken in the way to felicity, nor the end; and though this be a high Truth,
yet it cannot Transcend this other: That the obliging. Poison I have drunk will
not more certainly make me wait on you now, than the beholding of Artabbanes's
Grief, would have made me do it hereafter, when it may be the Then performance,
would have relished, of what the Now will absolve me of. I had looked like your
Murderer, not your Friend, had I not thus waited on you; so that what my
Inclination leads me unto, my Reason and my Interest do; which are Inducements
that none can condemn with so much Justice as that with which I obey them. The
fair Parthenissa, for a while only in Tears and in embraces acknowledged the
disobligingness and gallantry of this performance; in which latter, Zephalinda
held her company so strictly, that I thought they would prove as unseparable to
each other, as misfortune had been to both. She which last drank the Poison was
the first that spoke, and to the best of my remembrance these were her words:
Having now paid the Just and Antedated sacrifice of our Tears to Artabbanes's
condition, when he shall be informed of ours, let us absolutely in the future
silence them, lest the Tyrant should ascribe ours to his being one; and
thereby, though he be actually denied the Triumph of his Love, he imaginarily
possesses that of his Revenge. The Cruel Arsaces, said Parthenissa, cannot so
Transcendently delude himself, as to ascribe my Tears to his being so to me,
when he sees what the fair Zephalinda has done, which is of such a Quality,
that he will find his Triumph, though we are never so intent to cloud it; for I
am resolved he glories as much in the destruction of Virtue, as of Feminine
Honor; so that what my resolution has denied him in the Latter, yours has
conferred on him in the Former. Had I been single in my suffering, I should
have retrench't from him that Victory; for to have been denied his hopes, would
have as much eclipsed his satisfaction, as the Destroying of Innocence and
Constancy would have created it. I may, said Zephalinda, as justly allege he
is not the cause of my Tears, since a Death which I esteem so transcendent a
misfortune, as to believe the acting of my own after it, is a less one than to
survive it, may well peculiarize my Weepings to that solarie cause: But whilst
we continue ours, he may at least have some shadow for Insulting; whereas if we
entirely silence them, and in their Place assume an unclouded serenity, he may
consider the Way in which we evade his Power, to be as sublime a Trouble as the
End. Here the fair Zephalinda was interrupted by the arrival of two of Arsaces
Guard, whom he had sent to clear Parthenissa's Chamber of all, but her self:
These barbarous Men could not terrify those whom Death did not; all the effect
they produced, was a Joy that their sanctuary was so near and certain, and that
they had so timely resolved upon it, that the burning. Lust of the Tyrant could
not be more surely a sin, than that thereby they had put him out of the
Capacity of acting it. To render that yet the more so, Parthenissa began to
protract the time, that the Fatal poison might conquer so much of her Life, as
to exempt her as well from the beginnings as conclusions of Orodes's Insolence,
by reasoning with these infamous undertakers of a resembling employment. And
though what had begun, too pregnantly evinced the temper of their Souls, yet
the Eloquence of innocence conspiring with the sight of so many admirable and
growing Beauties which were so near an eternal fading, operated so
efficaciously, that they retired (dissolving into Tears unto their King, and
acquainted him with the cause thereof, which alas was so far from having a
proportionate Influence on Him, that what had converted them into Water, turned
him into Fire: For judging of the Cause by the production, they could not
assume a higher Pity, that those Beauties were to be gathered, than he did a
satisfaction that he was to gather them. Nay, his Reason was so obscured, that
he concluded they wept not that such Perfections were to be enjoyed, but only
that They were not to do it: so that having given them an high reprehension for
what deserved the contrary, he went hastily to Parthenissa's Chamber, in whose
countenance there was less disturbance than in his; which being a Truth as
visible as the occasion was not (at least as to him), he told her, At length,
Madam, I hope the greatness of my Flame, and Perseverance, has obtained a
Victory, which cannot be higher in it self, than my desires were of it; and
your Face gives me a satisfaction which nothing can hardly augment, but your
Words giving me the same assurance which your Looks do. If my Looks, Sir, (said
the Princess) gives you any other assurance than my Words have still done, they
hold no correspondence with my Heart; so that either you are mistaken in my
Looks, or my Looks in me. If (said Arsaces) I am mistaken in the signs of my
Felicity, I am certain I will not be so in the fruitions of it: and what the
Power of my Love cannot effect, that of my Authority shall. Yet I must confess,
I much rather ambition to derive my happiness from the former, than the latter:
and therefore I again prostrate at your Feet my Crown, as well as Liberty;
either deserves the retribution I but implore for both: your denying me my
right, authorizes me to take it; and therefore you render force legitimate, if
you necessitate me to it: My passion is as incapable of Delay, as Change: and
had my Promise given you a longer time to form your Resolution, my love must
have contracted it; so that I am come to know my Fate, which cannot admit of
the least suspension, because my Life cannot, if now denied that alone which
can give it a relish, as well as continue it an existence. In short, Madam,
this is the hour I must receive or take my Felicity; and the gods have as
little the Power, as I, of altering this Resolve. I know (said Parthenissa) you
will be as much mistaken in your hopes, as you have been in the signs of them.
The gods could not call themselves the Protectors of Innocence, and refuse a
Sanctuary to mine: Know, Cruel Arsaces, I have one above your Power to violate;
which it was high time to ascertain, when what should have been the cure of
your Lust, you considered as an Authority to act it: Know further, I despise
your Crown, and Death to avoid it; which is a Resolution I might derive from a
double cause; for had not my Constancy been prevalent enough to engage me to
assume it, your usage would be; which cannot with more necessity invite me to
that performance, than I will act it with joy. The degenerate Arsaces believing
parthenissa had some fatal weapon in her power, that thus authorized her to
threaten an enraged King (for he knew her too well, to have so much as a
suspicion of her thus proceeding upon any other score), suddenly seized upon
both her hands; and after commanding one of his Guards to search her, and to
take the cause of her Confidence away, he told her with a furious Look; The
certainty of that Sanctuary which made you with such insolence despise me, and
my Flame, is not in your Power, and you are in mine; so that what you refused
with scorn, if you implored with tears, I would now deny to you in the same
manner you declined the acceptance of it from me; nor can the contempt you have
endeavored to throw upon my Crown, be justlier revenged, than by the Power of
it, which by all that is Holy, shall no longer beg what it can take. Thereupon
with a countenance which relisht nothing but of Fury and Lust, he commanded
those which waited on him, to clear the room of all but Parthenissa; which was
going to be put in practice, when he that Arsaces had commanded to search and
Disarm her, told him, there was nothing about her which could destroy her Life,
for the certainty of which, he engaged his own. This strange assurance made all
the Tyrant's other Passions resign themselves into Admiration, and that
suddenly yielded it self unto Joy; for he believed Parthenissa had acted the
part of Despair, as a last essay, and then was resolved to yield to what she
could not resist. This flattering faith was created in him, by her having no
visible means to resist his Power, in a time when he had solemnly sworn to
conquer her with it, if by his Passion and Perseverance he did not do it by
then. Neither did the fair Parthenissa's silence all this while a little
contribute to this belief: but alas! hers proceeded from another Cause; for by
this, the Poison had made its fatal Approaches so near the throne of Life, that
the hand of Death began to draw an obscure vail over the vital spirits, and so
greedily to seize on the Noble dwelling of a Nobler soul, that Arsaces had
scarcely prostrated himself on his knees, to make Parthenissa those
retributions, the joy of his last faith had made him esteem so just a Debt,
when she began to retire to a Pallet, which she had no sooner reached, than she
fell on it; and having breathed a sigh, and indistincty pronounced your
generous Prince's Name, the Beauties of Vermillion resigned their Empire to the
color of Innocence; the fairest Lights which ever did or shall shine, became
eclipsed with an eternal Night; and the admirable Soul of a Body that was so,
took her flight to another, but could not to a fairer Dwelling. Here the
faithful Symander was so vanquished with his own Relation, that he had not the
power to continue it; neither had his generous Hearers that of desiring him to
do it: for they were so sensibly affected with this deplorable and fatal part
of his Story, that their Curiosity resigned its room unto their sorrow, to
which they so justly and unconfinedly abandoned themselves, that they fully
justified the vast grief of Artabbanes, since they resenting so much only by
their being Hearers of the Loss, they could not but expect much more from him
that was the sufferer of it. At length they were so much friends to their
Grief, that they conjured the afflicted Symander by a continuance of his Story,
to divert them in some degree from being so intent on that sad part of it.
Symander, to obey this Command, by many struglings with his grief, finally
obtained so much the victory over it, as thus to prosecute what he had brought
so near to a conclusion: This relation of the fair Parthenissa's death, which
invaded you with so high a sorrow, had so resembling an operation on the
unconsolable Emilia, that it was above an hour before her tears and sighs would
permit her to continue her relation, which she did in these terms: As soon as
the Barbarous Arsaces saw the fair Parthenissa pale and breathless, he became
so too, and continued so long in that condition, that I began to think Grief
had performed the Office of Justice, and had alone paid that debt to the
Tyrant, which all the world does owe him: But he soon returned again from his
seeming Death; but it was to act such violences on himself, that I thought his
recovery was a more signal punishment, than his dying could have proved. In a
word, whoever had seen the demonstration of his sorrow, would have concluded he
was the sufferer, not the Author of the Loss. At length (tired with the actings
of his grief), he continued quiet for a time, and then ran to Zephalinda, at
whose feet prostrating himself, he conjured her to tell him, Whether the fears
of his violence have cast Parthenissa into a seeming, or had made her cast her
self into a real death. But this fair Princess gave him an Answer by a
Demonstration; for in that moment of time the fatal Poison had so far conquered
her heart, that she had only life enough left to recover the Pallet on which
the dead Parthenissa lay, and in embracing and kissing her, to expire; as if
she ambition'd in the last act of her life, to evince the perfect friendship
she had paid her through the whole course of it. At this second death,
Arsace's grief turned into Fury; he began to believe himself so horrid a
Murderer, that whoever he spoke unto, was instantly struck with Death; which
though true, had been a punishment inferior to his Sin: And in this belief, he
ran frantic up and down the Chamber, crying in the perfect accent and voice of
horror and despair, Gods! give me Parthenissa again, give me Parthenissa again:
And after a thousand fruitless offers of seizing on the Swords of some of his
Guards, he at length ran his head with so much violence against the angle of
that great Cabinet which stood by the Pallet on which the dead Parthenissa lay,
that he thereby not only received a large hurt, but fell speechless and
senseless at Parthenissa's feet; where he continued grovelling in his blood,
till his Guards carried him into his own Appartment to have him dressed. Here
(said Symander to his generous Hearers) the fair Emilia ended her Relation, and
began again her weeping in such excess, that it even brought an accession of
grief to that which invaded me by her fatal Relation: Neither do I believe she
would have ended her Tears, but with her Life, had not the care of Artabbanes
been greater than any she had of her self. For remembering one of her Princess's
last injunctions to her, was to let Artabbanes know her last to him, was, A
passionate desire of pardoning her Murderer, and a more passionate one of
surviving her Murder; that as she carried into the other World the highest
Model and Example of a perfect Love; so that he would continue the like in
this: and that Parthia was miserable enough in suffering her Kings Sin, without
the addition of enduring the punishment of it: she conjured me to assume that
employment, whilst she would pay the dead Princesses the duty of Funeral (if
her grief left her life enough to do it, which she hoped, yet feared it would).
Emilia further enjoined me, by an immediate return to Artabbanes, to prevent
the fame of Parthenissa's death; and by my acquainting him with her last
desires, endeavor to prevent his. This I esteemed so necessary, that after
having at Parthenissa's and Zephalinda's feet, paid the tribute of my Tears,
and as much as I was capable of, attempted to lessen the fair Emilia's, I went
to Sillaces, and after to Lyndadory's Appartment, where alas, I learned, that
in the confusion of the late disorders, she had been carried away by some Armed
and unknown persons; and that the generous Sillaces, with what friends he could
assemble in so short a warning, was gone after her Ravishers. With these
accessional griefs, of the unhappiness of my Prince's sister, and of my failing
of so necessary and powerful. Consolers as I was confident Lyndadory and
Sillaces would have been to Artabbanes, I directed my steps to him, but with a
heart so replenisht with sadness, that nothing could in degrees equal it, but
the justice with which it was so. You may (generous Hearers) in some proportion
imagine the strangeness of my then employment, when I knew not whether I ought
more to apprehend that any other should give my Prince the fatal Intelligence
of his Misery, or that I should: but the second day I came to the place of his
residence, where the horror which possessed me, by the perfect knowledge I had of
what his sorrows would be, at the information I was to give him, so vanquished
all those resolutions I had assumed during my journey, that not only I invoked
death as a pleasing expedient to have declined it, but would have made use of
it, had not I feared that Artabbanes by my that way of avoiding telling him his
loss, might have received it worse, than by a verbal doing it. But though this
faith tied up my hand, yet by those sudden and various emotions which did
agitate me, I felt a burning shoot into my veins, and that at first with such
violence, that I was in hope the Fever would confer that obligation on me which
my affection to my Prince hindered me from conferring on my self: or at least
if his despair for the deprivation of Parthenissa, were greater than his
obedience to her, my sickness would enable me to wait on him, without the help
of my resolution or duty. At length (generous Hearers) at length I came into
Artabbanes's Chamber; and though it were in high tremblings, with a pale look,
and in vast disorders; yet they hardly equaled my Prince's at the sight of
mine: That generous Courage which had so often outbrav'd Death in all its
Horrors, which had so often unmoved endured, nay, courted the highest Dangers,
was now conquered, and yielded unto the bare signs of sorrow in another: but
alas, they were signs so clear and evident, of the only way in which fortune
and the gods had power to invade him, that in my being incapable to tell Him
his Loss, he did but too plainly read it. But at last, when Artabbanes
perceived that I had the power by words to acquaint him with what my emotions
made him apprehend was the cause of them; He told me; Are not the gods yet (
Symander) weary of persecuting the miserable Artabbanes, by the punishments
they have imposed upon him, but that they must also afflict him more cruelly
and sensibly through Parthenissa? For doubtless thy grief is too great for any
misery which can wound me, but through her. Has any of my Rivals by force or
delusion got her again into their power? Or has her Justice now discovered
those defects in the over-valu'd Artabbanes, which her mercy so long hindered
her from seeing and punishing? Speak, I conjure thee, for thy looks have as
much of misery for me, as my Fate can impose upon me. Alas Sir (I replied) I
must confess your Ryvals have at length got the success; but it is not your old
ones have done it, they have been but Instruments to convey her from
themselves, as well as you. Your present Rivals are such, that it is as great a
Sin, as Impossibility to resist them: In the infelicity of your Love, the
excellency of your choice is manifested; and in the highest misery of Love, you
have the highest occasion of evidencing yours has been the most pure, and most
excellent: for if in your Passion, you were only concerned in the object of it,
she is now in joys; which will be so far from clouding yours, that they will be
as incapable of increase, as of change. You have now, Sir, no more the occasion
of repining for the unequaled Parthenissa, since the gods, who denied her you,
but to possess her themselves, have thereby taken from you the justice of such
a proceeding; and have confined you, if you grieve, to evidence it is for your
self, not her; who believing you were of a contrary principle, and that her
felicity would create yours, staid not till your new Rivals called her, but
elected to go to them. Thereupon I told him particularly all that I had seen,
and all that I heard from Emilia; but I had no sooner ended this fatal relation
(what through the indisposition which then invaded me, what through the horror
and grief which I saw invade my generous Prince) then I fell at his feet; and
though my senses at that instant did not abandon me, yet it was but to be the
more cruel, and the more tormenting; for I saw and heard, that after Artabbanes
had fetched a groan from the bottom of his heart, which showed the greatness of
it, by its being capable to contain so much, he cried out; You are dead fair
Princess, you are dead! and you died for Artabbanes: Ah too great, and too
ungrateful heart, which can know this, and yet can live after it; but I
will punish thee for needing any help but thy own to act thy duty; yes
ungrateful heart, thy debt to my Princess shall be paid, though not by thee; My
Resolution shall have the glory of that performance, since thou have declined
it, or at least art so long in acting it. Thereupon he ran furiously to his
sword, and having drawn it, resting the hilt upon the ground, and leaning the
point to his Breast, he cried out; Divine Parthenissa! what you have done,
leaves the miserable Artabbanes nothing to do, but to admire and follow you:
the first he has still performed, and the last he now performs. These words
were no sooner uttered, than by falling on his sword, I saw the fatal point of
it, having pierced his body, appear all bloody, as if it blushed at the sin it
had acted. Oh Gods! ( Symander cried out) why did you give me life enough to
see, and not life enough to prevent it? and yet it might be just in them, that
for my being grieved they were happier than my Prince, I should behold and not
hinder his despair. But Artabbanes, who knew how requisite Death was to his
condition, and how opposite I would be to that only cure, as if having opened
two doors for his Soul to free her self from that dark Prison she had been
confined unto, were not enough; he strived to employ that little life was left,
to take even that little totally away; and doubtless had repeated his wounds,
if my horror thereat had not given me a supernatural strength, and enabled me
on my hands and knees, to crawl to him, and to seize upon the hilt of his
Sword, on which I took such sure hold, that spite of all his struglings, I
kept him from additional wounds, and by my loud and reiterated cries drew some
of the people of the house to my assistance; who with me, by mere force wrested
the fatal weapon out of his hands: which being effected, my Prince with a look
in which a crowd of different passions were distinctly visible, told me, And is
Symander too become my enemy? ah! if thou have a hatred for Artabbanes, can
thou more signally satisfy it, than to see him send himself out of the World?
and if thou have a Friendship for him, why do thou retard his following
Parthenissa? with that fair Name his Senses abandoned him, and left his Body
environed in that deluge of blood which had flowed out of it. This Swounding
which at first made me tremble, soon after made me rejoice; for thereby the
Chyrurgeons (who then came) without resistance searched and dressed his Wounds;
and having laid him in his bed, they there endeavored by powerful Cordials to
recall that life, which seemingly had forsaken him. I caused them to lay me in
a Pallet contiguous to my Prince's bed, where in expectations which ravished
from me all sense of my own condition, I waited for the effects of the
Chyrurgeons Art and Prescriptions. But alas, the fear I assumed that death had
eternally closed his Eyes, could not transcend my grief when that apprehension
vanquished: for the first proof he gave of life, was an action which sadly
demonstrated how intent he was on the destroying of his: for finding his wounds
bound, he tore away all things the Chyrurgeons had applied to them, and
endeavored to make his hands finish what his cruel Sword had but begun: But
those I had ordered to watch and hinder the effects of his despair, by plain
force, and by my command, held his hands; at which he assumed so high a rage,
that in words delivered with much more strength than I thought he had been
Master of, he told me; Cruel Symander, and much more cruel than Fortune, yea
than Arsaces himself; they but make the highest cure necessary: but thou after
it is so, do deny it me. I conjure thee by that love thou once did pay
me, by that adoration I pay my Divine Princess, who I now behold clothed with
more Glory, than she has been with misfortune; and by those Tears (unusual
Advocates for me) permit me to follow her: with that he shed such a shower of
them, that I was for a time unable to answer him in any other language; which
my Prince perceiving, he told me; Can thou then, Symander, give me the
highest signs of pity, and deny me the least Act of it? and can thou be
sensible of my miseries, and deny me their only Cure? Ah Sir (I replied) what
is become of that Fortitude which in all the strangest and intricatest
Revolutions and vicissitudes of Fortune, has always made you triumphant over
her? Has it abandoned you, or have you abandoned it, in a season where it was
most necessary? What will the World believe to your prejudice, when you your
self act so much to it? your Virtue, which now is the admiration of all, will
be believed the mistake of all; for when any thing can befall it greater than
it self, 'twill be thought it has acquired its glory, not from its own
strength, but from the weakness of its opposers. Hold thy peace (said my
Prince, interrupting me) hold thy peace; it is no wonder thou have lost thy
concern for me, when thou have ^ost thy reason; which if thou had not, thou
could not but see, but that the fortitude thou so flatterest me with, never
aspired at so certain a felicity, as thy cruelty hinders her from possessing:
That which thy madness terms despair, my reason terms fortitude; which high
virtue is not given us to continue our miseries, but to overcome them: Mine are
of so peculiar a quality, that if my fortitude should continue my Life, 'twould
act against it self, as much as against me: No Symander, my Fortitude never so
well deserved that Name, as now that it has made me cheerfully elect to act my
own Death, which certainly cannot be a sin, since 'twill reunite me to the
Divine Parthenissa: had the gods designed me Life, they would not have taken
away hers; and the duty of not killing my self, by which I must be banished
from my Princess, cannot be so great as that of killing my self, to be restored
unto her. But Sir (I replied) what Face can you present your self to your
Princess with, when to act your satisfaction, you decline your duty? and leave
this world without revenging your self on him, who sent her out of it, and
divested you of all felicity in it? This (said Symander) I spoke in expectation
that such a duty might qualify for the present the

violence of his despair, and that time might silence it in the future; but
alas, I soon found the vanity of that hope, by my King's thus answering me: If
I were not certain 'twere a higher Mercy to kill one of my Princess's Votaries
after her death, than not to do it, I would not beg, the blessing to become my
own executioner; and therefore I will not so much oblige the Tyrant, as to
become his: The gods, who know the greatest Crime merits the greatest
punishment, do now evince that truth on that Monster; for the certainty that to
be the fair Parthenissa's executioner, is the greatest Sin, cannot be a greater
Truth, than after having acted it, it is the greatest punishment to want
fortitude to be his own; and since Life is the torment of my Princess's
Murderer, how can it be the satisfaction of her Adorer? besides, I am
confined, and I believe on this score of her last commands, from embruing my
hands in his Blood. So you are (I replied) from embruing your hands in your
own; and that request, nay, rather command, imposed with much more earnestness
than the other; ah Sir, consider how much your despair offenses your Love, and
how unlike this proceeding is to any other of yours, where your Princess's
commands have acted you? you can decline becoming the executioner of her
Murderer, to obey her; and you will not decline becoming your own, when you
have a higher confinement to it: this is not to obey her, but your self, or
rather your despair, by going to her in the other world, when she orders your
continuance in this; and when that order was pronounced with her last breath,
you show you value something above her commands, which is a crime you have
hitherto declined with so much care, and she has acknowledged with so many
Elogies, that your now running into it, evinces nothing so pregnantly as that
her Memory has not the same Ascendant over you, which her Life had, though she
lost hers, but to continue the more gloriously in yours; consider too, I beg
you Sir, that the more painful the obedience is, the more meritorious it is;
that common obeyings are not fit sacrifices for Artabbanes to offer, or
Parthenissa to receive; and that the crime of disobedience cannot be the way to
so admirable end, as is your reunion with her: Yes, Sir, I tremble to think how
she will receive you, when the last act of your Life is a violation of the last
command of hers. Thou do delude thy self, Symander, thou do delude thy self
(said my King, interrupting me); the Divine Parthenissa knew too well the
greatness of her loss, and the just sense I should have of it, to enjoin me the
impossibility of surviving it: I rather ascribe that to thy cruelty than her
commands; or if she imposed that on me which thou say she did, it was but
the better to illustrate the vastness of my Love, which by contemning my own
Life, her Revenge, and my duty to her commands, manifests it is superior to
all those; so that by my Death I shall but evince a truth I most ambition'd in
my Life; nay, which at any time I would have laid down to witness; which is,
that my Love was as much above all other concerns as the Beauty which inspired
it was above all which ever inspired that Passion: Let not then thy cruelty
deny my Flame the most glorious manifestation of it; nor let me derive that
from Time and from Torments, which my resolution is so obligingly ready to
confer on me without any; nor flatter thy self with believing Time can change a
resolution, which is as irrevocable as that misfortune which has made me so
justly assume it: no, Symander, thou may tie my hands, thou may hinder them
from acting my Death, but thou can not hinder me from dying; for I here
solemnly protest by the highest powers, and by my Princess who has increased
their number, that I will neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, till the want of
those confer that felicity on me, which thou have so barbarously denied me.
Then turning himself from me in a shower of Tears, he seemed to continue those
reproaches which they had interrupted. I cannot (generous Hearers, continued
Symander) acquaint you with what grief I entertained this vow of my Kings; I
knew his resolution too well, and the power he thus had to act it, not to
tremble when he pronounced it; and if at first I had any consolation, it
proceeded from an unremoved resolve of sharing in his despair, if at last I
could not silence it; but this being a thing which related to my self only, was
soon expelled by a throng of cares, which my duty to Artabbanes introduced, who
continued so cruelly true to his vow, that for four and twenty hours after he
had made it, not all my Prayers and Tears could invite him to take any
refreshment by food or sleep; by which he was so extremely weakened, that he
had not life enough so long again to repeat his abstinence: which when I told
him in sighs and weepings, he answered me only in smiles, and by them seemed to
tell me, that though his way of dying were not so expeditious as that I had
denied him, yet it was as certain. In this unequalled misery, when both my
reason and my hope had resigned themselves unto despair, the gods inspired me
with an invention which till now I never did discover, and which but to you I
would not. Symander having nicely looked whether any were in the Chamber, and
whether his Prince were within hearing in the Gallery, and being satisfied
negatively of both, thus resumed his discourse; I knew too well my King's
despair was so great, that no remedy which was not so, could suppress it, and
that his vows were not to be canceled, but by those to whom they were
addressed; 'twas therefore, that calling to me a Youth which belonged to the
house in which we lay, and who during Artabbanes's indisposition, had showed so
much concern in it, and care for him, that I concluded him sit for any
employment conducible to his recovery, I enjoined him in the blackest hour of
Night to conceal himself behind the hangings, which was next my Prince's bed,
and by unripping a part of it, to convey a hollow Cane as near Artabbanes's Ear
as he could, without putting it within the reach of his hands, and then in a
counterfeit hollow voice to speak thrice (and with some good interval) these
ensuing words, Artabbanes, go to Hierapolis, there consult and obey the Oracle.
The time to execute this being come, which was three hours after it was
designed, and indeed my Prince's condition could not well admit of a much
longer delay, the faithful Youth had so well fitted all things, and so
excellently disguised his voice, that I almost began to believe the gods (who
knew nothing but themselves had the power to suspend that despair they had
involved him in) had undertook that Justice: As soon as Artabbanes heard the
voice, he called me, and told me, Symander, does my Fancy conspire with thee,
and with Fortune? or do I really hear a voice, which commands me an obedience
more cruel than thy late usage? I was about to reply, when the second time, the
first words were repeated, and they were no sooner ended, than I cried out as
surprised: At length, Sir, at length, you see my endeavor to hinder your
despair, was not my Sin, for if it had been one, the gods would not have
imitated me; nor can you any longer doubt their care, when to evince it they
make use even of a Miracle: He was about to have replied, when the voice the
third time enjoined what it had twice before; after which, Artabbanes cried,
No, Symander, I never doubted of their care, nor of their making use of
Miracles to show it; but then that care, and those Miracles were only to
torment me: Ah gods! how can you, having done so little for me, expect so much
from me? and why do you enjoin me life, when you have not only taken from me
all the Felicities, but also left me all the Torments of it? Ah Sir! (I
replied) the reason of Man is too short and dull to reach and pierce the Ways
and Providence of the gods, which commonly delight to contradict, and cross
what we do seem most confident of; partly by showing us the uncertainty of
humane things, to wean us from them; partly, to have us center wholly in their
power, which such a dealing is no ill way unto: Thus have the greatest Miseries
been as often cured, as the greatest Joys have been extinguished. Whilst
Parthenissa was alive (said Artabbanes), that is, whilst there was a
possibility I might be happy, I did undergo all my afflictions with a silence
great as themselves, and with a resignation which showed I knew the ambition of
my Flame deserved those sufferings, which I alone ascribed to that cause: But
now the cruel gods have made my miseries past their power to cure; With what
justice can they hope to retain so much Empire over me, as to expect I should
act a performance they themselves cannot reward? and how can the destroying of
so unfortunate a Life be esteemed a crime? for where an obedience is above
recompense, the disobedience cannot merit punishment: No, Symander, I rather
believe they command me to continue in this Life, that I may not see my loss in
the next; for what Surena and Arsaces have been to me in this world, the gods
are in the other. If they are, Sir (I replied), then Parthenissa governs them,
and consequently she would not permit them to command you a fruitless Misery.
Alas (said Artabbanes), do thou not know, that though my earthly Rivals did
adore her, yet they did persecute me? why may not I expect from Heaven the like
effects, from the like Cause? No, Sir (I answered), for whilst the fair
Parthenissa's Soul was environed with an earthly dwelling, she could not see so
cleae as now she is all Spirit; so that now you need not doubt her knowledge to
foresee your ills, nor her power to prevent them; and therefore you have
nothing to do in this command, but to obey it: I am confident, Sir, this
miraculous injunction proceeds entirely from your Princess's care; your now
Rivals, if you made your own execution the way to her, might deny you the end
you thereby expect, and that too without making any new Laws, but by their
observing those to which all Mortals are confined; perhaps she has represented
so truly your Miseries, that she has procured a command to the Oracle of
Hierapolis, to ordain you by death to put a period to them, that thereby the
guilt of the performance may be taken away, and consequently the punishment,
which doubtless she apprehends as much upon her own score, as yours. If that
were so (said my King), why did not the same voice which enjoined me to seek my
Death (for that only can be my cure) at Hierapolis, command, or at least permit
me to act it here? The cause, Sir (I replied) is evident; every common Lover,
in the first dictates which his Mistriss's death inspires him with, would fly
unto that cure you now are so intent upon: But when you do evince, that Time
which heals all others griefs, does but increase yours; and that every moment
your Princess's death makes you willing and ready to act your own, that will
evidence your Love and sorrow equal their causes, and that the effects of your
Passion are as peculiar, as the Beauty which inspired it: Even Arsaces would,
in the first fury of Parthenissa's Loss, have done as much as you: shall the
deprived hopes of a vicious Flame, have as high a production as those of a
virtuous one? Ah Sir, provoke not the world so much to mistake the nature of
your grief, as to give them but equal illustrations: show us what was but fury
in the Tyrant, is Reason in you, by acting your Death for Parthenissa's, when
he has forgotten hers: The highest production of grief being to dye; and he
having elected that, you have no way but by Time to make the difference: It
would cloud the beauty of your performance, if it were in the heat of your
Loss; and make that look but like the greatest Rage, which is the greatest Love.

I should be endless (generous Hearers) did I tell you all our reasonings; it is
enough you know, that at length I obtained the victory; and that which chiefly
gave it me, were the two inducements I mentioned last. I must not omit
acquainting you, that I elected the Oracle of Hierapolis for the place where my
King was to learn his Fate, not only because it was the most celebrated in all
Asia; but also because it was so distant from the place we then were in, that
it would necessitate him to a perfect recovery, to enable him to perform the
journey. Never any man lost his health with more unwillingness than Artabbanes
recovered his; and those things prescribed him he took in such a way, as
manifested Life was his obedience, not desire: Should I tell you all his
extravagant reasonings, his vows of acting his own death, if the Oracle gave
him any ambiguous answer, and his high repinings against the gods, for having
kept the power of punishing, when they had lost that of rewarding him, I should
injure your patience too much; in apprehension I have done so already: I shall
conclude all by acqainting you, That I wondered he had so much obedience for
those Powers for whom he had so little respect; to whose Providence he yet owed
the recovery of his wounds; which being so well closed as to permit him to
ride, we began our journey, which was the saddest that ever was performed; for
my King for the most part kept a deep silence, and when at any time he broke
it, it was in sighs and groans, or in repeating the fair Name of Parthenissa,
evidencing thereby, that she only occasioned them. The third Night we came into
a Village, whither after Artabbanes was gone into his Chamber, there came
certain Gentlemen from Selutia all in mourning, of whom I had the curiosity to
enquire what News that place afforded; one of them told me, That the Death of
the Princess Parthenissa, and the Princess Zephalinda, took up all the sorrow
and business of the Court; and that Arsaces continued in as deep a Melancholy,
as if the cause of it had been recent; that he had lately celebrated their
Funerals distinctly: That though Zephalinda's was with much solemnity and
State, yet Parthenissa's was with much more: and that in imitation of
Alexander's Funerals for Hephestion, Arsaces had caused all the Spires, the
Pinacles, and the Battlements, both of the Temples and the Palaces, in Babylon,
Niniveh, and Selutia to be beaten down; and ordered that all in his Empire
(which were able) should for the revolution of twelve Moons wear close
Mourning: That he had caused Parthenissa's Statue to be made by an admirable
Artist, which he had erected at the end of a large Gallery all hung with black,
which had no other light but what it received from One hundred Crystal Lamps,
whose flames were continually fed by an artificial oil, which hardly admitted
of any diminution: That at the feet of this Statue, he had placed his own,
kneeling, weeping, and fixing his Eyes on that Beauty, who seemed to have
communicated to the Alablaster her living insensibility: That every day when
Arsaces's grief gave him strength to visit this Gallery, he constantly spent
half of it at the fair Princess's feet, and imitated or relieved his Statue.
This Gentleman further told me, that though these Deaths, and this strange way
of deploring them in Orodes, left little room for other sorrows or discourses;
yet some there were who did both grieve and wonder at the strange forcing of
the Princess Lyndadorie's Palace, at her being carried away by unknown persons,
and at the not hearing since what was become of her, or the Prince Sillaces,
who the same Night had followed her Ravishers. This News (continued Symander) I
thought unfit to communicate to my Prince, lest it might bring an accession to
that grief, whose extinction was my highest care. The next morning therefore we
continued our journey with our accustomed silence; but when we came within a
days journey of this Palace, there happened an accident which I cannot but
acquaint you with. Not far from the Road in which we traveled, near the side
of a little Grove, we discovered eight Horsemen, who assaulted a Gentleman that
defended himself with so much resolution, as showed the difference of the
numbers did but render the Combat equal. My Prince moved with the generous
Strangers Courage, and apprehending at length he might stand in need of his,
pulling down the sight of his Helmet, with his Sword drawn he galloped up to
him just as one of his Enemies had killed his Horse; by whose fall he was so
much disordered, that had not Artabbanes by a furious blow killed one of those
who pressed him the most, the Stranger undoubtedly had exchanged Fates with his
Enemy: Artabbanes having thus relieved a danger which was impossible any other
way to be effected, suspending his Sword in the Air, and commanding me to do
the like with mine, addressed himself to one who seemed to be the chief of
those who had begun so unequal a Combat, and told him, Though I am ignorant in
the cause of your Quarrel, yet I have some reason to suspect it is not just,
because you depend upon your numbers for your success; yet if you please to
acquaint me with it, I will engage my self no longer to defend your enemy, than
I find my self confined unto it by the duty of Justice. Whoever thou art (the
other replied with an insolent tone) who have made thy self my Enemy, and then
would have me make thee my Judge, know, our difference does not concern thee;
but since thou have made thy self so much a Party, I will make my self the
Judge, and do condemn thee to share in that death thou vainly endeavourest to
hinder. Thereupon he darted his Javelin at my Prince, who received it in his
shield, and then charged him so briskly, that he found his courage proportioned
his insolency; this usage had no unfruitful return: and though it deserved a
signal punishment, yet he received an honor that was so, dying by the hand of
Artabbanes. By this time the Stranger had mounted himself upon the Horse of the
first man that was killed, and furiously thrusting into the midst of his
enemies, by two unresistable blows, lessened as many of their number; the rest
amazed at our assistance, and at those admirable deaths, made so faint a
defense, that the Combat soon ended with their Lives. The Stranger then lifting
up his Helmet, which was shaded with a great Plume of Feathers of Aurora
color, as his Armor was of the like, and garnished with such refulgent Stones
as sufficiently manifested their Master was of no small Quality, came to
Artabbanes with so much Grace and Majesty, that I was charmed with it, and told
him; Generous Stranger, I owe you my Life, and will at any time pay you that
debt with as much satisfaction as I contracted it: but I must beg your pardon
if a consideration much higher than my Life does now force me from you, which I
should acquaint you with, did I not justly fear the time it would take up,
would hinder me from paying a duty to a Princess, who before the obligation you
placed on me, merited all mine, and even yet does merit the most of it: But
that I may not hereafter be guilty of that ingratitude which my highest concern
makes me seem guilty of now, I must desire to know my Protector's Name, that
when the Beauty I serve has no further employment for my Sword and Life, I may
know where to offer both to him to whom I acknowledge I owe them, and for whom I
will with much more joy employ them. Artabbanes, extremely satisfied with this
Gallantry, and as much moved with the Cause of that haste the Stranger seemed
to be in, replied: My Name, Generous Stranger, is as inconsiderable as the
little Service you are pleased to think I did you: But were it as great as your
acknowledgments, I should yet conceal it, lest you might thereby believe I
pretended to a debt you have but too abundantly satisfied already. You
retribute so much for so little, and you thereby appear so worthy to be
obliged, that I cannot but offer you my service in the relief of that Princess
you are so intent upon; the inequality of your late Combat, makes me believe
your Enemies are not acted by the Principles of Honor; and therefore if not
for your own sake, yet for hers you so much value, and who perhaps sets a
greater value upon your Life, than you do on your own, refuse not the
assistance of a Sword which has been fortunate enough against all, but him that
wears it. This strange conclusion had doubtless given the Stranger a curiosity
of desiring to know what occasioned it, if the great haste he was in, had not
suppressed it; which was such, that it hardly gave him leisure to make this
Reply: You cannot be so unjust to your self, and me, as to conceal your Name
upon the score you mention; and therefore I believe some high Cause invites you
to it, which shall suspend my desire of learning it: Your Virtue I am confident
will guide me to you, as certainly as your Name, and upon better
considerations; that way of enquiring after you, will be more noble, and as
sure. I confess I have the high Felicity of being valued by the Beauty I adore,
and the misfortune of having an Enemy and Rival, who cares not by what ways he
reaches his ends; but by your valor you have cut off his chiefest assistance;
and his Crimes are such, that I should injure the Justice of the gods, if I
thought a single Sword which strikes with Justice, were not able to act my
Revenge, and my Princess's Deliverance. Besides, I am so much your debtor both
by act and offer, that I should give my self a greater trouble by becoming more
so, than by undertaking alone the destruction of those few Enemies your Courage
has left me. That is a consideration (said Artabbanes) which your civility only
has raised; but your Valor is such, that by those effects of it which I have
seen, I can hardly doubt of any other: I will therefore only beg your pardon for
having done your Rival more service by delaying you, than I have done you, in
endeavoring to assist you; and that you will give me so obliging a Proof of
your having granted it me, as the acquainting me with your name. I should obey
you (said the Stranger) if it were not to make my self fruitlesly known unto
you, which would be a manifesting of my self too low, both for the obligations,
and the sense I have of them: Permit me therefore to decline that honor, till
I derive it from my services, which I will seek you over all the world to pay
you, as soon as I am put into a capacity of doing it, by having paid mine unto
my Princess, the necessity of whose condition I beg may appologize for my now
leaving you, which nothing else could make me hope for, or invite me to.
Thereupon saluting my Prince with much humility and haste, he turned about his
Horse, and followed the Tract of a Chariot with such celerity, that we soon
lost sight of him. Artabbanes was so much taken with the good Mien and civility
of the generous Stranger, and so sympathized in his concerns, that he suspended
his usual melancholy to entertain me with them, which yet he did but for a
little time, and then in his accustomed manner, continued his journey hither,
where we arrived without meeting any thing else worthy your knowledge, and where
my King has received an Oracle; which makes me hope what I considered as an
invention of mine, was an inspiration of the gods.

'Twas thus Symander ended the History of his King's Life, and then begged
Pardon from his generous Hearers for the length of his Relation, and for all
those faults he had been, or those omissions he might be guilty of.

Artavasdes and Callimmachus having both took notice with much civility of
Symander, and acknowledged how well he had acquitted himself, went to
Artabbanes in the Gallery; who, though they found in an excess of sadness, yet
by the knowledge of its cause, they were so far from condemning, that they
participated in it. But the good Callimmachus, who knew the gods promises to
him, and their power of performing them on those two Subjects, endeavored by
the assistance of Artavasdes, to change his sorrow into Faith, which yet proved
but a fruitless attempt: For Artabbanes knew the utmost extension of Faith, was
to act above reason, not against it; and therefore found in his own condition,
two high a certainty of its admitting a change. Several days were spent in such
successless employments, and to recover the two Princes out of a dangerous
relapse into which they were fallen, whose cure had retarded their intended
Sacrifice ordained them by the Oracle: But Callimmachus finding the Princes in
perfect health, and esteeming it high time to obey the imposition of the gods,
as also believing the Beauties of a little Forest in which the Temple of Adonis
and the Vestal Nuns stood, might be some diversion to their sorrows, invited
them thither: It was not above forty furlongs from the Temple of Hierapolis,
and a place of so much delight, that a Melancholy which was capable of ease
might be certain of receiving it there. Artavasdes, who burnt with impatience
to make a journey into Parthia, to offer his Sword and Life unto Altezeera,
which the words of one of his dying Enemies made him apprehend she stood in
need of, would before this invitation have gone whither his love and duty
called him, had his health permitted it; but now it did, and Artabbanes also
(who he was unexpressibly troubled to leave:) a new difficulty arose which was
like to interrupt his voyage for a few days, which was, that those Arms he had
wore at his coming to the Temple were too rich, and too well known to his
Parthian Enemies (as by a fatal experiment it had near been demonstrated) to
travel with them into a Country where his only safety would consist in his not
being discovered: To redress which inconveniency, he was forced to bespeak
less-rich Arms in the City of Hierapolis (which is not above Ten furlongs from
the Temple) and those not being like to be finished in a longer time than this
journey would take up, he joined his desires to Callimmachus's, which were so
prevalent with Artabbanes, that he Promised to accompany him in that little
journey, so that during it, Callimmachus would engage to acquaint them with his
Story, which having done, he took leave of them for that Night, and the next
morning early, he waited on them again. Though the way was but short, being yet
too long to be performed without Horses, the generous Priest provided some for
them as good as ever Arabia produced; and mounted on one of that Country
himself, they set forth. They had not gone a Furlong, when the two Princes
summoned Callimmachus of his promise, which he found a much easier thing to
have made than to perform, and having testified this Truth by a few sighs,
which a reflection on those fatal accidents he was going to relate extorted
from him, he at length with a deep Melancholy, began the Relation of his
Adventures, in these terms.

The End of the Fourth Part of Parthenissa.
PARTHENISSA, A ROMANCE*

THE FIFTH PART.

PARTHENISSA.
THE FIFTH PART.
The First BOOK.
The History of CALLIMMACHUS.
THE gods, who manifest they are absolute, as well over Kings, as private
Persons, and if they evince not their being so as often on the former as the
latter, it is only because there are many more of the one Quality than of the
other (for in degrees of proportion, they have as frequently, if not more,
evidenced it on Monarchies and Commonwealths, as on their subjects) have so
clearly acquainted me with this Truth, by those signal miseries they have
involved that unfortunate Family in, from whence I have the honor to be
descended, that if my words would not acknowledge their power, my condition
must* for though by the Laws of a legitimate succession, I should now wear a
Crown as flourishing as most in Asia, yet I am limited to the governing of a
few Priests; which change I could never have digested, had not my fate
inflicted on me another loss of so peculiar and transcendent a quality, that
the loss of Empire is absolutely drowned in the fatal remembrance of it. Great
gods! (continued Callimmachus), had you only cast me from the Throne of my
Predecessors, and from all the joys and fruitions of an early Monarchy, I had
submitted to that fate with as perfect a resignation as you could have expected
from an Offender, whose crimes could not but be infinite, since his punishments
are so; but alas! why to this high misfortune would you add that higher, of
seating me in a noble Throne, only to precipitate me from it? But why do I
repine at the last unhappiness, when you thought me worthy of the first? and
how could I fancy you would inthrone me in the fair Statira's heart, which was
the highest blessing, when you would not inthrone me in my Father's Right,
which was but a common Justice? Here Callimmachus breast was so contracted with
grief by a reflection on what he was engaged to relate, that it necessitated
him to a small silence; which his generous Auditors would have made use of, to
procure his pardon for their not having paid him those submissions due to his
Real quality, which their ignorance was guilty of, and consequently could only
apologize for; but Callimmachus would not so much as listen to their intentions
when once he guessed at them, which absolutely to retrench he made the greater
haste to suppress his disorders; and having effected it, he thus continued:

I shall not scruple (Generous Princes) to acknowledge I am descended from
Prusias King of Bithynia, surnamed the Hunter; That Prusias, who to all his
other crimes, added those of betraying the great Hannibal, and of sending Minas
to Rome, expressly to murder his Son the Prince Nicomedes, whom he had married
very young unto the daughter of Attalus then King of Pergamus; which Nuptial
was no sooner celebrated, than he repented it; for finding how much the young
Nicomedes was justly admired by all the Bithynians, and that his Son's virtues
did but render his crimes the more visible and detestable, he resolved to
destroy him by poison, whilst he yet resided with him; and to this he was the
more inclined, by having the same belief of Nicomedes, that he had of himself;
which was, that where the power of winning a Crown was not wanting, the will of
doing it was the like; and therefore he feared the affection Attalus paid his
Son-in-Law, would invite him to employ his power for him, to which Prusias knew
he must submit; not that Bithynia could not bring as many to resist, as he
could to invade, but that he knew his Tyranny had lost him his Subjects hearts,
and consequently he could expect no safety from their Arms. But Nicomedes was
too generous to make good his Father's fears; yet having miraculously
discovered his intention of poisoning him, and avoided it also (for he that
should have given him the fatal Cup, mistook it, and by drinking it himself,
converted his sin into the punishment of it) he thought to put himself into a
condition of ending both his Father's and his own fears, and knew nothing could
better effect the design, than by absenting himself from Bithynia, which he did
after his Princess had presented him with a Son, which he also called
Nicomedes, whom with his Mother he sent to Attalus; whither he would not
retire, lest the place of his retreat might raise those jealousies, which he
intended thereby to suppress. He therefore went to Rome, not only as it was the
fittest place to form and fashion him; but as believing it a Sanctuary which
Prusias durst not violate: for it was from the Romans he had received his
Kingdom, which he had forfeited to them, by that assistance he had given
Perseus King of Macedon, whose Sister he had married. But nothing being able to
suppress the Tyrant's cruelty, when the dictates of Nature could not; he sent
Minas to Rome to destroy that life there, which the gods had so miraculously
preserved in Bithynia: But Minas when he was to act his treachery, and had on
purpose inveagled Nicomedes alone to walk on the banks of Tiber, was so
overcome with the Majesty of his Person, and the charms of his Virtue, that
instead of executing his crime upon his Prince, he revealed it to him; and
afterward made him so clearly sensible of the great hazard he should
constantly be in of losing his life, if Prusias had power enough left to
destroy it, that he at length persuaded Nicomedes to go to Attalus, and implore
an Army able to bring Prusias to Reason; Minas assuring him that as soon as he
entered Bithynia, he would bring him forces so considerable, that Prusias should
not be able to resist. In brief, all this was performed; and after a long and
intricate War, Prusias scorning all accommodation, was reduced to be King of
nothing but the City of Nicomedia, in which Minas had so good intelligence, and
so many friends, that they admitted Nicomedes and his Army by night, who before
his entrance, prohibited all violence or incivility to his Father upon pain of
death. But Prusias at the alarm, fled in disguise toward the Temple of Jupiter
for Sanctuary; and being by the way met by some of Nicomede's Soldiers, though
he told them who he was, was yet killed. This news brought to Nicomedes, he ran
to the dead body, embraced and wept over it, punished exemplarily all the
Soldiers which had had a hand in his death; then gave him a Regal funeral, and
afterward languished away his own life. To him succeeded his Son Nicomedes
surnamed Philopater, who no sooner came to the age of relishing a Scepter, but
his was forced from him by Socrates, ^irnamed Chrestus, his only brother, and
thereby necessitated to seek protection in Cappadocia, under Ariobarzanes the
King of that Country whose daughter he married; and when she had presented him
with a Son also called Nicomedes, she engaged her Father in the War against
Chrestus, who being a greater Soldier than either Philopater or Ariobarzanes,
not only, after a ten years War, drove them out of Bithynia, which they had
invaded, but also out of Cappadocia; and forced both the Kings with the young
Nicomedes to fly to Rome, where some years they continued, imploring a Roman
Army for their restoration, which they at length obtained. The Generals were
Mannius Aquilius, and Lucius Cassius, whose Armies being small, they were
ordered to demand an additional force from Mithridates Eupater, who having
privately agreed with Socrates to have Cappadocia if he would not assist the
Romans in recovering Bithynia, denied Cassius and Mannius his assistance; who
yet by that influence the banished Kings had over their Subjects, defeated and
killed Socrates in a furious Battle, and re-seated Ariobarzanes and Nicomedes
in those Thrones, of which they had been so long and so unjustly deprived. But
the poor Philopater had no sooner received his Son from Rome, whose youth was
as promising as either his Parents or the Bithynians could desire, but that his
Queen died; and that loss had so strong an operation upon him, that he soon
accompanied her, and left Bithynia to Nicomedes my Father. I have given you
this little account of my family (the crimes whereof, though but inherent to
one, yet the misfortunes were to all) to let you see that such as are eminent
in Title, are often so in afflictions; that the gods by ruining the highest
earthly felicities, teach us thereby, that they are not too solicitously to be
prosecuted by those that want them, nor to be relied on by those which possess
them; but that they ought to be considered as things which will leave us, or
must be left by us: that we should be no more moved with the fruition, than
with the deprivation of them: and that these just considerations might instruct
us to fix upon that place where Fortune has no Empire, and to which Virtue only
has the title.

The Kingdom of Bithynia knew few Superlours in extent, in fertility, in the
beauty and greatness of Cities, or in the multiplicity of warlike Inhabitants,
when Nicomedes my unfortunate Father came to govern it; and though he were a
person replenished with all the realities and ornaments which makes one worthy
to ascend a Throne, and to be settled in it; yet those Powers who from occult
causes raise some to a Crown that deserve it not, and tare the Scepter from
some who deserve to hold it, esteemed the unhappy Nicomedes a fit Subject on
which to manifest the last of these truths; and it was in this manner that they
acted their decree: When he came to ascend the throne, by his Father's death,
it was in so early an age, that he had a higher desire to observe how other
Kings did rule their Subjects, than he then had to rule his own; or else he
believed, by having a personal inspection into the advantages and defects of
the Regiment of others, he might the more perfectly know how to carry on his
own; but from whatever principle it proceeded, and whatever danger he incurred;
yet he was unmoveably fixed to visit in a disguise the Courts of such Princes in
Asia, whom same had most celebrated; and therefore having entrusted his affairs
at home to the Prince Astyages his Uncle, and then apparent Successor (a Person
as eminent for the honest, as the politic part of Government; but so strict a
Justiciar, that he put his only Son to death for having violated a Law whose
infringement was to be accompanied with that penalty), he began his travels in
an equipage fit to cloud the greatness of his real quality, and yet sufficient
to manifest he was of no inconsiderable one. In brief, after he had fruitfully
visited all places fit for his curiosity, or benefit: he at length came to
Mithridates Court, then the most considerable of all others in every respect;
for though as then the Prince pharnaces, the Prince Ataphernes, the Princess
Statira, and the Princess Roxana, were not come into the world; yet there was
such a confluence of other illustrious persons and beauties which composed it,
that Nicomedes was often heard say, That, to be one of that Court was as good
as to be the chief of any other. But that which raised this opinion in my
Father was, that the Pontick King (who all the world knew was as violent as
inconstant in his loves) had then newly assumed a passion for the Princess
Fontamyris, who was only Heir to Cephines, a Tributary-Prince unto him; yet
very considerable for his power and wisdom. This Amor joined with Mithridates
youth, made his Court the most delicious place, not only of Asia, but of the
whole world. My Father too, being in an age very susceptible of all the charms
of such a place, it was not strange he had so high an opinion of it, since all
sort of gallantries shined there in their greatest lusture. The next night
after Nicomedes came to Pergamus, then the residence of Mithridates, he was
informed that the ensuing one the King presented Fontamyris with a magni^ick
Ball; the great discourse of such a meeting, and the greater of that beauty who
was the cause of it, gave my Father the curiosity to be a looker on; but he no
sooner saw the fair Fontamyris, than he became one indeed; and what his
curiosity had extended over the whole Assembly, a more pressing cause confined
to one of it: And though Nicomedes the more unob^ervedly to gaze on his new
Conqueror, had retired himself into the throng; yet his good Mien, and the
advantage of his stature was such, that amongst many who considered him upon
those scores, as well as for his being a stranger, the fair Fontamyris did it
so intently, that not only Nicomedes observed and was concerned in it; but
Mithridates did the like too; and they had both much more cause for both; when
the fair Fontamyris, by the rules of the Ball was to elect one to dance with,
she chose my Father out of the throng, who as much confounded as joyful at it,
having with a deep humility acknowledged the honor she did him (in the Pontick
tongue also, which he spoke as naturally as his own) he afterward acquitted
himself with so much grace and unconstrainedness in the Dance, and observed the
Cadence with so much justness and regularity, that the Courtiers, who found how
much his having done so, disgusted Mithridates, could not find in their envy
and malice the least rise to manifest either; for the more curiously and nicely
they examined what he had performed, the more cause they found to esteem and
admire it. And that Fontamyris might have as much occasion to be sati^fied with
his civility, as he had to be with hers, whilst he was leading her to her
place, he again made her so many handsome retributions for the honor she had
done him, that if she had reason to be pleased with what he did in the Dance,
she had at least as much to be so with what he had done after it. Nicomedes
being obliged by the Rules of the Ball to take out another Lady, he took one
who ^ate next to Fontamyris, with whom he Danced, and then having saluted
Mithridates and all the company with much humility, but Fontamyris with much
more, he retired into the throng, where he continued as long as the Ball, and
in distempers, which till then he had never been acquainted with: But (said
Callimmachus) not having undertaken Nicomede's story, but mine, I will be as
brief in his as I can, with obedience to what you have commanded me concerning
mine own: and therefore I shall in short acquaint you, that my Father was so
far engaged in his passion to Fontamyris, and so successfully made his Court,
that at length it was not only her opinion, but confession, that the difference
between the Kingdoms of Mithridates and Nicomedes was not near so great, as
that between their persons; for my Father had informed Fontamyris, and
Cephines, of his real quality, though he and they had concealed it from the
Pontick, King, who never knew thereof till Nicomedes had secretly carried away
the Princess into Bithynia, which he did both by hers, and her Father's
consent, who yet durst not publicly own it, lest Mithridates resentments might
have vented themselves against him, who only was in his power. Soon after in
Nicomedia the Nuptials were re-solemnized openly, and with all the magnificence
a young King and a successful Lover could invent: But alas! those joys were but
of short duration, and like glorious mornings which are the soonest over-cast,
and turned to tears; for the lightning of this Nuptial-Torch, was the flame
which set all Asia on fire, was the original of that fatal war which afterward
the world too well knew by the name of Mithridatick; and was the occasion or
pretense of drawing the Roman Eagles out of Europe into the East, where they
have since extended their wings into the Euphrates, over which it is believed
they had long since flown, had not the Domestic differences of her proud
Citizens done more for Asia, than the blood and swords of all her Inhabitants.
This great people jealous of their glory, or thirsting after a pretense to
increase it and their Empire, so highly resented Mithridates not assisting
Mannius Aquilius, and Lucius Cassius, in the recovery of Bithynia and
Cappadocia, that they commanded those two Generals to invade Pontus, and to
make the loss of that great Kingdom the Penance of the King's disobedience: But
knowing the Roman Army was too small for so great a design, by a solemn Embassy
they invited Nicomedes to join his Arms to theirs, and to suppress the Enemy
both to his Family and Person. Nicomedes, who owed his Crown to the Romans, who
knew Mithridates Resentment would proportion his Loss, That if he omitted this
opportunity of depressing him, he would probably never meet with such another;
and perhaps in a heat of youth, ambitious to mingle Laurels with his Myrtles,
invited by Gratitude, Policy and Glory, added a Bithynian Army to the Roman,
over both which the Senate made him General; which they the more confidently
did, because his Education was Roman; and this Action made them believe his
Inclination was the like. Nicomedes, Mannius, and Cassius, found Eupater on the
Frontiers of Pontus with a vast Army, which he had raised to invade his Rivals
Kingdom; but now to his grief and wonder, he found must be employed to defend
his own. The Retail of this War would be endless: I shall therefore omit all
the battles, sieges and encounters of it, to tell you the event of that signal
day, on the success of which both parties had set up their Re^ts; The
Consequence being great, the Forces which composed both Armies were the like;
under Mithridates Ensigns there were Two hundred thousand foot, and One hundred
thousand Horse raised in Pontus, Lidia, the two Sc^thia's, Mesopotamia, Armenia
the less, and even the Bactrians, and the farther Eastern people came to his
help against the Romans, their common Enemy; to all which Craterus, a great
Captain, had brought him One hundred and thirty Chariots armed and fortified
with sharp Sithes; an invention which till then the Romans and B^thinians had
never been acquainted with; and which did more against Nicomedes Army, than all
Mithridates's besides. These great Forces were led by Commanders, whose
Gallantry rendered them as formidable as their Numbers: besides Craterus, there
was Dorilaus who led a Phalange of Foot, so considerable both for the number
and order, that the Romans both feared and admired it. Neoptolemus led Thirty
thousand Horse, and his brother Archilaus led as many composed of various
Eastern Nations. Canzaber a famous Bactrian Prince, led Thirty thousand foot of
that wild Country, and of the Zogdians; and amongst many others, the young
Prince Archathias, eldest Son to Mithridates by a P^ntick Lady, whose death had
given him the libe^ty of making his addresses to Fontamyris, was at the head of
Ten thousand Armenian Horse, and became his Command so well, that his good mien
and courage abundantly supplied the want of his experience. To this immense
Land-army, Mithridates had as considerable a Naval one, under the Command of
Betuitus, which Anchored at the mouth of the River Amadus, near whose banks
this fatal difference was decided, and from which the ensuing battle took its
name. Nicomedes army though inferior in Number, yet was not so in the
confidence of Victory; for the Senate, knowing how much depended on this great
field, had to their Legions under Cassius, and Mannius, sent Appius a noted
Captain, who had reinforced his Romans with so considerable a Number of
Cappadodocians, that his Army only consisted of forty thousand Horse and Foot.
Mannius by those helps he had out of Pamphilia was no less, not Cassius's
neither, who had newly received large accessional Forces out of Galatia and
Phr^gia. To all these Nicomedes had brought Fifty thousand foot, and six
thousand all natural Bythinians: and that the Empire of the Sea, as well as of
the Land, might be at once decided, he sent Order to Minutius, Russus, and
Caius Popilius, to leave the Guard of the Pontick Sea, which thitherto had been
their employment by express Order from Rome, to engage ^etuitus's Fleet, when
the Land forces began the battle. The Armies being drawn up by that time the
Sun had reached the South, Nicomedes encouraged the Romans by the Glory which
that day they might win, and by the profit the Victory would present them,
which was no less than the civilized parts of Asi^. Then addressing himself to
his own Subjects, he only told them: It Is this day, O Bythinians, that you will
decide from whom you derived your Originals; For if you seek your safety in any
thing but your Valors, your Enemies will not only stay, but even your King
will believe, and you will prove, That you are indeed descended from those
Cowards which the unfortunate Rhesus led to the relief of Troy, and which
Diomed the first Night conquered and dispersed: But if by your courages you
successfully court Fortune and Victory (for it is only by Valor those are won),
the world will know you draw your extraction from the Lineage of the gods, and
that Bithis the Son of Jupiter, and Thracis, was the noble Source from whence
you are descended. Nicomedes said no more, neither indeed needed he; for the
Bithynians were so jealous of their pedigree, and so offended at their enemies
saying, they were descended from those Grecian Fugitives, that they esteemed
Death a much less misfortune, than to be denied their true Original, or to have
that false one imposed on them; upon both which scores only, they had often in
ancient times begun and continued bloody Wars.

The Military Music was beginning to invite the hearers, to drown it in their
shouts: when a Post came to Nicomedes from Fontamyris, to acquaint him, that
the gods had given him the unfortunate Callimmachus, (which name Arsamnor my
Governor gave me at Athens; it signifying in the Bithynian language, as much
as unhappy at the Birth; my own being Nicomedes, which yet I never wore, being
but too much known by the misfortunes of it). But with this desired news my
Father begun the Battle, having first communicated it to the Bithynians, whose
joy made the Enemy mourn; for carried on with so high an Addition to their
Valors, they acted things which both the Romans and Mithridates admired.
Neither did Nicomedes performances exact a less debt; for having now a
successor, he was the more prodigal of himself, whereby all that durst resist
him, soon found the bloody punishment of that confidence. But alas! what
certainty is there of humane things? When the poor Nicomedes in the height of
his Glory, and at the head of a conquering Army, from a single unknown hand,
received a Dart, which piercing through his Body, deprived him of speech and
sense. The Bithynians by a general groan solemnized his fall, and the
Mithridatians imagining what alone in so fair a way to Victory, could produce
so strange an effect; by a shout of joy acquainted the sad Bithynians, they
knew what made them so. But the passion of grief at the Bithynians loss, being
greater than their fury for it: and at the same instant Craterus charging into
their greatest Body, with his armed Chariots, brought so general a disorder to
Nicomedes subjects, that they scarce could carry off his wounded Body; and the
Romans with their Auxiliaries seeing the Bithynians fly from that Victory they
had so generously courted, and almost obtained, despaired of recovering the
day; which they had much more cause for, when Craterus and Arcathias charged
Cassius in front and flank, as Neoptolemus and Archilaus did Mannius, and as
Can^aber and Dorilaus did Appius; where they found so poor an opposition, that
I may therefore truly say, They got not the glory, though they got the field.
Some affectionate Servants of my Fathers, believing when his side lost his
assistance, they would also the Battle, carried him away in a Litter past the
fury of the execution, and then by easy journeys brought him to Nicomedia; so
happy he was in his misf^rtune, as to find by experiment, that the Fate of
A^ia, and the lives of some hundred thousands had depended on his sword and
courage; for whilst those did act, Victory followed his side, and abandoned it
when they did not. Nor was Mithridates obliged only to one Element for Victory;
for his Fleet had triumphed on the Sea, as his Army had on the Land. Betuitus
presented him with the heads of Minutius Ruffus, and Caius Popilius, the two
Roman Admirals, who elected to share in their Navies Fate, rather than to
outlive it. And that Mithridates might have no cloud to obscure his Glory,
though the number of his Army exceeded his Enemies, yet the number of those
which fought, did not: for eighty thousand horse and foot, which composed his
last Battalion, obliged the rest of his Army only, by their not contributing to
their success. Ten thousand Bythinian Officers and Soldiers, who that fatal day
had lost their liberty, were the next brought before Mithridates, who sent them
all as a present to Fontamyris, and as he said, as so many witnesses of the
error of her choice. Nicomedes as soon as he was recovered, rallied of all his
Armies, some Forty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, with which he
attempted Mithridates Army, which was divided and secure by their former
Victory: But this Battle fought on the Banks of Gargarus, was an exact
Repetition of the former: My Father had the Victory, till by wounds he was
disabled from prosecuting and keeping it. This second de^eat deprived him of
all hope of bringing his Fate to a third trial, especially it being accompanied
with the loss of the Roman forces; for Quintus Appius, a Roman Praetor, was
betrayed by his own Soldiers to Mithridates; and Mannius was taken, and brought
to Pergamus, where after many derisions he was put to death, by melted Gold
being poured down his throat, thereby to reproach the Roman avarice.
Mithridates now seemed rather to make a Progress, than a War. The Cities of
Magnesia, Ephesus, and Mytilene, received him in triumph. By his Lieutenants he
conquered Licia, Pamphylia, and Paphlagonia, and at length crossed over the
Mountain Scoroba, which separates Bithynia from Pontus. It was then, the
unfortunate Nicomedes found he could no longer resist his Conqueror, and
therefore having sent for the chiefest Nobility of his Kingdom, and the
chiefest Inhabitants of his Cities, he generously commanded them to submit to
that Fate he could not oppose, and not to exasperate Mithridates by a fruitless
fidelity to him.

This rare and noble care, strangely affected those which were to enjoy the
effects of it, who in tears and other signal expressions evinced, they were not
desirous, nor therefore unworthy of it; so that the unhappy Nicomedes was
necessitated to make use of his Authority, to absolve his subjects from their
Obedience to it, and thereby robbed his Enemy of a full triumph, by deposing
himself.

This great business being performed with as much sadness as solemnity, he
retired unto Fontamyris's Cabinet, where they both sent for Arsamno^^a
Gentleman that had been Governor to my Father, and had discharged that trust
with so much fidelity, merit, and success, that they both resolved he was a fit
person to be entrusted with me. As soon as he was come, Nicomedes told him; You
see, Arsamnor, the gods for the present have cast down the House of Bithynia,
but perhaps they may restore that Scepter to the young Nicomedes, which they
have thought his Father unworthy to hold; had we still continued in the Throne,
you should have had as great Demonstrations of our Bounty, as now we give you
of our trust, which is the care of our only Son; let him never know his name,
or his real quality, unless he appear worthy of both, and unless the gods rai^e
him to a probability of recovering that right which we have lost. I will not
tell you Arsamnor's joy at this high trust, nor the Queens grief, when at once
she was forced from the Kingdom and her Son: You shall only know, that the next
day after, the King and Fontamyris, having laden Arsamnor with Jewels, made
him take a solemn Oath, never without their consent to acquaint me who I was;
and privately provided him with a swift Galley in a Creek opposite to the shore
of Greece (in which Country Nicomedes enjoined my Governor to give me my
Education) they both left Nicomedia, and not long after Bithynia, with much
less trouble than it occasioned in their subjects. The place which my Father
chose for his retreat, was the City of Celena, the Metropolis of the greater
Phrygia, whose King was a person deserved that title, and so much his friend,
as he was confident he would appear so, even when fortune was not. Nicomedes
would not take me with him, either from an apprehension that he might infect me
with his infelicity, which he believed was contagious; or else if Mithridates
by force or treachery should ever get him into his power, yet his ignorance
where I was might preserve me for more happy times, and make me one day recover
that Crown he had so fatally lost. I was therefore by Arsamnor's care and
sidelity carried with safety to that Galley which was provided for us under the
Promontory of Posidum, from whence the wind favoring us, blowing from the
North, with Sails and Oars, we soon crossed the Sea called Propontus, and past
through the Hellespont, memorized by the famous death of Hero and Leander,
whose Cities Seftos and Abydos crowned the shoars of the guilty waters. Then
crossing the Aegean and Icarian Sea, we cast anchor under the Promontory of
Panormus, where Arsamnor dismissed his Galley, and leaving me in a little
Village near Athens, went thither to seek a Sanctuary, which he easily obtained
by the favor of Ariston, the eminentest man in that City: for the Athenians
were jealous of the growingglory of Mithridates, left the loss of their City
might have composed a part of it. Arsamnor then formed himself an equipage fit
for a Nobleman of Cappadocia, which he said he was; as also that he was forced
out of his own Country by the prevalency of Mithridates Arms; and for his
fidelity to his own Prince, assuming also the name of Telamon, which had b^^n
his Grandfather's. The charms of his conversation, his affability, and other
ornaments and virtues, soon gained him so considerable an interest, not only in
Ariston, but in all the other Athenians, that he spent his time there in as
much safety, as if it had been in Nicomedia; and with as much satisfaction as
the remembrance of his Kings affairs would admit. But whilst I thus past my
infancy at Athens, Mithridates had conquered all Bithynia and Cappadocia, and
was near forming as great an Empire in Asia, as the Romans had in Europe; which
great people, though extremely perplexed by the sad discords of Italy, and of
their own City; yet being as careful of their glory, as of their being,
desiring the last but for the first, they elected Cornelius Scylla General of
the Asian War; under whose conduct they promised themselves a revenge as great
as their desire of it; his earliest actions rendering that belief a rational
one. But Scylla, who feared Marius and Cinna gave him this power in Asia, the
better to establish their own in Rome, delayed going to the War so long, that
the Grecian Cities, who at first more apprehended the Roman Power, than
Mithridates's, and therefore gave Scylla some promises of joining their Armies
to his, now looking upon Mithridates Army as the nearest, and consequently as
the greatest danger, joined with the Asian, as thinking it their best interest,
when doubtless Honestly only was; and the two first Cities which were guilty of
this change, were Athens and Thebes, to whom the Pontick King granted many
privileges; and to enable them to be his friends, or to secure their not being
his enemies, he sent them a vast Army out of Asia under the command of the
Prince Archathias, whose Lieutenant General was Archilaus, that same Archilau^
who did him such memorable Service on the banks of Amneus. Mithridates in
person continued in the City of Nicomedia to celebrate his Nuptials; for
finding Fontamyris preferred banishment with Nicomedes, before Empire with
Mithridates, Hate invaded the place of Love, and to let the late object of his,
know, resentment had performed what it may be she thought nothing but time
could, solemnly married in the Metropolis of Fontamyris Kingdom the fair
Calamis, whose beauty gave her what her birth could not. The Pontick King
thinking himself sufficiently revenged on Fontamyris by expelling her out of
Bithynia, and by making another Queen of it, in it; exchanged his love of
beauty, into love of Empire, and so assiduously followed the War, that in few
days all the Asian Princes had drawn their Swords in his quarrel, or had given
him Hostages not to employ them against him, so that nothing was more generally
believed, than that Greece would be the Scene of the War, and that Mithridates
would save Scylla the trouble of invading Asia, by meeting him half way.
Telamon finding how deeply Athens was engaged in the Pontick quarrel, would
have chose some other Retreat, fearing he was too considerable to be unknown,
if Arcathias, or Archilaus came into the City; and fearing also if he were
taken, it might be my ruin; but Ariston hindered it, who assured him no Asian
General, or Garrison should ever enter Athens, unless the Romans came to besiege
it, which if they did, he would not fail to send into some place of safety him
and his Son; for I was not only thought to be his Son by all the Athenians, but
I also thought my self so, so strictly Telamon kept Nicomedes command.

This promise made my Governor continue me in Athens, where we learned that
Rome awakened with the Revolt of Greece, with the great Army Arcathias had
brought thither, and with the greater Mithridates was to bring, had hastily
ordered Scylla to his command, who had in this mean time so well fetled his
affairs in the City, as he doubted not but to end the Asian War before they
could receive any considerable alteration. But that great people were then
reduced to so low a necessity, that to furnish Scylla, they were constrained to
give him those sacred golden Vessels which Numa Pompilius had consecrated to
the Roman Deities; thereby evincing, glory was their greatest God. Mithridates
now understanding that Scylla only wanted a fair wind to cross the Adriatic
Gulf; and that the Coast of Italy, which that Sea did confine, was now covered
with Soldiers, jealous lest so many Italians as were settled in Asia might
embrace the quarrel of their Country, or desiring the wealth of that people to
defray the charges of the War, or detesting that Nation, or else to render the
Asiaticks incapable of pardon, sent Orders to all his Governors in Asia, on a
prefixed day to kill all the Italians under their power, without any regard to
sex, age, or condition; to cast their car^asses into the fields, there to leave
them unburied, and to reserve one half of their goods to his use, the other
half to distribute amongst themselves. Oh gods! (continued Callimmachus) what
sins could the unfortunate Nicomedes and Fontamyris be guilty of, that you
could cast them from the throne of Bithynia, to place such a Monster in it? and
why would you give so much wickedness so much power to act it? or permit so
many millions to be governed by one, who was so unable to govern himself? But
yet it was fit that Subjects which could obey such an Order, should be governed
by such a King: Yes (generous Princes) the Asiaticks observed their Prince's
command, and on the fatal day shed a Sea of Italian blood, the slaves and the
free, the young and the old, the male and the female, the poor and the rich,
found no Sanctuary in their conditions, no, nor even in the Temples, nor in the
very embracing the gods of them: The Temple of Artemisius in Ephesus, the
Temple of Aesculapius in Pergamus, and the Temple of the Goddess Vesta in
Caria, were hardly able to contain the bodies of those who were murdered in
them: And as if their fury had engrossed or drowned all other considerations,
they had not discretion enough so to act their wickedness, as to leave
themselves the shadow of an excuse for it; since they killed these poor
creatures with so much relish, that it appeared to be as much their delight, as
it was their cruelty.

But this could not so much lessen the Roman interest in Asia, as it did
increase their title to it; for the gods could not protect the Asian quarrel,
without protecting the Asian crimes. Those of Delos (subject to the Athenians)
either apprehending to be engaged in a quarrel which the effusion of so much
innocent blood assured them would be unsuccessful, or hoping to cast off the
Athenian yoke, declared for Scylla before he came into Greece, against whom
Ariston went; but being too weak, had the assistance of Archilaus, and thereby
soon reduced Delos to her former obedience; in which expedition Archilaus so
flattered Ariston, and so elevated his ambition, that it was concluded between
them, Mithridates should make Ariston Prince of Athens, and that Ariston should
do fealty for it to Mithridates. Yet this was not done with so much secrecy,
but that Telamon had some suspicion of it, which afterward he was the more
confirmed in* by the actings of Ariston, which transcended what a free State
could suffer: But though the Athenians were sensible of it, yet they wanted the
power to redress it; for besides the interest Ariston had in Athens, he was so
openly countenanced by Archilaus, that the discovery of his design was a
greater trouble to the people, than the ignorance could have been.

Telamon at length so well acted his part, that Ariston permitted him to retire
to Miletus the Metropolis of Caria, and sent some Athenians to convey us
thither: this place he elected, as being by the situation of it, likely to
avoid that War which now threatened Greece, and like to oppose any War which
should threaten it, by the great obligations it had to Art and Nature. It was
there that Telamon, as soon as I was capable of learning, began to instrust me
in Philosophy, that on the score of Reason I might contemn that power and
glory, which misfortune was but too likely to deny me. In this calm retreat we
learnt those bloody revolutions which happened in Greece; how at last Scylla
Landed there only with five Legions, and certain Cohorts and Turmes, in which
small Army there was yet so exact a Discipline, that it made all believe, those
which had acted the highest conquest, the conquest of themselves, would hardly
be denied any other.

This belief not only brought Thebes under the Roman power, without Scylla's
employing it to procure that end, but also deterred Arcathias and Archilaus
from determining the War by a general battle. But Scylla, after having
fruitlessly essayed to provoke them out of so protractive and cold a
resolution, elected at once to besiege Athens and the Port of Piraeus,
believing if the Asians would not attempt relieving of those places, he should
soon win them; or if they did, he should soon win a victory. He farther
concluded, That if they were so ill Protectors of such friends, it would deter
the Grecians from continuing, or at least from assuming that name.

This resolution being known to Arcathias, and Archilaus, they determined that
the first of them should keep the field with half their Army to obstruct
Scylla's supplies, and the last should fling himself into Piraeus to obstruct
his conquests; and that the Grecians might see they had not invited them into
dangers which they declined participating in; Ariston, who in person continued
in Athens, having a considerable Garrison, performed things with it, which were
so; and never any Pyramid gave the builder of it more fame, than the walls of
Piraeus gave Piriclion an Athenian Captain, who had raised them during the
Peloponnesian War, and which in this Roman War rendered all Scylla's assaults
invalid, and the battering Ram unworthy that name; yet Scylla was not at all
dejected hereat, but elevated himself with the glory of besieging at once the
greatest Army in Greece, and the greatest City of it: for by this time the gods
had taken away the young Prince Arcathias by a sudden death as he was raising
an Army to relieve his friends, or not to have survived the unhappiness of
having been unable to do it; so that those forces wanting a Captain fit to
employ them, were by Archilaus orders come into Athens, and Piraeus by Sea,
which they did safely by the help of the Mithridatick Galleys, Scylla having
none to dispute the Empire of that element with. I must confess (continued
Callimmachus) the first actions of War which ever gave me envy, and a desire of
imitation, were those of this siege; for never was there more Art and courage
manifested in so small a compass, as within the Athenian walls, and the Roman
Camp. But famine put a period to the besiegers pains, and the besiegeds glory;
But yet even famine it self for a time lengthned the siege, the death of some
continuing the life of others; for the living fed upon the dead.

But in conclusion, there was no hands to justify the walls of Athens; and
then Ariston retired into the Castle, glorying that the Athenians had left
Athens, rather than that the Romans had taken it; but the same misery which had
reigned in the Town, soon did the like in the Castle; where Ariston endured
death with as much resolution, as he had opposed it; proud with the knowledge
that Athens and his Dominion over it found their period in one day, and that
the noblest City of the world accompanied his fall. Scylla being thus Master of
Athens, rewarded his Soldiers patience and courage with all things sacred and
profane; and by the great severity he practiced upon those Athenians which had
escaped the War and the Famine, made them know it had been an act of more
honor, and more ease, to have expired with their Country, than so to have
outlived it.

Archilaus burning with desires of revenge, or else to evidence by some high
performances after Arcathias death, that his having been General, had hindered
many great actions, drew all the Mithridatick Forces into one body, determining
therewith to place a period, or bring an accession to Scylla's glory. The Roman
General received this Intelligence with Prophetic Raptures, and in his high
Joy before the Battle, manifested his confidence of winning it. The Country
near Cherovia was the Scene of this Dispute, from which City the Battle took
its name. Murena Galba and Hortensius for a time drew all the Romans
admiration, till Scylla, jealous that those under him should act above him,
performed such prodigies of valor, that the Romans esteemed it more unjust not
to give all their wonder unto their General, than to have denied before a part
unto three such men. Archilaus in this defeat lost upon the place One hundred
and ten thousand men, and the hopes of ever having so many together again in
Greece, which by an Express he advertised Mithridates of; who to keep the War
out of Asia, forthwith sent Dorilaus and the Prince Diogenes, with Eighty
thousand Foot into Greece, to reinforce Archilaus, and to enable him to make
one other experiment of Fortune in the Field.

At the same time also he assembled all the Princes and Tetrarchs of Asia which
he suspected, or was not confident of; and having them in his power, put them,
their wives and children, to death; his past cruelty rendering this an act of
wisdom: for he had so offended all mankind, that he could not kill any but such
as were his enemies. Many Noble Cities he used as ill by Zenobius a Lieutenant
of his, whose natural cruelty equalled his Kings; this was the last place he
acted his Massacres in, and then went to Ephesus, expecting like reception, and
designing the like Tyranny. But the Ephesians finding that resistance could not
be worse than submission, resolved on the first, though Philopomenes was
Governor thereof, and made so by Mithridates. This example had so good success,
that the Cities of Thrales, Hippapes, and Mesopolites, followed it: which made
Mithridates think, that though cruelty was pleasant to him, yet it was not wise
[ I have not acquainted you with so many Tyrannies of his, because he was my
enemy, but to let you see that 'twas not only to punish the unhappy Nicomedes,
that this Mithridates was raised, but to punish all the civilized world]: To
these great revolts, he received the certain advertisement, that Archilaus and
Dorilaus had been defeated in a furious Battle by Scylla, who derived his
victory from his personal courage; for when his Army fled, he ran to the first
Eagle, and taking it up, flew with it into the midst of the Asiaticks, crying
out to his Soldiers, If any ask, O Romans, where you have abandoned your
General, tell them you left him fighting in Orchomenia: which expressions and
action raised their shame above their fear, and made them return to the Battle,
in which they did things that defaced the sin of their aflight, and presented
Scylla with the Victory, which though that day far advanced, yet it was not
till next day perfected; for then assaulting and entering Archilaus Camp, few
escaped out of it but himself. But to qualify the joys of such signal
Victories, Scylla received advertisement from Rome, that Cornelius Cinna, and
Caius Marius having usurped the power of the City, and over the Senate, had
declared him an enemy to the people of Rome, had razed all his Houses, and had
proscribed all his Friends and Partisans. Scylla at this so fatal intelligence,
loses not his courage, but resolves by it to form himself as great an Empire in
Greece and Asia, as his enemies designed in Europe, and then in a fair Field to
decide who should have both. But Cinna and Marius, who knew he had so high an
ascendent over his Army, that, what they could do, he could persuade them to do
it for him; and believing no other design could proportion Scylla's courage,
and judgment, elected Flaccus one of the Consuls, and sent him with two of the
best Legions to supply Scylla's Office, or to force it from him. But Flaccus
being no Soldier, they sent for his Praetor Fimbria, who had by many exploits
in Arms rendered himself justly famous. This new Roman Army being come to
Brundusium, part of it with the Fleet which carried them, was taken by
Mithridates Fleet; part of them perished in a storm; part that were landed in
Thessaly, went to Scylla, not being able to endure Flaccus his insolen^ies; and
the rest had done the like, had not Fimbria by Reasons and Clemency hindered it,
which yet more incensed Flaccus than if they had all abandoned him; for by
their so staying, he found one that served under him, had more power over his
Army, than he; which engendered such animosities between them, that Flaccus not
only commanded Fimbria back to Rome, but elected one Termus in his place; which
so enraged him, that he took away the Fasces and Rods (which were the
Praetorian Ensigns) as they were carried before Termus, who fled to Flaccus for
reparation. The Consul hereupon commands his Soldiers to seize upon Fimbria,
who experimented their love was a better commission, than the Senate without it
could give; for all the Army abandoned Flaccus, who was forced to fly to
Chalcis, whither Fimbria followed, and at length found him hid in a Well, from
whence being taken out, though he employed Fimbria's pity even in tears, yet he
caused his head forthwith to be cut off and flung into the Sea, though Flaccus
was both Consul and General, and Fimbria but a private Citizen. But to repair
so signal an affront to the Roman Empire, he vigorously prosecuted Mithridate's
friends, which were the greatest enemies of it, which he said, was the end why
the Army was sent out of Italy, and which had thitherto been interrupted by the
executed Consul's impertinency. Amongst his many exploits, one I cannot but
mention, which was his cruelty and treachery to the Illians; for finding their
strength might give his Romans as long a trouble, as it once did the Grecians,
he left off force, and flattered them so successfully under the name of Fathers
of Rome, that they admitted him into their City with his Army, which he soon
became Master of, and destroyed all that was living in it, thereby making
crueltly silence many, who would have otherwise reproached him with it; nay,
the Images of the gods, and the Temples in which they were adored, participated
of his fury, which some thought they deserved for not better defending their
votaries. Only the Palladium, which was sent the Trojans by Jupiter, was
preserved by miracle, a Vault of the Temple giving it at once both a Tomb and
safety; so that Troy was more unhappy in her children, than in her enemies;
Fimbria being worse unto her, than Agamemnon; or else her first death having
given life to the greatest Empire in the World, Fimbria would in gratitude
thereunto make her still continue in that condition. But Mithridates after the
last signal defeat given Archilaus, finding though Scylla and Fimbria were
enemies to each other, yet they were both so to him; and believing the first of
them wanted but an honorable pretense of leaving the Asian War, to dispute the
Empire of Rome with Marius and Cinna, and to appease the manes of so many of
his friends as had been murdered by them, as also fully convinced such a
series of defeats had disenabled him from much longer continuing a War; sent
orders to Archilaus to endeavor a Peace with Scylla, which after many a
meeting, at length at one between Scylla and Mithridates, was concluded, but on
such advantageous conditions for the Romans, that even the articles of the
agreement were the manifestations of his conquest* Scylla having so
prosperously put a period to his Mithridatick War, to leave all clear behind
him, went against Fimbria, and summoned him to deliver up him his Armies, being
Proconsul of Asia; to which Fimbria returning an high answer, Scylla
immediately besieged him, and reduced him to so low a state, that Fimbria hired
a Slave to murder Scylla, which being discovered, all Fimbria's Army were so
scandalized at it, that many abandoned him and went to Scylla, against whom
Fimbria had done too much to expect his mercy, and therefore contemning it when
'twas offered, upon the conditions of his departing into Italy, and resigning
up his Army, he stole to Pergamus, where in the Temple of Aesculapius he ran
his Sword through his own body; but finding the wound was not friendly enough
to afford him a sudden death, he commanded an infranchised Servant of his to
dispatch him, which he did, and then with the same Sword followed him. Thus
Fimbria died, whom the gods permitted to be as cruel to himself as he had been
to others; thereby manifesting, to be so was as much his nature, as it was his
crime. Immediately after his death, all his Army yielded themselves to Scylla,
who received them with so much humanity, that they found Fimbria, in killing
himself had obliged them, as much as Scylla; who having appointed Curio to
resettle Nicomedes in Bithynia, and Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia (which was one
of the Articles of the Peace), and having, the best he could, calmed the
differences in Asia, and raised five years advance of tribute in all the Cities
of it under his dominion, which so impoverished them, that they were
necessitated to pawn their Amphitheatres, their Town-houses, and all their
other public places, to enable them to pay it; by the assistance of
Mithridate's Galleys (which also on the Peace were resigned to him) he
transported his Army first into Greece, and thence into Italy, which he filled
with such confusions, and with so many horrid murders and proscriptions, that
to such as loved their Country, death was no ill expedient to avoid beholding
the miseries of it. The Heavens by many Prodigies seemed to foretell those many
others which men should act. A Woman in Rome was delivered of a Serpent in
stead of a Child. The Earth by a furious shaking, flung down many Statues and
Temples of the gods: And the Capitol, that proud Fabric, built by so many
Kings, was consumed by lightning.

These and many others of the same nature, were the actings and sufferings of
that part of the World in which I spent my infancy and earliest youth, which
were the only times of all my life that I was free from the sense of misery,
which too I derived from Nature, not from Fortune, who had provided
infelicities for me against my coming into the World, sufficient to make me for
ever detest it. But having hitherto entertained you with accidents at large, I
shall now confine my relations to narrower limits; being by this conjuncture of
time arrived to an age capable of relishing happiness and misfortune, to which
latter only my stars had de^ign'd me.

In Miletus, the place of my then residence, there were several young Gentlemen
of my age, and believed-quality (for I past still in the opinion of the World,
as well as in my own, for the Son of Telamon) with whom I learnt all those
exercises, as well of the mind as the body, which Greece and the lesser Asia
placed any value upon; in which I had the happiness to surpass my companions,
whose stupidity only I fear gave me that precedence. But sometimes to divert
our selves, we used to hunt the wild Boar; which was a Game that Country was
but too fruitful in: for often those furious Beasts, when pressed by hunger, or
by those which pursued them, would accompany their own deaths, with some of
their Hunters; which made Telamon very unwilling to afford me often so
dangerous adivertisement; neither would he ever permit it me, but accompanied
by most of those young Gentlemen, over whom my larger proficiency, and the rate
at which I lived (which was eminent) gave me some superiority; He himself too
keeping always by my side. One day, a hunting-match being agreed on, we found a
Boar of so immense a size, and so largely armed with Tusks, that the boldest of
our Huntsmen would have willingly resigned the hopes of the quarry, to have
avoided the danger of the chase, had not the fear of shame been more prevalent
than the fear of the Boar; who having cast off all his followers, but me (for
Telamon's Horse had strained himself so unhappily, that he could no longer
gallop), the enraged beast took along a Highway which came out of a
neighbour-wood, at the next extremity whereof, I perceived some Gentlemen and
Ladies, by the magnificence of whose equipage I easily judged were of no mean
Quality. The Boar not deterred at the sight of so much company, boldly runs
into the midst of them, and thereby so terrified all the Horses, that they fled
back into the Wood, where one of them cast his rider, which the Boar no sooner
perceived, than he ran furiously to her; Her great danger, and her greater
beauty, invited my assistance, which without balancing I ran to pay her; but
finding my Horse might offend her, whom I intended to protect, I leaped off of
him, and with a Javelin in my hand I placed my self between that beauty and the
danger which threatened her, and darted my Javelin so happily at the Boar, that
piercing him through and through, it put some stop to his course, and gave me
leisure to draw my Sword, with which, during his amazement, I ran him in at the
mouth, and sheathed the blade of it in his body; which though it gave him his
death's wound, yet before he died, with one of his Tusks he struck me into my
left side so deep, and so very near my heart, that his not having done me more
harm, could not be so strange as the grief which invaded the beauty I had
delivered was, that he had done me so much. I had that consolation and
misfortune together, to observe she was more concerned in my danger, than she
had been at her own, thereby evincing I had freed her from one trouble, but to
cast her into a greater. Never beauty had so many surprising charms as that of
the fair Monyma, which yet received some little accession by the condition and
dress she was in; For her shape, and stature, which was capable of no addition,
was perfectly discovered to the obliged and ravished sight, by the clothes she
then wore, which were such as the goddess Diana is represented with in her
celebrated Temple of Ephesus, when in dreams she manifested her self on Latmus,
to the sleepy Endymion: that little paleness which her danger and disorder
disobliged her with, was yet so well repaired by the reflection of some falls
of carnation-feathers which shadowed her face, that she seemed to be no loser
thereby.

In a word, she was such as made me more apprehend a wound from her, than that
I had already received. In the amazement of that silent Fear, the fair Monyma
came to me, and perceiving my clothes all bloody, she told me: I fear, Sir,
your highest civility has involved you in a resembling danger; but believe me,
your having so freed me from trouble, has made me a great sharer in yours.
Madam, (I replied, sensibly moved with so much obligingness) you might much
sooner ascribe the small service I have paid you, to my duty, than my civility;
for 'twas but just I should free you from that hazard I only had occasioned;
and if any thing troubles me in this performance, it is only from its looking so
much like my debt, that it leaves you no rise to attribute any part of it to my
inclinations, which (Madam) are such for your service, as they would joyfully
manifest themselves by courting danger, though it were as high as that goodness
which makes you so sympathize in mine. I had hardly strength enough to speak
these words, neither was I able to make an end of them without leaning upon my
Sword, which being too weak a support, I fell at Monyma's feet, who by a great
shriek acquainted me her trouble at it was the like. As soon as her grief
permitted her reason to act, she perceived a spring of blood issuing out of my
side; and believing that ebullition occasioned my fainting, she tore off some
of her linen, and by holding it to the orifice of the wound, endeavored to
stop the bleeding. But though her care was strangely kind, yet it had been
fruitless, if her reiterated cries had not drawn a Gentleman to her assistance,
who having learnt the cause of her concernment for me, afforded me so much of
his, that by it, and the help of a Chyrurgeon, which happily waited on him, my
wound was dressed, and my senses restored. The Stranger, whose care and
civility had so largely contributed thereunto, immediately came and made me
such signal and handsome acknowledgments for what I had done for the lovely
Monyma, that I concluded by the greatness of his gratitude, his concerns for
her were not little; and though his riper years might well have exempted me
from certain emotions I never till then was acquainted with, and knew not
whilst they disordered me, what they were, or from whence they proceeded; yet
after they ceased (which they did not till Monyma her self told me, he was her
Father) I found they proceeded from a small jealousy, to the cause of which I
was so mere a stranger that I knew not, even enduring the effect of love, that
I was at all engaged in that noble passion. But as soon as ever I understood
Philopomenes relation to the beauty I admired, I made him such humble
retributions, that he protested my civility had as much confined him to be my
friend, as the service I had done his daughter: and to manifest his care of me,
was greater than mine of my self, he forced me from an entertainment, which I
esteemed more pleasing, than that recovery the Chyrurgeon assured him it was an
enemy unto; and putting me into his Chariot (for though he and the fair Monyma
rid when I met them, yet it was only the better to enjoy the freshness of the
morning) he accompanied me to my House in Miletus, notwithstanding all my
reiterated Prayers to hinder it. By the way I met the afflicted Telamon, who by
the immense sorrow he assumed at my danger, had then made me conclude him my
Father, had I formerly doubted it.

I will exempt you from the relation of those visits I received from
Philopomenes during my indisposition, or from those many inquiries made after
my health by his fair Daughter; on whom, when I was restored to mine, I waited
so constantly, that Telamon began to fear I did it upon some more pressing
invitation than bare civility. That which made me the more openly make my
addresses to Monyma was, the then believed equality of our conditions; for she
was the Daughter of an Ephesian Lord, who had so detested Mithridate's cruelty,
that though by his Commission he was made Governor of Ephesus, yet he had
invited and persuaded the City to declare against him; which injury he
apprehended Mithridates would revenge, being enabled thereunto by the fresh
agreement concluded with the Romans, who for the most part were returned with
Scylla to rob Italy of that peace they had left Asia in: And that his Country
might not be involved in his misfortunes, or occasioned by him, he had left
Ephesus and retired to Miletus, whose strength he thought would prove a better
Sanctuary. But if Telamon had cause to suspect I had a passion for Monyma, this
which I am now telling, gave him a certainty of it.

The City of Miletus was in ancient times besieged by a barbarous Prince, who
having by their obstinacy endured much loss, resolved to repair it by the ruin
of the place; but being informed that amongst the besieged there was a Virgin
of such excellent beauty, that Nature never had obliged the World with the
like; this Barbarian desired and obtained a sight of her from off the Walls;
which so inflamed him, that he esteemed to conquer her, was a happier Victory
than to conquer Miletus: so that when the Citizens despaired of safety, he sent
them word, If they would deliver up to his pleasure the fair Cyaxara, he would
forthwith raise his Siege, and never more present himself before their Walls.

This Nymph having as much Resolution as Beauty, devoted her self as a
Sacrifice to save her Country, and only tied the Tyrant to suspend the acting
of his lust, till she was out of the Territories of Miletus, that her people
might not behold, but only enjoy the advantage of her shame.

This Contract being made, the fair Cyaxara was delivered up to her Ravisher,
and abandoned her friends with more constancy and resolution, than they were
Masters of, when she did so.

The next night after he had got out of the agreed^on limits, he determined to
enjoy the reward of the War; but instead thereof, the virtuous Cyaxara had
prepared for him the reward of his sin: for when he was come into her bed in
the height of his Wine and Lust, with a Poniard she had concealed, she pierced
his heart; at which unexpected stroke, he uttered so loud a cry, that many of
his chief Officers who were in the next room, ran to his assistance; but it was
too late: for his black soul had forsaken his guilty body. And Cyaxara hearing
a throng of people coming into her Chamber, with the same weapon all reeking
with the Tyrant's blood, with which she had preserved her self from the lust of
one of her Enemies, she preserved her self from the revenge and fury of the
rest.

The death of this Monster occasioned so many divisions in his Army, that
thereby Miletus was preserved from the fury of it: whose Inhabitants in
commemoration of the fair Cyaxara's Gallantry, ordained a yearly Festival
should be for ever celebrated for their deliverance, and for those eternal joys
her Virtue had invited the gods to crown her with: and that this day might be
observed with more solemnity, the Magistrates of the City gave the fairest
Diamond they could buy, to the best Tilter, who was to present it to the
greatest Beauty in the Assembly, and who during that year was to be called
Cyaxara. This signal day being come, and believing my self able enough to
manage a Horse, and handle a Lance, I begged Telamon to permit me to be one of
the Tilters; which he assented unto: and it being the first time of my
appearing in arms, he so beautified mine with Jewels of inestimable value, that
they drew the eyes of all the people on me at my entrance into the Lists, as
much as my success did when I went out to present the reward of it to the fair
Monyma, who was seated upon a Scaffold with others of her Sex, who were of
highest quality at that meeting. As soon as I came to the foot of that
Scaffold, I allighted from my Horse; and having begged and obtained the Ladies
permission to ascend it: I presented Monyma with that Diamond I had won, and
told her; This Madam, which my Fortune has given me, my Justice humbly pays
unto you; I should be as blind as that power from whom only I derive my
Victory, did I any other way employ the acquisitions of it; for it is so much
your Right, that to have declined presenting it to you, had been to have broke
the Laws of this solemn meeting.

This little Complement put Monyma into a small Disorder: which having
something conquered, she replied, That Callimmachus, which your merit has given
you, your civility has presented me; but indeed you had but this way of
employing your success, to make me think you deserved it not: All these Ladies
(turning to those that were near her) will have cause to desire the perpetual
extinction of this festival, when it furnishes an occasion of acting so high an
injustice; for it is as much so to decline making your present to any of them,
as to confer't upon me. I shall never Madam, (I replied) have a belief opposite
to the fair Monyma's, when her modesty does not form hers; but then I must beg
her pardon, if to avoid the greater offense, I commit the less: neither do I
think these Ladies can esteem me unjust; the most they can believe is, that I
am unfortunate in having a success which confined me to disoblige so many, to
do right to one; since none could have had my power, that could justly
otherwise have employed it. Whilst I was thus discoursing, a Gentleman called
Diocles, who that day I had dismounted in the Tilting, came to the Foot of the
Scaffold where his Mistress was, to whom he apprehended I would have given the
prize (for it is none of the least miracles in Love, that every one believes the
Author of his is the handsomest) where finding himself deceived, his jealousy
turned to anger, and he was no more troubled at his first belief, than he now
was at what had displaced it. The beauty he served was called Irene, who
yielded to none but Monyma; she was blessed with as many graces of the mind, as
of the body; and therefore had no inclination to receive the addresses of
Diocles, who had nothing considerable but his extraction, his riches, and his
courage; the last of which had been so often, and succesfully tried, that
duelling seemed to be one of his recreations.

The great affront he had that day received in his person, and the higher he
thought he received in his Mistress, made him with a loud voice tell me;
Callimmachus, could I have fancied you would have given the prize of this days
Tilting to any, but the fair Irene, I had by my Sword hindered you from acting
that Crime, and her from enduring it; but since I find you guilty thereof, I
cannot but punish what I should have prevented; which I would have done in a
privater way, could I have suppressed my resentments so long: And yet it is but
just that the injury being before so many thousand witnesses, the reparation
should be the like. I had no sooner heard these words, then saluting Monyma and
the rest of the Ladies, I descended from the Scaffold, and having flung off my
Armor as Diocles had done his, I told him; That which, I confess, my Fortune
has given me over all the rest, my Courage has given me over thee, which I am
come by a repeated experiment to convince thee of, and to let thee feel I have
been much more just in paying the prize to Monyma, than thou have been in
presuming to own thy self a Servant to the fair Irene.

At the end of these words we drew out our Swords, and observing that not only
all the Ladies, but the Magistrates of the City were coming to part us, we ran
at each other with as much fury, as if our Mistresses had not only been the
beholders, but were to have been the reward of the combat. My thrust was more
fortunate than his, for it pierced him through the body, but his only pierced
my left arm; so that in the close having flung him down and disarmed him, I bid
him ask his life; He told me, since it had been so unsuccessful, 'twas not
worth the pains. My resentment being a little over, I told him, Though thou
would persuade me, by representing thy life is not worth the asking, that it
is hardly worth the taking; yet I believe it much more considerable, and
therefore for Monyma and Irene's sake, I give it thee; by this time these two
beauties with many others, as also Telamon, and the Magistrates were come, who
forthwith caused both our wounds to be dressed; and because mine was in my Arm,
the Chyrurgeons sent for a scarf to support it in, which staying for too long,
the fair Irene took off a rich one she had on, and bid them make use of that;
this sight wounded Diocles more than my Sword had done; which taking notice of,
I told Irene that he wanted it more than I, and though it were strangely
obliging to me, yet it might prove more so to him, whose condition made
intercessions for him, by his being incapable of making any for himself.

Irene immediately, either pitying Diocles, or to be revenged on me, permitted
me to present it to him; which he refused, saying, He never willingly received
a favor from an Enemy, nor would not his Mistrisse's derived from such a
mediation, and conveyed by such a hand. This rudeness made me repent my
civility, and I believe revenge it, by wearing what he had declined.

I will exempt you (continued Callimmachus) from the relation of Monyma's
little Triumph, from Telamon's discontent at my quarrel, from his trouble at my
wound, and his care of my recovery; which was much earlier than that of
Diocles, who languish'd above a year before he was able to pay a visit to
Irene, and to beg her pardon that he had so ill defended her right. During all
which time, I was so assiduous in my addresses to Monyma, that I had pregnant
cause to believe they had not been fruitless.

The fair Irene also had contracted so strict a friendship with her, that she
became her confident, and at length my advocate, from whose intercession I
received more than I could have expected from any one; so that now my greatest
fears were from Telamon, who always manifested so inveterate an aversion to my
Love, and one day so expressly prohibited my continuing it, that not being able
to divest my self of it, I was necessitated to carry it with so much secrecy,
that Irene, and at last Monyma her self began to think that was my design,
which indeed was my punishment. I had not the confidence to acquaint her with
what made me so rarely visit her; but when ever I got the opportunity of paying
her that duty, I was so passionate in my expressions and looks, that I hoped my
actions would acquaint her with what I durst not, which I esteemed the least
unhandsom way of disclosing my misfortune, and of evidencing my constancy. But
whether she did not, or would not, understand this way of proceeding, she not
only began to use me at a rate, which might manifest a less concernment for me
than she had once honored me with, but also conjured Irene to decline
interceding for a person who declined interceding for himself. This that
obliging friend informed me of, which occasioned a violent dispute between my
duty to Telamon, and that I owed the fair Monyma; in which, though they could
not vanquish each other, yet they vanquished me, and cast me into so deep a
melancholy, that the last admired it, and the first did pity it.

Irene concluding there was something of mysterious in this, resolved to break
those con^inements Monyma had imposed on her, and to know of me what occasioned
my sadness, and then to impart it unto her. In this resolve she so artificially
ordered things, that once in the Temple (which was the only place I visited)
she conjured me to acquaint her with the occasion of my change, and grief;
which she only asked, that she might contribute to the cure of it. So generous
a proceeding from a person which I knew was so, made me resolve to be rather
known unfortunate, than to be believed guilty; I therefore fully informed her
with what strict prohibitions Telamon had made me of ever visiting Monyma
again, which had occasioned my seeming coldness, but had really so punished it,
that it had produced those visible effects she so obligingly deplored, and
endeavored to remove. I had not in so public a place leisure to say more, or
she, than that the next day in the same place and hour I should meet her again.

This command the succeeding morning I observed, and had not been long in the
Temple, but Irene came into it; and whilst others were employed in their
devotions, she told me as I kneeled by her, that Monyma was neither worthy of
my Love, nor her friendship; for she was so unwise, and so unkind, as not to
believe the too great truth I had told her, and she had told Monyma, who
thought 'twas but a design to cloud my change and passion for her self, and
therefore that I must no more make use of her solicitations, since they were so
far from acting that cure, that they made the disease.

This information added wonder to my grief, both which so entirely possessed
me, that I had hardly strength enough to acknowledge that friendship, whose
effects had so wounded me; which yet having performed in the best way I could,
I immediately retired to entertain my thoughts, which but too much contributed
with fortune to torment me: For now I had not only two Enemies to contest with,
Telamon's aversion, and Monyma's jealousy; but the latter was so unhappily
placed, that what occasioned the ill, rendered it incurable, since she had a
suspicion of her, by whom only I had hopes to cure it.

This accessional misfortune conspiring with my Melancholy, cast me into a
languishing fever, which so moved Telamon, that one evening he came to my
beds-side, and told me, Callimachus, I cannot be mo^e confident that I am the
occasion of your sadness and indsposition, than I am, that you would excuse it,
if I durst acquaint you with the reasons; which being confined by ties too
great to be broken, but by those which only can absolve me from them, I am
resolved to make a Journey expressly to obtain their leave; provided before I go
you will solemnly protest unto me, that during my absence, which shall be but
two Moons at most, you will make no engagement of marriage to Monyma; and if by
some accident I cannot foresee, I should miscarry in the Journey, you will then
before you make her any promise thereof, observe what is contained in this
Paper, and not open it till that time is eff^uxt; There you will find things
you little expect, and such as I know will invite you to believe I am as just,
as you now think me cruel; and that I had more wronged you in yielding to your
desires, than I do in opposing them.

I shall not (continued Callimachus) tell you my amazement at these words; my
endeavors to dissuade him from a Voyage which I despaired not my obedience,
and the sense I had of his goodness, might in some short time exempt him from;
nor those holy vows I made him, when I could not divert him from his intended
Journey, that I would not make any such engagemeet to Monyma during those two
months, nor after, till first I had observed his commands in the sealed Paper.

Three days after, when Telamon found my health was in some measure restored;
after he had once again made me reiterate my former vows, he brought me a
Cabbinet, in which he told me there were Jewels enough to continue for some
years the Equipage I lived in; then having embraced me, and kissed my cheek, he
told me, Perhaps Callimachus, you are much more than my Son; and then hastily
went aboard his Galley (for his Voyage was to be performed by Sea) that I might
not see some tears which were stealing from him.

The End of the first Book of the Fifth Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA.
THE FIFTH PART.
The Second BOOK.
AS soon as my grief for Telamons depa^ture was qualified, in few days I was
able to pay the fair Monyma a visit (which was not prohibited me). When I came
into her Chamber, I found to my amazement, none with her but Diocles, who was
kneeling by her. I believe my sight surprised them as much as the company I
found Monyma in, and Diocles posture did me: after we had expressed so much by
a silent contemplating one another; he rose up, and told me, I hope
Callimachus, you are glad to find the fair Monyma has made me your Rival, and
that on my knees I beg pardon for not having been earlier convinced of a Truth,
which I did never so much doubt, as now I joyfully acknowledge.

This precipitate declaring himself my Rival, made me in spite of that respect
I owed Monyma, thus answer him: If your becoming my Rival does no more please
the fair Monyma, than it does trouble me, you will be as unsuccesful in your
submission, as you were in your resistance: And I cannot but believe, had you a
year sooner acknowledged so clear a truth, you had saved more thereby, than now
you will get.

This reply so incensed Diocles, that with an inflamed look he told me; since
any wounds were received, for not acknowledging Monyma's beauty was the
highest, I shall repine at nothing therein, but that Callimachus hand did give
them, who owed his success to his quarrel, not his courage. That I owed my
success (I answered) in that dispute, to what you say, I shall as freely
confess, as that in any other my Courage will give me the like over Diocles:
which if this moment I did not convince you of, it is only that all my passions
yield to those I have for the fair Monyma; which if yours did, we had not so
long cast off that respect we owe her; and which your rudeness shall not make
me be any longer guilty of. Whereupon having whispered a word or two unto each
other (which was an assignment where we should meet an hour after), Diocles
immediately saluted Monyma, and went out of the room; she all this while was so
astonished, first at my coming to visit her, then at her being found at
unwares, and lastly at our quarrel, that she had not the power to command
Diocles not to go away, though twice she opened her mouth to do it. I was not a
little satisfied to have so favorable an opportunity of acquainting her what
had so long hindered my waiting on her, and what had now given me the happiness
of doing it: I will not by retail tell you all the particulars of this day, nor
of some subsequent actions; it being enough for you to know, that I so well
convinced Monyma of my passion, and how unalterable I should be in it, that she
at last freely permitted me to make her my addresses again; and then she
informed me, that a little before I came to her, Philopomanes had brought
Diocles into her chamber, and had commanded her to accept of him as her
servant, and as one whom he had fixed upon for her husband: That Diocles had
told her, he now perceived a fault he as much gloried to confess, as formerly
to be guilty of; and that my visit had obligingly interrupted his saying more,
and consequently her enduring more.

This free proceeding rejoiced me as much as my res^auration to her favor, and
made me believe what I had told my new Rival by way of resentment, he would
find a Prophecy. 'Twas then also she acquainted me, how that her ignorance of
what had invited me so often to visit Irene, and so seldom her, had given her a
little jealousy, which had but too much punished it self by making her feel
how sensible my supposed change was to her, which she ingenuously confessed was
more so upon the account of her having lost me, than that Irene had got me.

These ravishing assurances left me no fears, but those which proceeded from an
apprehension of what Philopomanes authority might act against me; and that they
were spoke to gain a power over me, which might suppress that design I had
against Diocles, over whom thereby I might believe my advantage was sufficient,
without seeking any greater from my Sword.

Whilst I was thus evincing my gratitude, and entertaining my apprehensions,
Monyma went out of the room, as she told me, to call one of her Women, left
Philopomanes by finding us alone, might not only suspect the cause of Diocles's
going away, but prohibit her receiving any visits from me, to prevent his
receiving the like disgust in the future.

Her return with what she went for, was so sudden, that it then silenced one of
my doubts; and because I had received as much satisfaction as I could have
promised my self from that day's waiting on her, that I had a witness which
denied me the liberty of those discourses which I took most pleasure in, and
that the hour of meeting Diocles drew near; I kissed the fair Monyma's hands, and
went not long after to the place we had agreed on; where instead of finding
Diocles, I found a guard of Soldiers, who conveyed me to my own house; and by
their placing themselves at my Gate, made me know it was my prison: soon after
a friend of mine came to advertise me, that Diocles had preceded me in the like
usage.

At first I repined against Monyma, who I knew was only acquainted with our
difference (and who, I learnt afterward, went out of the Chamber purposely to
send notice thereof to the Officers of Justice) apprehending she denied me the
repetition of a Victory my Sword had once conferred on me. But then my thoughts
changing, I began to believe (as Lovers still are apt to flatter themselves)
that her being more a friend to my safety, than my honor, had occasioned this
proceeding; and in that faith I found in my trouble, my satisfaction:

But (said Callimachus) to continue this part of my Story in that brevity which
I have hitherto practiced, I shall tell you, That after the Magistrates had
declared we should not be freed till we had mutually sworn never to fight
against each other, and that all our friends had long and unsuccessfully
endeavored to extort that promise from us, wearied with our confinement, more
with our not waiting upon Monyma, but most of all to obey her command, we past
that assurance before her, and continued as much friends, as persons which had
so little cause for it, could be. The next day after this reconciliation,
Monyma sent to me to meet her at Irenes (with whom she was perfectly
reconciled, having discovered her mistake) where she told me, she had received
a positive command from Philopomanes, never to admit any of my visits; and
therefore henceforth those I paid her must be where I then was, and that too
both privately and seldom, left the privilege of going to see her friend, might
be also denied her. She further told me, she was confident this had long since
been resolved, though but that morning only enjoined: for her Father knew too
well how much an alliance with so considerable a person, and so vastly rich, as
Diocles was, would be to his advantage and settlement in Miletus, not to
prosecute it with his utmost endeavors: and that had he given her that command
before the reconciliation, it would for ever have hindered it: for knowing I
should have been eternally deprived of her company, I would probably have
declined that agreement, which must have involved my Rival in the like
infelicity: she then too acquainted me with that which her disorders at my
former visit had made her omit, which was, that before Diocles made any
expressions of his passions to her, he had conjured her to acquaint him,
whether she had any inclinations for, or engagements to me; that if she had, he
might not be so rude as to give any interruption to a person, whose
satisfaction should always form his. To which, she assured him she had not;
which then was a real truth; my not waiting on her having made her believe I
had suppressed my inclinations for her, which had invited her to silence any she
honored me with. This information made me much lessen that aversion I had for
Diocles, who I till then thought had designedly endeavored to be my Rival; but
on the other side I was struck with so deep a sadness, foreseeing those
obstructions my passion would contend with, that neither some fresh favors of
Monyma's, nor Irene's promising me all her assistance, could any way divest me
of my melancholy; which made the first of them tell me, she thought my
affection was not near so high as I represented it, since she too visibly found
my fear was greater than my love; and that the apprehensions of things to come,
were more prevalent to make me sad, than her friendship was to hinder me from
it.

I was much ashamed to have this reprehension, but much more to have deserved
it; which to do so no longer, I forced my self to divert those two persons, I
so justly esteemed, which yet I did so constrainedly, that I gave them more
cause of pity, than satisfaction.

I had some time the happiness of thus waiting on Monyma at the fair Irene's,
and of receiving reiterated assurances from her, that neither Diocles's
address, nor Philopomanes commands, could any thing prevail to the prejudice of
my passion. And as she was determined not to give her self to any without his
consent, so she would not be given to any without her own.

'Twas by such entertainments as these that at length my grief was conquered,
and almost the two Moons of Telamon's absence, during all which I had not heard
any thing of, or from him, which gave me occasion both of trouble and wonder.
But alas, not long after this tolerable condition I was told by Monyma, that
her vigilant Father having discovered these hours of entertainment we enjoyed
at the fair Irene's, he had so expressly prohibited her ever to speak to me
again, that now there was no way left of communicating our minds, but by
Letters, which too must be managed with much circumspection and art, lest that
Expedient of acquainting each other with our thoughts might be also denied us.

But now I must make a little digression, to inform you of what brought as
great, as unexpected a change, not only in my then passion, but in all the
subsequent Actions of my life. When Sylla had pacified Asia, and made
conditions with, or rather imposed them on Mithridates; two of which were, that
Ariobarzanes should be restored to Cappadocia, and Nicomedes to Bithynia, he
shipped his Army for Italy in the resigned-up Fleet of the Pontick King, and left
Murena and Cotta with two Legions only (either to show how absolute his
conquest had been, or that he could spare no more from his intended one) to
settle those Princes in their Thrones, and to order those other affairs which
his precipitate departure had denied him time to effect.

These two Roman Commanders summoned Mithridates to withdraw his Garrisons and
Army out of those two Kingdoms; which at first he seemed to send Commands to
have done, but the Governors made so many delays, and frivolous excuses, that
the Romans began to believe, his intentions and his promises were different.
And the truth was, Mithridates did but protract the time, till he could hear
what Sylla did in Italy, resolving (as the event manifested) if Rome was
engaged thoroughly in her domestic differences, he would not part with two
Dominions which had cost him so much Treasure and Blood, and which were to be
restored to persons he had too sensibly wronged, to trust them with a power to
right themselves; it being also much easier to keep them out of their Kingdoms
(if Sylla and Marius were plundg'd into a civil War) then having restored them,
to keep his own. The apprehension Murena had of this (for Cotta then returned
for Italy) made him send Mithridates word, that if by a set day, all excuses
set apart, Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes had not right done them by fair means,
they should have it done by the Sword, and he should be declared an Enemy for
ever to the people of Rome.

This brisk message made the Pontick King find, that the day Murena had set
down for the restitution of Bithynia, and Cappadocia, if he did not perform it
by then, was the space he had allowed him to prepare for War, which he
cheerfully did; because the same time he received certain intelligence, that
Marius and Sylla were so thoroughly engaged in Blood, that even Rome was become
a humane Shambles, and that they neither had the time, nor the power to mind
any differences but their own. But because he had experimented how advantageous
it was to the Land-war, to be Master of the Sea, and that he had resigned to
Sylla all his Fleet, as an evincement he was once conquered, and as a greater,
that he should not put him to the trouble and charge of doing so again: He used
all means imaginable to recover a second Fleet; And though by the endeavors of
Be^uitus his Admiral, he had engaged many Pirates under his pay, yet he found
so loose a discipline amongst them, and consequently so uncertain a help, that
their pay was more considerable than their Service: and therefore he discharged
them, resolving to compose his Naval-forces of such only as should give him
hopes to repair the smalness of their number, by the exactness of their Order
and Obedience. This was the reason why he sent Betuitus to visit the Maritime
Towns of Caria, there to entertain such Ships of War, as the free people of
that Province would permit him to employ.

And because Betuitus had unsuccessfully endeavored to win the consents of
those of Miletus, who were much more powerful at Sea, than any Town in Asia; he
at length (having corrupted some of the chief men by large Presents) was
advised by those to invite his King to come personally thither, as the only,
and then the certain way to effect his desires.

The Pontick Admiral found this advice so probable, that he persuaded his King
to that Journey, who came with a very small retinue within twenty Furlongs of
the City, and from thence sent a couple of Gentlemen to acquaint the
Magistrates thereof, that they might not be Alarmed thereat, and to desire
admittance and audience in a business which was of such importance, that he
would be himself the deliverer of it.

The people of Miletus though exceeding jealous of their safeties and freedom,
being truly informed of the small Train which accompanied Mithridates, esteemed
it less hazardous to grant his desire, than to deny it; since the affront might
provoke him to a War, which could not but be much more dangerous than his
visit. They therefore sent some of the eminentest amongst them to complement
him, to desire him that night to rest himself where he then was, which was a
house of pleasure belonging to the fair Irene's Father, that the next day they
might be better prepared to give him a reception, which should have more
relisht of their respect, and of what was due to so great a King, had not the
shortness of the time hindered it.

There was none unsatisfied at the sending of this message but Philopomanes,
who apprehended Mithridates took this as a pretense, and meant indeed to be
revenged on him for his having delivered up Ephesus to his Enemies.

But these fears were soon suppressed by the Senates assuring him, they would all
dye before their City should be no Sanctuary to such as fled into it, as one.
The same evening it was resolved, that two of the greatest unmarried beauties
of Miletus, should the next day be dressed like Amazons, and hold a silk Cord
cross the Gate the Pontick King was to enter at, which they should not loose
till he had solemnly sworn, he would attempt nothing against the liberty of the
City; which when he had done, then they should admit him, and the Magistrates
should be ready to wait on him.

This they esteemed the eivilest way of exacting such an engagement, which they
could not think was more necessary, than they were concerned how without cause
of disgust they might desire and receive it.

The performance of this ceremony was placed upon Monyma and Irene, who the
next morning in the clothes of Amazons, and dressed to perfection, went to
Diana's Gate, atteded by the Magistrates, and all the Principal persons of the
City; to which place Mithridates soon came, only followed by his own Train, and
many of the young Nobility of Miletus, which went to wait on him into the City.
When he came to the Port, those two Beauties drew their Barricado cross it; and
Monyma with an action and tone altogether charming, told him, Sir, the people
of Miletus have for many ages been so justly jealous of that perfect freedom
they enjoy, that they never admitted any Prince within their Walls, till he had
solemnly sworn, not to act any thing to the destruction or lessening of it.

This, Sir, which their care has made them practice to all others, custom only
invites them to make use of toward you; of which they all hope you will be
clearly convinced, by seeing what till then denies you admittance into their
gates, and what sex and number they have elected to defend them with. Irene
having spoken some words to the like effect, Mithridates after a little silence
fixing his eyes on Monyma, and addressing his words to her, replied: A desire
from a person of so much Beauty, and so obligingly made, cannot be but obeyed;
and therefore I swear by all the Gardian-Angels, I will not at my now entering
Miletus, attempt or design any thing against the freedom of her inhabitants;
and I swear by you, Madam, speaking to Monyma, That what I bind my self from
now, I will abjure for ever for your sake.

Monyma and Irene, to whom Mithridates also made some little complement, at
this assurance let fall the Cord, which made Mithridates immediately alight,
who having saluted them both, told the first of them, with a visible emotion;
That (Madam) which you have desired from me out of custom, I must beg of you
upon a stronger motive; for doubtless your City cannot have so much cause to
apprehend losing their liberty by me, as I have to lose mine by you: And
therefore as I have sworn to you to leave it in as perfect a freedom as I found
it in; permit me to implore you, the promise that I shall receive no worse
usage from you. And if after having seen so much beauty, I could have had any
room left for wonder, I should have entertained no small proportion, to find
that a people jealous of their Liberty, should yet permit a person to reside
amongst them, who is so certain a Conqueror of it.

Monyma was so highly disordered by this unexpected entertainment, that she was
not a little obliged to the Magistrates, who by coming to salute the Pontick
King, detained her from making any reply.

But after Mithridates had performed the uneasy Ceremonies due to such people,
he went again to Monyma and Irene, and leading of them both, he desired some to
show him the way to their Houses, that he might wait upon them thither; which
he performed, though they and the Magistrates often and earnestly begged of him
to decline it.

This was not thought strange by those who knew him; since he was so great an
admirer of Beauty, that he had twice already only upon that account, married
Ladies of less quality than either Monyma or Irene; of the first of which,
before he left her, he desired the permission of frequently waiting on her
whilst he resided in Miletus: And having learnt whose daughter she was, he went
to Philopomanes, embraced him, and told him, for her sake he pardoned all that
was past, and promised him as large a share in his esteem, and trust as ever.

The morning of this ceremonious day, I had received a Letter from Monyma, (all
other ways being rigorously forbidden her) wherein she acquainted me, she was
assured I had some new dispute with Diocles, which many apprehended would be
decided by the Sword, and therefore she conjured me, to secure her that day
from those fears that belief had raised in her, and that if she had an interest
in me, I should evince it by not exposing to any hazard a life which was as
dear to her as her own.

This information had some little ground; for Diocles and I had exchanged the
night before at a Ladies house, some words, which doubtless had occasioned a
duel, had not our pre-engagement hindered in both any thought of that nature.
But finding her concerns of a quality, that it was both a duty and kindness to
silence them as soon as I could, I forthwith writ her a Letter to ascertain her
of my obedience, and went with it that evening to Irene's, where I was
confident to meet her, or at least to get the Letter conveyed unto her.

I had not been there long, when Monyma came in, accompanied by Philopomanes
and Diocles, the first being very vigilant over her, having had some noise of
our renewed quarrel.

I am now (continued Callimachus, changing his voice) come to the relation of
an accident that befell me, and which I believe never had, nor never will have a
parallel.

The time of Telamon's promised return, was that evening to expire; and
therefore I then carried about me the Letter which he left with me. that was to
tell me such strange and unexpected things, in case he came not back by the
time limited; this Letter by chance was about the same bigness with that I was
to deliver Monyma, and put into the same pocket; so that by a sad misfortune,
whilst Diocles and Philopomanes were discoursing together at one end of the
Chamber, and Monyma and Irene were doing the like by the fire^ side, thinking I
had found a favorable opportunity to deliver my Letter, I took out the wrong
one, and walking carelessly to them, I stole the Letter into Monyma's hand, who
being intently speaking to Irene, and not minding me, finding something
unexpectedly touch her hand, she shrieked out, and let it fall; which noise
made both Philopomanes and Diocles turn about, who perceived the cause of it,
as well by the Letter which lay on the ground, as by the disorder Monyma and I
were in; but she soon coming to her self again, took up the Letter hastily and
scornfully, and sealed as it was, cast it into the fire, which immediately
consumed it.

This proceeding made my satisfaction rather than my trouble, knowing she had
no better an expedient left to remedy what had happened, than thus to use me.
And the better to contribute to this delusion, I went away abruptly, and in a
seeming high discontent. At which her Father and her Servant were so pleased,
that they both acquainted her with their being so, by passionate and sensible
expressions: And the obliging Irene following and overtaking of me, made me
know the true cause of Monyma's proceeding; and offered, if I had any thing to
acquaint her with, she would perform the duty of that unhappy Letter; which I
did: and having acknowledged the unmerited friendship she honored me with, I
went to my own house, joyful that even misfortune it self had more contributed
to the di^guising of our Loves, than our inventions could; and troubled at
nothing but at Telamon's absence, which perhaps I might learn the occasion of,
in reading the Paper he had left me, which I then might lawfully do, the time
he had limited being then eff^uxt.

But, O gods! what was my astonishment, when having opened it, I found it was
the Letter I had writ to Monyma, and consequently 'twas Telamon's Paper which
she had burnt! I cannot tell you what a throng of several thoughts came into my
fancy, and how many misfortunes this one made me apprehend; sometimes I feared
Monyma would believe I had discovered something in that Letter so much to my
disadvantage, that my fatal mistake was but to conceal it from her. Sometimes I
trembled to think, that by my oath to Telamon, being obliged to perform a
journey mentioned in the burnt Letter, before I made any engagement to Monyma,
by that sad loss I was confined from an Hymeneal union, should she condescend
to one; and not temporarily, but eternally, should Telamon be lost; which I was
more than apprehensive he was, his last assurance to me being, That if he lived
he would be with me by the time limited. Sometimes (so ingenious I was to
torment my self) I feared he affection'd me so exceedingly, and disgusted so
much my alliance with Monyma, for whom he knew that I had an unextinguishable
passion, that not having any means able to suppress it, he had made himself
away, or banished himself, thereby to confine me (in observance of those solemn
Oaths I had taken) from that union.

These and many resembling considerations I suggested to my self, against my
self; besides the vast trouble I was in for the loss of Telamon, as well as for
the ignorance of my own condition, which his last words obscurely made me
imagine, was more elevated than till then I had believed it; all which
concurring, or else my body of its own constitution, then inclind'd to
sickness, cast me into so dangerous a one, that for six days I gave my Servants
and Physicians as little hope, as I had desire of life; but the seventh day,
the malignity of my fever was mitigated, and in as many days more, I was in so
promising a way of recovery, that understanding one of Monyma's Pages desired
to give me a Letter from his Lady with his own hand; I gave him admittance, and
he presented me with the Letter, whose superscription was this:

To the generous CALLIMACHUS.
And knowing the hand to be Monyma's, having kissed it with transports, I found
it contained these words:

That same duty which first necessitated me to decline your visits, and then
your conversation, now makes me give my self away to the Pontick King. When it
was so powerful, as to make me do that for Diocles, it is not strange it could
make me do this for Mithridates, who transcends him as much in merit, as in
quality: believe me, Calimachus, I am troubled to wear a Crown, since it is not
from you that I receive it; for whom I had such inclinations, that had the gods
rendered it no sin to follow the dictates of them, I should have preferred a
private condition with you, to the greatest Empire of the World without you:
And since you can no longer legitimately continue that affection you once
honored me with; Nor I, that which your merit and my inclinations made me once
pay you; permit me at least still to continue in your memory and esteem, as
whilst I live you shall be the most precious thing (as far as honor will
permit) in the thoughts of the unfortunate Monyma.


As soon as I had done reading this fatal Letter, I looked distractedly upon
all my Servants which were present, and upon him that had delivered it, who, I
knew, was one that Monyma reposed a peculiar confidence in, thereby
endeavoring to ask that from the company by my looks, which my words could not.

At first I believed the relics of my fever had distracted me, which when I
found it had not, I Wished it had; then thinking I had read by a false light, I
made them open the Curtains of the bed and windows, and re-perus'd those
killing words, which finding the same I had found at first, I sunk down into my
bed, and fixed my eyes upon the youth which had brought me the cause of these
disorders, and seemed by a silent, mournful contemplating him, to reproach his
having assumed so cruel an employment: but when I observed him weeping so
bitterly, that it made me give him some of that pity his Message rendered him
unworthy of, I fancied there was something of mysterious in it; and in that
flattering imagination, I commanded all my Domestics out of my Chamber, and
then conjured the disconsolate youth to inform me, why he would assume an
employment which could not but occasion that grief in which he so sympathized?
and what could invite his Mistress to so precipitate an inconstancy, if what was
in the paper he had brought, was a real truth, and not to palliate some
necessitated proceedings of hers, which I hoped he was sent to acquaint me with?

Alas Sir (the Page replied), what you have read, is but too sad a truth; and
my tears are not shed upon that account which you seem to ascribe them to, but
to Monyma's electing of me for so unthankful a message, and to the grief which
invaded her at the writing of that Letter, and you at the reception of it: yes
Sir (he continued) had you but seen how cruel a conflict she was in between her
duty and affection* and in what agonies she wrote unto you, when the first had
got the victory over the last, you might perhaps imitate me, and perhaps pity
what you detest. Thereupon he told me at large how Mithridates during my
indisposition had made so solicitous an address to her, that many thought his
desire of a permission to employ such Vessels of War of Miletus, as would serve
him for affection or pay, was rather the pretense, than the cause of his
Voyage: How after he had found that the infinite Beauty he admired, was guarded
by a proportionate Virtue, he had changed his purpose, and endeavored to
appropriate what he had endeavored to destroy; which he might legitimately do,
the Princess Calamis being dead six months before, having some fifteen years
past presented him with the Prince Pharnaces, the Prince Atafernes, the
Princess Roxana, and the Princess Statira, and the Princess Cleopatra: How as
soon as so unexpected an overture was made to Philopomanes, he had embraced it
with a greediness, which showed both his wonder and his joy; and had so
incessantly pressed his daughter to embrace so high a Fortune, that this day
vanquished by his intercessions, or rather persecutions, she has promised to
morrow to give her self to the Pontick King, who seems to be much more
satisfied at it, than any other concerned in it; and that she had esteemed it
fitter for her own Letter to inform me of it, than that any thing else should;
over which she reigned such showers of tears, that had I seen them, I must have
concluded, that could not be her design which was so much her torment.

I leave you to judge (continued Callimachus) whether this accession to my
former miseries had left Fortune any thing more than life to inflict upon me.
But lest this Page should be sent to observe my actions, as well as to acquaint
me with his Mistris's, I resolved to bear my loss in his sight, with a
constancy which should (when she knew it) invite her to believe I was unworthy
of such an usage; and that though she had given he^ self the Victory, yet I
would deny her the triumph of it.

Therefore with as much composedness as those various agitations I was under,
would permit me, I forced my self to tell him, Go and acquaint your Lady in my
Name, she should not have assured me, That as she would never give her self
away without Philopomanes consent, so she would be never given away by him,
without her own; or having given me that engagement, she should not have sent
me this Letter, for they are inconsistent; tell her also the same duty which
has hitherto made me obey all her Commands, I know will make me to obey this
last. I dismissed him with these words, and endeavored to find in my reason, and
resentment, the power of performing what I then spoke.

But alas, some expressions in that Paper which had brought her desires of
declining my passion, too much contributed to the impossibility of performing
it, and continued me in disputes too painful to be related.

The next morning, though my indisposition were not a little increast by the
precedent days Agitation; yet I commanded one of my Servants to bring me an
account of that ceremony, which was made so much to my cost: Toward the
evening he returned, and told me that Monyma had been led to the Temple of
Hymen, with all the solemnity which so short a preparation could admit of,
where Mithridates waited for her, in raptures as visible as great.

But as the Priest was going to perform his Office, Diocles with a naked Sword
ran furiously at the Pontick King, telling him, that none could possess Monyma,
whilst he had a Life and Sword to hinder it.

This short declaration of his gave some Pontick Lords, who environed their
King, time to draw their Swords; and though they could not hinder him from
receiving a slight wound in the Arm, which he got putting by Diocles's thrust,
yet they hindered him from receiving any more, and took away his life who had
given him that; Immediately a great many of the youth of Miletus, forced into
the Temple: against whom the Magistrates commanded all the assistants to make
opposition, and sent hastily for some of their Militia to suppress and punish
this disorder.

The Pontick Nobility also, who had attended their King with some of his
ordinary Guards, put themselves into too resolute a posture about him and his
Queen; That the Friends of Diocles understanding of his Death, seeing the one,
and hearing of the other, and only coming to contribute to their Friends
interest, in case he had successfully performed his design, began by little and
little to retire; so that before any help came, there was no need of it; but
lest Mithridates might again be expo'sd to the revenge of Diocles friends, as
he had been but too much to his, those Companies which came to his relief, were
by the Magistrates appointed to be his Guard whilst he continned in their City.

And though Philopomanes, with all the chief men of Miletus, and Monyma her
self, earnestly conjured him to suspend his Nuptials till his hurt was well,
yet he was deaf unto them, protesting, he was much more concerned in the cure
of that wound the fair Monyma had given him, than in that Diocles had, and that
delay would be more dangerous to the first, than the last.

This being often reiterated, as his opinion, and at length as his resolution,
the Priest performed his Office, and Monyma gave the Pontick King her hand and
faith; who led her from thence to the Temple of Diana, much adored at Miletus,
their City standing near Mount Latmus, the residence of her Endymion, where the
remaining ceremonies being perfected, she was conveyed back under a Triumphal
Arch, supported by some of his Nobility, and followed by the acclamations of
all the people.

I did nothing (continued Callimachus) but sigh during this relation, which
being finished, I asked the maker of it, Whether he had observed any thing in
the new Queens countenance which relisht of obedience rather than inclination,
in all that performance. To which he rereply'd, That either her heart and face
were in perfect mis-intelligence, or never any of her Sex went with more joy to
a Nuptial, than she did to this. This he told me, as he confessed to me
afterward, both as it was the truth, and as believing my condition would
rather have been impaired, than advantaged by a contrary assurance; since I was
not to expect my cure from her kindness, but my resentment. I commanded him
again to endeavor to bring me an account of the conclusion of the day, as he
had of the beginning; which not long after he did, by telling me, He had seen
Monyma in Mithridates arms. All that night I took as little rest, as the
Pontick King did; for I could not but consider, That in the same time I was
deploring my loss, another was enjoying it. Ah how sensibly I felt my
resentments were inferior to my love, since I found my trouble in that which
otherwise had presented me my cure.

Whilst I lay thus struggling with my miseries, I learnt, that ^ive days after
the Nuptials, Mithridates having obtained license from the Senate of Miletus to
engage what Ships of War he could in their Cities or Territories (at the same
time granting the like favor to the Romans, and Nicomedes, and Ariobarzanes,
to preserve that equality they had till then so wisely for themselves observed,
believing the advantage they had given the Pontick King in first making his
Levies, would be repaid by giving them voluntarily a privilege they had never
solicited for) he took a solemn leave of them; and taking his Queen with him,
was accompanied by them to the utmost limits of their Country, where after
many professions and embraces, he had taken his final leave, hasting into
Pontus, to prepare for that War he was determined to make with Nicomedes and
his Confederates.

The next day after this departure, the fair Irene sent to visit me, prosessing
she would have made one her self to have comforted me in my loss, had the Laws
of Civility permitted it; and had she not apprehended I had been so highly
injured by one of her Sex, that it might too justly raise in me an aversion to
all of it. I returned this obligingness with all the respect and acknowledgment
I was capable of, assuring her I could never be an enemy to a sex which had a
person of so much merit of it, as she was, who had given me more inclinations
for it, than Monyma could do the contrary. It was above six moons (generous
Hearers, that I lay languishing in my misfortunes, and disputing for the
victory over them; which at length having obtained, I resolved to search all
the inland-seas for Telamon, who (I had some hope) might only have been taken
by Pirates; at least I esteemed it my duty, as much as 'twas my inclination, to
leave nothing unattempted which might satisfy me I had performed that debt I
owed him; hoping further, that the varieties of this voyage might settle the
cure I had with so many difficulties acted; in prosecution of this resolve, I
caused a large Galley to be bought; and having Manned her to the utmost both for
the Sword and the Ore (the immense quantity of Jewels left me by Telamon,
inabling me to defray the most prodigal expenses; which made me conjecture his
quality was more eminent by much, than he had made the World and me believe) I
prepared to leave for ever Miletus, the place in which I had enjoyed and
suffered so many satisfactions and misfortunes: But this resolve was a few days
suspended from execution, by a confinement which I was extremely pleased with,
The Nuptial of the fair Irene, who was to be married to a Carian Lord, that in
all men's opinions, and, which was more, in her own, perfectly deserved her: I
omitted no gallantry in this occasion, which might evince my joy for it, and
that high friendship I so justly paid her. I was also a little concerned to
let her see, that as I could endure all the crosses of love, where mine was not
unfruitfully received; so I could divest my self of my passion, when I found it
was unworthily placed.

Having spent some days in this employment, and left the fair Irene in that
condition she desired and merited; I took of her and her Lord a final leave;
and setting to Sea, I followed the course which Fortune only had appointed for
me, believing she could not be as inconstant as she is represented, if she made
me as unhappy in one Element, as she had made me on the other.

I will not tell you how many Coasts and Maritime-towns I visited, enquiring
after Telamon; nor the particulars of a signal Naval-fight between Nicomedes
and Betuitus, between the Hellespont and the Thracian Bosphorus, in which I
joined with the former, having too much cause to be an Enemy to Mithridates;
nor those Civilities the King of Bithynia conferred upon me, nor those high
Employments he offered me to tie me to his service. Those, though otherwise
considerable in themselves, I designedly omit, that your attentions may be
entertained with Adventures less unworthy of them. One day as I was sailing
between the Promontory of Assum, and the Island of Lethos, I perceived three
Galleys which were engaged in a furious fight; and though I made up to them
with as much haste as my sails and oars could afford me; yet before I joined
them, the dispute was ended by the Victory the two had obtained over the one.

The succesful were so intent upon the joy of their being so, or upon the
dividing the spoil, that though I was come near enough to perceive them
transporting in their Boats from one Vessel to another, many Ladies richly
clothed; yet they never put themselves into a posture of defense, or so much as
seemed to be concerned at my approach; so that without any acts of hostility, I
came near enough to see a Lady fall upon her knees, and with elevated hands to
beg my assistance, which she seemed to implore with so good grace, and so much
to need it, that I resolved to afford her whatever lay in my power.

But to make my quarrel just, or to render any needless, I desired the
Commander of those Galleys to restore those fair Captives to their freedom, or
to acquaint me whether it was justly they had lost it.

But instead of a civil reply, I was rudely commanded to be gone, lest I should
be involved in that captivity I so impertinently enquired into.

This harsh Answer took from me all hopes of acting my design, but by force;
and therefore to loss no time, and to take them in that disorder which their
advantage in number seemed to render necessary, I forthwith grappl'd with that
Galley which the prisoners had been conveyed into, and leaping upon the deck, I
soon made them find, that an answer not so rude had been more safe, than that
force which made them presume to give it.

But whilst I was disputing the Victory in one of the Enemies Galleys, my own
was boarded by the other; where though they found some considerable resistance
for a time, yet in the end they were reduced to need and call for mine; which
the less disadvantageously to afford them, I left my Lieutenant to justify
that progress we had made, and with some Soldiers with me I returned into my
own Galley, which I found had almost lost that Name; yet our unexpected relief
so animated our friends, and therefore so terrified our enemies, that from
assaulting they began to retreat, and after a little time to leap confusedly
into their own Galley. We knew how necessary it was to husband this confusion,
so that following them, we soon made our selves Masters of their Vessel,
killing all that resisted, and extending mercy to those that flung down their
arms and implored it. This small success gave me hopes of a greater, which the
sooner and hopefullier to solicit, I left some of my men to guard the
prisoners; and with the rest I flew to my Lieutenant, who was in a condition to
need my assistance, before I could afford it him: For a Gentleman covered with
a rich Armor, and having a Helmet shaded with a great plume of Carnation
Feathers, had during my absence animated his own party, and acted such
prodigious things, that he had almost reduced us to a condition of only hoping
to dye handsomely. This Enemy, after much dispute, I singled out, and began a
combat with him, which made me know the honor of the success would at least
equal the danger of acquiring it. Thrice we were forced to take breath, to
enable us to deprive each other of that little which was left us; and the
fourth time he lifted up the sight of his Helmet, and discovered a face so full
of deformities, that it took up my amazement, till his words put a period to
it, which to the best of my remembrance were to this effect:

Valiant man! thou have showed so much courage in a cause wherein thou have had
so little invitation to manifest it, that it gives me a high desire to make
thee my friend, at least to have thee no longer my enemy; which to persuade
thee to, I shall freely give thee all my this days acquisitions, except one
Beauty, for whom I have so unextinguishable a passion, that it has forced me
against the respect and duty I owe, and shall but in this occasion, eternally
pay her, To endeavor by force that which by my Prayers and Services I too long
and too unsuccessfully attempted.

I cannot think it strange, I replied, that believing I fought for Pillage,
thou should make me so low an offer. But I would have thee know, Since thy
rudeness and the assistance which some prisoners thou have, have implored of
me, has only made me draw my Sword, nothing less than an acknowledgment of thy
offense, and a restoring those Captives to liberty, can invite me to sheath it.
One then, or both must dye, the other furiously answered, which is a fate I can
with less trouble embrace, than those conditions thou proposest to avoid it.

These words being finished, he pulled down the sight of his Helmet, and
renewed the Combat with a rage, which I could not attribute to a less motive,
than that which animated his; twice with two reverses he made me stagger, and
made me owe my life to the faithfulness of my Armor; but at length I gave him
so large a wound in his left side, that despairing of Victory, as of Life, he
hastily abandoned the Combat, and ran to the Stern-Cabin, to which place I flew
after, and just as he entered it, I past my Sword up to the hilts through his
body, which he being less concerned in than in not imploring a pardon from the
Beauty he served, he fell on his knees by her, and presenting her a handful of
his blood, he begged her, that that Oblation with the loss of his life, might
expiate a Crime, which he was much more troubled to have committed, than to
have it thus punished: Then breathing a deep groan, and kissing her feet, he
expired in that performance.

Though you may believe all this did not a little surprise her to whom he
spoke, and at whose feet he died; yet I can assure you, her beauties did
infinitely more surprise me.

Ah Gods! With what Majesty and Empire did they disclose themselves! and how,
at first sight, she divested me of a high anger, and invaded me with a higher
admiration, which having obliged me to contemplate her a while in silence, I at
last broke it, to tell her: I implore your pardon, Madam, if to obey your
commands, and to serve you, I have been guilty of a rudeness which has rendered
me unworthy of either: but had I known your Enemy and mine had fled unto you as
his Sanctuary, he should have found you an inviolate one, since to have been in
that way suspended from my revenge, had been a higher duty than to have acted
it.

That admirable beauty to whom these words were addressed, by an amazed looking
upon all those Women which waited on her, seemed to evidence her surprise and
astonishment at them, and then told me; What you have acted and hazarded for
me, should have prepared you sooner to have received my retributions, than to
have made me any excuses; But those I owe you are such, that what contracts the
debt, renders me incapable to satisfy it.

Madam, I replied, You will (I hope) permit me to believe, your not owning my
fault too infinite, is but only to acquaint me your mercy is, which has in that
one performance so over-rewarded the duty of the service I have paid you, that
I must beg of you to honor me with more of your commands, to expiate my having
so rudely obeyed these. What you undertook, and what you have performed, She
answered, are both so generous, that it leaves me no apprehension that you will
employ your Victory to any other end than to restore us to that liberty, whose
loss invited you to solicit it; and therefore you have le^t me nothing more
to desire of you, but to convoy us to our intended Harbor, that we may not
repeat as great a misfort^ne as that which your courage has freed us from.

That, Madam, (I replied) which now shall be my obedience, should have been my
desire, if I had not esteemed the honor you have already done me, too great to
importune you for any more: but before I obey you, allow me to free the place
and Galley you are in, from the blood and disorder in it, and to restore your
Friends and Servants to that freedom they had so underservedly lost. Then
dragging out the dead body that was in the Cabin, and causing the blood to be
washed away, I went to see what face things wore, since my abandoning the
Combat; but I must freely acknowledge, I went away in such disorders and
emotions, that I found I had endangered my own liberty, by a sight of that
beauty, to whom I had restored hers.

Do not wonder, I beseech you, that I could so soon be apt to receive the
impressions of a passion, in which I had so recently been unfortunate; since
those Charms which now began to subdue me, were such, that I had as little the
power, as the will to resist them: Never had the gods been so prodigal of their
gifts to one person, as to her; Her stature and shape were such, that it was as
impossible to have found in either a defect, as to have wished to either an
addition.

Her complexion was so fresh, so lively, and so admirably mixed, that it might
entirely have taken up my wonder, had not her fair eyes challenged at least an
equal part as their just proportion: in brief, all things were so peculiar in
her, that I could not say, this individual grace or feature was exact according
to the received rules of Beauty, since hers were of a quality that imposed new
ones, which had nothing of unhappiness in them, but the impossibility of having
them imitated. Neither could her exterior graces transcend that rational faith
I had assumed of the Beauties of her soul, which had manifested an absolute
equality in the highest extremes; for her grief at her captivity had not
dejected her, nor her joy at her restoration exalted her; but she continued in
as perfect a calm, as if her mind, secure in it self, nor feared the frowns of
Fortune, nor cared for her smiles. Whilst I was entertaining my thoughts on the
Stern-deck with this part of my relation, the relics of the Enemy were killed
and taken, the Galley according to my orders was disburthen'd of the dead, and
all the innocent prisoners were brought together into mine; where they had
waited longer, had not my Lieutenant interrupted my ravings, and invited me to
dispose of them: which when I went to do, I found that Lady amongst them, who
had in so moving a posture, before the fight began, invited my assitance. I
desired her to acquaint me, who that Beauty was she waited on, or accompanied:
To which she told me, her Name was Mithridatia; that she was daughter to a
Pontick Gentleman who was highly loved by his King, and who was Lord of Lestos;
which that morning she had left, to go to her Father, who had concluded a
marriage for her with a Cyprian Gentleman. This News did not a little surprise
me; but lest she might observe so much, I begged her pardon if my curiosity were
so uncivil as to desire to know who that was which had taken them prisoners,
and seemed to have so violent a passion for the fair Mithridatia. She replied,
His name was Nepturnus, that he was Admiral of the Cilican Pirates; That some
six Moons past being forced into Miletus, the chief City of Lestos, by a
furious storm, he had seen Mithridatia, and had assumed a violent, but secret
passion for her; that having been near her Father (who was then by
Mithridates's Command contracting with him for a Cilician Fleet) when he sent
Orders for her going to Pontus, he resolved (as this day he acknowledged to
her) to intercept her at Sea, and to carry her into his own Country, where he
declared he intended to make himself King, and having a Crown to present her,
he hoped she would not in an Hymeneal way refuse it. He made her many Apologies
for his being necessitated to such a proceeding, which yet operated so little
upon her, that she was determined to have owed that obligation to death, which
now she is indebted for to you.

This Lady having thus finished her information, I gave her many retributions
for it, and accompanied with her, and followed by those late prisoners, I went
to Mithridatia, and told her, Forttune, or the Mercy of Nepturnus, had spared
so many of her friends, which I desired her to accept of from my hands; to
dispose of such of her Enemies as had avoided the fury of the Sword, and to
name that place to which she would have us steer our course. The first she
received with satisfaction; the second she begged me to act in as I thought fit;
and for the last, she named Nicomedia the Metropolis of Bithynia, the then
residence of Mithridates, and consequently of her Father, who she assured me
would acknowledge my obligation in a way much more proportionate to it self,
than she had the power to do.

The name of the Pontick Kings Court did so strangely surprise me, that when
she mentioned it, I could not but repeat it; but recollecting my self again,
with a deep sigh I said, I would obey her, though the place she had named had
in it horrors for me, which nothing but her commands could persuade me to
engage my self in.

She seemed at this declaration to be as much surpised, as I had been at what
constrained me to make it; which made her conjure me to inform her, what high
cause of aversion I had for that place; and since I had, that I would but land
her on any shore which obeyed Mithridates his Power. Madam, I replied, the
knowledge of what you desire, will give me so deep a sadness, and afford you so
little satisfaction, that if it may not displease you, I should implore your
revoking that command; which yet if you do not, I shall obey it; but I must beg
your pardon if I observe not your last orders; for since they concern my
particular, I should be too unworthy your Care should I accept of it. Then
pausing a little, and recollecting my self, I thus continued: No, Madam, upon
more serious consideration, I am now so far from being troubled at my going to
the Pontick Court, and at my detestation of it, and perhaps of Mithridates
person, that I passionately wish, if it were possible, that the cause thereof
were capable of accession, that in that performance you might be convinced I
have no consideration higher than to serve the fair Mithridatia. I found her a
little troubled at what I had spoken; but finding I was unalterable in my
resolution of waiting on her thither, she at length assented to my doing so;
and we steered our course toward Nicomedia; to which place we had arrived in
two days, had that obliging gale which then followed us, continued so long: But
it was soon forced to give place to a raging North-East wind, against which we
strugled two days and one night; but then it became so uncontrollable and
furious, that the Pilot forsook the Helm, and we soon after our hopes: this was
about an hour before day During all the extremity of the storm, I had declined
giving the fair Mithridatia any full intimation of her danger, that if the gods
had delivered us out of it, she might have been exempted in some measure from
the apprehensions of it; but now that the longer concealment of our condition
might have proved a greater crime than civility, I went trembling to the
Stern-Cabbin; and having desired and obtained the permission of coming in,
having first acquainted her of the danger with a dejected countenance, I told
her; The gods are my witnesses, Madam, that the loss of my Life would be my
satisfaction, if thereby the eminent hazard yours is in, might cease; but we
are now involved in a ruin, where neither the actings of Courage, nor the
sacrificing my self for your safety, can any way purchase the ambition'd end.
My grief at these words rudely disabled me from speaking more, which gave the
fair Mithridatia an invitation thus to answer me: That death, generous
Callimachus, which you are so sensible of, merits not your sorrow, which might,
upon a general account, be more justly employed for your own loss, than for
mine; the World will lose by me but a person who has hitherro given neither
much hope, nor any evincement of becoming considerable; but by you it will be
deprived of so much, both by expectation and evidence, that your private loss
may truly be lamented as a public one: but when ever the gods do call us, we
ought to resign our selves as willingly to death, as we would enjoy the
felicities of life, if they do assign us those for our portion; else we follow
not their will, but ours; and serve not them, but our selves.

These words, so obliging to me, and religious in themselves, made me resign
all my fears to admiration; from which I was soon recalled by a hideous cry in
the Galley, by which I too soon, and too clearly knew the Vessel was foundered,
had struck, or sprung some greedy Leak. The horror of the noise and danger,
made me forget all respect; so that taking Mithridatia in my arms from off a
bed on which she lay in her clothes, I carried her on the deck; whither I was
no sooner come, but the conquered Galley opened in the middle, and left us to
the mercy of an Enemy, which she found had none.

I was unalterably determined to carry what I held, on shore, or dye in the
attempting my highest inclination and duty.

Thrice by the fury of the Sea, the fair Mithridatia was struck out of my arms,
and thrice I recovered her again; but at last my strength failed me: and though
I yielded to few in the world in the art of swimming, yet in such mountains of
water, so much obscurity, and being confined to save another I was much more
concerned for, than I was for my self, my spirits were so diminished, that I
looked for no more, than to find my burial in that Enemy, from whom I receive
my death; happy only in this, That I should not out^ live a loss that I much
more apprehended than death; and that mine should be serving, nay expiring in
the arms of a person of as high a virtue as beauty. But the gods, who often
delight to cast us into dangers, the more to endear that mercy which relieves
us out of them; and to make us think upon a better place, by seeing the
uncertainties of this; sent a plank of the broken Galley to me, just in that
moment of time, upon which with very much difficulty I got, and had by that
help a little leisure to recover my breath and strength; but finding both were
too great a load for it, I begged the fair Mithridatia, having first acquainted
her therewith, not to quit her hold, whilst I would swim by it, and endeavor
to shove it to land, which then by the dawn of the morning I discovered not a
furlong from us. But that generous person conjured me, not out of a vain hope
of saving two lives, to forsake almost a certainty of saving one.

Ah Madam, I replied, I beseech you do not hope to invite me to save my life by
an action which will render me unworthy of it; nor think me capable of a
performance, which if you believ I am, you must deny me that esteem, which next
to your safety, I value above all things else; no, Madam, I am unmovably
resolved to bring you out of this danger, or to share in that Fate I want power
to alter. Thereupon sliding from the Plank, I began to thrust it toward the
shore, where at length, through many hazards, we arrived; the sea and the wind
which had brought us to that extremity now contributing to the freeing of us
from it. Never did there appear any thing so like Venus's ascension out of the
sea, as the fair Mithridatia's did; and had not her rude usage by that Element
destroyed that Faith, she could not but have been taken for the goddess of it.
But alas, as soon as she had recovered the shore, what through the difficulties
she had strugled with, what through the bruises she had received from the
shelves near the land, she fell into a swound, and was so carried by me to a
house near the place where her fainting had seized on her: As I was performing
this duty, casting my sight toward the sea to observe whether any relics of
our small Fleet had been spared by the furious waves, I discovered a little
Skiff with but one in it, which driven by the wind, was recovering that place I
then was on: I had not the leisure to see the event of this discovery, or to
afford that necessitous person in it my assistance; for the fair Mithridatia's
condition took up all my thoughts and care, who I soon after brought to that
house I intended; where promising those in it, high rewards for their service
and assistance, both they and I began to pay her, and afford her all we could:
but her senses were no sooner returned, than she was invaded by a violent
fever, which yet could not render her condition more dangerous, than therefore
it did mine. At the first appearance of this fatal disease, I posted away
several Expresses for the most expert Physicians at Larissa, the nearest City
to us (for we had been shipwrack'd in that Gulf, which takes its name from the
Mountain Pelius, which is not many furlongs from the bottom of it). But as I
was taking order that all the helps which Art could yield the fair Mithridatia,
might be prepared for her, there came one all over wet into the house we were
in, who to my joy and wonder I found was Demetrius, an Athenian servant, which
Telamon had taken whilst he resided in Greece; and who had so faithfully and
cheerfully served me during my residence at Miletus, that I had entrusted him
with my most secret concernments. I lern'd from him, that 'twas he I had seen
in the Skiff, which with his naked Sword in his hand, he had secured for me,
when he had observed the Galley foundring; but that the care he had of me had
been fruitless, since the same wave which had broke the vessel, carried him out
of it in the Skiff, which having no man in it but himself, was driven even by
the storm to the shore. He farther presented me the small Cabinet, in which I
had my preciousest Jewels, which he carried with him to supply our want on the
land, if the gods ever brought us in safety thither. I was a little pleased at
the escape of Demetrius (who (continued Callimachus) had abandoned the World
with me, and is one of the Society of this place) and at the care he evidenced,
in saving so plentiful a preservative against want, which otherwise I might
have apprehended in a strange Country, having my self only saved some Diamonds
of good value, which I constantly carried about me. But alas, these faint
satisfactions were rudely cast out by the too eminent danger the Physicians at
their arrival told me their fair Patient was in. Five days and nights her Fever
increased; during all which time, at seasonable hours, I never stirred from her
feet, paying her all my respects and services; but the sixth night her malady
gave the Physicians so little hope of her life, that they advised her to
prepare her self for the loss of it.

This advertisement was no sooner received, than she sent for me into her
Chamber (for that night by her express Commands I was removed into my own, my
watchings and my distempers having flung me into an indisposition, which they
had assured her would prove hazardous, if not timely prevented); as soon as I
came in, she commanded all else out of it; which being obeyed, she told me with
much grace and calmness; Callimachus, that life which you have so often and so
miraculously preserved at Sea, the gods are now determined to lend me no
longer; and I obey their summons with a joy which assures me of that happy
place whither I am now going.

If I resent any trouble at this change, I assure you it proceeds from some
regret I have of owing you so much; yet hereby of being rendered incapable of
any thing, but acknowledging it, and of being necessitated to conceal my real
condition from you, which is occasioned by a hasty vow I made, and caused all
my Women to take, when you were disputing, as we then apprehended, only whose
prisoners we should be; I conjure you to satisfy your self, nothing but such a
tie could have occasioned my silence. Ah Madam (I replied, interrupting her)
what I see and find of you, renders my knowledge of your Extraction unnecessary,
and your goodness needed not have apologiz'd for your continuing me in that
ignorance, since your Empire over me is so absolute, that the knowledge of what
is your will, is the highest reason for me to be contented with it.

But oh gods! Madam, is it possible that so much Beauty and Virtue as you
possess, should be showed us, to make it as much our misery, as now it is our
wonder! For the knowledge of it cannot more act to the performance of the
latter, than this hasty deprivation of it will to the perfecting of the former.

That little Beauty and Virtue, she answered, which I have, is but lent me by
those who have the power and the right to recall it; and who have been so
merciful, as to give me, till I received your obligations, no con^inements to
that life they resolved to take so early from me; and who I believe have given
me those, but the better to illustrate and set out my obedience; which could
not have appeared so clear, had it not had some difficulties to have contested
with.

These words she spoke in so low accents, that I feared they were her last; and
that fear I found was not groundless, when immediately stretching forth her
hand toward me, her eyes soon lost their conquering light; and the small
remainder of that Vermilion which was left in her cheeks, fled hastily away,
and resigned the entire Empire to that color which by the Laws of Nature and
Beauty was but to have enjoyed a share; and by a few sighs seemed to celebrate
the separation of a soul and body which had once been so excellently matched.

The End of the Second Book of the Fifth Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA.
THE FIFTH PART.
The Third BOOK.
THE loud and confused noise I made at this fatal loss, immediately drew such
as waited in the next room, into Mithridatia's; where all their Art and care
proving unsuccessful, they forced me into my own chamber, for nothing else
could have made me abandon a person, who though dead, I valued more than all
things which were alive. I cannot tell you the horrors I was in; which though
infinite, yet they could not transcend my joys, when Demetrius came to my
bedside and told me, the fair Mithridatia, which had layn six hours without
motion, was, when the Physicians had given her over, come again to life, and
was fallen into a sweat, which they assured me was the Crisis of the disease. I
could not credit this by the report of my ears, unless my eyes confirmed it,
which they soon did, and thereby gave me more felicity in that one service,
than in all they had ever done me before. In brief, the Physicians last thought
was the truest, and in three days their fair Patient was in so probable a way
of recovery, that my fears had quite resigned their places to my hopes. But she
was no sooner out of danger, than I fell into no small one, by a fever, at
least as violent as hers had been, partly through over-watching, partly through
the disorders of the ship-wreck, partly through the grief which invaded me at
the supposed death of the fair Mithridatia: But those gods which had preserved
her, extended the like mercy to me; but yet I fell into three relapses, which
were much more dangerous than my first sickness; the last of those was so long
and hazardous, that it rendered my recovery almost a miracle. This desperate
condition I was in, being told fair Mithridatia, she forced both her modesty
and her weakness to give me a visit, which she might perform without exposing
her self to the open air, my chamber being next to hers. As soon as I saw her
come in, I told her; I know not, Madam, whether I have cause to rejoice, or be
troubled at the honor I now receive; for if I consider my self, I have
infinite reason for the first, but if I consider you, I have as much reason for
the last: but I hope you come to oblige me with some of your commands, which
will certainly present me my cure; for I cannot believe the gods can esteem the
punishment of my sins so necessary, as my obedience to you.

This, she replied, which you now have spoken to acquaint me with that belief,
might well hinder it any longer from being yours; The gods cannot be what we
must believe them, if we believe them to be gods, and not to be offended at
your esteeming civility a greater debt from you to me, than is the acting of
justice from them upon you; do not, I conjure you, Callimachus, by such
discourses, give me more cause to fear your loss, than your sickness can; and
be confident, your declining to evidence your acknowledgments this way, will
more pleasantly satisfy me of them, than any thing you can say in it. Madam, I
answered, there is nothing could so entirely convince me of my being in a
fault, as your declaring that I am; and nothing I hope can so much convince
you, I will no more be guilty of wit, as your having commanded it me: But,
Madam, will' you permit me to believe the gods will restore me my health, now
they and I find you are concerned in it? I do not only, she replied, permit you
to believe I am concerned in it, but desire you to make it a part of your
faith, as I assure you it shall be of my prayers, That what you have spoken in
your sickness, may not provoke them to continue it.

And to retrench you from the occasion, as well as to hinder those emotions
which I apprehend your civilities to me, and their necessitating me to such
answers, may cast you into, I will retire into my own chamber; which
immediately she did, but with looks which told me my reprehensions were upon a
score, which made them an Obligation.

That night I took so much rest, that the next day I was capable of
entertaining my self in the just causes I had to admire the virtues and
beauties of Mithridatia, which was my most constant employment all the time I
kept my chamber; and all the time I had the high privilege to wait on her, in
hers, I had new and fresh occasions to continue it.

I cannot tell you what resolute opposition I made before I yielded; which when
I had, I was in a far higher perplexity that I had made so much resistance,
than formerly I had been, that I was able to make no more.

My precedent usage from one of the fairest of her Sex, which thitherto I had
considered as an invitation to hate all of it, I now looked upon as an effect
of my Fate, which had denied me the less felicity, but to make me pursue the
greater; and I could no longer quarrel at that inconstancy which had already
more obliged than it could injure me, since'twas a Nobler happiness to
solicit Mithridatias's esteem, than to possess Monyma's.

These, and a crowd of such like suggestions, made me know I was a Lover, and
not the repeating of any symptoms had appeared in me in my first passion, which
were as short of such as I then resented, as those were of my condition before
I had resented any.

Never perhaps did any beauties captivate at once with more Majesty and more
sweetness, than the fair Mithridatia's did, which inspired me with a flame so
far transcending my first, that had I known whilst served Monyma, that I could
have loved as much as I did, and had loved her no more than I then did, and
that she had known the like, I must have both condemned my self, and have
excused her: my former fire appeared but a heat compared to this, and rather
seemed to have prepared my heart for this conquest, than to have acted one over
it.

I was not ignorant how difficult a design I engaged in; How unapt so severe a
virtue as hers, would be to admit of an address; How improbable it was to
invite so infinite a beauty, to believe any services could give any man a title
to it; How unhappy I was in not knowing from whom I derived my extraction, and
in not having a Place or Friend to whom I might retire, and enjoy my happiness,
should her mercy con^er it on me: and lastly, what just cause I had to believe
(by what she had told me) that her blood proportioned the greatness of her
beauty and merit, and might render the first of those three as high an
obstacle, as the two last. This latter consideration made me a thousand times
resolve to acquaint her with my passion, before so powerful an obstruction was
openly known unto me; But then those resolves soon vanished, when I thoroughly
considered such a proceeding might appear to her, as a making use of her being
in my power, which was a meanness could hardly have been more punished, than by
performing it.

I was also loath by so precipitate a proceeding (if she told me what she did to
hinder my manifesting to her, what she might have discovered or feared in me)
to have given her cause to believe, that any consideration of her quality could
suppress the payment of a duty, which two higher considerations could not;
besides, I esteemed it as uncivil, as unwise, to inform her of my adoration,
till a succession of services had given me some title to it; and then also I
concluded it more proportionate to her beauties and the passion I paid them, to
let her discover it, than I; and indeed, I was much more apprehensive she would
do so to some, than not at all: I beg your pardons (continued Callimachus), if
I have too particularly retail'd this part of my Story, which I will endeavor
to repair, by contracting some other.

At length the gods restored us both to our precedent Healths, which made me
employ some men all along the Coast, to discover if our misfortune had been as
favorable to any of our company, as to us: as also to hire a Galley of good
force to continue that journey, which the late storm had so fatally
interrupted. They performed the last part of their employment; but as to the
first, they could not hear of any that had escaped alive the fury of the Seas,
but a couple of ordinary men who had re^ship'd themselves again for Asia; and
that diverse dead bodies of Men and Women, and Ribs of several Vessels wracked,
had been cast upon the shore of Thessaly. With this sad intelligence, by which
we had just reason to apprehend our Friends and Servants were lost, we prepared
our selves for Nicomeda, to which place the fair Mithridatia was very
scrupulous to go, because I had manifested some sensible aversion to the
Pontick Court.

Her civility had been so great, that ever since I had discovered an
unwillingness to disclose the cause thereof, she had not desired to know it;
but the fresh wounds she had given me, had so entirely cured those I had
received from Monyma's inconstancy, which was the only occasion I had to detest
the Pontick King, and Court, that I thought the breaking of my silence was a
duty I owed the civility of hers, and was indeed so far from being longer
necessary, that I esteemed it would be disadvantageous to me, since she might
attribute my then speaking to those two causes which invited me to it.

The day therefore before we went to Sea, having spoken to her something which
seemed to relish fo that which she had prohibited (though really 'twas not
meant so by me); to expiate that offense, I offered to tell her what it was,
which had occasioned my hating Mithridates Court; at this overture she assumed
so unusual a satisfaction, that I found the knowledge of it was no indifferent
thing unto her, This made me hasten to give her that account, which I did in
the same manner I have presented it to you.

After I had finished my Story, she continued in silence for some time; but
then she broke hers, to tell me: I am persuaded Callimachus, you will not think
it so strange, being born a subject to Mithridates, if I do take his part; as
being so, if I should do otherwise; it is therefore I must tell you, though your
loss was great, yet the Pontick Kings injustice to you was not; for by your own
relation, I find he knew nothing if your addresses, nor of her engagements to
you; And therefore if he injured any, 'twas Diocles, who openly, and by his
Parents assent solicited her affection.

Nither indeed was the criminal so much to you, as to Philopomanes, for she
sinned more against him in loving you against his commands, than she did
afterward against you in marrying Mithridates in obedience to them; The
Paternal right preceding the right of Love; the first having existence from our
birth, the latter only from the time we are capable of those impressions, which
cannot also be legitimately received, till the former obligation be justly
cancelled.

Madam, I replied, though you have said much more for her, than ever she has
said for her self; yet I beg your pardon, if I assure you the event of things,
has more apologiz'd for her, than any thing I have heard said by her; for
though some Priests have given the right to the Paternal power, before that of
Love, yet the gods those very Priests do adore, have given it by their actings
to that Noble Passion, which seems to be the god of the gods, those being
necessitated to submit to that.

No, Madam, the charms of a Crown were greater with Monyma, than those of Love
and Constancy; She could disobey her Father in Diocles's case, but she would
not in Mithridates's: had her actings, Madam, proceeded from that filial duty
you artribute so high a power unto, it would have manifested it self in the
first, as well as in the last; the obedience consisting in observing what
Philopomanes enjoyed, and not relating to the disproportion between the persons
for whom the injunctions were made; so that in one of her performances, she
erred: for either she should not have promised me her affection, when he had
commanded her to confer it on Diocles, or she should have continued it to me,
after he had enjoined her to bestow it on Mithridates. I think, replied the
fair Mithridatia smiling, that you cannot justly believe, that having committed
one offense, it is better to commit another, than to repair that; which, as I
understand it, is the true state of your case.

However, by her Letter I find she cannot think obeying her Father is more her
duty, than she fears it will prove her punishment; which makes me for my Kings
sake, as unwilling you should visit his Court, as you were formerly to do it
for your own; since your presence may afford Monyma a disturbance which may
invite Mithridates to sympathize in it.

No, Madam, I replied, the wrong has cured the wrong, which if it had not, I
have since met with what secures me from ever thinking on her again. These
words fell from me unawares; but I had no sooner spoken them, than I blushed,
and perceived Mithridatia did so too: so that had not Demetrius accidentally
come in to acquaint me that the Captain of our Galley was come to speak with
me, I had been engaged in a difficulty I should not have so easily freed my
self from, as I entered into it. But joyfully laying hold of that opportunity,
I went out of her Chamber, into my own, where having told the Captain we would
set to Sea next morning, I dismissed him to prepare himself accordingly. The
house, in which we were, belonged to a Gentleman of Thessaly, who in his youth
had so prodigally consumed his estate, that in his age he was necessitated to
that retirement: His Wife was dead, and had left him two Daughters, the eldest
of which (whose name was Nerea) all the while of Mithridatia's sickness, and
during her recovery, manifested so high a concern for her, and had with such
care and diligence served her, that she enjoined me to move her Father, to
permit her to go with her into Bithynia, which I did, and after many
importunities obtained his consent; in requital whereof, and for the use of his
house, and civilities during our continuation in it, I presented, and forced
him to take such a quantity of Jewels as freed him from fear of want, and of
being unable to provide for Nerea's Sister.

The next day we went aboard our Galley, and in three days, without meeting any
adventure worth your knowledge, unless the being assaulted by a Ship of War,
which we took, we safely arrived in the Port of Nicomedia, the residence of
Mithridates, because Murena then threatened the invasion of Bithynia, of which
that City was the chiefest: The Palace standing on the Seaside, we landed
there, and passing through one of the Gardens to go to the Prince Atafernes's
Apartment, we observed all those we saw were in deep mourning; the fair
Mithridatia desired me to ask the cause thereof; which I did of a Gentleman
that was passing by, who told me 'twas for the death of the Princess Statira,
the favourite-Daughter to the King; I acquainted her with it, at which she was
in no small disorder; but hers was not comparable to mine, when immediately
after, there came a throng of Gentlemen into the walk in which we were, amongst
whom was one, to whom all the rest paid so high a respect, that I concluded it
was one of the Kings Sons, and so it was: which so soon as Mithridatia was
satisfied of, she lifted up her vail, and gave the Prince and all that waited
on him the liberty of seeing her face, at which they all were amazed, and in a
disorderly silence, seemed to evidence their suprize.

At first I thought it was an effect of her beauty, which I knew was capable of
as signal a production; but I was soon taken out of that belief, by the Prince
Atafernes's crying out; Oh gods! is it not Statira that I see? yes Brother
(replied Mithridatia) it is Statira that you see, who has been preserved by such
strange means, that when you are acquainted with them, 'twill certainly make
your gratitude as great to this Gentleman (looking upon me) as your wonder is
at my return.

These words were scarce spoken, when Atafernes flew into his Sisters arms, and
by a thousand embraces celebrated his joy: But those being finished, he came to
me, and in many obliging terms assured me, I had served a person, who could not
have a higher sense for my having done so, than himself and all the rest of his
Family would eternally have; to these and many such assurances, I made him
acknowledgments as proportionable to his quality and civilities, as I was
capable; and because Mithridates was that morning at his devotion with his
Queen, and the Princess Roxana (Sister to Statira); Atafernes, leading us into
a less practiced walk, conjured her to tell him by what miracle I had avoided
that furious Storm, for as for her deliverance from Nepturnus, he had learnt it
from a couple of her servants who had escaped out of one of the Galleys upon
the Coast of Greece, who a few days before were safely arrived at Nicomedia
with the fatal news of her loss, which had put the King and all the Court into
that mourning they would now cast off with a joy equal to that grief with which
they had put it on.

The Princess to obey that Brother for whom she had the highest affection, gave
him an account of his desires, and I believe in very advantageous terms for me,
since he came to me afresh with many embraces and vows of perpetual friendship.
This I say, because though I was present, yet the grief which invaded me, by
finding to all my other difficulties, that additional one of Mithridatia's
quality, denied me the power of listening to what she had related.

But our retired entertainment was soon broken; for some of the Courtiers,
knowing what infinite satisfaction the unexpected news of the Princess's
Arrival would be to Mithridates, went to him, and interrupting his devotions,
acquainted him therewith, who suddenly after came to the place where we all
were, and even in tears manifested his joy.

The Prince Atafernes, and his fair Sister, having given some time to those
tender evincements of his affection, informed him that it was to me he owed,
first her Liberty, then her Life, and at last her safe Return. I cannot tell
you those various and passionate expressions the Pontick King gave me for what
I had done; nor those many protestations of what he would do for me, if ever he
could find an occasion wherein his power should proportion his desire of
gratitude.

Mithridates then leading the Princess in one hand, and me in another, walked
back toward the Palace, at the Gate whereof the Queen and the Princess Roxana
met him; the first of which knowing the great affection her Husband had for
Statira, and being satisfied by the universal voice of the Court, that never
any person could have a better title to it, in transports of satisfaction
embraced and kissed her, and then hastily demanded where that Gentleman was, to
whom they all owed their present felicity.

This is he, Madam, (replied Mithridates, taking me by the hand, leading me to
her): But as soon as she saw who I was, she stepped two or three paces back, and
looking upon me ^ixtly a while, she hastily begged the King's pardon, if a
sudden indisposition forced her to retire; and forthwith did so: it was happy
for her and me, that Mithridates and the rest of the company were so thoroughly
engaged in looking upon, and entertaining Statira, that she only observed the
disorders of Monyma, which I was not displeased to find she did, that she might
believe in the future I could not but be prepossest with a higher passion, by
my having declined that which I once had for the Queen, when even she had not
totally divested her self of that friendship she had once honored me with,
which her emotions at this meeting gave a pregnant evincement of.

The two Princesses having by many manifestations of friendship demonstrated
the greatness of theirs, they begged the Kings permission to follow Monyma,
which they did, but found her in a condition which caused at once their pity
and wonder. She was the more willing that Mithridatia and Roxana might see her
in that posture, that it might apologize the more effectually both to them and
the King for her abrupt departure, and make all three believe what she was not
a little concerned they should; for she did not so much as suspect I had
disclosed any thing of my addresses to her, which the Pontick King was entirely
ignorant of; for they had been actually private, and seemingly suppressed, from
the time Diocles had obtained Philopomanes favor; and from the time
Mithridates had solicited hers, none was so unadvised as to have acquainted him
with my Story: besides, during his residence in Miletus, I had never stirred out
of my Chamber. Whilst the two Princesses were paying their Care to the Queen,
in which Statira was most successful (as best knowing her disease); the King
was concernedly enquiring of me who I was, and whether my affairs would permit
me to reside with him, from whom he protested to me, when I expected all in his
power, I did not believe more than he intended. After I had with much humility
acknowledged the obligingness of such expression, I told him, My ignorance who
I was, and the duty I owed a person who had given me my education, and perhaps
was my Father, whom I had lost at Sea, had invited me to search all the West
coasts of Asia, and the East of Greece, to find him out; which having
unsuccessfully performed, I was now only hopeful the Land would restore him to
me; and therefore I should with satisfaction embrace the offer he was pleased
to make me, for some time: which offer you may easily conceive (considering how
inviolate a confinement I now had in his Court, and how impossible it was for
me to have any plausible pretense for a longer continuance in it) was a thing I
was more satisfied at, than he could be at my acceptance of it.

Mithridates much pleased with my reply, told me, That he had but one desire
more to make me, which was, That I would accept of Nepturnus's forfeiture,
which was a very large pension he had settled on him during his life, upon his
faithful engagement of bringing him a Fleet of Cilicians able to dispute the
Empire of the Sea.

But this I absolutely declined, assuring him, That the greatest obligation he
could do me, was to command me things wherein I might serve him, not my self.

This refusal at once troubled him, and made him admire; but at length I so
well satisfied him in what I had done, that he pressed me no more: for I
protested to him, the offer should tie me to his service more than if I had
accepted it; and that I had a private reason for my disobedience, which if I
could acquaint him with, would invite him to excuse me for it.

This I did, because I hoped 'twas the civillest way of letting the fair
Mithridatia know I aimed at higher rewards than any of such a nature; that I
had nobler con^inements than profit to keep me in her Father's Court; and that
I was not of an inconsiderable condition, when I refused such high offers.

The day after my arrival at Nicomedia, the Princess Statira sent to me to wait
on her in one of the Palace-Gardens; where she told me, Two things had invited
her to do it; the one, To desire me to excuse the concealment of her quality;
the other, To give me her acknowledgments for my having promised the King to
make his Court my residence; since thereby she hoped to let me see by the
considence she would repose in me, that nothing but her vows had occasioned
that incivility; and yet the Name her Governess had told me was hers, was
really so, since she was called Mithridatia as well as Statira, and her Sister
was known by the Name of Roxana as well as Nissa.

Madam (I replied) this acknowledgment is as far below you, as the excuse is
above me; you had reason to make a vow of concealing your name and quality,
whilst you knew not but in my success you might only have changed one of your
Enemies for another; and having made it, you had no reason to violate it.
Neither, Madam, was there any necessity of disclosing who you were, your Virtue
and your Beauty were too high for any extraction but that from whence you
derive yours.

But, Madam, will you permit me the confidence of desiring to know whether all
that your Governess said was as true; for she informed me, you were sent for
from Lesbos to be married to a Cyprian Gentleman.

That also (said Statira) is true: That Cyprian Gentleman is the King of
Cyprus, who having seen my Picture, took such a fancy to me (for I can call it
no better, since it had no solider a foundation) that by a solemn Embassy he
desired Mithridates's permission of making his addresses to me; which he has
assented unto, his difference with the Romans rendering so powerful an Alliance
necessary to his affairs, especially that Island being abundantly provided with
Shipping, of which my Father was wholly disfurnish'd by his peace with Sylla.

'Twas therefore I was sent for from Lesbos, where these three years I have
resided in an impregnable Castle, because Mithridates was told by the Oracle at
Delphos, That I should run a great hazard of marrying his open and mortallest
Enemy.

You cannot (generous Princes) but believe that this information operated
powerfully upon me; yet not so much as to render me incapable (after some
introductory discourses) humbly of asking her, Whether she could think a
Passion, which had for foundation that only which a thousand Casualties might
impair, and which time must, was worthy of her; and whether she could prepare
her self to receive a person for her Husband which she had never seen, and
pretended to her only upon an invitation so disproportionate to her.

If the gods (she replied) had made me as much at my own dispose, as they have
at Mithridates's, I might have lived perhaps free from all Addresses, at least
not have received any where Beauty was the only motive of them: But since I am
at another's Command, I can prepare my self for obedience, and afterward
esteem him to whom thereby I am subjected; and this I can act with less
dissatisfaction, than I can decline it; because the duty of the performance
will lessen, if not take away the trouble of it; and the omission would invade
me with a grief above the cure of any thing it could present me: And this,
Callimachus, I believe I told you in another's case as well as mine.

It is true, Madam, you did so; and certainly since, though you declared 'twas
your belief, you could not thereby make it mine; I must conclude the reasons
are very clear and pregnant, which force me to the crime of my embracing your
judgment. And indeed, Madam, if you thoroughly consider it, by your Rule
possibly you may find you make a Father a Tyrant as well as a Father; or if he
become not one, his Child owes it to his Mercy, not his Justice.

I think the utmost of the Paternal Right, is to hinder any which own it, from
marrying against that consent; a negative obedience is the farthest it can
unoppressively extend it self; Shall there be no distinction between what power
a man has over his Beast, and what he has over his Child? And shall Reason be
esteemed unfitter to rule, than Nature? which, Madam, according to what you
argue (yet I hope do not believe) may follow. For if the Paternal Right is only
founded upon that Title, he that does possess it, may have much less reason
than the person over whom he does exercise it; and then the certain'st rule
shall be laid aside for one that is not so: besides, Madam, your Principle
always followed may make obedience due to an Idiot; there being as much
difference between the most re^in'd reason, and that which is but a degree
above folly, as there is between that and Idiotism it self: Neither, Madam,
observing your Law, are we freed from obeying a Parents passion, as well as
obeying him; for if his aversion to his Child, his revenge to her Lover, his
ambition, his interest, or any other passion, be more predominant in him than
Nature or Reason, even those very passions must be obeyed as the Father; so
that if the child's reason be not Judge, when the Fathers just power, not his
imper^ections, act him; you must give his weaknesses as high a right to rule,
as you say the gods have given him.

Such, replied the Princess, is the discrepant constitution of Man, that even
the gods cannot prescribe a Law, which in all things shall be equal: and
whoever will not observe a Rule, because it has inconveniences in it, will at
length find he must walk by none at all.

If a child were to be Judge, whether the Parent or himself had the highest
reason, or when his Father was acted by the principles of a just paternal
power, or by his passion, it is as, if not more like, he might err, as his
Parent; and what was not consonant to his desires, he might say, proceeded from
his Fathers having a less degree of reason than himself, or was occasioned by
his Passion; so that if the inconveniences of allowing the disobeying power to
the child, and the undisputed power to the Parent, be equally great in
themselves; and that the not having any Rule established between both, is more
prejudicial; certainly the giving of the precedence to the Father is but just,
since it is most likely that a person who has many years experience more than
another, should have a greater quantity of it; and doubtless there is some
difference during ones life, due to the Author of it.

But, she continued, I will desire no more than what you have already
confessed, to invite you to acknowledge the truth of what I have spoken: for
that negative obedience of not marrying a person, which a Parent has
prohibited, and which you say is a duty owed by a Son to a Father, is as much
as that I have argued for; since the misery of Marrying a person one does not
love, cannot be greater than the misery of being denied marrying one which one
does love.

Ah Madam, I hastily replied, because I saw the Prince Atafernes coming toward
us; A Lover is not perfectly miserable so long as he has hope, and that he may
enjoy whilst another does not possess his Mistress: there is too, some
satisfaction, that if he be unhappy, his Rival is so too; besides the
difference is great between a Passive and an Active misery.

It Is true, said the fair Statira, in some cases, but in this it is impossible to
separate them; for he that is involved in the former, must consequently be the
like in the latter.

By this time we were so near the Prince, that I could make no reply, which I
was not a little troubled at; het last words having given me a rise to have
made one, which had been apt enough for what I drove at.

Atafernes, as soon as he came near us, told me, he came to make me an
invitation to a Tilting, which the King had appointed to celebrate
Mithridatia's return with, and Monyma's recovery; That his Brother the Prince
Pharnaces was Challenger, and he Defendant; that Archilaus (who had commanded
so many vast Armies under Mithridates, but now was suspected by him for that
ignoble conclusion he had necessitated him to make with Scylla) Neptolemus,
Dorilaus, and several others, were joined with him: that Gordius and Craterus
were of his own party, and if I would make one of that Number, he should not
doubt of success: and that Statira was to give a Bracelet of Diamonds to
whomsoever obtained it.

I looked upon the Princess, so soon as Atafernes had done speaking, as
desiring to receive my Orders from her, that she might see where their
obedience came in the Balance, it out-weigh'd even the respect I owed to
Mithridates's Successor, which Pharnaces some few days before was declared to
be.

Mithridatia soon perceived my meaning, and as suddenly (lest what was a
civility to her, might otherwise appear the contrary to her Brother) desired me
to add my assistance to a side, which she wished might be the conquering, and
which then she would be assured would be so.

I gave her my humble retributions for acquainting me which that was, that I
might thereby be ascertained of success in my party, whatever I met with in my
particular; only I begged that I might be exempted from running against the
Prince Pharnaces, for he was Brother to two persons I had so high a respect
for, that it could not but extend it self to every one which related to them.

This they thanked me for, and then Statira retired to give us time to prepare
for the ensuing solemnity, which since it was Mithridatia's sight, and for a
favor from her, I resolved to appear in it in all the magnificence I could,
and therefore gave order to Demetrius to cover my Arms with the fairest Jewels
were lest me by Arsamnors care, and preserved by his; and that the rest of my
equipage might be proportionate.

But as soon as Pharnaces was informed by Atafernes of my desire of knowing the
Arms he would wear, lest my ignorance might make me act a crime, which
knowingly I would never be guilty of; he absolutely refused making use of my
respect, saying, it might be the Victory would come in competition between him
and me, and that then he would not have my civility suspend him from it; nor
decline to decide that, which he was confident his courage would advantageously
forgive him; that therefore he was resolved none of his party should be known
to the other.

This Atafernes informed me of, lest otherwise hearing the denial of my offer,
and not the cause of it, I might have been unwilling to assist at the Tilting;
or else since the words were spoken so publicly, and therefore could not but
come to my knowledge, he esteemed it more friendly to give me that information,
than that any other should.

But as soon as I received it, I determined to do my utmost to make him think
my civility sprung not from that consideration to which he ascribed it.

The day being come, and all the preparitory solemnities performed; The King,
the Queen, the two Princesses, with the young Cleopatra their Sister (who then
gave admirable promises of beauty, which she afterward fully performed) with a
throng of other persons of eminent quality, ascended those proud Scaffolds
which were provided for them; and then the Trumpets invited both parties to
give the beholders the sport they were come to see.

All the young Nobility began the Justs, and by various misfortunes had cause
to with they had been upon the Scaffolds, rather than in the lists: at length
Dorilaus had unhors'd so many of ours, that with some insolence he cried out,
if we had no better Disputers of the Victory, 'twould be best to yield it.

These words inflamed Atafernes, who presented himself for his next Enemy, with
so much agility, grace and strength together, that all the assistants by a loud
shout seemed to tell one another the advantageous thoughts they had of him,
which he abundantly made good: for the first encounter they made, both their
Lances shiver into the Air; the second was but an exact repetition of the
first; but the third, having taken the strongest Lances they could get, and
being enraged that neither of them had worsted the other, they ran with such
fury, that when they met, the Prince Atafernes carried Dorilaus clear off his
Horse with his saddle between his legs; but then his own Horse stunned with the
fury of the shock, was forced to touch the ground with his Cropper, and being
incessantly spurred to make him rise, and perform his course, struggling to obey
his Rider, unfortunately he fell over upon him; and though he did him no great
hurt; yet, by that mischance he was disabled, as much from continuing the
sport, as by his valor he had disinabled Dorilaus: which so soon as Atafernes
perceived, he beckned me to come near him, and told me in my Ear, he left the
hopes of his parties success to my management; and then was carried off, armed
as he was, and Dorilaus the like.

The next which ran, were Neoptolemus and Craterus; but the third course (for
the two first were equal) the first got the best of it.

Then there remained of all our party, but Gordius, who was Lieutenant. General
to Archilaus, and his creature; he desired me to permit him to break a Lance
then, lest my skill might deny him that favor. This civility I could not
refuse, though I was impatient enough to have revenged Atafernes's fall, and to
have been acting for a reward, which was to be received from the fair Statira's
hands.

But I was not long suspended from my desires, for Gordius was unhappily
dismounted by Neoptolemus, and left me only to make good our parties title to
success, which I was as concerned for, as hopeful of; the fair Mithridatia
having not only expressed her inclinations for our Victory, but seemed to have
some confidence of it from me; elevated with these thoughts, as well as with
the honor of having our Sides entire hopes left to my Arm, and somewhat
troubled with those unhappinesses which had brought it to that pass, I began my
course against Neoptolemus, in which I was so successful, that being but a
little shook in my Saddle, I carried him clear off his Horse, and made him
measure his length in the dust. This action was solemnized with the
acclamations of the people, whereunto to put a period, Archilaus soon appeared
at my opposite end of the Career, [I tell you now their Names (continued
Callimachus) in the order they fought, though I knew not any of them till after
the Combate] who furious at his Brothers disaster, came to revenge it; but at
the second course he was forced to bear him company, and resign his place to
Pharnaces, who was esteemed one of the best Tilters in Asia, and therefore was
not troubled at his parties want of success, since he was confident 'twould but
the better set off his.

We were by the Laws of that day, to have but three courses, the first of which
was performed so equally and furiously by both, that the people by a general
clapping of their hands did applaud it; but having cast away the Truncheons of
our broken Lances, we took stronger ones, and with them so rudely met one
another, that both our Horses were forced to recoil four or five steps; and
'twas with many spurrings, that we made them perform their course.

This too was celebrated by the people in as great a measure; nay, it even
invited the fair Mithridatia, the Princess Roxana, the Queen and the King to
rise from their seats, as some demonstration how much it had pleased them.

But the third Course decided the Victory on my side: For I carried Pharnaces
clear off his Horse; but yet it cost me the loss of both my Stirrops, and so
rough a shaking in my Saddle, that I had near fallen out of it. When I had
perfected my course, I turned about, and saw the Prince yet lie on the ground
with his Helmet off, for by the rudeness of his fall, the Laces of it were
broken; As soon as I perceived who it was, I ran to him, and lighting from my
Horse, with the sight of my Helmet up, I told him, Sir, I humbly beg your
pardon for the crime my ignorance has made me commit; had you been pleased to
have accepted of that motion, my respect and duty made you, you had exempted
your self from this trouble, and me from a greater, by having occasioned it:
but I hope, Sir, you will remember it is a mere effect of my obedience to your
commands which has made me so highly offend, and therefore you will be therein
convinced, since I observe them against yourself, I shall not decline them
against any other.

I had much rather (said Pharnaces) owe the loss of success to your better
Fortune, than have denied trying it in that way you proposed; No Callimachus,
civilities in Arms are never seasonable till after Victory; so that I cannot be
more pleased with yours now, than I was offended at them before.

That Sir, I replied, which you are pleased to term my better Fortune, and
which I should have called it against any other of your party, I shall term my
unhappiness against you, as I shall what I humbly motion'd by the Prince
Atafernes, since I observe how contrary to my expectation it is resented: And to
manifest the truth of what I said, I shall humbly beg you to make my Apology to
the Princess Statira for not imploring a prize from her hands, which to receive
from the Title I must own if I have it, would as much trouble me, as to go
without it.

No, said Pharnaces, I enjoin you to go and receive what is your due, since to
deny it upon such a score, were to violate the Laws of this days recreation.

Thereupon he commanded some Gentlemen to carry him to his Appartment, whither
I would have waited on him, but he would in no ways consent unto it.

As soon as he was carried out of the Lists, to the extremity whereof I
attended him: I went to the Scaffold on which the fair Statira was, and told
her, Madam, That success which all here as well as my self may be convinced I
owe entirely to Fortune, since I obtained it against the Prince Pharnaces, is
so much my grief, and so little my due, that he himself will bear me witness I
was ashamed of, and troubled at it, and would not have implored the prize from
such fair and just hands as yours are, had not his commands of doing it given
me that confidence, and conferred on me a Title, I only depend upon. Mithridates
satisfied with what I had done before the Justs, and more so with what I then
did, came to me, and in embraces told me, That both my courage and civility
gave me so high a right to the prize, that he knew his Daughter upon either of
those scores, much less upon both would not deny it me.

This favorable sentence on my behalf, made the Princess present me the
Bracelet, which I kneeled down to receive, and in the same posture told her; I
have (Madam) by the great Mithridates decree, and by the Prince Pharnaces
goodness, so many Titles to this gift, that I cannot tell from which particular
one I derive it: and to attribute a part to every one, were to injure all in
not sufficiently obliging any: Will you therefore (Madam) permit me to owe it
entirely to your favor, that will hinder me from disobliging many other
pretenses, and oblige me more than all of them.

This I presumed the less timorously to speak, because I observed the King, and
diverse others, were then receiving an account of the two Prince's healths, from
a Gentleman they had employed to enquire after them.

But she blushing at what I had said, told me, My success had given me a better
Right than her favor.

I had much ado to avoid telling her; But not so desired a one.

Presently after, this great Assembly broke up, and Mithridates, Monyma, and
the two Princesses went to visit Pharnaces; but finding him more troubled than
hurt, soon after they visited Atafernes, from whence all but Statira (who
stayed with her Brother, as I did to wait on them both) went to take the Air to
refresh themselves, after the heat of that days ceremony.

As soon as they were gone out of the Chamber, I told the Prince; Sir, I am
come to give you an account of those commands you honored me with when you
left the Lists; and to present you with what only, by the power they gave me, I
have acquired: If the Princess Mithridatia had been pleased to have given it me
upon the account of her favor, which I once presumed to implore, I would much
rather have parted with my life than with it: but since she declined giving me
that Title to the prize, and gave it to my success; I could not, Sir, but bring
it unto you, from whom I must always acknowledge I entirely derived it.

Atafernes, refusing my proffer, and embracing me, replied, Statira could not
have been more obliging, in giving you that Bracelet as a testimony of her
favor, than she was just, in conferring it upon the score of your Victory, to
which I have so little contributed, that my refusal of the prize, is infinitely
short of what I owe you for obtaining it; and having no other way to evince my
gratitude for your having done so, I do earnestly conjure my Sister to give you
the prize upon the account upon which you once desired it.

Atafernes having done speaking, we both looked intently upon the Princess,
whose face was immediately covered with Blushes: which when her Brother
observed, he told her; You have often assured me, Mithridatia, that you gave me
a higher share of your affection, than you gave any one else; I beg you
manifest it in granting me this desire; it is not injurio^s to that strict
virtue you profess to the World; and 'twill be consonant to that strict
friendhsip you profess to me, which I shall set the greater value upon, when I
experiment the effects of it do not only extend to me, but to a person I am
equally concerned for; and when it enables me to pay a debt, which otherwise I
should be incapable to discharge.

Sir, I answered, had you owed me my debt, you had abundantly overpaid it, in
thus desiring to do so. Then addressing my self to Statira, I told her; Madam,
had I imagined the duty I have performed to the generous Atafernes, and
acquainting him with the grounds on which I did it, would have occasioned those
desires in him, and those troubles those desires have raised in you, I should
rather have appeared rude to you both by my silence, than have been found
injurious to you in so breaking it; and therefore, Madam, I humbly beg you in
the Princess Mithridatia's behalf, that you will not let he descend so much
below her self, as to act what her Brother asks of her, and I once implored,
when it was only to avoid receiving the prize from a title which now I observe
to own, will be less injurious, than to decline; and consequently your denial
will be as favorable as your grant, nay more, having, Madam, a higher
concernment for what I find pleases you, than I can for what pleases my self.

This I did speak with an accent and look which palpably manifested, my respect
only made me do so; which invited Atafernes to fix his eyes upon Statira, who
easily read in his countenance, how much her delay, if not denial, was sensible
unto him; and that was so prevalent, that turning to her brother, she told him
(in no small disorders) I thought you were so fully satisfied of my affection,
that you would not put it to fresh experiments; but since you will, you shall
see I can disobey you in nothing: then looking upon me, she said; Callimachus,
that which I gave you, as due to your success, I now give you in obedience to
Atafernes desires, as a mark of my favor.

Madam, (I replied) since the gods have placed every way so infinite a
disproportion between you and me, that I cannot ever so much as hope to receive
on my own account, what you are pleased to give me on your generous Brother's:
I cannot but acknowledge their goodness in raising me up so powerful an
Intercessor; and yours in permitting him to be so.

I spoke so much, being a little heightened in that act of friendship I had then
received from Atafernes; and I durst speak no more, by repining at having
received no more, I should induce her to repent her having done so much.

All the rest of that evening we spent in Atafarnes's Chamber; and after,
having waited on the Princess to hers, I retired to my own [for, though a Ball
was that night designed; yet, because the two Princes were unable to assist at
it, 'twas deferred till a fitter opportunity] and past the greatest part of the
Night in reflecting upon the passages of the preceding day.

The strange difficulty Statira had made of letting me receive the prize as a
mark of her favor, when upon the Scaffold I had lighted upon no ill expedient
to have clouded it with, and when thereby both she and I had adjudged the
honor of that day to her Favourite-Brother, and also had exempted me from
carrying it away from her eldest Brother; And her declaring, when she made me
that obliging assurance in Atafernes's chamber, that it way to obey him; could
not more perplex me, than I was pleased with what I inferred from that
proceeding; for I flattered my self with an opinion, that thereby she had
discovered my passion, and believed I was not ignorant she had done so; both
which occasioned that coldness, which was at once my satisfaction and my
trouble.

But if in this one carriage of hers, I had occasion to make that my Faith, by
many a one in the future I had not so much as a shadow left me to suspect I was
mistaken; for whereas formerly she often elected me to wait on her, above any
other, she was afterward careful to avoid it; and from being friendly she only
continued civil; but yet she was civil in a way, which assured me she was not
offended at any thing, but that for which, though I could have wished she would
not have been, yet I could not but expect she would.

I was not ignorant in how improbable a design I had engaged my self; that
being but a private person, destitute of friends, and ignorant even of what I
was, to lift up my sight toward a Princess, the greatest in the World by her
quality, and more formidable to me from her severe virtue, and her absolute
resignation to her Fathers will; which he had but too positively acquainted me
with, as he had her, that if she would observe his, she must give her self to
the King of Cyprus, who was but forming a Fleet fit to assist her Father with,
and an Equipage fit to make his Court in.

But all this, and much more, was not so prevalent to dissuade me from a
resolution of adoring the fair Statira, as her virtues and beauties were to
confine me to do it; and having already gone through one of the most difficult
performances, that of letting her know my passion in so little criminal a way,
I despaired not of attaining the other, that of persuading her to permit it;
for I was so obliging to my own hopes, as not to despair in an Age, when the
Sword gave the Law; but by mine to present her with those Titles, which my
birth had denied me, or my ill Fortune had concealed from me: And therefore in
those high preparatives which were made for a War the ensuing spring against
Nicomedes, Ariobarzanes, and Murena, I was not unactive: But there happened an
accident which was much more speedy and favorable to me, than I could have
imagined; for at a solemn Feast made by Gordius to which Archil^us,
Neoptolemus, Craterus (with whom I had contracted a strict friendship, and who
was indeed a person of much honor) Dorilaus, my self, and many others were
invited; Archilaus fell into discourses of a deep discontent, which is a
disease that commonly proceeds from the highest power too long entrusted in one
subjects hands; who finding the King incapable to remunerate future services by
having given all he can give to preceding ones, do not consider, That duty, if
never rewarded, obliges him to all he can do; and if rewarded, to the utmost;
duty and gratitude binds him equally to the like.

I admired none there attempted to show him his error; but perceiving their
respect to him, made him lay aside all his to his Prince; I could not but do
that my self, which (though less concerned than many which were present) I had
condemned them for omitting.

But Archilaus more provoked by my minding him of his duty, so entirely cast it
off, that what at first I had considered as an Act of heat and passion, I now
looked upon as a providence of the gods, who would make him disclose some
Treason, which if he had continued silent, he might have acted. Therefore the
more to make him discover himself, I told him; I see Archilaus, that your being
General over so many gallant men as are here, makes them continue in a silence,
their looks visibly detests; and therefore, since I am not engaged to it by
that obligation, I declare unto you, if to morrow morning you do not acknowledge
before them, that your passion only has made you utter these criminal
expressions, I shall expect reparation for them with your Sword; which if you
decline, prepare your self to answer what you have said, before Mithridates, to
whom I am too strictly bound, to hear him injured, without endeavoring to
right him in one of those ways I have proposed.

Young man ( Archilaus furiously replied) the services I have done the King of
Pontus, are so many and signal, that they will be credited before thee; and
therefore not to give thee satisfaction, but to punish thy insolence, I will
give thee that meeting to morrow morning which thou desire; where be as
certain I will punish thy pride, as now thou may be that I resent it.

This answer so incensed me, that I could not abstain from answering him: Those
duties which thou gloriest in, have not acquired so much for thy King, as thou
gave away from him unto Sylla; but I will now speak no more, since thou have
assured me to morrow of so certain a means to repair thy disrespect to thy
Prince, and thy rudeness to me.

Archilaus, losing all his patience at what I had spoken, laid his hand upon
his Sword, as I immediately did the like on mine: But the Company interposed to
part us; which made me tell him, I shall expect thee to morrow morning early in
the Meadow near the Sacred Grove, single, or with any person of Honor that may
witness we fought fairly: but know, if thou failest, or that this be divulged,
I am acquit from that silence, which otherwise I promise thee till then to keep.

Archilaus only by a nod of his head seemed to tell me, he assented to what I
had proposed, which made me immediately retire to my appartment, to prepare for
our intended Duel, which I was confident of; for my Enemy was a man of known
Courage, and our dispute and assignation was only before persons who loved him,
(...) had much rather have exposed him to my Sword, than to my Accusation.

In brief, according to assignment we met; Archilaus bringing with him Craterus
as a mutual witness, who (he knew) was one I reposed no small confidence in;
for my Enemy understood the Punctilio's of honor, and was curious in their
practice; so that if he had been as honest as gallant, we had never measured
our Swords.

The first Pass, our Clothes were only wounded; but the next, he hurt me
through my left Arm, as I did him through his right; and following my thrust,
closed with him, flung him down, and disarmed him. Craterus immediately stepped
in, to hinder me from making any fatal use of my advantage, which I had no
design to do: for immediately permitting him to rise, and restoring him his
Sword, I told him; Archilaus, be satisfied, I am in the right by my success
against you; and be as satisfied, that if you employ that Sword and Life I give
you, for your King, he shall never know what you have spoke against him.

Archilaus with a deep sigh only replied; You are generous, and I am
unfortunate; and then with Craterus went away: but lest my wound in my arm
might give some suspicion of what we had been doing, I resolved to keep my
Chamber for a few days, as being indisposed in health; and being confident the
Prince Atafernes would visit me, I caused the Chyrurgeon which dressed my wound
(whose privacy I strictly enjoined) to let me blood in the same arm I was hurt,
that unsuspectedly I might carry it in a scarf: and to take away all cause of
jealousy, I caused the blood he took from me, to be left in my Chamber till
A^afernes did come, which he suddenly after did; for 'twas my custom every
morning to wait on him; which omission, then, lest he should think strange, I
sent to apologize for, being rendered incapable by an indisposition which had
necessitated me to breathe a vein, and would for a few days confine me to my
Chamber. This information he had no sooner received, than he came thither, and
by many tendernesses convinced me, I had a higher interest in his affection and
friendship, than I either thought or deserved.

All that day he continued with me; and the next, returned early to repeat that
honor.

I had then also the satisfaction of having the fair Mithridatia send one of
her Gentlemen to enquire after my health, which I would always have been
deprived of, to have it so obligingly sought after.

The same day toward the Evening, Mithridates favored me with a visit; and
during his stay with me, Craterus came hastily into the Chamber to acquaint his
King, that Archilaus and Neoptolemus were fled in disguises; that Archilaus had
secured Chalcedon; and Neoptolemus, Heraclea, the chiefest Towns of the
Bosphorians and Colques, of which two Provinces they were Governors, and
thereby possessed themselves of all his Fleet, who were rendezvous'd in those two
Havens; and that they had given out words which made it more than probable that
they would join with Nicomedes, Ariobarzanes, and Murena. The truth of which
intelligence was not to be suspected, since 'twas impossible they could
justify their first crime, but by acting this second.

Mithridates was sensibly surpised at this advertisement, and forthwith gave
orders for all his chief Officers to meet, to advise of the best expedient
against so threatening a danger; whilst the Council was assembling some of the
Guards which had got notice of the two Brothers escape, seized upon and broug^
before the King a person whom they found in the dusk of the evening stealing
over the Works; for no sooner was this News divulged, than all the Ports of
Nicomcdia were shut, and the Guards doubled, lest to the public Revolt, some
private attempt might have been made against his Person. This man was soon
known to be Archilaus Secretary, who confessing nothing, was forthwith
condemned to the Rack, which he had not resolution to endure, or scarcely to
look on; so that he told Craterus, if he were brought to the King, and might
only suffer death, without tortute, he would discover all. The first being
performed and the last promised by Mithridates, he told him, Sir, since the
agreement made by my Lord with Sylla, he found himself so little valued by you,
that after a long dispute between his resentment and his Loyalty, the first
obtained the superiority; whereupon immediately he made his secret applications
to Nicomedes and Murena, who promised, if he delivered you, Sir, alive or dead
into their hands, they would make him King of Pontus, which he should hold in
^ee from the people of Rome.

This he promised within one Month to perform; which he had certainly done, if
by his too little precaution at a Feast Gordius lately made, he had not spoken
words of so high a discontent against you, that they necessitated Callimachns
to that duel with him, which he was confident would not be so privately kept,
but that it would come to your knowledge; and therefore not being ready to act
his designs against your person, he thought it more advisable to revolt to your
Enemies, and present them with your Fleet, and those two Provinces he and
Neoptolemus commanded, than run an apparent hazard of being discovered, and
prevented even in that.

I was commanded by him to continue here, and endeavor to gain Dorilaus for
him; but I had not so much as the opportunity to speak with him: and having
advertisement that the Ports were shutting, I apprehended 'twas the more
probably to seize on me; I resolved to fly, but I was prevented; and therefore
must submit to your Justice, and my Fate.

This Discourse was no sooner finished, than Mithridates and Atafernes looked
upon me, in a way which (me thought) seemed to reproach my silence to the one,
and my affection to the other. But Craterus immediately told the King all that
had passed, and then thus continued; I am, Sir, the most guilty, but I know
nothing could have bribed me to so criminal a silence, but my Generals electing
me to be a mutual second to both, which perhaps he knew, and therefore imposed
on me that employment: besides, Sir, I was more than hopeful, his having given
Callimachus that way of satisfaction, for what I thought proceeded from a
distemper of company only, might have ascertained him from his accusation, and
consequently have confined him to employ that Life in your service, which was
given him by the gods, and by his Enemy, for that end.

As soon as Craterus had finished; Mithridates came to me, and in embraces and
many words as obliging, acquainted me how sensible he was of the service I had
done his State and Person, in so timely discovering a Treachery, which
otherwise had ruined both.

He also cast forth some words how happy he was in having a Friend, who, though
a Stranger, had manifested more concernment for him, than all his Subjects had
done.

I was (continued Callimaclus) a little in disorder to find my acting, gave
some ground for this reproach to Craterus, and those other brave Men which had
been present at our quarrel; and more, that by such a deciding it, I had
brought the safety of Statiras's Father, her generous Brothers, and perhaps her
own to so hazardous an issue as a Duel was, for which I made many excuses to
Mithridates, extenuating too the supposed offense of Craterus and the rest's
not doing what I did, by their being under Archilaus command, and by their
belief that they were words of passion rather than design; to repair all which,
and to evidence I spared not my Enemy upon any criminal account, I humbly
begged the King to employ us all against him, that by our actions we might
obtain and merit his belief to our professions, and that I in particular might
endeavor to destroy a person, I now found I had but too prodigally spared.
Mithridates again embraced me for this desire, which he told me should be
granted; professing openly he was confident that the same Sword which had
worsted Archilaus in a Duel, would do the like in a Battle. Soon after, he went
out of my Chamber to hold that Council he had summoned, and forthwith ordered
the Secretary to be put to death.

The Prince Atasernes, who had assisted at the Council, came again to me that
Night, and in raptures of joy acquainted me; That Mithridates having resolved
on two Wars, the one against his Rebels, and the other against Nicomedes,
Ariobarzanes and Murena; had then nominated two Generals, which were Pharnaces
and himself; This to command against Archilaus, that against Nicomedes: That
the King had made me his Lieutenant General, and Gordius his brothers; that
Craterus was to go with him, as Dorilaus was to go with Pharnaces.

I confess this Advertisement was not unpleasing to me, for it gave me a
relation to that generous Prince, which fixed me near his person, and put me in
a possibility of acquiring Glory, which was the only way I had to court the
fair Statira in: but I was a little troubled Craterus should have a command
under mine: yet Atafernes soon made it cease by protesting he resented none
thereat, but was rather pleased, being in effect as well as in profession,
highly my Friend.

Ten days after, having Rendezvous'd on the Banks of the River Calpas thirty
thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse of those with whom Mithridates, designed
to make War against Murena, he ordered them to move toward Nicomedes and his
Associates, who had furnished Neoptolemus with some considerable additional
Forces to join with his Brother, lest in that Peninsule he was in, he might be
worsted; and indeed it was high time, for Neoptolemus had already brought his
Army over the Mountain Horminius, and after having crossed the River Hypias was
hastily marching to gain the Passes of the River Sangarus, after which he had
nothing but Bodies of Men to hinder their so much desired conjunction.

After Atafernes had performed the parting^ duty to his Father and Brother (to
the first of which I paid many humble acknowledgments for the honor he had
done me, and the trust he had reposed in me, which he answered too flatteringly
to be repeated) he took me with him to the Queen's Appartment, where there then
was the Princess Roxana, from whom as Atafernes was taking leave, Monyma,
covering her Face with her Vail, told me; I know not, Callimachus, if what I
was necessitated to do, has left you any belief, that I am still concerned for
you, or has left me any of that Empire over you, which you were once pleased to
give me; but lest you should so much wrong me as to have a contrary thought, or
lest I might so much wrong you as to believe you would impose that penalty on a
necessitated Fault, which can only be due to a willing one, I conjure you in
the War you are now undertaking, be not so covetous of honor, as wholly for it
to neglect your safety, which is considerable, and perhaps but too much so, to
me.

I was so strangely surpised at these words, especially at the last of them,
that doubtless I had been much troubled for an answer, if Atafernes having
taken leave of Roxana, had not then come toward us, which gave me only time to
reply; Madam, I have still paid so exact an obedience to all your commands,
that I hope you cannot have cause to suspect I will decline that practice.

This was the civilest, shortest, and resentful'st answer I could give her,
which were the three ingredients I desired it should be composed of: soon after
having kissed the Princess Roxana's hands, we went to the Appartment of
Mithridatia, which her Brother did visit in the last place, as being that for
which he had the highest concern, and resolved to bestow the most time upon.

Never was there any separation so moving as that of these two excellent
Persons, and never did I see the fair Statira give so clear an evidence that
the equality of her mind was conquerable, as in this occasion, which yet was a
Noble Condescension, since even that weakness appeared but the better to
manifest the strength of her friendship; yet it has made me many time since
conclude she had some Prophetic foresight of the fatal miseries this War would
produce.

Three times in strict embraces they endeavored to part before they had the
power to do it: which as soon as they had obtained, I went to receive her
Commands; which when she perceived, passing her hands before her face to cover
the trouble Atafernes had raised in her, she told me with an Accent and Grace
particular to her self:

Callimachus, I owe you my Liberty and my Life, which are high obligations; and
I can assure you are not, nor ever shall be forgotten; but yet those I was not
near so much concerned in, as I am in Atafernes, whose safety I expressly
recommend to your care. I know the earnestness of youth, and the first
solicitings of Victory, are motives will precipitate him into dangers, from
which only your courage will be able to free him; but I wish I could be as
confident that your advice would preserve him from running into such perils, as
I am, that your Sword, when they are run into, will disengage him out of them:
I conjure you, moderate his Heat by your Counsel, and by representing to him
the miseries my life must be replenished with, if his should be lost; against
the apprehensions whereof, I am not a little fortified by the gods, having
chosen for him such a friend as Callimachus, who when he acts all that valor
and frien^ship can produce, does but make good the opinion I have already of
him.

Madam, I replied, The duty and care I owe the Prince Atafernes, as he is
himself, is incapable of accession any other ways than by the relation he has
to the Princess Statira, and by those commands she has now been pleased to
honor me with: I cannot doubt that a person who is so justly and highly in
your care, can be denied that of the gods; but yet I can no more hope the means
to that end should be by my advice, than doubt it can be by any other, than by
representing to him how certainly his death will occasion and accelerate yours:
that is a sin, which to avoid. I believe he would not only be content to
decline the Courting of Glory, but even be an Enemy to it: No Madam, the gods
are too just to make you give your friendship to one, who can prefer any thing
before it, or who would not despise all honor for that only of observing your
Commands, which are of so unlimited a power, that what they enjoin, they will
enable me to perform, or render the not surviving my disobedience, a just
penalty for having been guilty of it.

I cannot, said Statira be invited to believe, that an addition to a loss, can
any way repair it; and therefore if the gods should call away Atafernes, I
expect Callimachus should rather live to give me consolations, than by his
death give me an higher need of them.

These words she hastily spoke, because the Prince was come toward us, who had
been taking leave of his Sisters Women; which I think he did, to allow me the
more freely an opportunity of doing the like to her, whose obligingness in her
last expressions, I endeavored to acquaint her by some of mine, were as
sensibly as humbly received.

Soon after Atafernes took his last Farewell, which was in so many tears, that
I could not more pity Statira, than I did envy him.

The next morning early all the Streets of Nicomedia echoed with the Trumpets,
and were filled with the Guards which attended the two Princes to their Armies.

Ours that Night we overtook, for it had been led but three easy days marches
by Craterus, who brought Atafernes notice that Night to his Tent, that
Archilans the preceding day had made a General Muster on the Banks of P^illis,
that his Numbers were much superior to ours, and that he was therefore
resolved to seek a Field for the decision of the War, unto which bold
resolution he was as much invited from the advantage of his numbers, as by his
intelligence that Pharnaces was advanced toward Neoptolemus with a vast Army
(for Mithridates had manifested the disproportion of his affection between
those two Princes, by the disproportion in the Number of their Forces, which
was near double) whom he therefore was solicitous to join with, and would not
decline an engagement in pursuance of that Design.

All which Craterus assured his General he had even then received from a
faithful Spy.

This Advertisement made us resolve to prepare for the Battle, the avoiding
whereof would be as advantageous for our Enemies as if we had lost it; but in
regard their Number so much exceeded ours, it was esteemed advisable to
endeavor to divert a part of their Army, whilst we were fighting with the
rest: and therefore I caused an Officer of ours to go as a Spy into their Camp
(which by reason of their great advantage in Forces, and their immediate
resolution of fighting, was not at all fortified) and there to act that part so
grossly, that he could not but be seized upon for one; which when he was, and
condemned (which would infallibly follow) then to let Archilaus know if he
would save his Life, and give him an equal employment in his Army to that he
lost in Atafernes's; he would discover to him a secret, which probably might
destroy his Enemies; which should be, that we had sent a third part of our Army
to meet an additional supply (equal to that Number) which Mithridates had sent
after us, hearing of the Enemies unexpected Forces; which if Archilaus would
send to meet, he might with as much ease defeat, as having done that to them,
he might the next day do the like to the rest.

The attempt indeed was hazardous for the Undertaker; but the Laws of War
render it just to employ Men upon things which were much more so, for the
general advantage: His hire too was great; neither was it impossible but, if he
were believed, he might get off, either by their trusting him, or by our
success before they were able to discover and punish his Delusion. But to leave
as little to Fortune as such an Affair would admit, I sent a Spy with him to
bring me word if that same Night any part of Archilaus's Army moved out of
their Camp, that immediately on notice thereof we might do the like to fall on
the Remainder.

In brief, This Officer so well acted his part, that fifteen thousand Horse and
Foot, were sent (and he for their guide) about fall of the Night, to intercept
our imagined Recruits, and three hours after (which was the time spent in
bringing that Advertisement) we moved with all our Army (which was purposely
kept in readiness) toward the Enemy, and by break of day came to their Camp,
which after some little resistance we broke into, for they were so confident of
their false intelligence, that they did not so much as fancy we would attempt
them till our believed supply, and that part of our Army which went to secure
them, was joined with us.

The execution was very bloody, for all but the usual Guards were taken asleep
and in disorder; But yet Archilaus escaped in a Boat down the River of Psillis,
at the mouth whereof his Fleet lay, with which he immediately set Sail for
Heraclea, lest Neoptolemus's ignorance of this misfortune, might occasion his
being involved in a parallel one.

But to improve this success to the full, I forthwith caused our Soldiers to
refresh themselves, to put on the clothes of them they had killed, to furl up
their own Colors, and march with those we had so lately taken toward the
residue of that vanquished Army, leaving such behind in Archilaus's Camp as
were wounded or tired, as also a competent Guard for Craterus's person, whose
wounds disinabled him to stir out of it.

A little before the fall of the Sun we came in the sight of them, as they were
sadly returning from their hoped Victory (having put to death him that had
deceived them) which was the time we desired to do it in, that seeing our
Soldiers Clothes and Colors, they might the less suspect us: this also happened
as we had expected; so that some of the chief Officers riding fearlesly up to
us, we seized upon them; the Body moving carelessly, seeing their Officers
joined with us, were immediately surpised; which so soon as they found they
were, and heard Archilans was defeated, and mercy offered to those which flung
down their Arms, and would willingly take up that Allegiance they had so
slightly cast off, they all embraced that mercy, which was both their duty and
safety: amongst those many Prisoners which were there taken, there was a
Bosphorian Lord called Lingarus, which had commanded these Forces, who had the
repute of a man of honor and courage.

Him I spoke with privately as we returned to Atafernes; and desired to know
the ground of his and so many other brave men's revolt; and whether Chalcedon
and those other Cities Archelaus had seduced, would not on so signal a
disowning of their Quarrel by the gods, and an assurance of pardon, return to
their former quiet and subjection.

To which Lingarus answered, I am confident that neither this miraculous
Defeat, nor all the assurances of forgiveness, will any way prevail to persuade
the Bosphorians to return under Mithridates's power, whilst he designs them
that Governor, which Archilans assured me he would give us, which did more for
Archilaus than any other way he could have done for himself; but if instead of
Pharnaces we may have Atafernes, I dare engage that considerable Province shall
sheath their Swords, or cheerfully employ them against any Enemy, when led by
so generous a Prince, whose eldest Brother has given such undoubted and early
marks of cruelty, that we thought it much less hazardous to oppose than submit
to him, and wanting, by Archelaus and Neoptolemus's change, a Friend which
might acquaint Mithridates with our sense in such a way as we desired, as also
being pressed by them to prevent by Arms what we could not by Petition; and that
the crime of a Revolt, before Pharnaces was imposed on us, would appear less to
the King, than to do it for that Reason, with their faithful promises of never
making a peace till we should be secured from that fear which made us make a
War, invited us to what we have done, and has brought us to what we suffer.

I was not a little pleased to understand so desired a truth, and that by
making an internal peace we might be better enabled to carry on a War against
Nicomedes and Murena, which promised more Glory than this we now hoped so
advantageously to finish.

'Twas therefore that I fortified Lingarus in his design of quietness, having
Atafernes for Governor, which I faithfully promised in few days to solicit
Mithridates for.

The next day we returned to our Camp, where our General (who had stayed there
by reason of an incommodious hurt) gave me so many acknowledgments for what I
had contrived and acted, that I was more satisfied at them, than at the Victory.

As soon as I had visited Craterus, whose wounds were more painful than
dangerous, I returned to Atafernes Tent, to whom I imparted what Lingarus had
acquainted me with, and what I had promised him, which I begged his permission
and license to accomplish, whilst his Army was taking that refreshment their
two harrasing marches required: I further represented to him the Command of so
considerable a Province (which being so well affected to him before they knew
his Government, and consequently would be so entirely when they did) might
render him considerable to his Father and Brother, as well for his power as
desert; and if the Province of Bosphorus were forthwith quieted, he might by
joining Armies, share in his glory, having acquired with much celerity, all
that the War he was assigned unto could produce, which might let the World see,
the disproportion Mithridates placed between them, was purely an effect of his
inclinations, by his acting against evincements able to convert any thing else.

I had scarce done speaking, when Atafernes embraced me, and replied; The gods
do now abundantly repair giving me such a Brother, in giving of me such a
Friend; yes, Callimachus, I say, such a Brother; for till now I never
disclosed, but to Statira, a wickedness of his, such as the very thought of it
makes me tremble; for he no sooner saw Mithridates honor me with some marks of
his affection (not content with the precedence he had therein) but he instantly
calumniated me unto him, and finding the unfruitfulness of so unjust a
proceeding, he hired one of my Domestics to kill me, which the faithful
Servant acquainted me with, and then fled into another Kingdom, knowing how
unsafe this was after such a discovery to me, and such a disobedience to him;
this not succeeding, he hired one to poison me at a Feast he invited me to; but
the Servant which was to do it, being accidently called aside, another came to
fill some Wine for Pharnaces, and took it out of the Fatal Bottle designed for
me; but the other on his return found the mistake, and ran to his Prince to
acquaint him with it, who before he came had drank the Wine; but having timely
notice, he rose hastily from the Table pretending a sudden indisposition, and
before the poison had too much seized on his vitals, he forced himself to cast
it up.

This the designed Actor hereof a few days since, as he lay on his Deathbed,
repenting his sin, sent very privately for me, and acquainted me with, begging
my pardon, and advertising me of my danger in the future. Neither has this
cruel Brother desisted, though he has had so clear evidences how much the gods
detest his being so, but has highly solicited the Marriage of Mithridatia to
the King of Cyprus, that by her remove, my chiefest support might receive one,
for she so perfectly affects me, and is so highly valued by Mithridates, that
whilst she is near him, he can hardly that way act his designs.

Sir, (I replied) the crimes of your Brother render the motion I have made so
necessary, that if you decline it, and that Pharnaces reach his ends, you are
not only guilty of your own sufferings, but also of his actings, having so fair
a way to prevent both.

Go then, said Atafernes, and make me your Debtor for my safety as well as
success.

That very hour I posted away toward Nicomedia where Mithridates resided, for
whom I had a Letter from the Prince, which referred the relation of our late
Victory to my making, with this flattering Complement [Since the Actor would be
the best describer of it.]

I also presented Mithridates with all those Colors we had taken from
Archilaus. His joy was exceeding great, so were his acknowledgments to me, in
the heat whereof I so happily pressed him, that he gave me a Commission from my
General to be Governor of the Bosphorians, and to pardon all of them which he
thought fit, wherein he enjoined the using of all expedition, in regard he had
then received certain intelligence that Nicomedes, with a considerable Army of
itself, was joined with Murena and Neoptolemus, and that they daily expected
Ariobarzanes with some considerable accessional Forces, which if united might
overpower Pharnaces, with whom he earnestly desired Atafernes might join, as
soon as ever he had put the affairs of the Bosphorians in any tolerable
posture.

But whilst Mithridates's Orders, and the Prince's Commission was drawing up,
Mithridates told me, 'twas but just the Queen should participate of the good
News I brought; so that he fortwith led me to her Appartment to give her an
account thereof: during which I observed what but confirmed the opinion I had
assumed, by those words she spoke when I last waited on her, which made me not
a little rejoice that Mithridates was present, lest otherwise she might have
begun a Discourse I would not willingly have been engaged in.

The King soon after dismissed me to make my other visits, since I allowed my
self so little time for their performance.

From thence I went to pay my duty to the Princess Roxana, who, after she had
satisfied her self with questions concerning the Battle, and highly rejoiced at
her Brother's success in it; asked me, whether I had been with her Sister? to
which I told her,'it was the next visit I intended; I will then, said Roxana,
accompany you thither; for you carry with you what will give her so much
satisfaction, that it will be some to me to see it.

I could not refuse this honor, though I was sensibly troubled at it; yet when
I came to the fair Statira's Appartment, I found Monyma there, whereby I
perceived that privacy I was denied by Roxana's Company, I had otherwise been
deprived of by the Queen's, which also did confirm me in a belief that she had
discovered the passion under which I suffered, and in which I delighted.

This made my visit short, and the Discourses in it unfit for my Relation; only
when I took leave of the fair Mithridatia, she told me softly, I had done so
much for her Brother's glory in the Battle, and for his safety after, that the
sense of those Obligations should always continue with her.

Immediately after, having received my dispatch from Mithridates, I returned
toward our Camp, all the way entertaining my thoughts with what had been said
and done since my leaving it, though thereby I found or apprehended new
Obstacles in my passion (from Monyma's resentment and power with the King)
equal to those I was prepared to contest with from Statira's disposition and
quality, and from the lowness of my own.

As soon as I came to Atafernes, and had presented him with the effects of my
journey and solicitations, for which he gave me higher marks of his favor and
friendship than ever: He forthwith sent for Lingarus, to whom he communicated
his Commission, and upon his faithful engagement of acting, as he had promised
me, he had his Pardon and Liberty; which he so well employed, that three days
after, the strong City of Chalcedon sent Atafernes her Keys and Submissions;
and all the rest, by her Example, did suddenly expel or seize on Archelaus's
Garrisons, and returned to their former obedience, which gave Lingarus as high
an interest in Atafernes, as he then manifested he had in his Country.

This accelerated success was very opportune; For the prince had no sooner thus
settled his Province, than the first days march he made out of it to join with
Pharnaces, he received advertisement from Mithridates, that it was impossible
to do so: For Nicomedes and Murena by a subtilty of War finding the Pontick
Army kept and camped near the Bridge Omiris upon the River Sangarus, over which
none could go to Nicomedia but by marching about to the source thereof, which
would cost six days time; they caused some of their own Soldiers to run away to
Pharnaces, and to inform him, that Ariobarzanes being not yet come, and
understanding Atafernes had defeated Archilaus, (which really they had not then
heard), they were so terrified thereat, that they would have for the present
dissolved their Army, had not their shame been superior to their fear, but
that they were then beginning strongly to entrench themselves, till their
expected supplies arived; so that if they were immediately attempted, the
resistance would be small, and the probability of the Victory great; For though
they had the River Hyppias before them, yet there were Foords enough unguarded
some hundred furlongs above the Roman Camp, which they would undertake to guide
the Pontick Army over.

This Advertisement confidently delivered by certain Bithynians, who
acknowledged themselves weary of following their unfortunate King, and desired
no other reward for so emiment a service, but that they might return quietly to
their homes, and receive their Sepulture in that Country which gave them their
Birth.

This invited Pharnaces to commuicate it to Gordius, Dorilaus, and the rest of
his principal Officers, who finding the design full of hope and honor, as also
one motive of the Enemies fear ( Archilaus defeat) true, which News was the
precedent day come to Pharnaces, and perhaps envious at Atafe^^es glory, and
fearful by a conjunction of forces,(which that Prince's Victory enabled him to
make) He might further eclipse his; They resolved on the design; and, making
their Intelligencers their guides, they marched all the succeeding Night with
all the Army (but a Guard they left to justify some works they had cast up at
the end of the Bridge Omiris) to those Foords which were a days march above
Nicomedes's Camp, who having received advertisement thereof, leaving some few
men to continue their fires therein till Pharnaces's appearance, and then in
Boats to recover their Fleet which Rid at the mouth of Hippius, he forthwith
marched over that River, broke down the Bridge, and thence sending four thousand
Horse with Foot behind them, to Omiris, those partly by deceit, partly by
force, took the Fort which commanded it, and put all that defended it to the
Sword: then marching his own Army over it, he broke that down also, as well to
hinder Pharnaces's following him, as to let his Soldiers know they were to
expect no safety but in their courages.

The success of this excellent Stratagem could not give Nicomedes and Murena
more joy, than the arrival of Archilaus by Sea that night invaded them with
sorrow; for till then they had not heard of his Defeat, a stiff East Wind
having denied him a conjunction with his Associates, though the distance was
not above a Nights Sail.

Nicomedes and Murena having given some hours that Night to sorrow, began then
to console themselves in that Fleet Archilaus had brought them, which made them
absolute Masters at Sea, and in the hope they had of being speedily the like on
the Land, by their having so well separated the two Brothers, and by being so
near Nicomedia, the unfortified residence of Mithridates, which they designed
the next Evening to see, and the next after to possess.

The End of the Third Book.
PARTHENISSA.
THE FIFTH PART.
The Fourth BOOK.
MIthridates Fear was not inferior to the Joy this confidence had given his
Enemies, whose hasty advance made him often determine to desert the place of
his usual residence, and seek his safety in Atafernes Army, which he considered
as a more hopeful Sanctuary than that large and unfortified City. But at length
his Honor having conquered his Apprehensions, he resolved to continue where he
was, and not to increase Nicomedes advantages by two such signal accessions, as
those of his own flight, and of the loss of Nicomedia, which last would be an
infallible consequence of the first. This intention once assumed, he sent
several Expresses to my General to acquaint him with it, and to command him to
hasten out of his Army such a considerable strength to secure the City, as
might rationally do so, till he came up with the residue, or till Pharnaces
could come to his assistance. Atafernes having received these Commands,
resolved in person to take four thousand Horse, and mounting as many select
foot behind them, to cast himself into Nicomedia, as knowing those services in
which the King's safety is ascertained, and which he is a spectator of, are of
deepest impression, and happiest advantage. The command of the Army he
entrusted me with, though I passionately begged to wait upon him, both as 'twas
my inclination and duty to him, and the Princess Statira's last commands; for
which disobedience having undertook to excuse me, upon the necessity of the
public safety; and having pressingly invited Lingarus and the rest of the
Bosphorian Nobility, to increase his numbers, and to contribute to a battle
which probably was to decide a War, the Enemy having put themselves into a
posture which rendered that belief a rational one, he marched away, taking
Craterus with him, whose wounds made the Town more fit for his condition than
the field. Soon after I followed his steps, leaving yet nothing unessay'd to
increase the Army to such numbers, as without Jemerity we might conquer
Nicomedes, and not be obliged to the assistance of Pharnaces, and thereby end
both Wars, before he had begun one. Neither was I altogether indebted to my
hopes for so flattering an imagination, but to my reason also; for Lingarus had
so intently and actively employed himself, that when I was come within a days
march of Nicomedia, he overtook me with the flower of the Nobility of
Bosphorus, who perhaps thereby endeavored to let Mithridates see, they were
too considerable not to be continued his friends, or to be made his enemies.
But alas, my satisfaction then could not transcend my sorrow soon after, when
by an Express from the King, I understood that the same morning on which the
Letter was writ, the Prince Atafernes being furiously assaulted by the Enemy
(who knowing their condition, admitted no recovery if they were not conquerors
of Nicomedia, and of one Army before the other had joined with it) and having
with wonderful resolution beat them off, had so far and so briskly followed
this dawning success with all his horse, that before he saw his mistake, he was
not in a capacity of remedying it, the whole Army having interposed between him
and his retreat, which finding 'twas impossible to make, he and his were
resolved so to signalize their defeat, that his foes might have as much cause
to mourn, as to rejoice at it. This design he had fully acted; and at length he
and all that followed him, overpressed with multitudes, were every one killed
or taken; and whether he himself had fallen into the first or last of these
misfortunes, was yet uncertain; so that the Forces in Nicomedia being deprived
of him, seemed to be deprived of what had animated them; defending now the
Enemies renewed and universal assault, with such coldness, that 'twas deeply
apprehended their ressistance would not be long enough to render my relief
worthy that name. Oh Gods! you alone can tell my trouble at this sad
advertisement, having of two persons I most valued, lost one, and being but in
too high a probability of losing the other. But I had not time given me to
deplore my unhappiness, nor hardly enough to prevent the increase of it:
Therefore immediately marching away all the Horse I had, and appointing
Megabizes, a gallant and experienced Officer, to follow me expeditiously with
the Foot, I bent my course with all imaginable celerity toward Nicomedia,
resolved to put a period to the danger of those in it, or to my life.

By the dawn of the day I was come near enough to hear the shouts and cries of
the Assailants and Defendants, and soon after to see all Nicomedes Army (except
those employed in the storm) under their Colors. By this I knew the place was
not lost, and that the Enemy had no small hopes that it would soon be won.

Thrust on by this apprehension, and elevated by that joy, I flew to charge a
Body of near Ten thousand Horse, which lay ready to receive that relief they
believed Mithridates needed, and I would bring him.

I strictly ordered all my Soldiers not to follow any success the gods and
their courages should give them, farther than might contribute to our entering
of the City, which was then only our design.

The Fight was furious and bloody, the hopes of both parties depending upon the
event of it; but at last I singled out the General of their Horse, and in sight
of both parties killed him; at which our Enemies gave ground, and soon after so
precipitately lost all, that we entered Nicomedia, not having lessened our
Numbers above four hundred, and having lessened five times as many of our
Adversaries: But, as if Fate had designed that both the Streets and the Fields
should be equally moistened with human blood, as I entered the West-gate,
Nicomedes in person entered the East, having left the generous Craterus for dead
in the mouth of the breach, and filled up the grant with the dead bodies which
had so resolutely defended it, thereby having rendered those which had been the
obstacle of their entrance, now the means of having it more easy. Had you seen
the faces of the Nicomedians, you might have read their condition; for they
equally participated of joy and fear, their friends being triumphant at one end
of the Town, and their Enemies at the other. But the last News coming earlier
to Mithridates than the first, he thought it no longer courage, but frenzy, to
expect relief in a place which he now esteemed incapable of any.

He therefore hastily abandoned the Palace with the Queen, the Princess
Statira, the Princess Roxana, and the young Princess Cleopatra; and flying with
them toward a little Fort which stood at the extremity of the Street I was
entered, and commanded the Sea (to which Element he now only hoped to owe his
deliverance), he met me at the head of my Forces, covered with dust and blood,
as most in the first Ranks were.

The posture we were in, joined with the intelligence of the Enemies having
entered the City, made him no longer doubt but that his Fate was come; and in
that belief he was going to act it with his own hands: but perceiving his
mistake by the flight of those few Guards he had left, and by the cries of the
Princesses, lifting up my Helmet, and turning the point of my Sword to the
ground, I rode up to the King, and conjured him not so much to wrong the gods
and his own Soldiers, as by abandoning Nicomedia to evidence he doubted the
goodness of the one, or the courages of the other, their having so freshly
defeated a considerable part of the Enemies Forces and their now having so
opportunely sent him a more considerable part of his own, were such good
earnests of future mercies, if not themselves present ones, that to doubt a
deliverance afterward, were but to provoke them to deny it.

Never words had a more fruitful effect than these, not only upon Mithridates,
but even upon the fair Statira too, who lifting up her fair eyes eclipsed with
weepings, fixed them so obligingly on me, that my felicity was thereby higher
in my own apprehension, than their late danger had been in hers.

Here (generous Princes, continued Callimachus) I must acknowledge my crime; for
I could not but bless the gods which had cast her into such misfortunes, since
they had destined me to free her from them.

As soon as I was alighted, the King flew into my arms, and in expressions
great as his joy, he began to give me acknowledgments of the same nature: but
he was cut off in the midst of them; for by this, Nicomedes had so far entered
the City, that her Inhabitants and Garrison by their hasty flight, and confused
cries, seemed to acquaint him all was lost. I had only time to conjure him to
return to his Palace (which he was not many paces from) and to beg him to rest
assured of a Victory which our Swords had in some measure begun, and were now
going to perfect.

Mithridates, whilst he was acting my desire, gave me so many assurances of his
confidence in my Courage, that it brought no small accession to it.

But when (out of respect) I was helping the Queen to walk, he so expressly
prohibited so dangerous a civility, and she to take away the opportunity of my
continuing it, went so hastily from me, that thereby I got an occasion of
telling the fair Statira (whose incessant weepings seemed to reproach my having
not paid her commands of never abandoning her Brother, that obedience I owed
and have faithfully promised them), Madam, had I followed my highest
inclination, and my greatest duty, for so I shall always call that observance
your orders exact from me) I had now freed that generous Prince from his
misfortune, or not lived to see you so deeply deplore it.

But his injunctions on me of following him with the Army, which by reason of
Craterus wounds he would not trust with any other, and his reiterated Vows of
apologizing for me to you, has made me guilty of a Crime, which by what I see
and feel, cannot be greater than my punishment.

But Madam, I am now going by some eminent action to dry up your tears, and
wash away my guilt, or else to convince you by my death, that I did not
altogether merit that cruel Command of your Brothers, which at once was to
separate me from waiting on him, and from obeying of you.

These words brought fresh tears into the fair Princess's eyes, and seemed so
to contract her breast with sorrow, that she was only able to tell me; The poor
Atafernes has told me all which you have now spoken, and I think I have not
been accustomed to give your words so little credit, as to provoke you in so
fatal a way as you mention, to invite me to believe them: no, Callimachus,
though the gods have so signally punished the Royal House of Pontus, as to
deprive it of that unhappy Prince (the uncertainty of whose death has hitherto
hindered grief from acting mine) yet I believe their Mercy will place limits to
their Justice, and not deprive it at the same time of so considerable a Friend,
for whose particular preservation I shall as concernedly pray, as for the
public success.

A hideous cry occasioned by some of Nicomedes Soldiers, who thirsty after
blood or pillage, had much advanced themselves before the rest of their
Companions, rendered me incapable of hearing what she farther said, or of
speaking any more unto her; so that having hastily again recovered my Horse, I
moved eagerly toward that Enemy, the shedding of whose blood could not be but
a just and necessary expiation for their having caused Mithridatia to shed so
many tears.

I will not here enumerate the various accidents of that bloody Day: it may
perhaps suffice to tell you, That Mithridates having seen the Streets of
Nicomedia run with the blood of his enemies and his subjects; he at last saw
after a little Battle, in a great Piazza, that by the last the first were
expelled the City, in which they left so considerable a part of their Army,
that had they been alive, they had been enough to have kept it against the rest.

I was not solicitous to follow the execution too far, lest I might have
repeated the generous Atafernes misfortune, and thereby have left Statira
without a Defender, when she had honored me with that Noble Title. Besides, I
was not without apprehensions, that Nicomedes might believe it a more hopeful
design to cut off our Foot under Megabizes, than now to take Nicomedia; and
might with such celerity attempt it, that if any time were lost, that part of
the Army might be so too. Having therefore first diligently searched for, and
at last found the poor Craterus Body, which yet seemed to have some life in it,
and of which I took all imaginable care, I hastily caused that wide breach by
which the Enemy had entered, and had been expelled, to be made up; and whilst
that was doing, I went to the King, gave him an account of what we had done,
begged his permission forthwith to attempt those who interposed between
Megabizes and me; and being joined, to camp in those great Fields which
Neighbored the West-port, that our men having a Night's refreshment, they
might be the earlier refreshed for a Battle, which I was confident Nicomedes,
Ariobarzanes, and Murena would so pressingly offer, that I must either accept
it, or draw into the City in which our Horse would be famished, before
Pharnaces could come to our Relief, and by which our Army would be as much
dejected, as the Enemies heightened; who also might when Pharnaces came near,
silently rise in the Night, and fight him before we could get notice of their
remove; wherein if they had success, all would too probably be lost: whereas if
he permitted me to decide the quarrel in the Field, if we did not present him
with Victory, yet at least we should so much diminish our Adversaries Numbers,
that our Friends should find an easy way into it.

Mithridates and all his Council believed this too hazardous a Resolution, but
I so confidently persuaded them the contrary was so, that at the last they
condescended to what I proposed.

I was beginning to take my leave, and to return to my Men, when the King
perceived some blood drop from my Arm, at which he seemed as much concerned, as
if it had been from his own; and forthwith sending for a Surgeon to dress
me, and for a Scarf to support it, the Queen not having one about her, and
fearing 'twould take up too much time to send for one, she desired the fair
Statira to spare me hers (for by a happy accident she had one which she had
prepared for the unhappy Ata^ernes): This that obliging Princess did, and I
received it from the hands of Monyma, who by an excess of civility would needs
put it on her self, though I endeavored by many entreaties to free her from so
low a trouble; But whilst she was ordering of it, I seemed by my looks to
acknowledge Mithridatia's goodness, more than the Queen's, and that the first
had more obliged me in granting the Request, than the last had, in having made
it; and if I was capable of any dissatisfaction in so much happiness, 'twas
only in deriving my Obligation from any but my Princess.

But finding my hurt had more befriended me already than it could injure me,
unless by longer expectance of one to dress it (which it is inconsiderableness
needed not) I went away, having first paid my humble acknowledgments to the
Princess, and the Queen, and so fully assured Mithridates of success, that he
seemed to be then as desirous of the Event of my Enterprise, as formerly he had
been apprehensive of it.

My Soldiers having (during this) taken a little refreshment, which the
overjoyed Inhabitants willingly presented them, were all in Arms at my return.
I told them, we were again by another Victory to join with those, which we had
obtained a Victory, to separate our selves from.

This was so requisite a performance, that it appeared such to the meanest
capacities there, which made the motion be received with Military shouts; at
the conclusion whereof, we cheerfully left Nicomedia by the same Gate by which
we had entered it.

We were not above two furlongs on our March, when we discovered many Divisions
of Horse drawn up to intercept us, and all the Residue of Nicomedes's Army (who
easily foresaw our intention) moving to join with those; we were therefore
hastily advancing to charge, which we did with such fury, that all their
resistance contributed but the more to their loss, and our glory.

We had no sooner disintangled our selves from this bloody Impediment, than we
prosecuted our intended design, and with such diligence, that Nicomedes not
being able to overtake me with his Foot, thought it was the more safe advi^e to
give his men refreshment, whilst I * was harrasing of mine, that they might be
the fitter next day to attempt the City if I did not return, or to give me
Battle, if I did,

'T was therefore that uninterruptedly I joined with Megabizes, whom I met
about thirty furlongs from the place we had so lately fought in, and with whom
I found such brave accessional Forces, which Lingarus's credit had drawn under
out Ensigns, that I returned with a firm resolution, no longer than the next
Day to decline a general engagement: and an hour before the Sun was set, I
camped in some great enclosed Fields contiguous to the Walls of Nicomedia,
where I ordered my Soldiers to take as much rest as their vicinity to so many
ill Neighbors would admit: And having assembled a Council, and resolved in
what form we should give the intended Battle, leaving Megabizes the command of
the Camp, I went into the City, taking Lingarus with me, whom I presented to
Mithridates with those Elogies I esteemed due to his merits. The Kings actions
showed he believed my words, and that gallant Man received so many kindnesses
from his Prince, that it brought no small increase to the zeal he had already
assumed for his Service.

Whilst Mithridates was entertaining himself with him, and giving him many
Professions that his present services had totally wiped away his preceding
fault, one of those many Officers I had employed amongst the Prisoners to learn
some intelligence of Atafernes, sent to speak with me in an antichamber; to
whom I went hastily, and from whom I received information, that by a Prisoner
of quality he was assured that generous Prince had been taken alive, but much
wounded, and yet not so dangerously, as to make the Surgeons despair of his
recovery. Transported with this happy News, I fled unto the King, and
acquainted him with it, who sending forthwith to the first Informer of this
joyful Advertisement, and having received from him a full convincement of the
certainty thereof; he told me, Go, Callimachus and stop the poor Statira's
tears with this obliging assurance. This almost as obliging a Command I hastened
to obey, and having obtained the Princess's permission of waiting on her, I
entered her Chamber, but did find her so drowned in sorrow, that for a while it
made me forget my own grief, and that I was come with what would mitigate hers:
but when I had found the ^ncivil cruelty of such a sympathizing; I told her, I
was once, Madam, coming to implore the privilege of mingling my tears with
yours for our common Loss, and of lamenting, till I could revenge it: But now,
Madam, I am come to tell you, That the Prince Atafernes has not lost his life,
but his liberty; which misfortune I hope by this time to morrow so to free him
from, that you will have no trouble but in beholding of his, when he shall know
those tears his Captivity has made you shed; and if he prefers not your
satisfaction above his own, he cannot but believe his wounds and loss of
Liberty a cheap price for discovering so high a friendship as thereby he
experiments the Princess Statira honors him with; for my part, though I value
him at the rate his virtues merit, yet if I can by restoring him to his Freedom
give her as great a contentmeat, as the loss of it did give her a trouble, I
shall hardly so much repine at his Fate, as I shall glory in my own.

The Princess either did not, or would not hear my last words, but interrupting
them, told me; O gods! Callimachus, is it then possible that Atafernes is
alive? or do you think my sorrow was so near sending me to bear him Company,
that to deny that only remaining happiness, you this way endeavor to suspend
me from it now, and to morrow hope by repeated Victories I shall not find room
enough to entertain a killing grief in so general a cause of Joy? Madam, (I
replied) the Truth I have told you is as great, as therefore my satisfaction
is; and your generous Brother wants, I hope, but that Freedom which ere long he
will enjoy; since Fortune which has honored my Sword with some success when
'twas for your service, will not deny it the like when it is for your
satisfaction.

You have (said the Princess) done so much already for us, that I know not any
thing which we may not expect from your Courage and Civility; and the next
happiness to seeing my Brother at Liberty, is to receive an assurance of it
from you; but yet Callimachus, have a care you give me as good an account of
your self, as your promise; for your preservation will be as requisite for my
satisfaction, as for the public safety.

Madam, (I answered, transported with what she had spoken) till these glorious
words, I never was acquainted with any thing which might flatter me into a
belief that my preservation could be useful to the public, or as much as to my
self; the gods having kept me a stranger to my own extraction, and yet at the
same time having given me a heart to aspire to what the sublimest only can
legitimately pretend unto; yes, Madam, I have such transcendent aims, that I
thought I could undertake nothing which was not inferior to them, till the
gods destined me to your service, which goodness I must at the same instant
acknowledge, and deplore; since for to make me useful to you, they have eclipsed
the condition you were born unto, and have thought fit rather to diminish your
greatness, that thereby I might become in some poor measure useful to you, than
continue it, whereby I should have been denied that honor; and since I find by
so unhoped-for, yet obliging experiment, that such a manifestation is not
indifferent unto them, nay, rather than not evidence it, they have shaken the
greatest Empire of the World, and troubled a Princess fit to be enthroned in
it; I shall no more doubt they will finish what they have begun, than I should
rejoice that my Opinion might have the honor to be yours; or if it be not,
that you will pardon its being mine.

All the while I was speaking, I was much more concerned in Statira's looks in
what I spoke; for I could not but believe that a heart entirely hers, could be
elegible to her; and therefore I was much more intent to know her sense of what
was there, than to cloathe that discovery in expressions fit for its self, or
that admirable Person to whom it was made: Neither durst I, observing that more
reserved look she put on when I began my discourse, conclude it in words of the
same quality; but I so altered it, that the end might relish of the beginning,
or of my great hopes of relieving her generous Brother: In which sense she
seemed to receive what I had said, and therefore told me; Though the gods have
directly concealed from you what your extraction is, yet obliquely they seem to
inform you of it; for by giving you such high aims, you may thereby know your
descent is not disproportionate: yet permit me to tell you, that your designs
of acquiring as great an Empire as you preserve for Mithridates, is not to me
so eminent a proof that your birth is high, as your so generously undertaking
his quarrel against his Rebels; the relief of the oppressed being a clearer act
of greatness, than winning of Kingdoms; this being most frequently the
recompense of force, that being always the illustration of virtue. But alas (she
continued) would to the gods I could believe the Wars my Father is plunged
into, could be irrationally attributed to what you alledg: No, Callimachus, his
own faults, and the crimes of his subjects are too visible, and great, to allow
me any rise to ascribe our present confusions to any other cause; and if I have
any hopes that they are sent only for our correction, not our ruin, it is that
the gods have sent us in our afflictions such a Friend, who doubtless would not
have been permitted to have employed his sword and conduct in a quarrel
designed to be unsuccessful: Nor would those powers have so strangely preserved
Ataphernes, but that every individual of this unfortunate Family are destined
to owe their safety unto you, that the gods might not wholly destroy a House,
in which possibly some unguilty persons are, and yet preserve it in such a way
as might entirely silence any imaginations of their having acted toward that
mercy: And it may be also to make those of it in love with virtue, above power,
when they shall experiment, that the desert of an unknown person could more
preserve them, than innumerable Armies too too empty thereof.

I had not (continued Callimachus) leisure enough to admire the excellent
virtue, and resembling obligedness of the fair Statira, nor indeed to pay by my
acknowledgments any part of that vast debt, what she had said, had so justly
engaged me unto; by reason the Princess Roxana, and immediately after, the
Queen came to congratulate with Mithridatia the happy news of Atafernes's being
alive.

Whilst the two Sisters were entertaining one another, Monyma after some usual
Discourses presenting me her hand, made me follow her to the farthest end of
the Chamber we were in; where having a while continued silent, she at length
told me; I observe, Callimachus, your carriage toward me has so much of
indifferency in it, that it might justly provoke me to imitate you; which
(doubtless) long agon I had done, were it not to convince you, that in all
things which entirely depend upon actings, I have an esteem for you incapable
of suppression, or as much as of dimunition.

Madam, (I replied, strangely surprised at what she had spoke) I hope my
carriage to you has relished of all sorts of respect due to your condition and
merit; if it has not, I humbly beg to be told my fault, that I may not only
repair it, but also punish a crime so contrary to my duty and inclination.

Your fault, (the Queen replied, casting down her eyes, and blushing) is better
mended than told: but since you pretend to be ignorant, I shall find out an
opportunity not only to acquaint you with it, but also with what, I am
confident, causes it. These words were scarce out of her mouth, when she went
away, and 'twas happy for me she did; for had she staid, she could not but have
guessed by my disorders, what had occasioned them: her last expression gave me
so much fear, that I found my self too unfit to continue longer in the
Princesses Chamber, out of which I pretended to go, as a duty to the company
there, having assured them, if the next day the Enemy declined not the Battle,
which I thought neitheir their condition nor courage would make them guilty of,
I would leave no means unattempted to restore the Prince Atafernes to his
Liberty.

After the civilities that promise did invite the Queen and Princesses to
bestow upon me, I went to visit Craterus, whom I found more afflicted by his
being unable to assist me in the intended Battle, than at those wounds which
denied him that power, and me his help: from thence I went to Mithridates, who
the nearer we grew to the execution of our design, had the more aversness to
it; but having again dissipated those cold apprehensions by words altogether
Martial and promising, I retired toward the Camp, accompanied by all those
Officers which then were in Nicomedia, resolving not to see that place again,
till I were covered with Laurels, and till by eminent repeated services I might
let the fair Statira see, I wanted not merit, but a sufficient quality to
aspire unto the title of her servant. After, having given the requisite orders
for the succeding days business, I dismissed all men out of my Tent, but
Demetrius, whom I ordered to imbellish my Armor with the richest stones I had;
for designing to act remarkable things, I was resolved to wear Arms which were
so: And knowing that so signal an engagement could not but invite the Princess
to be a spectator of it, which from the Battlements of the Palace she might
easily be, I thought my intended gallantry would be excusable; and I elected
rather to be known to all my enemies, than not to be so to my Conqueror. All
the night almost I entertained my self with the Capriciousness of my Fortune;
By how rare an accident I had first seen Monyma, and by a rarer lost her; how
that to cure the relics of that passion, I had elected a course of life which
had cost me a greater; how Fortune seemed to delight to engage me in love, by
having enabled me to pay my two Mistresses higher services the first moment I
saw them, than others could expect to perform in the whole course of their
lives: And then, that she was really more concerned in making me unfortunate in
it, having the first time persuaded me to pay my affection to a person from
whose humor I could expect no success; and the last, from whose quality I was
to attend the like unhappiness: how from nothing I was raised high enough to
love, and not high enough to hope the reward of it: That if I proved successful
in War, I should be no longer useful; and if unsuccessful, I could be no longer
considerable; as also, that if the War were protracted, the greatest glory of
it would be lessened, even that of expedition; That the King of Cyprus was
daily expected, whose Title and Power, joined with the Authority of the Father,
and the exact obedience of the Daughter (whose principles I had but too
resolutely been acquainted with, to allow me the least hope she would decline
the practice of them) would soon involve me in infelicities as vast as those
joys which were to cause them. These and many other suggestions of as
unpleasing a nature, my memory (conspiring with my fortune) represented to me
in their liveliest colors, and would not so much as by sleep allow me an
interval of rest, so that they were my constrant and importunate Companions,
till the day, and the military music made them retire, and resign their places
to the thoughts of acquiring Victory, the possession or loss whereof some few
hours would decide. The glory I possessed in being the fair Statira's Servant,
and the glory I hoped that day to win in being her Brother Deliverer* so
dissipated that melancholy the nights entertainment had infected me with, that
when I began to draw out my Army, my looks so participated of my hopes, that my
desire of success could not therefore exceed the confidence my Soldiers had of
it: And that which did yet more contribute to my hopes, was to see the Tarrase
of the highest Tower in Nicomedia covered with Royal Pavilions, whereby I was
satisfied Statira would honor us with her sight, whose influence could promise
nothing less than Victory.

But whilst the Mithridatick Army was drawing up in that form I appointed, and
the Enemies were covering the opposite side of the Plain with their Divisions,
an Officer from the head of one of those which was most advanced, came toward
me, and turning the point of his Javelin to the earth in sign of friendship,
told me with a loud voice, That one of his Generals desired to speak with
Callimachus between both Armies, and engaged his Faith during the parley, and
till his return, nothing of violence should be offered, and that he entreated
the like assurance.

A compliance herein having a possibility of good, and a certainty of no hurt,
I was advised to accept thereof by all the Officers which were near me, whose
opinions I more willingly followed, because of the passionate desire I had to
learn the condition of the Prince Atafernes. I therefore told the Enemies
Officer, I would forthwith meet his General, for whose safety during the
conference, and return to his own Army after it, I engaged him my Faith. To
which he (being told who I was) replied it was sufficient; and so returned to
the head of the Enemy's Army, from whence I saw a Gentleman advance singly into
the middle of the plain, where immediately I met him, and where after, having
lifted up the sights of our Helmets, and performed all the civilities which are
usual in such cases; He told me; If you now think it strange that I have
desired a parley, when we are going to fight a Battle, possibly you may do so
no longer, when I have told you I am Nicomedes King of Bithynia; that same
Nicomedes who owed principally to your Sword and Conduct, a Naval Victory he
obtained over Mithridates in the Mouth of the Euxine Sea; and that it is but
even now I learnt you are that brave Callimachus, from whose courage I derived
so signal an advantage; I must plainly confess after this information, I could
not but desire to express my trouble, both that you are engaged against me, and
for him, who, to say no more, deserves not such a Friend: But I come not now to
Court you from him, I could not be worthy of your Friendship if I now made you
such a Request; neither could you be worthy of mine, if you now granted it: all
that I ask, is, after this Battle, if the gods make us outlive it, that you
would take leave of him, and join your self to a quarrel, which possibly
deserves your embracing it; and to a Prince, who during his life will give you
as large a share in his Fortunes, as he has already in his esteem.

This I hope will not be thought an immodest desire, since, as you once assured
me, you are not Mithridates's Subject, and had too much cause to be his Enemy;
and that you must fight to maintain an Usurper in the Throne, and to keep the
Legitimate Prince out of it, who has not only a right thereunto by a lawful
succession, but also even by the Pontick King's Treaty of peace with Sylla, and
his reiterated engagements to Murena.

If the gods too, favor my Arms in this Field, I hope I shall not need employ
them to win another; and though I should lose this day (which I have no cause
to doubt, but your being my Enemy) I have yet so many powerful Friends in As^a,
nay the whole Roman Empire is so engaged in my quarrel, that Mithridates to be
quiet King of Bithynia, must be the like of the whole World. As soon as
Nicomedes had done speaking, I replied: The honor I once had to do you a small
service, is so nobly remembered, and paid, in what you formerly did, and now are
generously pleased to offer, as well as in that high care you have of my
reputation even when I am in Arms against you, that I hope you will conclude my
confinements to Mithridates's service are not to be broken, since they continue
firm after such powerful Assaults: Yes (great Prince) I take the gods for
witness, that your generosity will make me look upon success with grief, and
wish I had never worn a Sword, since it must be so unhappily employed.

I can too with the like truth protest, if the now difference between the
Pontick, King and you were ended, that I would as freely hazard my life to
restore you to your Kingdom, as now I will to preserve Mithridates from losing
his: And though possibly his innocence toward you might not be perfect, yet I
beg you, generous Nicomedes, to consider how unfit it would be for me to hear
it accused; and let that consideration prevail with you to send me away, with
the sorrow of being compelled to draw my Sword against a King, from whom I have
received many Obligations, and never any dissatisfaction; I say, Compelled, and
that too by causes so undisputable, that I must act what I do, though I were as
fully convinced of the Justice of your quarrel, as you your self are.

After this Declaration, be pleased rather to pity than condemn my not
accepting of your favor; and be confident I would not have said so much, but
to one I perfectly honor, and to whom I am a servant in heart, though my hand
may act against that truth.

This I spoke, being truly affected with the injustice I did to the King of
Bithynia in opposing his undoubted right, and being as perfectly vanquished
with his civilities.

His answer too was so moving, and full of Obligation, that thereby I the more
clearly discovered the height of my passion for the Princess Statira, which
made me deaf to friendship and justice, and resign the power entirely even to a
hopeless Love; but yet to a Love so glorious, and so charming, that not to have
given it the precedence of all other considerations, would have been a greater
Crime than to have done it.

What need I tell you more (generous Princes) than, that this conference ended
with the high satisfaction and trouble of us both, the one to see we had such
invitation to be friends, and the other that there was such an impossibility of
becoming so.

But before I took leave of the unhappy Nicomedes, I begged him to tell me what
was become of Atafernes; to which he replied, If he were living, he was in the
power of Murena's Soldiers, for he had been taken by the Roman Legionaries.

This doubt raised in me so many fears and troubles, that they were visible to
the King of Bithynia, who therefore assured me, since he perceived I was
concerned for him, he would thenceforth be the like.

I paid him as many acknowledgments for that promise, as for all his other
respects, which he increased by telling me; Lest you may believe the denial of
your friendship to me, has suppressed mine to you; Permit me to tell you, Your
disorders at Atafernes's danger, may be prejudicial to you; for I see your Army
is ready to begin the Battle, having Ariobarzanes and Murena to supply my
absence, and that yours probably having none to supply yours, may sustain a
prejudice, which this way I would not have it endure, were it commanded by
Mithridates himself, much less being it is by the brave Callimachus, whose
refusal of my offers I cannot be offended at, since, by what he has told me, I
must believe it springs from a cause to which not only a desired friendship has
been inferior, but even a formed one, and which I have experimented has been
so prevalent with me, that I cannot be offended at its now being so against me.

These words made me at once joy'd, and confounded; this that he should know
the truth of the thing (though not of the person) and that, that it had
produced so obliging an effect.

In brief, we parted, and I believe as full of thoughts at what had past, as at
what was to come, he galloping to the head of his Troops, as I did to the head
of mine, where I gave all the chief Officers a Relation of Nicomedes's desires
to me, which only had occasioned and continued our conference, of which also I
sent an account to the Pontick King, that he might have no cause to suspect my
fidelity, which was tied unto him by an Obligation, though secret, yet
incorruptible.

This being done, I forthwith sent every Commander to his respective place: and
having in a short speech incited the Soldiers to manifest their courages for,
and before their King, I commanded the signal of Battle to be given, and then
the military Music began to invite us to that glory which so Noble a Field was
to present the Conqueror: never perhaps was there a Battle in which so many
Kings and of Royal blood were Actors, or Beholders; and never perhaps were
Armies so brave and glittering as these.

The King of Bithynia and the King of Cappadocia appeared in an Equipage, and
with Forces worthy their Titles and their hopes; and Murena manifested that the
people of Rome were sometimes as exorbitant as the As^aticks, which their pride
or wisdom so much condemned.

On the other side, Mithridates Troops which consisted (for the most part) of
the young Nobility and Gentry of his Dominions, which their honor, as much as
his danger, had incited under his Ensigns, were so gallant and rich in their
Furnitures, as were also all those Courtiers which shame or glory had drawn out
of Nicomedia; that they looked rather like going to triumph after a Victory,
than to win one: Who even that morning had beheld the various multitudes of
Colors, the Wind and those which carried them did wanton with; The glistering
of Arms, and Swords, the vast Numbers of brave Horse, all seeming as impatient
of delay as their very Riders; the variety of Nations and Habits, and their
distinct Martial Countenances; the exact regularity every individual Battalion
had within its self, and the perfect proportion all of them had with each
other: whoever too had heard the neighing of the Horse, the shouts of the
Soldiers, and the Military Instruments, could not but have confessed how
deformed soever the face of War uses to appear, yet that day it had Charms
enough to have captivated even that Sex whose Nature is composed of pity.

I must acknowledge how greedy soever I was of a Victory, which I hoped might in
some measure repair the unhappiness or ignorance of my Birth, yet I was so
delighted with that Noble entertainment and Prospect, that it was with some
reluctance I put a period to it.

The Enemies Forces consisted (as I may say) of three Armies, and were
commanded by Nicomedes, Ariobarzanes, and Murena, out of all which Archilaus
and Neoptolemus had a great body of Horse and Foot given them to lead, who
acted so many high things that day, that had it been for their Country (as it
was against it) their precedent guilt might have been thereby entirely defas'd.

In imitation of the Enemies Order, I had divided my Army into three equal
parts, having first chosen out a select Number, as a general reserve to answer
all Emergencies: and because I was exceedingly overpowered in Foot, I placed
behind every Battalion of my Foot, a Reserve of Horse to countenance and second
them, which proved of no small use.

Secretly, behind the outwardmost divisions of our wings of Horse, I placed
some of our best Archers, who when we were going to charge, discovered
themselves, and thereby not only amazed, but so galled our Enemies with their
Arrows, that the wounded Horses by their disorders made sufficient breaches for
us to enter at: This too did not a little help us; but that which did most, was
this which I am now going to tell you (for I never saw it practiced before; and
it was then of so great an advantage, that you will perhaps pardon my
particularizing of it, and possibly one day have occasion to make use of it;
which if you have, I wish it may be as successful to the followers, as to the
beginner of it).

I found when our Armies faced one another, that the Enemy did much over-wing
us, and that possibly therefore he had neglected to secure his left Flank with
a deep stream which ran some three furlongs from it; so that he had so much of
Champion-ground on that wing, and had much more on the other.

In our embatteling therefore I let him see how much he outwinged us on both
sides; but when he moved to the Charge, I gave strict order to all my Army to
shog still toward the right hand; so that by the time we came to mingle, we
outwinged their Left Flank, as much as their Right Wing outwinged our Left, and
thereby in a great measure shared the inconveniences with them, which by their
numbers they might have entirely cast upon us, if they had taken the advantage
of the place in keeping the stream on their left Flank.

I shall not trouble you in giving a minutes description of this days action;
it is enough you know, though the Mithridatians did behave themselves like men
of Honor, yet the Romans led by Nicomedes (for Murena had been dangerously
wounded, and was carried off in the beginning of the Fight, and all Nicomedes's
Forces had been broken and dispersed) so signally manifested their Courages,
and kept their Discipline, that I was twice reduced to our general Reserve, and
to a Body of Foot which had been kept entire only by the help and countenance
of some Horse which had been their Reserve.

That which had reduced us to this extremity, was not only the fall of
Megabizes (who though he lost his Life, yet he got a Reputation which was much
more worth) but also the dangerous wounds which Lingarus received, who thereby
was carried out of the Field senseless and speechless, yet accompanied with so
many elogies, that none which was a friend to Honor, would have declined the
bloody rate at which he had purchased his. Great gods! what did I not think!
and what did I not say, when I saw my self reduced to so sad an extremity, to
be worsted in Statira's quarrel, nay even in her sight, and thereby expose her
to lose her own Liberty, whose Beauties were capable to deprive all men of
theirs! To presume to lift up my eyes to such a person, and be defeated at the
head of such an Army; To have had success enough to give me such exalted hopes,
and then from the height of them to precipitate me, were considerations too too
sufficient to make me cast my self into the arms of death, to put a period unto
them.

I may truly say (generous Princes) that this despair made me act strange
things, even worthy the fair Mithridatia's sight, and perhaps her commendation,
which yet I even blushed at, to find that any motive could inspire my Arm, more
than the Noblest Passion for the Noblest Object.

I killed in this fury Neoptolem^^ (...) the head of his Forces, and took
Ariobarzanes in the Center of his, and by the help of Lingarus's Son, who had
rallied a body of the young Bosphorian Nobility, I stopped the current of
Nicomedes's success, and thereby gave my own Forces time and opportunity to
Rally, which they did, and with which we soon made our Friends see we were
Conquerors, and our Enemies feel it.

Never was there in such a number so horrid an Execution, scarcely Nicomedes
and Murena laden with wounds, could recover a little Boat, which with much
hazard carried them to Archilaus's Fleet, where he himself soon after did
arrive, cursing Fortune which had given them such hopes, only to make their
loss the more unsupportable.

But amidst the blood and confusion of our Victory, I caused the Name of
Atafernes to be ecchoed in all places, and by all Persons under my Command,
promising high Rewards to any which could bring me News of him: but finding
those ways unsuccessful, I sent several parties of Horse toward the Sea,
presupposing when the Enemy had seen the probability of their Defeat, they
might have sent him toward their Fleet, as the only place to secure so
considerable a Prisoner in.

And that nothing might be left unessay'd, and something acted according to my
own mind, galloped I my self away at the head of some Horse, to seek that
generous Prince, for whose Freedom I had higher desires than for Victory.

I was already come within sight of the Sea without discovering what I sought,
and was even turning back when I perceived coming out of a small Wood, a body
of Horse, who bended their course toward a Galley which rode near the Shore,
but yet they marched so leisurely, that I concluded in so general a Flight they
carried off some considerable Person, whose then condition would not admit of a
speedier motion.

I therefore resolved to attempt them, and having sent some Horse to engage
them, and to retard their March, I came up at last with those I had with me,
and after some Resistance, broke and defeated the Enemy: But, O gods! what was
my joy when I found in a Litter the Prince Atafernes alive! but so weak and
changed with his wounds, that 'twas some time before I knew him, and 'twas with
much difficulty that he embraced me.

This addition to the winning of the Battle, made me need but one desire more.
With Atafernes I joyfully took up our way to the Camp, whither as we were
going, he so signally owned the services I paid him and his Family, and in
such pressing words assured me, they had nothing in their power above my Merit,
that thereby he flattered a Despair, which his fair Sister could only suppress.

He told me too, that he owed his life to me, before I had this last time
redeemed it; for Murena enraged at his wounds, and thinking the day would be
lost, since those necessitated him to retire, had commanded his Soldiers (to
whom I was a Prisoner, and who then guarded me) that if they could not recover
the Fleet before they were overtook, they should put him to Death; which (being
once pursued) they were about to perform, when by accident Nicomedes in his
flight passing by, not only hindered, but discharged those Romans of Murena,
placed a Troop of Bithynians and Cappadocians about me, with order if they were
overtook, or worsted, they should leave me untouched; and having acquainted me
therewith; he added, 'Twas for Callimachus's sake, who had desired his care of
me.

This generosity I was informed of with much satisfaction, and with no less
trouble, to find my Fate had destined me to be an Enemy to a Prince, who by
many confinements merited my Service.

We were no sooner arrived at the Camp, than the shouts of Victory were drowned
in those Atafernes's life and Liberty occasioned in the Soldiers, whose joys
yet had not a higher production, than a cause. 'Twas then I waited upon
Ariobarzanes, where having paid him all the civilities due to his Title, and
given him all those consolations due to his condition, I sent him to
Mithridates, accompanied with the chief Officers of the Army.

But to let you see the instability of the most promising earthly condition, as
I was environed with some thousands of Conquerors, and in the embraces of a
generous Prince, there came a young man of an excellent Mien, and in a Garb
which showed him to be of some quality, who desired to speak with me, promising
a piece of intelligence worthy my knowledge.

I must confess I trembled at it, fearing it might be some discovery where
Nicomedes was concealed, and therefore I would have put him off; but he so
pressingly importuned my attention, that in the end I gave it him; but instead
of what he promised, he plunged a Dagger into my breast up to the Handle, and
would have doubled his stroke, but that I had strength enough left to force it
out of his hand, and return his bloody present, at which he fell, and had only
Life enough left to say, That he was Neoptolemus's Son; and that since I had
destroyed his Father and Family, having no other way to act his Revenge, he had
chosen that, which he hoped his high wrongs and necessitated condition would
apologize for.

His immediate Death saved him from those torments the rage and grief of the
Soldiers had designed him; but such abundance of blood gushed out of my wound,
that I soon after fell, and 'twas with much Art and pain, that my wound was
bound up.

The generous Atafernes took me into his Littor; and the Palace in Nicomedia
being the nearest place we could retire unto, we advanced thither.

Never was there Triumph so sad as this, and never was there Laurel and Cypress
so exactly mingled; the whole Army marched by the Littor carrying the Trophies
of their success, and washing them with their tears; so that when the King, the
Queen, and the Princesses, came to meet us at the Court-gate, to honor and
share in the joy of our success, they found so many evincements of grief in all
the Armies looks, that they knew not what to fear, and yet did fear every
thing; the sadded Soldiers which marched in the first Ranks, gave so imperfect
an account of what they were demanded, as did also all those which followed,
that their eyes were their first and truest Intelligencers; and though at the
same time they saw Atafernes alive, and free, yet seeing me with so little life
by him, and all disfigured with blood, it seemed to chase away all their causes
of satisfaction; and I found by as sad, as high a proof, that my life was not
inconsiderable to so many eminent Persons; and above all, to that fair Princess
to whose Service I had devoted it: The shrieks she made when she saw me in so
dangerous a case, drew me from that Dyingslumber I had been in, and as soon as
my eyes were open, they met with hers, which suddenly after wept such a deluge
of tears, that had I not ascribed them all to her Noble Brother's condition, I
had neither deplored my own, nor her grief.

I would have forced my self to rise, but I found I could not; which she
perceiving, forbad me any more attempts of that nature; by which I had scarce
strength enough humbly to acknowledge her care.

This made them the more hasten up to the Prince's Chamber, where he would have
me lie, causing another Bed to be set up. We were no sooner in a condition to
receive a visit, than the two Princesses, and the King gave us one (a sudden
indisposition of the Queen's then confining her from stirring out) who after he
had spent some time with me in evincements of his satisfaction for what I had
done, and sorrow for what I was reduced to, and in kindnesses to his Son; he
went immediately after to the Queen's apartment, out of which he seldom did
use to stir, when any distemper tied her unto it: The two Princesses stayed
with Atafernes, who perhaps to oblige me (for I believe he then suspected my
Passion) desired his Favourite-Sister to entertain me, whilst he did the
Princess Roxana.

That admirable person did me therefore the honor to come near my Bed, and
told me; I see, Callimachus, how deceitful and uncertain all humane things are;
for had I know that this day you should have brought us home Victory, and
Atafernes, I could not have believed there had been unhappiness enough left to
have clouded our satisfaction; but your wounds and danger make it impossible at
once to express gratitude, and joy.

Madam, (I replied) there can hardly be a higher evincement how unestimable
most Worldly things deserve to be, than to see that so inconsiderable a persons
condition should cloud and disturb yours; but, Madam, how sad soever it
appears, I have yet sufficient cause to bless the gods, which have given me
life enough to deliver you from your Enemies, your Brother from his
imprisonment, and to see you once more, to give you such an account of the
honor of your Commands: And possibly now there would remain no addition to
these happinesses, but that I left the World, lest the future actions of my
life might be inferior to these, and consequently more unfit for you to
receive, or me to pay.

The Actions you have performed (the Princess replied) in a few days, are so
signal and eminent, that upon the glory of that stock you may spend a longer
life than your condition or courage will (I fear) lend you; and though in the
future you should never more oblige us, what you have done already has left
such deep impressions in me, that I must lose my memory to lose the sense I
have of them; your favors being of the like quality with Life, which needs not
still be renewed; it is first principle being so powerful, that it still carries
it self on in the strength and vigor thereof.

Madam, I answered, by so telling me of what I have done, you tell me what I
should have done, had my power of serving you proportioned my desire of it; and
though you could flatter me into a belief, that you are so good as to credit
what you say; yet that Rule I have set up to my self in serving you, does so
far transcend all you have spoke, that whilst I do any thing short of what may
be done, and whilst I ever intermit acting at that Rate, I am such a reproach
unto my self, that my dissatisf^ction surpasses whatever you can imagine of it.
At the end of these words, Mithridates came hastily into the Chamber, with what
did more wound me than the young Neoptolemus Sword; 'twas with News that the
King of Cyprus with a vast Fleet appeared before the Harbor, and had sent some
of his Nobility to advertise him thereof, and to beg his permission to land,
that he might offer his Forces to him, and his service to the Princess Statira.

Oh Gods! continued Callimachus, how great a torment this was you only know,
and I only did feel; 'twas such, that before I could be master over my own
motions, I sighed so loud, that the Princess not only took notice of it, but
had the goodness to enquire what had caused it: I was a thousand times going to
tell her the truth, and then in a Sea of blood to have expiated the confidence
of that discovery, as well as to have avoided that indignation it could not but
have raised in her; but then the Majesty which shined in her eyes, which could
not inspire me with higher admiration, than it did with reverenc and respect,
stifled those thoughts even in their Birth, and rendered them guilty only in
design, not in act.

But I was then as much troubled what to say, as I had been what not to say;
and finding no better expedient than to attribute it to the pain of my wound, I
made use of that, whereat she assumed so high a grief, that I persuaded my self
she could not then entertain any other guest.

Mithridates observing the visible sadness in the Princess's eyes and looks,
came toward her, and asked her, What could in such general causes of joy make
her express so little of it? To which she replied, Whilst the recovery of her
Brother's wounds was so uncertain, and mine so dangerons, the dictates of
Nature and Gratitude would sufficiently apologize for her sorrow.

The King answered, there is so little fear for the one, and so much glory in
the other, that I must not only desire but expect, that you will divest your
self of whatever may render you unlike that Statira, whose shadow has conquered
the King of Cyprus.

The Princess made no reply, but by bowing her self seemed to say, she had too
long practiced obedience, than to decline it.

The King at least (I believe) placed that interpretation upon what she had
done, for he suddenly after went to the Port to receive his designed
Son-in-law, who made so magnifick a descent from his Fleet, that all concluded
he could not be less than a King, and a Lover.

In the mean while, the fair Statira continued alone in Atafernes Chamber, her
Sister after Mithridates was gone, returning to Monyma, who otherwise had been
left unaccompanied.

That generous Prince who perfectly loved her, beginning then to consider, that
to be Ascanius's (for so the Cyprian King was called) he must de deprived of
her, told her; Would to the Gods, Statira, you did not consider duty above
friendship, for then I might be certain to enjoy your Company whilst I enjoyed
my life; but now a Fathers power will give that happiness to a Stranger, which
otherwise I should have possessed; and that affection I have for you, must
endure an absence which cannot more bless him, than trouble me.

These words he spoke so loud, that I not only heard them, but also that she
thus answered him; If it were lawful to break those Ties the gods have confined
us unto, the King of Cyprus should have been exempted from giving both himself
and me this trouble; but since the violating a Divine Rule cannot bring a
satisfaction so great, as the sin is, I shall strive to evidence as little
discontent in obeying Mithridates, as I am certain I should have done if he had
commanded me not to receive any addresses, which are to banish me from
Atafernes, in whose affection and company I find so high a contentment, that I
am capable of begging no higher than to be continued in it: Since, replied the
Prince, you are devoted to that obedience, ah that Callimachus were King of
Cyprus, I could then find some consolation in my loss, and without reluctance
part with my best happiness, to him I esteemed best worthy of it: Blush not
Statira, at what I have spoke; for since I am unable any way to evince my
friendship in Actions, deny me not the privilege of doing it in wishes.

This (continued Callimachus) was so strange and unexpected an expression, and
consequently had so universal an operation on me, that my wound gushed out a
bleeding, and thereby so entirely conquered those few spirits I had left, that
casting open my arms, and fetching a deep groan, I fell into a swound.

The Princess was not so confounded at what her Brother had spoke, but that she
had heard my last manifestation of life; so that turning her eyes toward me,
she saw my condition, and therefore shrieking out, she went hastily into the
Antichamber, and called in all the servants which waited there, by whose help
I was soon brought to my self again, and the Surgeons which some ran for,
having bound up my wound, desired all persons to leave the room, lest I might
repeat the like sad accident: Statira, who possibly was glad of such a
pretense, civilly to decline her Brothers company, whilst he was addicted to
discourses of that nature, having first desired me to take a special care of my
self, which the more powerfully to invite me to, she told me she should receive
it as an obligation, immediately withdrew, and left me to contend with
difficulties too strong for me, though I had not been reduced to a weakness,
which for the many causes I had to despair, I rather wished were greater, than
less.

Atafernes, not to oppose the prescriptions the Surgeons had made,
continuing silent, thereby gave me the uninterrupted leave of entertaining my
own thoughts, which were so confused, that for a while I could not reduce them
to any method: but as soon as I had in some degree composed them, I began to
consider, that Fortune continued her usual practice, and by mingling felicities
and torments, gave me still at once cause to adore and hate her: The glories
which the beginning of that day had thrown upon me, and the miseries which the
conclusion of it had involved me in, appeared so admirable, that though I
enjoyed those, and felt these, yet I could hardly believe either: but when I
began to consider that all my Victories made but an easier way for my Rival to
possess Statira; that the nearer I had acted to deserve her, made my
deprivation of her the more sensible; and when that by a miracle her generous
Brother had let fall expressions whereby without a crime I might in some
measure have disclosed what her thoughts were toward me, before she had passed
any engagement to Ascanius, or have found so much cause of despair, as I might
no longer have flattered my self into a suspense more unsupportable than the
highest effect of it; then to fall into a fainting which had hindered it; I
could no longer contain my self, but by loud exclaimings, condemned that Fate
which I wanted power to prevent or alter.

Atafernes finding thereby that his silence was so far from contributing to my
good, that he apprehended it had done the contrary, soon broke it, and after
some introductory discoursers, having first commanded all those which in the
outward Chamber might have been within hearing, to keep at a greater distance;
told me, That friendship, Callimachus, which we have contracted, merits we
should have nothing in reserve to each other; and if it does not confine you to
tell me all the secrets you know, yet at least it does to acquaint me with the
truth of those I shall discover: In a word, either my observations have
strangely deluded me; or you have something in your breast, which though I may
be concerned in, yet I am kept a Stranger unto; and though possibly I might
hitherto have had but cause to suspect it, yet what these few hours has
produced, makes me confident of it; so that if any thing can persuade me to
excuse your so long silence, it will be your persevering in it no longer.

You cannot but imagine (generous Princes) that what Atafernes then spoke, made
me repeat as high Emotions as any that day I had been invaded with; for I found
my self necessitated either to deny the truth, and thereby become guilty to my
Friend; or reveal it, and thereby become guilty to my Princess: but at length,
finding to adore her could not be a greater duty, than to conceal any thing
from her Noble Brother, and be a crime; especially, he then extorting a
confession from me by the powerfullest Rack, the conjuration of a Friend,
blushing and trembling all-over, and fetching a deep sigh, I spoke to him to
this effect: If, generous Prince, I have concealed any thing from you, it is
that only which I thought unfit I my self should know; and I was too much
concerned to continue the blessing of your esteem, to acquaint you with what
might too justly invite you to deprive me of it: but since what I am to say is
a pure effect of my obedience to your command, I do with less trouble lay my
Secret before you, knowing you are too virtuous to require a discovery, and
then abhor me for making it.

Here I paused a little, being startled at what I was about to say; but finding
I had said so much, that not to speak more might be as ill resented as if I
spoke all, I thus continued; I must confess, great Prince, I must confess the
beauties of your admirable Sister gave me the confidence of lifting up my eyes
toward her, or rather denied me the possibility of doing otherwise; and ever
since I first beheld her, I have languished away in flames which only her eyes
are able to kindle, and which death only is able to quench; it is therefore that
long since I had embraced that cure, had I not thought I was obliged as much to
be just to her, in punishing my sin, as I had been to her beauties, in
committing it; and therefore not to put a period to my torments was too much a
duty, to let the ease of ending it persuade me to so criminal an Act: this,
great Prince, has hitherto kept me from laying violent hands upon my self, and
perhaps I might not lie if I assured you, I have had as high a dispute, not to
embrace that remedy, as I have had to avoid that presumption which will render
it necessary.

This is that concealment I have so long labored under: and if now I have
discovered it, permit me to say it springs from a friendship as great as my
passion; and nothing inferior unto that, could have made me discover this.

Now you know my miserable condition, be not, I beseech you, so cruel as to
deny me your pity, if you do your pardon.

After I had done speaking, Atafernes was some time before he answered me: but
at last he thus spoke; If I have been so long silent, it is not that I am
surpised with what you have now said; for I consider it rather as a
confirmation of what I formerly thought, than a disclosure of what I was
ignorant of, but yet I see so infinite a distance between what you aim at, and
what possibly I wish you may possess, that I do not only believe your
unhappiness is great, but also I highly sympathize with you in it.

Statira's disposition, Mithridates's authority and engagement, Ascanius's
passion and presence, joined with the ignorance of your extraction, are
difficulties so insuperable, that to assure you of all my assistance, is to
promise you at once whatever I am capable of, and yet nothing: But yet not to
leave any thing unessay'd, and to let you see I am your Friend in
impossibilities, as well as in things of hope, I will not only let her know
your passion, but employ all my interest in her, to make her approve and accept
it.

I will tell her, That the Sword which has captivated Kings, will present her
with Kingdoms: that virtue is preferable to power; and that being more a friend
to her Happiness, than her Titles, I will conjure her to elect Callimachus
without a Crown, sooner than Ascanius with one.

This, dear Callimachus, is all I can do, and this therefore is the least I
will do; wherein if the success answers not my endeavors, be confident I shall
resent as vast a trouble thereat, as you your self can, and where my power
cannot serve you, my friendship shall suffer with you.

Generous Prince (I replied, bowing my self as low as my wounds would admit)
you have already manifested so much obligingness and condescension to me, that
I find my scores of gratitude are as unpayable to the brother, as those of
adoration are to the Sister: you have done so much in the best extreme, that
nothing but my acceptance thereof could make me do the like in the worst. But,
Sir, I have not told you my Secret to invite your assistance, but to illustrate
my obedience; and if I expect your favor in any thing, it is in your pardon,
not your solicitation; which latter yet I cannot more want, than I desire the
former. No, Sir, though my Star's have destined me to a passion for the
Princess without hope, yet it is not without satisfaction; and what I should
not patiently undergo as their imposition, I shall as her due.

Possibly (said Atafernes, interrupting me) You cannot think this Discourse
fitter for you, than I do, that acting the contrary is so for me; and therefore
as I do not quarrel with you for making such desires, so I shall expect you
will not be offended with me, if I grant them not: Mithridates owes her unto
you, and she owes her self unto you; and though you have not a Kingdom to give
her, yet this day you have given her Father one, and preserved him another,
whereby you have made his condition such, that he need not find that a want in
you.

Doubtless he would have given you Statira this Morning to have been certain of
what you have placed him in this Evening; therefore why should you despair he
would buy success at a higher Rate than he will reward it? for my Fathers
promises to the King of Cyprus, they were made but to engage him to undertake
that which you have performed without him, and thereby not only removed the
invitation to that performance, but secured Mithridates against the Cyprian's
resentment at it, should he have any: besides, our new Lover may be persuaded
to lay aside that Title by Statira's appearing averse unto it, which if the
King once give her a Rise to do, let it be my care to improve it to that height
your condition will need, and my friendship will therefore undeniably
endeavor: it is not a new thing for a Lover to fail of his Mistress's
affection, nor for a Father in that case to decline making his Daughter
miserable, to prevent a strangers becoming so.

He will more secure his Empire, and probably enlarge it in tying you by his
alliance to his service, than by giving his Daughter to any Neighbor Prince;
the doing the like is an action so common, that it seldom produces an effect
which is extraordinary; but the bestowing of Statira upon Callimachus, will not
appear more rare to the World, than 'twill prove advantageous to him; for what
returns may not be expected, when the largest cause of gratitude is placed upon
a person the most replenished with it; and to whom the gods have given so much
virtue and courage, that thereby his power of being thankful, will equal his
will!

As for Statira, I strangely mistake, if she will not prefer him who deserves a
Crown, before him that only wears one; and when I shall acquaint her with your
passion for her, and my friendship for you, possibly if the one does not move,
the other may; and the just ascendent she has over Mithridates, may prevail
with him to free her from Ascanius; and your repeated services may in time
force him to believe no Reward under her deserves that Name; so that when it
comes in competition, whether he must do nothing, or so much, he will rather
elect This, than that.

Ah Sir, I replied, Do not, I beseech you, so much as mention acquainting the
fair Statira with my flame: I am scarce able to undergo my own knowledge of it,
and therefore shall never be able to support hers: your pardoning my Crime is
so much above my desert; and your offering to attempt to reward it, is so much
above my hope, that I cannot be that greateful person you were pleased to speak
me, if I did not hinder your undertaking a design which must lose you, your
Father and your Sister, and that too upon my account: No, generous Prince, let
not my passion make any other unhappy, nor give me so low an opinion of my
offense, as to find by such an experiment, as great a misery as it self can
befall me by it.

My afflictions will either be supportable, and then they will not need your
care; or unsupportable, and then my death will render me incapable of it.

Do not, I beg you, believe I do this out of a modesty which none could want
that had so many pregnant causes to raise it; but out of conviction that I am
tied in duty, when she knows I have done her the highest injury out of my
power, to do her also the highest Right is in my power to present her; to dare
to have said I love her, is That; and to dare to kill my self afterward, is
this; so that if you would not have me punish my self, now I have accused my
self, let that be a secret to you, which shall be one besides to all the World.

Many such implorings, continued Callimachus, I was forced to make, and many
such reasons to present to his consideration, before I could extort that
promise from him which I had so passionately desired; which soon after I had
obtained, a Gentleman came to tell us the Cyprian King was entered the Palace,
and was gone to wait upon the Queen and the Princesses; and not long after
Mithridates accompanied with Ascanius, came to visit Atafernes. Gods! What
agitations was I exercised under, when I not only saw my Rival come into the
Chamber, but found him a person of an admirable good Mien, and of a fashion not
inferior: I must acknowledge I was so mean, as then to hope I might discover in
his Discourse what might have secured those fears his outside had raised in me;
but it was but just I should be defeated of so low and unworthy a hope, and so
I was; for I found in what he spoke to the Prince, he was as much beholding to
Nature, and Education, for the gifts of his mind, as he had been to either, for
those of his Body.

After his civilities were performed to Ataphernes, the King told him; This
room, Sir, contains a person worthy your knowledge, and by whose courage and
success you have enjoyed so peaceable an entry here.

The merits of Callimachus (said Ascanius) are so well known to me though his
person be not, that though the motives be very high which make me desire his
friendship, yet they cannot exceed the passion I have to acquire, or merit it.
After these words, he saluted me with so much obligingness, and with so good
grace, that in spite of all the causes I had to abhor him, I could not abstain
from giving him a Reply, that relished of that civility which had acted over my
resentments such a Conquest.

After many discourses of an usual quality, Mithridates took a Rise to inform
him by retail, of all those transactions which had happened so recently within
and near Nicomedia; and did it with such elogies in my favor, that Ascanius
cried out; Happy Callimachus! that not only performed the highest things, but
acted them for and before the persons most worthy of them: would to the gods I
had by all my blood purchased that glory, which has cost you but a part of
yours.

Mithridates, who found by this ardent ejaculation, that the subject of his
discourse had rather raised Ascanius envy, than satisfaction, by degrees
disintangled himself out of what he had so far engaged in, and then conducted
him to his apartment, where all things relished of the highest Luxury Asia was
never guilty of, or the profusest Actor of it, ever practiced.

He was not long gone, when the Queen (then recovered of her indisposition)
with the two Princesses came to visit Atafernes, who earnestly enquiring how he
made his first addresses, received an assurance from both those which were
least concerned in it, that never man had in such an occasion, acquitted
himself with so much gallantry: His humility to Statira was at once full of
deep respect, and of Majesty; as if thereby he would show, to be a King, and
her Slave, were not inconsistent, but rather that this Title did help to
heighten that; his looks had in them at once so much passion mingled with
reverence, that either seemed to be as incapable of addition, as change; and
his discourse and entertianment had peculiar charms: so that in effect there
were hardly any of the senses which found not in him, sufficient to captivate
them.

These, and many other expressions as wounding to me, fell from Monyma and
Roxana, which the obliging Atafernes easily guest, and therefore made the more
haste to put a period to them; which when he had done, the Queen leaving her
two Companions with their Brother, came to me, and observing they were probably
engaged in a discourse with him, which might not suddenly interrupt hers with
me, she began it in these words: If at your return with so much glory, I did
not come to congratulate it with you, I may truly say, you are the cause
thereof: for when I saw the bloody rate of your purchase, a sudden horror so
invaded me, that till now I could not free my self from so many of its effects,
as to be able to visit you, and to let you know why I did not so, sooner.

Madam, I replied, that little blood I have spent in your service, is too
prodigally paid, by what you now are pleased to act, and speak; and had I
known my wounds had so sensibly touched you, they would have been more painful
to me upon that account than their own.

I should (she answered blushing) have believed those words, had they been
spoken to me at Miletus, or were I a person not far from hence, who though I
must confess merits them better, yet perhaps would not receive them with that
satisfaction I should, if I thought them not words of Civility, rather than
Truth.

Madam, I replied, (being somewhat moved to be still struck by her in so
sensible a place, and, if possibly, to make her think she was mistook) permit
me to say, that had you never given me cause any more to doubt your words, than
I have given you to doubt mine; you had been free from the trouble of such
discourses, and I from the unhappiness of your believing I deserved them.

Alas Callimachus (said she, interrupting me) why do you delight so much to
torment me, as not only to mind me of my unhappiness but to acquaint me you
think I was the Author of it: No, I attest the gods, I would now, even with joy
descend from the Throne, to be that to you, which I am to Mithridates; and
rather be his who deserves the greatest Empire of the World, than his who
possesses it: but (she continued, letting some few tears steal from her eyes)
since the gods have otherwise designed it, I beg but this, That you will esteem
it a punishment sufficient for me to have lost you, and do not augment it so
much as to let me see another has got you; this is all the unfortunate Monyma
desires; and if there be any unreasonableness therein, ascribe it to a passion
which makes me act more illegitimate things for you, than I ask of you.

She went away at the end of these words without staying for an answer; and
telling the company a relapse of her indisposition was going to assault her,
she hastily retired to her apartment; and not long after the hour of rest being
come, Atafernes enjoining me to try if I could take any, and endeavoring the
like himself, thereby gave me a license to reflect upon some things past, which
so powerfully entertained my thoughts, that I could not for some time so much
suppress them, as by sleep to enjoy that refreshment my mind and my body but
too much wanted.

These last words of the Queen, I soon concluded, sprang from a passion which
would not be easily quenched, and which had a being would so much interrupt any
progress in that I paid the fair Statira, that it self would have been a
sufficient impediment, had I conquered the misfortune of many greater.

I was too proud at my insensibility, when I saw a Queen weeping before me, and
one so full of youth, and beauty, that she could not be a greater wonder for
her Charms, than I was in resisting them.

I must confess I was a little grieved, that so signal an evincement of my
constancy should not be known to her who was the cause of it; but then when I
considered that the misfortune could not be greater, than consequently the
merit of it was, I concluded she deserved all I could suffer, and therefore I
had more cause to rejoice I had done so much, than to be troubled that she knew
no more.

Whilst I entertained these parts of my fate, it was only with sorrow: but
when I thought upon those parts which related to Ascanius, how he was come to
rob me of my hopes, which was all I had left, or indeed ever had, and how a few
days would invest him in that felicity I was to lose, Rage and Resentment so
entirely governed all my faculties, that if I did not follow the extremest
dictates of them, 'twas only because I thought them too low and
disproportionate to their cause.

At last, not having strength enough to persevere in such entertainments, sleep
by degrees began to conquer me, and held me a Prisoner for some few hours,
which yet it could not have so long done, but by letting Dreams continue what
my waking had begun; whereby, and by the emotion of the precedent day, the next
Morning I found my wound was so inflamed, and my Body so feverish, that the
Surgeons doubted of my Life, and informed Atafernes so much; who easily
imagining the cause, having freed the Room of all which waited in it, told me
so many flattering things, and then so reiterately vowed if I mended not, he
would tell Statira what caused my languishments, that partly through hope, but
much more for fear of that, I began patiently to receive those Medicines which
the Physicians and the Surgeons prescribed, whereby in few days I was past
all danger of Death, as I wished I had been of Life. I knew not with what
design I lived; and yet I could not oppose my doing so, carried on by an
internal motion, whose cause I was as ignorant of, as unable to resist its
effects.

Mithridatia, every day she visited her Brother, had so much humility as to
enquire of me of my own health, and as my answers were of its impairing or
mending, so her looks put on melancholy or satisfaction.

Atafernes was so generous as constantly to enquire of the Princess what
progress Ascanius had made in the acquisition of her esteem, yet could never
learn any thing from her, but that her duty to Mithridates had left her nothing
but obedience.

This strange perseverance and submissiveness that generous Prince acquainted
me with, and thereby prepared me to receive a stroke, which soon after wounded
me; but alas! not enough to relieve my pain, but increase and continue it.

'Twas with the fatal News, that at the expiration of fourteen days Mithridates
had publicly declared the Nuptials between Statira and Ascanius should be
celebrated; who thereupon sent half of his Fleet into the Euxine Sea, to
conquer what that Element had saved of Nicomedes, Ariobarzanes, and Murena's
ruins: The revolt of Archilaus and Neoptolemus having deprived the Pontick King
of most of his Naval-forces, and his designed Son-in-law's being so strong,
that he rather thought that proportion of the largest, than the least;
reserving also the residue to carry back his Queen with more pomp into Cyprus,
which happy Country had been once destined to the Queen of Love, and now to a
Beauty which more justly merited that Title.

In the mean while Pharnaces returned with his Army, more troubled that his
Father had by Atafernes received his deliverance, than if he had entirely
failed of it: and if he had any thoughts which refreshed him, they were only
those which did rise from the speedy probability of Statira's removal, and
consequently of his Brother's being thereby deprived of his powerfullest
Friend; and therefore he so incessantly pressed the speedy celebration of the
Nuptials, that thereby he gained as high an interest in Ascanius, as a
performance so acceptable to an impatient Lover could possibly procure.

At last the Eve of the longed-for day arrived, and now nothing was seen but
preparatives for celebrating of it, which was to produce the highest extremes
in the Cyprian King and me. The Armies had received orders to express their
Military joys in all those ways which could give the highest evidence of them;
the Streets were already beautified with triumphal Arches; The Courtiers did
all strive who should outshine each other; The Priests had prepared herds of
Sacrifices; And in a word, all things had put on their chearfullest looks, but
Statira, Atafernes, and I; the first continuing that same equal temper which
had been so long her practice, that I feared it was turned her Nature; the
second sympathizing in his Friends sorrows, wore them so visibly, that they
were at once both my comfort and my trouble; the third you may too too easily
imagine had such infinite causes of grief, that their effects were
proportionate.

Had it been the hour of my Death which was come so near me as the hour of
losing Statira, I should have considered it with much less trouble.

Sometimes I resolved to go and tell her I adored her with a passion which
could much rather make me elect the Grave, than to see her Ascanius's; and
though I was able to live and not possess her, yet I was unable to live and see
another do it, and then act that truth as well as speak it; sometimes I
resolved to let the Cyprian King know how absolutely impossible it was for him
to enjoy Statira, and I my life, and therefore that he must deprive me of This
to possess That, and thereby either avoid being sensible of my loss, or hinder
him from acting it: sometimes too I thought of going to Mithridates, of laying
my Services before him; and of acquainting him Ascanius had never acted, but
what all men living would, adored the highest Beauty, and desired to enjoy her;
that my Sword had put him past the needing such a Friend, or at least the
buying him at such a Rate; that if he would make her the blessing of my
Services, I would engage to carry his Ensigns where the Roman Eagles yet could
never fly, and seat her in a Throne as little unworthy of her, as the Earth
could produce; that as soon as Mithridatia's Beauty was as well known to the
World as to Ascanius, all the Kings of it would do more for hope of that Reward
than Ascanius could do for possessing it: sometimes too I was determined to
present my self to those Forces to whom I had so often showed the way to
Victory, and by disclosing my despair, have provoked their Swords to have cured
it.

These and many as extravagant thoughts were the productions of my distemper,
which when a little consideration had let me see they were, I cast them off as
such.

But though my Reason showed me what I was not to do, yet it could not what I
was to do; so that when the Night came, the last Night of all my hopes, I was
as unresolved what to do, as I was certain, doing nothing, what I was to suffer.

I had some little glimpse of comfort, to feel I was not able to go to the
Temple, and be a looker on, lest thereby I might have been snatched from my
self, and forced into a Revenge, which I had so long endeavored to reason (at
least persuade) my self out of; but this appearing only a hindering of me from
doing ill, and not any thing of advancement in my doing well, I had as little
time to reflect upon it, as I have spent in telling it.

The generous Atafernes did scarce abandon me one moment, knowing my condition
needed all the consolation, though it was above all service of a Friend. The
Night was not an hour old, when Ascanius leading in Statira, came into
Atasernes Chamber, which bare sight had near overthrown thrown all the sober
thoughts of the preceding day, but they stayed not long, Mithridates carrying
them away to see some fires of joy the Nicomedians had made to grace the Eve of
the intended Marriage: some two hours after, Atafernes and I, having disengaged
our selves from our many Visitors, went to try if we could walk in a Gallery
contiguous to his Bedchamber; where we had not long been, when Statira and
Roxana came into it to visit their Brother, having missed him in his Chamber.

That obliging Prince so dexterously managed the business, that heg ot his
elder Sister to him at one end of the Gallery, and lest me with my Princess at
the other.

I thought this was an opportunity not to be lost, and yet could not imagine
how it might be improved, but to begin a Descourse which might give me the
opportunity to say something, if by a Miracle I should find a Rise for my so
doing: I told her, You are now (Madam) going to place Ascanius in a felicity so
great, that if thereby you could place your self in a resembling one, you would
not leave your Servants any thing to wish, or your self to desire.

I know not (she replied) whether my satisfaction will be great, I am certain
my obedience is: but acting what lies on my part, I shall have this comfort,
that if the end answers not my expectation, I may condemn my Fate, but not my
self.

Ah Madam! I answered, Permit me to believe you go upon a clearer Principle
than you mention; for else what comfort can it be to you, if Ascanius should
not still be as much your Servant and Adorer, as he is now to know your
misfortune is an effect of your virtue; and that your obedience which you so
highly magnify, should make you more miserable than the declining of it could
possibly have done? No, Madam, I cannot but believe, if it were fit for me to
beg a knowledge of the Truth, or that you should condescend so low as to speak
it, but that the Charms of Ascanius's Person and Conversation contribute as
much to his happiness, as your obedience to Mithridates.

You make me blush (the Princess replied, passing her hand before her Face);
but yet if you are not seemingly but really concerned in what you say, I will
satisfy your doubts.

Concerned Madam! I hastily answered; Yes Madam, I am concerned, and shall be
whilst I live, in all things relating to you; and therefore, Madam, permit me
to beg of you a certainty of that upon which I must ground all my felicity or
trouble, because by it I must judge of yours.

Then, said Statira, I do assure you it, as a real Truth, that nothing renders
Ascanius more acceptable to me, than Mithridates Commands, and possibly I
should not lie if I said nothing else; but then I tell you as great a truth
when I say, That that it self is more powerful with me than any thing which can
flow from my own inclinations; for I know by observing those I may err, but by
observing that I cannot.

For as to what you mentioned, that it would add unto my trouble to consider
that my Virtue occasioned it; I answer, it would much more afflict me to avoid
an evil by an evil, than to endure an evil for having done what was good: for
the event is only in the power of the gods, but the performance of Duty is in
my own.

Never, continued Callimachus, never did any words at once so much cure and so
much wound as these; and never was any confidence higher rewarded and higer
punished, than mine, which asking such a question, received such an answer.

But, not to appear too much surprised at what she had last said, I replied; I
have heard, Fortune delights to make some men perfectly happy, and some as
perfectly miserable; which last I have, and do experiment, and the first you
have now justified in Ascanius: for nothing could cloud his felicity, but to
know, your obedience only does invest him in it, and that he is as unlikely to
know, as not knowing it he is unlikely to think any happiness is equal to his;
or indeed if he knew it, it might still leave him in that condition: for what
you say would not be highly considerable, when what you do is so infinitely so:
Nor, Madam, will I presume to argue in the furture against your obedience,
since I feel you are so unchangeably fixed upon it, and so far engaged in it,
that though I might convince your Reason, I should not be able to change your
Resolution; Pardon me, Madam, if I have made use of an expression, which had
been too arrogant had I spoke it upon my own score; and may be pardonable from
so great a goodness as yours, it being spoken on your generous Brother's, who
will not only by your Marriage be deprived of his powerfullest supporter, even
when Pharnaces's anger will most need your continuing such; but also tear you
from him, whom he as certainly values above all things, as you merit to be so;
And if, Madam, after what I have said, I may be permitted to mention any thing
so low and inconsiderable as my own contentment, excuse me if I say, After you
are Queen of Cyprus, I shall never expect to see any: the sadness that Title
will involve your Noble Brother in, were there no other consideration, will
strike me with a grief I should much rather elect to dye by, than to live under.

This, generous Princes, (continued Callimachus) was all I did say, and indeed
all I durst; and I had more reason to think I had spoke too much than too
little, when I heard her thus answer; Would to the gods, Callimachus, I had
missed this last discourse with you, for it has left so deep an impression in
me, that I can hardly hope it will ever be defaced.

I confess I tremble when I think upon Pharnaces humor, and how naked
Atafernes will be left when I am removed at a distance, unable to do him those
Services my interest in my Father gave me hitherto power to pay him. I cannot
too, without horror, reflect upon my eternal separation from that poor Prince,
in whose Society and friendship I have enjoyed a happiness I must despair of
finding in all things else: I must also confess, I resent no little trouble at
my being to be banished from Callimachus, who has placed on me so many
indelible Obligations, and in whom without flattery I have found such eminent
and singular worth, that I know nothing he could wish that I do not wish him:
nay, I attest the gods, had they made me the Distributor of their Rewards, I
would joyfully have placed him in whatever he ambitions, and that without any
reservation: This, generous Callimachus, is all my unhappy condition makes me
able to do for you, and therefore I hope will be accepted of by you,

Madam, I replied, prostrating my self at her Feet (which I the boldlier did,
because I saw Roxana and Atafernes had their Backs toward us, and were looking
out of a Window) what you are, and what you say, makes me attest the self-same
gods as my Witnesses, That had I by Birth or Virtue possessed all the Empires
of the World, I would have laid all them and my self at your Feet; and have
more gloried in doing that, than in commanding them: But since the gods have
concealed from me my Birth, and given me only a Sword to raise my self with,
whereby I am unable to act any thing worth your acceptance, permit me at least
to say, what my performances should have said for me; that never, never was
there any passion like to that I have for your Service, and never any life
could be so nobly employed, and ended as I should think mine would be were it
to be spent, and were I to dye therein; nor would I ever desire a higher
recompense for doing so, than I should receive in doing so: Possibly, Madam,
studying too much for what I should say, I mind not well what I say, and
therein may have offended; by which you may in some measure judge what an
unfortunate person I am, that even for those expressions by which I would
deserve your favor, I must absolutely need it.

But (Madam) will you pardon me, if I am forced to ask you if you do not think
there is as just a debt due to a Friend that is also a Brother, as to a Father?
and whether you have endeavored all you can to pay that, before you engage
your self so positively to pay this. I know (Madam) I could scarce be guilty of
this confidence, nor were it indeed pardonable, but upon the score of the
Prince Atafernes, whose contentment you have so often recommended to my care,
that I had rather trouble you in obeying that command, than avoid doing it by
so criminal a silence.

The fair Statira having first commanded and made me to rise: told me, Your
care for my Brother which I have so often recommended to you, is so much my
desire, and has been so much my satisfaction, that I cannot condemn any
production of it, though this does both violate what you even now promised, and
increases a grief which is of it self already but too unsupportable; and
therefore I will not scruple to assure you, that in the sense of my being to be
banished from A^afernes, I have been so importunate with Mithridates to free me
from Ascanius addresses, that you cannot think me so religious a worshipper of
Obedience, as I fear he does the contrary.

Let this truth therefore which I have now spoke, and which I am resolved never
to speak again, or ever thought to disclose, be sufficient to absolve me in
your judgment; and hence forwards do not condemn, but pity an unfortunate
person, who having tried all just ways to avoid being so, has at last elected
to submit to a Fate, which she cannot decline, but by what would render her too
worthy of it.

Here (said Callimachus) that admirable Equality which this fair Princess had
so unintermissively practiced, was overcome by some tears which the end of her
Discourse drew from her, which suddenly after being ashamed of, and to let me
fee hers had rather been surprised than conquered, drying up her fair eyes, and
putting on her usual looks she told me: I know not, Callimachus, what influence
you have ov^^ me, but you have made me do and say more than I thought even
(...) nes himself could.

And since you have so far pierced into my secrets, allow me a little to
enquire after yours, and tell me what Discourse you could have with the Queen,
which could send her so hastily, and in such disorders from you? for if I be
not much deceived, her Eyes were full of Tears, and her Face of sadness, when
she retired.

Ah, Madam, I replied, After what you have told me, do not think I am capable
of doing any thing but of lamenting your condition, and of offering you my
Sword and Life to redress it.

The gods forbid (she hastily answered) you should have so criminal a thought:
No, Callimachus, I tell you positively, if ever you should again mention such a
thing to me, much more endeavor it, you would cast me into greater miseries
than you would free me from, and convert that high friendship I have for you,
into a proportionate hate.

Before the Princess had fully ended these words, Pharnaces came into the
Gallery, and thereby put a period to an entertainment which had darkly given me
some small satisfaction, and had clearly discovered, that was all I was to
expect.

As soon as the Princesses and Pharnaces were gone, I gave Atafernes a million
of acknowledgments for that opportunity I had derived from his favor, and an
account how I had employed it.

I will not trouble you with a relation of those generous offers he made me of
acting himself what Statira's commands had bound me from; nor of those reasons
and prayers I made use of to divert him from it. Neither will I tell you how I
entertained my self that fatal night, during which I slept as little as I do
now; being too sensibly afflicted with the considerations, that it should be
the last of my hopes; and that my misery was denied the common consolation of
having it build the felicity of my Mistress, who in one performance was to make
her self and me unhappy. Nor indeed can I tell you all those confused thoughts
my Love and Despair dictated to me, which left me not till the day appeared,
and that the hurry and noise of the preparatives for the Nuptials, made me to
begin to feel I was to provide to endure an unhappiness I was not able to
prevent.

Here Callimachus observing the heat of the Sun began to be too offensive, and
by this time being come to the River Cyris (which not many furlongs off,
continuing still navigable, falls into the Euphrates) the banks whereof were
shaded with diverse Trees which might afford an obliging shelter against that
Enemy they endeavored to avoid, desired Artabbanes and Artavasdes to take the
benefit of that natural defense, whilst his Servants would prepare an
Entertainment as good as the place would afford.

Our two Heroes had been so pleased with his Relation, that (doubtless) had
they not had more care of him, than of themselves, they would have declined
accepting of such a proffer, especially in such a part of his History; but the
Laws of Respect being more prevalent than those of their curiosity, they left
the highway, and took a path which led them to a tust of Trees which had many
neighbors of the like bigness and growth; but when they came thither, they saw
an Horse tied unto an Oak, at the foot whereof the Master of him lay: His
Armor was all black, without any thing in it which might give the least rise
to judge the cause of his sadness; and his face was turned to the ground,
whereby they were disenabled from the hopes of discovering who he was by a
fight thereof.

The noise which they made when they came near him, did not alter the posture
he was in; whereby they concluded a deep sleep, or a proportionate sorrow had
seized upon him; and therefore they withdrew to another shady place not far
from thence: but before they had well seated themselves in it, they discovered
a Boat ascended the River by force of Oars, which soon after came to the Shore
on the same side they were of, out of which there landed a young Gentleman of
an admirable Mien; and soon after there descended out of the same Boat by his
help, two Ladies, which though veiled, had yet in their stature and fashion so
admirable a grace, and so like unto Parthenissa's and Altizera's, that had not
Artabbanes and Artavasdes esteemed it as great a crime to have thought any
therein could have resembled their Princesses, as an impossibility that these
could be them, they must have judged against their eyes, or have concluded the
first of them had seen a miracle, and the last what he would as much have
prized.

These two excelent persons being landed, there came out of the Boat after them
only three Women, and as many Men, who all together took the way to
neighbour-Village, to go to which they were unavoidably to pass not far from
the Thicket where Callimachus and his generous Friends were; who observing it,
took as concealed places, and as near the way as they could. Soon after the
Strangers coming thither, and finding they needed the shade they were in, that
lovely young man which led them, advised their continuance there, whilst he
sent one of the servants before to prepare an accommodation for them in the
Village, or to carry them to the Vestal Nuns at the Temple.

This motion being assented unto by all, and a servant employed about it; he
that made it, having first sent away all the rest at a good distance, embracing
and kissing the two Beauties which were with him, told them; This recompense of
my services which I now take, you will both confess is not above their merit:
for now I have brought you within a few ^urlongs of the place to which I
undertook to conduct you, where I hope the gods will soon give you cause to
believe they will henceforth reward that Constancy they have so long permitted
men to persecute; and possibly the mercy of preserving us in so long a journey,
is but an earnest of a greater.

I confess (one of the two replied) this last smile of Fortune is more than we
have been acquainted with this long while, and might therefore invite us to
believe she has a mind to be reconciled: but I have found her so treacherous,
that whilst she can be my Enemy, I must fear she will. You know too we are not
yet safe; neither do I know, till I hear of my generous Friend, whether my
condition will require being so: possibly what he may have heard already, has
occasioned him to do that which may invite me to believe, what I have been
freed from, may be that which I may wish had not been, and which I may have
cause to elect again.

Ah, Madam, the other replied, how preferable is your condition to mine! you
but fear that loss which I have already suffered. It Is true (said she that had
first spoken), but then you are to consider, though the generous Prince you
have lost, possessed your affection, yet there is a generous Prince living, who
deserves it, and who you have confessed had a juster title to it than he which
by death has now lost it. You are (Madam) a felicity great enough for two, and
therefore the gods have destined you to reward those two which have best
merited it.

Oh gods! Madam, the other replied, Be pleased not to wound me afresh with such
remembrances, mine being a grief, which if it be to be conquered, will be
better so, by time, than by discourse.

I know not, said the young Gentleman, what others may do hereafter, but for
the present I pretend so great an interest in you both, and you daily give me
such evincements of it, that if either of your former Lovers should chance to
see it, they would conclude me more happy than they could expect to be; and
think I had took too large a possession, to be cast out of it, or possibly that
'twere vvorth their pain to do it: But since your discourses rob you of your
quiet, and that sleep may restore you to it, I would move you till the return
of your Servant, to endeavor to take all this place will afford you.

This motion being relished by both, he took off a loose garment he had on, and
spreading it upon the ground, the two Ladies and he laid themselves upon it,
and having all of them embraced each other, endeavored in that posture to find
a repose which the distemper of their bodies, but much more those of their
minds did render so necessary.

All the while these lovely Strangers were thus discoursing, and thus doing,
Artabbanes and Artavasdes were in transports higher than till then they had
ever been acquainted with: for though many things in those two Ladies resembled
Parthenissa and Altezeera, yet their voices did it in such perfection, that our
Heroes were often going openly to have resolved their doubts, and had certainly
done so, if their immodest kisses and embraces had not assured them of thelr
mistake.

Artabbanes could much sooner believe his Princess was revived, than that she
should be unchaste; and Artavasdes, as perfect a Lover as he was, could easilier
believe that another might be like Altezeera, than that she could do things so
unlike her self: so that whatever hopes or thoughts their ears and sight had
given them, were destroyed by the actions of those two fair Strangers.

A thousand times they ran over all the words they had spoke; and though they
found therein something which might have come from their two Princesses, had
the one been living, and the other in that place; yet other parts of it had so
little connection with those, that the repetitions they made, served rather to
increase their wonder, than resolve their doubts; sometimes also they believed
it a delusion of the Devil's, who conspiring with Fortune, endeavored in this
last essay to conquer Constancies which till then they could never but assault:
They were sometimes too about to try if they could see their Faces plainly,
which during their discourse they had but imperfect glimpses of. But those
resolutions soon vanished: for to think those could be Parthenissa and
Altezeera which had done such strange things, would have appeared as admirable
in our Heroes, as that very Immodesty would have done in their Princesses.

But Callimachus, who perceived their disorders, and who being the least
interessed, was the fittest to counsel them, advised they would leave Symander
in that concealment from whence they had made their discovery, and that they
themselves would retire to a shade at a farther distance, where they might take
some refreshment, and the better consider and advise what was to be done when
Symander should bring notice of their being awake.

This proposal was no sooner made, than accepted of; and our two Heroes, with
Callimachus, went to a place within sight of the first, where having received a
refreshment more proportionate to the Prince of Venus's Priest, than the place,
they conjured him to prosecute his Story, though what they had seen and heard,
gave them impatiencies, which nothing but their desires of knowing so generous
a Friend's Fortunes, could have dispensed with.

Callimochus at length vanquished with their persuasions, and believing the
Strangers might employ as much time in sleep, as he should in telling the
remainder of his Adventures, in these terms did begin where he had left off.

The End of the Fifth Part of the History of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA, A ROMANCE.

THE SIXTH PART.

To Her Royal Highness, the Princess Henrietta Maria, Duchess of Orleans, and
Daughter of England.
Madam,
WHen I had last the Honor to Wait on Your Royal Highness, You ordered me to
write another Part of Parthenissa, and You gave me leave at the same time to
Dedicate it to You.

Only Your Commands, Madam, could have made me Undertake that Work; And only
Your Permission could have given me this confidence.

But since Your Royal Highness appointed me to Obey, it was proportionate to
Your Goodness to Protect me in my Obedience; which this Dedication will. For
all my faults in this Book cannot be so great as His, who shall Condemn what
has been Written for You, and is by Your own Allowance humbly addressed to You.

Nothing less than Your Name could be my Sanctuary; and nothing more than Your
Name can make it inviolable.

If ever Your Royal Highness can give away so much of Your time as must be
Employed in reading this Tome, You will find in it the Fairest, the Greatest,
and the most Virtuous Princess of Asia, so much divided between what She ows to
her Quality, and her Obedience, and what She ows to Her Inclinations, and Her
Gratitude, as possibly Your Royal Highness may oblige Her at once, both with
Your Pity and Your Kindness.

But, Madam, She has Commanded me to assure You, That if You will Honor Her
with the Last, She will neither desire, nor need the First. Your Concernments
for Her Misfortunes will put a Period to them; since She cannot lament any
Cause, which will Produce for Her so Advantageous an Effect.

I did once design to have Ended Her story in this Book; But the Vicissitudes
of Her Fate were so many, and so various, that I could not confine it within so
narrow a compass. Nor was I Overmuch solicitous to do it; For since I limit my
self in the main Events to the Truth of the History, I was Apprehensive, Madam,
that the ill Result of Her Destiny might have given You as much trouble, as the
ill Style in which I should have related it.

But, Madam, rather than to Apologize, for having Written no more, I should
humbly beg Your Pardon for having Written so much.

And since nothing can be a nobler Motive to forgive an Offense (especially
where the Person offended is equally merciful and generous) than Ingenuously to
acknowledge it; I will confess, That being to draw the most Excellent Princess
of that Age, I took for my Model the most Accomplished of ours. And to make the
Portraicture of the fair Mithridatia, I attempted, Madam, to make it resemble
Yours.

But I find the Copy so unlike the Admirable Original, that I could not go
more beyond my duty in the Design, than I am come short of my intention in the
Event.

But, Madam, though whoever had been possessed with my Ambition, must have fallen
into my disappointment; for it is one of Your Noblest Advantages, to be above
description; Yet I am so far from being grieved at my fault, as I rejoice that
I could not avoid committing it: Since I had exceedingly rather want, than have
the Power to describe You.

As much as Your Royal Highness Transcends the Pontick Princess in all the
Gifts of Nature, and Excellencies of the Mind, May You by so much surpass Her
in all the Services of Fortune, and the Felicities of Power; And may you be
inclined to extend one evidence of the Latter, by pardoning the confidence of
laying at your Feet this Tribute now Paid you by

Madam, Your Royal Highnesses most Humble, most Obedient, and most Devoted
Servant. ORRERY.

PARTHENISSA.
THE SIXTH PART.
The First BOOK.
The Continuation of Callimachus his HISTORY.
IBroke off (said Callimachus) the Relation of my Life, in a part of it so full
of Horrors for me, that nothing could Equal it; and in a Condition so far above
the hope of Remedy, that nothing could be more; for that Fatal Day was come,
which was to place the Princess Statira in an Estate far more inaccessible to
me, than she had been, either by the height of her Quality, or the Lowness of
mine: As vast disproportions as those, having been often Equaled by Love; and
had I been so blessed as to have obtained hers, the other Obstacle had been
Conquered as an Effect of that Victory. But now her Vows were so entirely to
confine her to the Happy Ascanius's Affection; That to have Solicited hers,
would have been an Action as void of Hope, as Virtue. Already the Sacrifices
were brought to the Temple; The Augures were there to judge of the Prophetical
part of the Victims; The People by the way began to sing the usual Songs, in
Honor of Hymen; The Triumphal Arches were Imbellish'd with their Noblest
Ornaments; The Priest which was to Join their hands, stood ready at the Altar;
and the Cyprian King himself, with looks as full of Felicity as his Condition
was, came at last, leading Statira into Atafernes's Chamber, to Solicit his
Presence and Company at the Nuptial Solemnities. This Sight, Generous Princes,
This sight had so Universal an Influence on me, that had not Ascanius been
absolutely intent upon his Request, he might have easily seen my Disorders. and
as easily have imagined their Cause. I had not the Confidence or Resolution to
speak one word to the Princess; But mine Eyes were so unmovably fixed upon
hers, and were so sad, and languishing, that they proved no uneloquent Orators;
for I perceived the Brightness of hers begin to be obscured with a Cloud, which
would have dissolved into Tears, had not the Cyprian King turned toward her,
to implore the joining of her Desires to his Prayers, whereby she had been
surprised in a disorder, which though she had much trouble to Conquer, yet (I
believe) it did not equal that which had occasioned it; from which flattering
Belief, I had still new cause to condemn my Fortune, which never gave me
pleasing hopes, but to torment me; for my condition was such, that I more
needed what would send me to the Grave, than what might dissuade me from it;
had I been Master of my own Reason, I should have attributed Statira's grief,
to her being so near a performance, which would separate her from a Brother,
whose loss might have but too abundantly justified the highest effect thereof;
and not have ascribed that Noble sorrow to some Esteem she had for the unhappy
Callimachus, whose Condition and Services were too low to hope for such a
Felicity. The Generous Atafernes was not conquered by Statira, or Ascanius's
Solicitations; Excusing himself upon the Account of his want of health, which
going into the Air, might so much increase, that it might prove an Interruption
in those Ceremonies: Though the real Cause was, That he would not assist at a
Solemnity, which was to Cost him (as he afterward told me) the deprivation of
his Sister, and possibly the loss of his Friend. The King of Cyprus(not a
little troubled at this Refusal, which he disguised by saying, He was as much
afflicted for that Indisposition which denied him the honor of his Company, as
at the want of it) soon after took his Leave; Mithridates sending him word,
That all things were ready if he were. This happy Summons he Joyfully obeyed,
and blushed that he had needed it; and leading out the Princess, went to
possess a happiness as much above Merit, as Description. But whilst I reflected
thereon, all my passions broke their Chains, and did so violently Agitate me,
that my Reason could not more Torment me, than they (at that time) did; and
though Atafernes Endeavored by his Arguings, and his sympathizing with me, to
persuade me to moderate a grief, which I could not Cure, yet all his Attempts
were in vain; I could not consider what Statira was gone to do, without giving
my self as much up to despair, as she was to give her self up to Ascanius: The
very remembrance of whose Name, seemed to add more Fire to my rage;in the
dictates whereof (I thought such Extravagant things, (that if my memory could
serve me to repeat them, yet) I should be ashamed to do it. What Condition
(Generous Hearers) could be more Irrecoverable, than mine seemed to be? Which I
have the more particularly told you, to raise your hopes, or hinder your
despair, for your own; for just in the moment I had cause to believe Statira
might be giving her hand and faith to the Cyrian King, Demetrius came running*
hastily into the Chamber, and (losing that respect he owed to the Prince) he
told me, I have brought you (Sir) an Intelligence, which (doubtless) will
exceedingly surprise you, if at least it has the like Operation on you, which
it had, and has, on all that Great Assembly in the Temple: At the Gate whereof,
a Gentleman, who had rid Post, in haste acquainted Mithridates, That his, and
the King of Cyprus Fleet had fought with Nicomedes's, in the Prospect of the
City of Carri, where after a bloody dispute, Nicomedes had remained the
Conqueror, and that so Entirely, as hardly any one had escaped, but a few
Quinquereme Galleys: That Arsides, Ascanius's Brother, and Admiral, had been
killed in the first Heat of the Battle, which had not a little contributed to
the Enemies Success; Who immediately after, the wind blowing from the North,
had hoised up all his Sails, and as swiftly (as those and his Oars could carry
him) made for the Bosphorus; and, as the Governor of Scutari did conjecture,
would endeavor to surprise the Residue of the Cyprian Fleet, in the Bay of
Nicomedia, Who (if they got not Intelligence of their Friends defeat) might be
Conquered by their Security, or (if they did) by their Fear, if vigorously
Asssaulted on the first Impression of it. This Gentleman (whom the King knew to
be a Person of Honesty and of Courage, and therefore through apprehension had
not augmented the Loss or the Danger) had scarce done speaking, but several
Posts came one upon the Heels of another with Advertisements from the several
Governors on the Coa^^, that a Prodigious Fleet had already passed the Straits
of Bosphorus, and was with all Celerity doubling the Point of Acritas, which
makes the North-west Head-land of the Bay of Nicomedia. These Reiterated
Assurances, gave the Two Kings on time for Consideration, there being scarce
time enough left to prepare for Action. Ascanius's misfortunes could not appear
greater to him, than his disorders did to all the Assembly; The loss of a
Fleet, and a Brother much more Considerable, did seem sufficiently to Apologize
for his Trouble, which yet he told the Princess had a higher cause than either
or both of those* Which was, That by so Signal an Infelicity he should be cast
into a greater, That of being a while suspended from Joys, which, if in degrees
compared to his Losses, made them appear little; That his Brother and Navy
could not have been Noblier lost, than in her Service, to whom all he had was
both his dedication and his debt; That since Arsides was dead, there was no
other but himself, with whom he durst entrust the Remainder of a Fleet, which
were to have the Glory, not only to fight for her, but before her; That he had
often exclaimed against the Excellency of his Fortune, which had destined him
the Highest Happiness, and had still denied him the opportunity of Acting what
might make him the less unworthy of it; That therefore the gods had now removed
that Occasion of Complaint, and thought it were at a high price, yet it was not
at one he would decline to purchase it at: That he was confident this day
should, in the conclusion, be as a Signal for his advantage, as the beginning
of it had been to his prejudice: and, That since a few Hours would decide the
difference, he Humbly begged, that all the preparations for the Nuptials might
continue as they were, that at his Return with Victory, he might receive a
Crown from her of Mirtles which he would infinitely value above one of Laurel,
and which would be a Cure above any misfortunes he had or could undergo.
Mithridates was present all this while, and either to satisfy Ascanius's
Request, or else to let the people see the confidence he had of Victory; He
commanded all the Assistants to continue as they were, till that King's Return,
and to join their Sacrifices and Prayers to his Arms. He then commanded
Pharnaces to permit Ascanius to draw out of his Army what Soldiers he should
need to man his Fleet with; and the like Orders he sent to Atafernes's Forces:
But the Cyp^ian King declined that High favor; possibly, left whilst he
brought Mithridates assistance, he should seem to need his. Ascanius had no
sooner took leave of the Princess and her Father, but he was followed by
Pharnaces, who publicly declared, He was resolved to share in his Danger, and
Triumph; That it was unjust another only should dispute his Quarrel, and he
himself be but a Looker on: And that he would let Mithridates see, he wanted
not Inclination, or Courage, but Fortune to have served him, as eminently as
his Brother. With these and many such Reason (continued Demetrius) he conquered
Ascanius's resolution, and went with him on Board his Fleet: which they
doubtless had been surpised, if the Solemnity of this Day, which they were
prepared to Celebrate, had not put them into a readiness; and scarce were they
ordered to prepare for the Battle, when the Enemy, who was to present Them it,
appeared. In this condition (said Demetrius) I left things when I came from the
Temple: and, if I be not much mistaken, there is a Tower at the end of the
adjoining Gallery, from whence you may see this Naval Fight. O gods! (continued
Callimachus) What retributions did I not pay you for this admirable
Interruption and Bl^ssing, which in Raptures I considered as the forerunner of
a greater! Nay, the Generous Atafernes was himself overjoyed thereat; and in
his Servant's concernment, seemed to have forgot those he had for his Father,
and his Country. I begged his leave a Thousand times to contribute my help to
those Force which fought for Mithridates; That I might imitate my Prince, by
letting him see, I had a stronger Inclination for what was his, and his
Father's interest, than my own. But though he still resolutely denied me, yet I
was not silenced till he told me, 'twould be fit I considered, That not only
Ascanius and Pharnaces might esteem it as an offense, that uninvitedly I came
to participate in their Glory; but that also, having declined to assist at the
Nuptials for want of strength, if I could assist at the Fight, it might give
some occasion to suspect by the one, what caused the other. These Reasons (I
confess) conquered me, and Demetrius then returning with assurance, that from
the Tower he had mentioned, we could see all the Bay of Nicomedia, the Scene of
the intended Fight; The Prince and I went thither, having first sent Orders to
his Army to Imbattel themselves along the Shore, and to five thousand Men to
have a watchful Eye toward the City, lest upon any ill Success of the Fleet,
it might be ready to receive her former King. As soon as we came to the
uppermost Room of the Tower, which afforded so commanding a Prospect, we
discovered the Cyprian Fleet had weighed Anchor, and was with their utmost
Industry striving to get the Wind of Nicomedes, which he rendered an
Impossibility to do; for he had no sooner doubled the point of Acritas, but he
kept the Northern shore of the Bay so close on his left hand, that he doubted
not by that Advantage to get as certain a Victory, as he thought to have
obtained by a surprise; which failing of, and seeing his Enemies in so good and
ready a form, relying on the benefit he had of the Wind, on his Courage, and on
his former Success, he resolutely advanced, to become as absolute Master of one
Element, as Mithridates had made himself of the other: The Cyprian Fleet
enraged by the loss of their Companions, animated by the presence of their
King, and by the glorious Assembly on the shore, loudly published, such unusual
Incitements were of more advantage to them, than the Wind was now, or the
recent Victory had been to their Enemies. In a moment, we saw that noble Order,
which both Fleets had so well observed, turned into confusion, and Cyprian and
Nicomedian Flags and Streamers, so promiscuously mingled, that the Discomposure
was then as Great, as a little before the Regularity had been: sometimes
Galleys of equal strength had also an equal Fate, and by opening each other
with their Brazen Beaks, sank both to the bottom together, with those fatal
Engines which sent them thither: Sometimes we saw Men so eager after their
Dawning success, that they minded not how by an unexpected Leak, they became a
prey to an Enemy more merciless than themselves, and needed that help from
others, which even then they had denied to others: Sometimes the Heavens were
darkened with a Cloud of Arrows, and then again nothing but seeming Lightnings
employed our Sight, occasioned by the Sun's reflections on the Helmets and
Swords of the contending Soldiers: but though these Prospects afforded us
variety of Objects to entertain us, yet one above the rest, did it so entirely,
that nothing else could divert us from it: and this was, The two Galleys which
carried the Admiral's Flags, met, and grappled, and so long fought for the
Victory, that we thought there would have been hardly any left in either to
have solemnized it: But in the conclusion, we saw one run up the Mainmast of
the Cyprian Admiral, and having taken down from thence the mark of her being
so, forthwith the rest of the Fleet began to retire, and in a short while so
visibly and hastily fled toward those Forces which were their Friends and
Spectators on the Shore, that we could no longer doubt of Ascanius and
Pharnaces's Defeat; but in it, I was so equally divided between the
Inspirations of Interest, and those of Honor, that the one not entirely
overcoming the other, I remained neither sensible of Joy or Grief: But
Ataphernes, who, by his condition, was left to a more free way of resolving,
than my unfortunate one left me; cried out, Callimachus, I know not what
disorder this Loss may bring amongst our Soldiers; Nor what intelligence
Nicomedes may have in this City (over which, but by the Fate of War, he is
lawful King); therefore, if your strength will permit you, see to the safety of
it, if Mithridates has not given particular Orders therein already; and I will
hasten down to the Strand to save what we can of our Vanquished friends, and to
oppose any Descent the Enemy may make in this confusion of our Affairs. Though
I had not Health enough to see Ascanius possess Statira, yet I had enough to
defend her against Nicomedes; and with Joy accepting that employment,
Ataphernes forthwith commanded a couple of Chariots to be brought us, for we
were not in a condition, without much pain, either on Foot, or on Horseback,
to act those Duties we held necessary, and had therefore undertaken: The
Prince's Chariot being first come, and he having the longer way to go,
instantly made use of it; and mine soon after coming, I forthwith went in it,
from the Palace, toward the great place of Arms in the Center of the City; but
by the way, I was met by the then Chief Magistrate of Nicomedia, and
Mithridates's natural Subject, who told me, he had even then presented his
apprehensions to the Prince of some Conspiracy by the Nicomedians, who were
more active and stirring, than he had observed them ever to have been in
Alarms; and that Ataphernes had commanded him to impart this Intelligence to
me: I thanked him for his care, desired a continuance of it, and that he would
forthwith draw all the Citizens into Arms, of whose Fidelity he was groundedly
confident, and have a vigilant eye over the rest. I forthwith dispatched some
of my Servants to Ataphernes's Camp, with repeated Orders to have their Men in
a readiness, with parties of Horse constantly moving between Nicomedia and the
Army, that if any thing were stirring, they might with the needed Celerity
repair to the City and defense of Mithridates, securing the Gate that was next
the Camp, to be thereby certain of admittance, if there were need: When these
Orders were given, finding the King had left none particularly to answer a
Revolt within the Walls, I did the more hastily put the Pontick Militia of
Nicomedia in Arms; and no sooner were they in a posture to Fight, but the
occasion was offered; for most of the ancient Inhabitants of the place, hearing
of their King's success, took up Arms to increase it; and thinking to surprise
us, began the Engagement with that Fury, which usually possesses such as
promise themselves Success, or, wanting it, are certain of Death; I was not
over-forward to oppose them, not knowing the Courages of those I headed, and
being (with much difficulty) able to make use of a Horse which then was brought
me: But principally, because I knew the Conspirators party was at the height,
and mine would be increasing; for some time, I was therefore contented not to
lose Ground, as my Enemies were, that I won none: When a hasty Intelligence was
brought me, that a rich Nicomedian had invited the Princess Statira to a
Gallery in his House, which stood much more commodiously to see the Fleets,
than any part of the Temple; and that she was no sooner there, but her
Gentlemen were assaulted, who yet defended themselves with some resolution, but
(if not instantly relieved) their Courages would yield to their Enemies number:
This fatal advice made me cast off all those cold prudential considerations,
under which I had thitherto Acted; and telling the danger the Princess was in,
to those Forcess I headed, they seemed, by an universal Acclamation, to
evidence their sense of it, and to promise with the hazard of their Lives to
free her from it; I was loath to lose the first heat of this Duty; and, having
by a successful charge broke through those which had stopped up my way to my
relieving the Princess, I flew from those as fast as they had done from me,
minding now no enemies but those which were such upon the most unpardonable
score; as soon as I had discovered them under their Ensigns, before the Gate of
that treacherous Nicomedian's House, I saluted them with a furious Cry; and
finding by the Order they were in, they had finished their attempt, I had not
so much patience as to look behind me, to see whether I was well followed,
which I too late found I was not; for many of my Party thinking it safer and
more beneficial to pursue a routed Enemy, than to Conquer one that seemed to
Brave them, followed the Execution of those, and left me with a few to conquer
these. It was a miracle I was not worsted, my own weakness, and the weakness of
my Party concurring, seemed to condemn me to a Defeat; against the belief
whereof, nothing did fortify me, but the remembrance for whom, and (possibly)
in whose presence, I fought: These two Reflections gave me that strength, which
my late Wounds seemed to have denied me; evidencing thereby, that Love has a
higher power than Nature; the weakness of this, being repaired by the strength
of that. But whilst I was thus forcing a passage through a thousand Swords, I
received from a young Nicomedian, so large and deep a Wound through my left
Arm, into my left Side, that almost despairing of Victory, I even blessed that
Hand which had given me so great an assurance of not out-living the loss of it;
yet still I fought, esteeming that as great a duty whilst I did live, as it
was to live no longer, when I could not by my Sword act the Deliverance of the
fair Statira; but I was snatched from these Melancholy thoughts, by the welcome
Cry of Demetrius, who aloud told me, Sir, your relief is at hand; he told me
what was true: For, immediately I heard the Trumpets of some of Ataphernes's
Troops, who having by my Orders secured that Gate of Nicomedia, next their
Camp; just as the Revolters were marching hastily to possess it, had, by it, a
free admittance into the City; whose Revolt having been assured of, and of my
danger, they came hastily to punish the one, and relieve the other. Demetrius's
assurance was heard by the Enemy, as well as by me, and was so thoroughly
believed by them, that what brought me Advertisement of a relief, did also Act
it; for, fearing lest all the Prince's victorious Army was falling on them,
most fled away toward the Harbor, and there in Boats sought to save
themselves under his Protection, for whose Service only they needed it; others
fled in at the Gate of the House in which Statira was, having forthwith
Barricado'd it, began from the Court-wall to play upon my Relief with their
Darts and Arrows. I forthwith commanded all those Troops which came to my
succor, to leave their Horses, and some to attempt the breaking open of the
Gate, others to get Ladders in the adjacent Houses to scale the Walls; and in
the opposite Buildings I placed some Foot (who by this time were come up) to
beat the Enemy from their Defenses; it seemed those that took this House for
their Sanctuary, were of the resolutest; for though my Soldiers omitted not
their Duties, yet they proved fruitless: My old Wounds, and my new, rendered me
unable to lead my Men up those Ladders, from whence so many had been tumbled
down, that even the most heated amongst them, were somewhat cooled. The much
Blood I had lost, made my strength decay so visibly, that several of the
Officers came to conjure me, to retire to some place out of danger of the
Enemies shot, to dress my Wounds, lest my longer neglect might render those
mortal, which possibly of themselves were not such: But I was deaf to all such
persuasions, and leaning upon my Sword, I did by my words solicit their
Courages, to whom I was not able to bring any Accession by my Example, or
Assistance: Never was any disability so sensible as mine was then to me, to
stand useless in my Princess's Service; and when to act it, no other impediment
remained, but forcing of an ordinary Wall, wounded me more than all the Arms of
the false Nicomedians had done: But I was soon struck with a deeper stroke than
any yet I had received, 'twas with a redoubled Cry of some of the Princess's
Women, that they were forcing her away into a Barge, to carry her to
Nicomedes's Fleet. This Advertisement, generous Princes, this Advertisement
acted a Miracle on me; I lost not only the remembrance of all my Wounds, but
even of the pain and weakness they had given me; and running to the next
Scaling-Ladder, I climbed it up, killed two of those which resisted my gaining
the Top of it, and having won the Battlements of the Wall, I was soon so well
followed by the rest of my Friends, that the Enemy by a precipitated Flight,
left us no other trouble, but to follow them: which, whilst the Soldiers were
doing, I flew to the place where the Princess's Women continued their Cries, by
which I was guided to a small Key, where the Barge they had mentioned was;
there I saw a Crowd of Soldiers forcing into it the fair Statira, and those
Women which had attended her, for all the Men had been lost in her Defense:
This Sight gave my decaying Strength a new Inspiration, in the Dictates
whereof, by a furious Cry, I warned the Ravishers of their inevitable Death, if
they proceeded in their Crime: But this was so far from hindering what I
feared, that it did but hasten it; for knowing they had done too much to be
pardoned by Mithridates, and too little to be received by Nicomedes, unless
they presented him with some benefit to his Service, as well as endeavor in
it: Leaving all the Women on the shore, two of the Nicomedians by plain force
ran with Statira into it, and the chief of them commanded all the Rowers
immediately to Lanch from the shore. This fatal Order was no sooner given, than
obeyed; so that nothing coming timely enough to hinder the execution of it,
recollecting all my remaining Forces, I leaped into the Barge, and passing my
Sword through him who commanded in it, and who had laid his impious hands upon
the Princess, I fell Dead at her feet; seeming in that place to have received
the reward of my Endeavors; and in that condition, the punishment of their
unsuccessfulness. The Death of the Nicomedian Commander raised a fury in all
his Soldiers, which my fall, and the Barges being got off from the Key, gave
them but too much opportunity safely to discharge; and therefore running to my
Body with their Swords drawn, from the Head of the Barge toward the Stern
where I lay, and at which end I had got in (that part being brought near the
Shore, for the Princess's more convenient going into it) they had doubtless by
many new Wounds acted that, which seemingly had been acted to their hands, had
not she (forgetting her own misfortune, and contemning all their Arms)
interposed her self between me and them: and, by the majesty of a Look only
peculiar to her self, and able to infuse a deep veneration in the most salvage
hearts, put thereby a full stop to their fury, even in the highest Dictates of
it. She was her self as much amazed to find this unexpected reverence, as those
were, in whom she had raised it: And therefore, not to lose the desired effects
of it, she told them; Barbarians, Will you, to the horrid Sin of forcing away
your King's Daughter, add that Inhumanity, of imbruing your hands in the blood
of a Dead man? The truth of that reproach, and the belief they gave to that
assurance, made them by degrees retire to the Head of the Barge again; which
they had no sooner done, but the Princess, and Nerea, (the only person of all
her Attendants which had the Honor to participate in her misfortunes; for, (as
she told us afterward) finding they were resolved to force away the fair
Statira, she had flung her self into the Barge at first, not to be separated
from her). These two, I say, by an excess of goodness, and the Princess, of
condescension, tearing of the Linen they wore, did with it endeavor to stop
the many springs of Blood which ran out of my Body; and by a Deluge of weeping,
Statira her self celebrated her apprehensions of my having lost my Life; a Life
too nobly lost, since 'was in her Service; and too nobly lamented, since 'twas
so, even by her Tears, But her Charity and Grief were soon forced to resign
their rooms to her fears; for the Nicomedian I had run through when I leaped
into the Barge, had a Brother with him, who more minding to save his wounded
Brother than to revenge him, whilst others were running to this, he employed
himself in that; but in vain: For the Soldiers, which the awe of the Princess
had made retire, were no sooner gone back to their dying Captain, but he
expired in his Brother's Arms; who now seeing 'twas no more time to serve him,
ran to revenge him; and finding my Sword (which by accident lay near him)
covered with his Brother's blood, He cried out to his Soldiers, Companions,
follow me, and you shall see this Sword that has acted yours, and my loss,
revenge it. This was no sooner said, than with a furious look, he ran toward
the place where I lay. The words he spoke, were so loud, that they reached the
Princess's ears; who, fearing lest those who had been so soon converted, might
as soon be guilty of a relapse, had not so entirely minded me, as not at all to
mind them. And therefore, when my intended Murderer was come near me, with
Looks as bloody as his intention, the Princess, by an excess of generosity,
interposed her self a second time between me and my Death, commanding Nerea to
give me that care, which the cruelty of these men forced her from contributing
unto; and with a Look, able to have struck a Veneration and Awe into any but
him on whom 'twas misspent; she told him, Monster, Art thou alone of all thy
Companions capable to act a violence to me, and a barbarity to a dead
Gentleman? That Crime which they were ashamed to have designed, art not thou
ashamed to perform? Madam, (he replied, interrupting the Princess) It Is I only
of all my Companions, who have lost a Brother, and yet a Person dearer to me
upon the account of Friendship, than of Blood; who even now Dying in my Arms,
recommended in his last Breath his revenge to my Sword, which by all that is
Sacred, nothing shall hinder me from. Cruel man! (she answered) What Revenge
would thou desire that is not acted already for thee? His Condition renders
him incapable to suffer more* or thee to do more: Malice it self ceases in
Death; and thou will not (I hope) be worse than the worst of Ills. If he were
Dead (the Nicomedian hastily answered) you would not both have taken such care
in dressing his Wounds: neither whilst you fruitlesly endeavor to keep me from
increasing their number, would you employ your Woman to dress those he already
has: No, Madam, be he what you say he is, and what I think he is not, this
Innocent Blood, which covers this Sword, must be washed away with his guilty
Blood, who has thus stained it. Barbarian, (the fair Statira replied) Can
thou draw from the duty of a performance I owe a Gentleman which Died in my
defense, an Argument to provoke thy rage, and increase thy guilt? Because our
charity is mistaken in doing good, lest thy malice from thence should be
mistaken in not doing ill, thou will run to a Sin which past-Ages have not
paralleled, neither future ones will? What greater evidence can thou have,
that Callimachus is Dead, than that thou have his Sword? That Prince also to
whom thou art now carrying us, is too generous to receive under his protection,
a Person so loaded with Crimes; and the wickedness thou art now intent to
commit, will outweigh the Service thou do him in making me his Prisoner; and
force him, lest he share in thy guilt, to deny thee the reward of it. I never
use (the Nicomedian furiously replied) to sell my Services; and those I have
now paid, being done for my King, are both my Duty and my Reward; and having
lost my Brother, do I thirst after any other recompense, than the satisfaction
of revenging him? which lest your tears, and prayers, might hinder my Prince
from denying me the right to do, when I come unto him, I will perform it
before: I conjure you therefore, Madam, as you value your own safety, do not
any longer put your self in a posture of hazarding it, lest any of those blows
my just resentments aim at him, should fall where I mean them not, and make me
as actually guilty, as you would persuade me I am already intentionally. Thou
would (said Statira) not only commit a Sin, but to do it, would persuade me
to act another; since thus to revenge thy Brother's Death, cannot be worse in
thee, than the permitting of it would be in me: Thy Brother's Blood is shed in
a treacherous Action, for so I must call what thou now do, though it be for
thy natural Prince, whom thou should have followed in his misery; or, not
having the courage or honesty to do that, thou should not have had the
wickedness to do this. Thou did live under my Father's protection as a
Subject, and now forcest away his Daughter as a Traitor into the hands of his
Enemies: Can thou, I say, who in all the actions of thy Life, have not done
what thou should do, and done that which thou should not do, think it a
Duty to revenge a Brother, who Died in the Crimes thou art guilty of? And shall
not I esteem it a higher Duty of preserve from more than Inhumanity, the Body
of a generous Prince, who now lies weltring in a deluge of Blood, only for my
defense? or, If by a Miracle, he should above my belief, have any remnant of
Life remaining, shall I not expose mine to defend his, which had not needed my
defense, had he not been reduced to what it is, by defending me from thee, and
that Brother, whose just loss excites thy rage? Do not think to fright me from
a duty I would not fear to pay, with the certain loss of that which thou do
thus threaten me with: Can thou think thy resentments are fit to be acted?
And can thou have the vanity to think thou can terrfie me out of mine?
Shall the imaginary Debts of wickedness be more punctually paid by thee, than
the real ones of Virtue by me? Ah! It Is thy Ignorance of good which makes thee
so bad, or makes thee hope to make me the like! No, no, If thou will go to thy
cruelty, thou shall go to it through me; I should be more troubled to decline
thy fury, than to endure the fiercest effects of it: Therefore lose no time,
for all thy solicitations to me, are as vain as mine have been to thee, or
rather for thee. I will lose no more time then, since you command me it,
(replied the angry Nicomedian) I have lost too much already, and the Ghost of
my Brother seems to reproach me for that remissness, which my respect to you
has made me guilty of to him; Permit me therefore (he continued, advancing
nearer the Princess to lead you from a sight which might but heighten your
displeasure. Touch me not (said the fair Statira); thy seeming care of me, is a
real cruelty to me: Those impious hands which are to be imbrued in
Callimachus's blood, must not give me any assistance; or, if thou have a
respect for me, show it in obeying my Commands, or in granting my desires of
desisting from a Crime the gods will punish, if Men would not. Remember the
condition thou art now in, flying from Mithridates's justice, which may make
thee rationally fear thou may one day feel the highest effects of it. Desist
from this wickedness, and I will engage to procure thee my Father's pardon; not
only a forgiveness for thy self, but for all thy Companions; and the remittal
of all your Forfeitures. Consider what it is to be eternally banished from your
native Country, from your Friends, and from all that is dear unto you, and to
become Vagabonds, eternally confined to an Element, as merciless as thy self;
for Nicomedes has no place but his Navy, on which to set his Foot: I do not
conjure thee, not to bring me to thy King. Keep me as Hostage there, till what
I have promised be performed; I ask not for my self, I ask for him, who in
serving me, is rendered for ever unable to serve himself: Thou need but not
to be wicked, to be happy: abstaining from one intended Crime, shall procure
thy patdon for every one thou have acted: No man except thy self but would lose
all he has, rather than perform that Sin, which to buy thee from, I offer thee
all that thou have lost: But, if all my commands, my desires, and my offers
move thee not, as I fear they will not; (for he that is Deaf to Virtue,
probably will be so to all things else) carry thy Rage to the highest; add to
the Barbarity of giving new Wounds to a generous Person that is Dead, and to
the forcing away thy King's Daughter, that of shedding her blood also; for thy
Sword can no way be so sensible to me, as to see it employed against him. Can
you, Madam, possibly believe (replied the Nicomedian) after having unmovedly
heard all your Commands, and with disdain (pardon me if I must say so) all your
offers, that only an Inhuman desire to shed Blood, and not a virtuous Revenge,
inspires my now resolution? And since I am acted by such a Principle, in the
name of all the gods, Madam, do no longer fruitlesly endeavor to hinder its
effects; were Callimachus as much Alive, as you would persuade me he is Dead;
and from my own being Alive, would thence have assured me he is Dead; were he,
I say, in the condition you wish him, possibly his Courage would not have so
long protected him, as my respect to you has done; He, that at the Head of a
victorious Army, could not force a weak House, till my Companions fear did more
for him, than his own Valor; is not an Enemy so much to be feared, as you
would have me fear him; nor a Friend so much to be esteemed, as I perceive he
has the honor to be esteemed by you. Whilst the Princess (continued
Callimachus) was by more than a Human goodness employing her words for one so
highly unworthy of them, Nerea had not only stopped the bleeding of that great
Wound I had in my Side, but also by casting water upon my Face, and by several
other things practiced to one in a Swoon, brought me out of that, which too
much Motion, and too little Blood had cast me into; and I was no sooner come to
my self, than confusedly remembering the danger the fair Statira had been in,
and not being able to imagine what the result of it had been (fetching a deep
groan) Oh gods! said I, What is become of the Princess? Those few words I spoke
just as the Nicomedian had ended what I last related, and were no sooner heard
by him, than (crying out aloud) Madam, Does your Dead man speak? He at the sa^^
time struck a furious blow at me, and said, Take that as a Present sent thee
from the Manes of my Brother. The violence of the stroke was broken by the
interposition of the Princess; who, finding now my Enemy had lost all respect
to her, and was carried away by a Deaf fury to my immediate destruction, began
now to conclude, I should immediately be what she but feared I had been. Nerea,
the better to afford me her help, had set me up against the Stern of the Barge
(the place in which my strength had so fatally left me) which was so narrow,
that whilst the Princess stood before me, none could come on either side to me,
so that all the blows made at me were over her shoulder; therefore more
offensive to me, being hindered at that price, than had they all taken an
unobstructed effect. The Nicomedian's words and actions, made me soon imagine
what was doing, and therefore looking about for my Sword, more to punish his
insolence to Statira, than to defend, or revenge my self; I endeavored to get
up, but my Treacherous weakness cast me down again, and left me to the rage of
an insulting Enemy; to which I had then been sacrificed, had not the fair
Statira, by a prodigious Cruelty to her self, finding all other ways
unsuccessful, cast her self upon me, and by covering me with her Body, rendered
it an impossibility for the Nicomedian (but by her Death) to act mine. Nerea
also seizing with all her strength upon his Legs, did so entangle him, that he
was not able to move one step to force Statira from the posture she was in;
This made him call to some of his Soldiers to tear that impediment from him,
and that safety from me; who, by striving to get up, had opened my Wound again,
and had thereby repeated my former fainting; and therefore was not sensible,
either of my danger, or of the felicity by which yet I was preserved from it;
The way of it being infinitely fuller of satisfaction, than the end. The
Nicomedian's Soldiers ran to obey their Captain's command; and having with much
difficulty forced Nerea from from his Knees, and with infinitely more rudeness
forced the Princess off me; lifting his Eyes up to Heaven, and his Sword into
the Air, He cried out, Brother, dear Brother, accept of this Sacrifice, the
least that I owe thee, and the greatest I can pay thee. Statira by a loud
shriek endeavored to stop his lifted-up Arm from falling on me, or by it,
endeavored to honor and lament my Death; when on a sudden, instead of seeing
* the Nicomedians's Sword fall upon my Head, she saw it fall out of his Hand,
and him soon after Dead at her Feet. Possibly, generous Princes, (continued
Callimachus) never any Man was so near Death, and so strangely escaped it; I
have not, to make the deliverance seem the greater, made the danger seem such;
for even in that very instant, which was between the lifting up the Sword to
kill me, and the letting it fall for that effect, an Arrow shot him through the
Heart. Statira has often told me, she thought it came from Heaven, as a Return
to her prayers and tears: But lest the truth might look like a Fiction, permit
me to tell you what will free it from that unhappiness. The Barge we then were
in, was that Magnificent one which Mithridates himself commonly made use of,
when for his Divertisement he would take the Air in the Bay; and because it was
imbellished with much Gilt, and admirable Painting, it was kept in a House
built on purpose for it upon Pillars some little distance from the shore, lest
the curiosity of the common people might injure it in either; and therefore
those to whose care it was committed, had a small Skiff, capable only to hold
the Rowers of the Barge, which were twenty, in which as they had occasion they
went to it, and returned from it. This Skiff, when the Barge was thrust from
the shore by the Nicomedians, at my Arrival had only six Rowers, ready to
receive such as in their intended flight to Nicomedes's Fleet, could not have
room enough in the Barge; the Watermen, left in the Skiff, seeing the Barge
hasten away, from whence only they could expect their relief, were so amazed
and terrified thereat, that before they could resolve of any thing, they were
discovered by Demetrius, and by his Orders secured: He having seen my danger*
in having cast my self single amongst above twenty Armed men, besides as many
Rowers, and ready at the time I did so, to sink under my Wounds, calling to him
some of the nearest Officers, ran with them to the Skiff, and just as he was
going to leap into it, he fell down by the side of it; for, in the Fight he had
received some Wounds, which his zeal in my Service had not made him consider.
The decay of his strength was so great, that it hardly gave him power to say
hastily to Rebadates; I recommend, valiant Rebadates, Statira and Callimachus's
relief unto you, which it seems the gods have esteemed me unworthy to
contribute unto; Fly then, and lose no time, lest you lose them. Some Soldiers
forthwith took up Demetrius, and carried him to the next Help; In the mean
time, Rebadates and ten more of his Companions leaped into the Skiff, and
having not only promised the fearful Rowers their pardon, but exceeding great
rewards, if they carried him time enough to relieve their Princess, and me;
Those timorous Men tugged at their Oars so vigorously, that Rebadates soon
perceived he went faster than those he pursued, and therein he was not
mistaken; for those in the Barge, both Rowers and Soldiers, being out of all
danger from the shore, had been at first so entirely taken up with their common
design of revenging their dead Captain; and after they had been diverted from
that by the Princess, were so intent in observing what past between her and his
Brother, that thereby they made such slow way, as a small Boat with few Rowers,
might easily overtake them. Rebadates perceiving a far off the Barge full of
Men, (for all in it standing up, made it appear so to him) he did esteem it
advisable, by a slight, to supply the smallness of his number: He therefore
ordered the Rowers to continue their diligence, and on their Lives, by no word
or signal, to give any notice to their late Companions, whowere in the Barge;
but rather, if any questioned them, before they came near, they should answer,
they thought themselves happy they had only brought away themselves: He then
appointed all his Friends to keep themselves undiscovered, by lying flat in the
bottom of the Skiff with their Arms ready, that as soon as ever they came to
the stern of the Barge, they might with all their Arrows salute the Enemy, and
second that Salutation by leaping in with their drawn Swords. These directions
were not more exactly observed, than the whole design happily succeeded; for,
of all that were in the Barge, some were wholly taken up in the employment I
already mentioned; and others, who looking toward the Skiff, saw none in it
but the known Rowers belonging to it, troubled not themselves in asking any
questions, they might at leisure be resolved off. This gave our Relief the
opportunity they wished: And Rebadates lying himself at the Head of the Skiff,
when he came near the stern of the Barge, seeing a bloody Sword high in the
Air, was at once confounded and pleased at it; this, in a belief it gave him, I
still was alive, since I alone was in the Barge to oppose them; and that from
an apprehension, 'twas so colored at my cost: Therefore, starting up with all
his Companions, just in that moment the Nicomedian was going to Kill me, by a
happy Arrow he killed him; and springing into the Barge with his Friends, he
made such an execution amongst his Enemies, that those of them who had escaped
the first furies of it, fled from the stern to the Head of the Barge, and
there, but by defending themselves, gave their Assaulters an encouragement
which they needed not. Whilst Rebadates was thus employing his Valor for my
safety, one of his Companions was employing his Art for the like end: 'Twas an
Officer, who had received so often, and so many Wounds, that by a dear
experience he had no small Skill in the Cure of any which were Curable; and,
because the duty of his Profession often called him unto danger, and his
Courage oftener, he never went without things necessary about him, for his own
or his Friend's use: and seeing me lie in that sad posture I was in, and that
the fair Statira and Nerea's help (which they were honoring me with again) was
too small for a danger which seemed so great; observing also, that his
Companions had not so much need of his assistance as I: He came to afford me
his in so seasonable a time, that he told the Princess, though he could not
warrant the event, yet he did assure her, Had his Service been never so little
delayed, it could not but have proved fatal to me: But whilst this obliging
person was preserving me, his Friends were destroying my Enemies, in which they
proved so successful, that by that time I opened my Eyes, I could see none of
them in a posture of resistance; though the last of them which had been so in a
despair, and exposed himself to ten Swords, that he might pass his own through
Rebadates, which he did, but paid for that Wound, by the loss of his Life; yet
Rebadates by that he had received, fell, and needed the assistance of that
Friend; as soon as I had received from him all which then he could afford me.
Several others of those Gentlemen, by whose courage the Princess had received
that deliverance, I was thought unworthy by the gods to present her, were so
dangerously hurt, besides two which were Killed; that had the Watermen in the
Barge* had half so much courage as they had fear, they might have done that
with their Oars, which their Masters failed of doing with their Swords: But
these Men, conscious of their own guilt, and well seeing which way the dispute
was like to be decided, and having no promise, or hope of pardon, whilst
Rebadates and his Friends were Fighting, and the Princess, Nerea, and Tomsones
(for so was that Gentleman called, who had dressed my Wounds) were intently
bestowing their care on me; the Watermen of the Barge had got into the Skiff,
and fled toward some boats they saw afar off; the Rowers also of the Skiff
fled with them, suspecting their past-Crimes would have a more punctual
payment, than their late Services a Reward, especially those being voluntary,
these constrained; so that by the time we were delivered from our Enemies, we
found our selves unable to return to our Friends; at least did it so slowly,
that before we had time sufficiently to admire the Miracle of our deliverance,
we saw we needed another to secure it: For all the Rowers being fled, and not
above two with Tomsones being free from Wounds, and thereby, as well as by
their unacquaintedness in using of an Oar, unable to Row, we moved so slowly
toward the shore, that our Watermen had time enough to overtake those Boats
and Persons they fled unto; who they found were Nicomedians flying from their
City to their King: These being fully informed how great a prize was in the
Barge, and how little resistance would be made in the defense of it, and
knowing well all the Boats and Barges in Nicomedia were carried from the shore
by their defeated Companions; they made toward our Barge, hoping by presenting
Nicomedes with so great a gift, they might deface the blemish of their first
unsuccessfulness. Their Barges being so well fitted, and ours so ill, they had
no great difficulty to overtake us; and though Tomsones was a person of great
Valor, yet having but three sound Men in the Barge, and seeing about two
hundred in three others, and many more coming, thought it better to use his
Tongue than his Sword; and therefore began, as soon as they were within Call,
to capitulate with them: Telling them, though possibly their Numbers might at
length oppress him and his Companions, yet he assured them, ere they did so, he
would lessen them considerably; and therefore he offered them, If they were
Inhabitants of Nicomedia, their pardons and full Indemnity, would they carry
the Princess and me back to Mithridates: If they were Soldiers of the Fleet of
Nicomedes, and that they could esteem a Lady, and a dying Gentleman fit
Presents for them to make, and him to receive, He would, upon their faithful
Engagements of carrying us with all Honor and Civility directly to their
Prince, without any opposition, yield himself upon the faith of that
Engagement. Whilst he was thus talking with the several Companies which had
surrounded him, one of the Nicomedians which commanded in one of the Barges,
came gently behind Tomsones's Barge, and then furiously leaped into it, as soon
as he had joined it; but Tomsones soon made him find, that Treachery should be
more fatal to him that had designed it, than to him who was to have suffered by
it; for at first Thrust, he passed his Sword through him up to the Hilt, and
having thereby laid him Dead at his Feet; by a second Thrust, having happily
done the like to another; and his few Companions by a brisk seconding him, and
mingling themselves amongst those which had Boarded them, made them immediately
with more Celerity abandon our Barge, than they had entered into it; and the
rest seeing how ill this intended surprise had succeeded, were so far from
revenging, that they openly condemned it, and began to listen to what had been
offered; esteeming it now a more hopeful thing to take us by Capitulation, than
by Force: Nay, some of the Soberest amongst them, sensible of the Ills they
were to suffer, by a wandering Sea-life, and probably an eternal Banishment from
their Country and Estates, and therefore much moved with the assurance of the
contrary, of which they seemed no way to doubt, by reason of that great
Influence the Princess had over her Father (who, the more hopefully to conquer
their doubts, had her self confirmed that offer made them by Tomsones) began to
incline to the first Proposal rather than the last, and had actually accepted
of it, had not amongst that number, (as almost amongst all others) the
Indiscreeter, and the Worst, been the most; who, being also of a condition
which rendre'd War their hopefullest Trade, and who expected more from
Nicomedes by such a Present, than to recover of their own by returning; and
believing this manifested condescension of some of their Companions, would,
when known to Nicomedes, render the Numbers which were to share his Liberality,
the less, and their Services which opposed it, the greater, so loudly exclaimed
against this, and so readily promised to observe the other, that the less
Number at length yielded to the bigger; and We to both; Tomsones having first
made them solemnly Vow, that none should enter our Barge but Watermen to Row
it, till we were arrived at the victorious Fleet. This he did to secure
himself, as much as his condition did admit, that no incivility should be
offered the Princess, nor to me by a multitude, he apprehended, by what they
had done, might not be too averse to it; as also, that thereby he kept himself
in no worse a posture for defense, than he was in before the Agreement, should
they by any Treachery violate or break it. As soon as we had received our
Rowers on Board, environed with all the other Barges, we moved directly to the
Nicomedian Fleet, which lay at Anchor about thirty Furlongs from us. All the
time we were going thither, the Princess sat by me, waiting for some stronger
marks of Life, than hitherto I had given; and conjuring Tomsones, by the most
pressing words she could speak, to give me all his Care and Skill; and, if
after their separation and Imprisonment, Rebadates, or any of those generous
Officers, to whom, as to him she owed that little Life I had, wanted any thing
which might contribute to their Recovery, that he would acquaint her with it;
for she promised her self from Nicomedes's Civility, all things of that nature
which she could ask. Tomsones assured the Princess of a perfect observance of
all her Commands: But begged, if I should Dye of my Wounds, that she would not
ascribe it to his neglect of them, for they were so deep and dangerous, and I
so weak, that at their first Dressing, he was not able to form any certain
judgment of them; but had more reason to fear the worst, and to believe the
best. These words, as he that spoke them did afterward assure me, drew some
Tears from the fair Statira's Eyes, and cast her into a Melancholy greater than
she had discovered for her own Captivity. We had not now ten Furlongs to the
Fleet, when I began to open my Eyes again, and to recover so much Memory, as to
call to mind how I was brought to that sad Condition: and that the danger
Mithridatia had been in, was the cause of it. But not knowing any thing more,
and the incertainty which that I knew left me in, forced me to fetch a deep
Groan, and to say, Oh gods! What is become of the Princess? She her self being
near enough to hear this Question, had the goodness to answer it, by saying, I
am here, Callimachus, and have not any greater trouble than what your danger
gives me: Ah! Madam, (I replied, turning my faint Sight toward that place from
whence her Voice came) Mine is not worthy your thoughts, much less your
trouble; but for the sake of the gods, tell me where you are, and what
condition you are in. The Princess justly believing the truth thereof would but
heighten my danger; told me, As to my condition, I have acquainted you with it
already; and as to the place, we are on the Water, and in that Barge where the
gods have so signally favored your safety, that I cannot think, they will soon
permit the loss of a Life, which by a Miracle they even now have saved. Alas!
Madam, (I replied) I find you are not pleased to return direct answers to my
humble desires; and therefore, by your so telling me, you are not a Prisoner,
you do but too much acquaint me you are one. Oh gods! (I continued) What has
the unhappy Callimachus done, that you have thought fit to call him out for the
Princess's deliverance, and then denied him the Honor of it, and yet permitted
him to outlive it? Ah! Take again the Life you have lent me, it can now only
serve to torment me: No Honors nor Glories to come, can balance this Infamy;
to live to see the fair Statira a Captive, and made such by my unhappy defense
of her, is a Load too great for Life to support. The deep Wounds these
considerations gave me, not long after made me relapse into a more dangerous
Swoonding than any I had before; and though Statira, in Expressions far above
me, and Condescensions far below her, endeavored (whilst I was capable to hear
and observe them) to remove the cause of my despair; yet I thought it built
upon too much Reason, to permit it to be Vanquished; nay, that admirable
goodness which she showed me, was so far from acting her desires, that it made
me but the more resolutely approve of mine own, which was to Die. My condition
having left me nothing more Elegible: since, if I recovered, 'twould be but to
see that fair Princess in the Bonds of Imprisonment, whilst she continued with
Nicomedes; and in those of Marriage, as soon as she was freed from the others,
either of which was a misery that rendered Death a less, than to behold one of
them, Whilst I yet lay in a seeming Death, we were come so near the victorious
Fleet, that one of the Barges which had conducted us, advanced faster than the
rest, to acquaint the King how they had failed of their first design, and what
good marks they brought him, that they had attempted it. This was the cause,
that by that time we were come to the side of the Admiral's Galley, Nicomedes
was ready to descend into our Barge, which he did, and with many Civilities and
Respects, strove to render Statira's loss of Liberty, as little uneasy as he
could. After she had convinced him, she was not unsensible of what he said, and
did; She told him, There is, Sir, in this Barge a Gentlemen, who though he has
been your Enemy, yet I will believe you will not deny him your care. Madam,
(said Nicomedes) I have already been told that Callimachus is here, and
dangerously Wounded; and though he has been my Enemy in so high a degree, that
by his Sword I have been kept out of my Kingdom, and this Day out of the
chiefest City of it; yet your Commands, and the Duty I owe to Gallantry, though
in an Enemy, shall make my care of him be as great, as if his Wounds had been
received for, and not against me. Statira, as Tomsones afterward assured me,
gave Nicomedes more Acknowledgments for what he had promised her for me, than
for what he had paid her, for her self; which had made the Bithynian King tell
her, I cannot, Madam, blame Callimachus for tying himself so absolutely to your
Service, since by the Honor of your Concernments for him, he has that Duty so
advantageously rewarded; and possibly, his present condition is not so much to
be lamented upon any account, as that by it he is rendered incapable to know
these fresh Obligations you lay upon him, and to pay you his Acknowledgments
for them. Callimachus (replied the fair Statira blushing) has too much hazarded
himself for me, not to make my care of him a Debt due unto him; and since he
has been Prodigal in obliging, I ought to be just in paying. But I believe,
were he to speak only the truth, he would esteem his now Condition more
deplorable, by its rendering him incapable to resent your generosity to him, and
to pay you his retributions for it, than on any other score; and since by
favoring me he is reduced to that misfortune, be pleased to accept of my
Acknowledgments for him, till the gods render him able to present you with his
own for himself. Nicomedes, who found by that little disorder Statira had been
in, that what he had intended only in a Gallantry, was otherwise received, took
a particular care, no more to err on that side: But having in Magnificent
terms, applauded the justness and greatness of the Princess's care of me, he
presented her his Hand to lead her up into his Galley, and then told her; I
know not, Madam, if you have any other Commands to Honor me with, for any else
in this Barge; but if you have, I beg to receive them ere we go out of it. Sir,
(replied Statira) Here are some Gentlemen, who had not now been Prisoners, or
Wounded, if their civility to me had not involved them in that misfortune: But
I know they are in the power of a Prince, that renders any Intercession of mine
for their good usage, a needless thing. Nicomedes by bowing himself,
acknowledged that advantageous opinion the Princess had contracted for him;
who, to evince it was a true one, commanded some of his Officers to take as
much care of Rebadates, and those others that were hurt, as they would of their
best Friends; and to give all the rest any freedom they desired, but that of
returning to Nicomedia; and because he had understood Tomsones had dressed me,
and was very happy and skilful in curing of Wounds, he appointed him to be
still near me, and to lie in a Pallet in the next Cabin to me. These Orders
being given, the Princess, helped by Nicomedes, ascended into his Admiral, and
as soon as she was come into the noblest Room of it, He acquainted her, That
her Brother, and the Prince, who was to have a happier and nearer relation to
her, were in the same Vessel with her; and because he easily believed they
would have longing impatiencies to wait on her, he would retire the sooner to
afford them that Honor. Statira had scarce time enough to reflect upon the
prodigious changes of that Day, but she was interrupted, first by the Arrival
of Pharnaces, who carried his Arm in a Scarf, having received a Wound which had
necessitated him thereto; and he having condoled their common misfortune, and
magnified the high Gallantry of the King of Cyprus, which he solemnly
protested, transcended his present misfortune; for while he had been generously
disputing in the Head of his Galley, there had entered a throng of Soldiers,
which had Boarded her on her Quarter, and had made him a Prisoner. Ascanius
himself immediately after came in, but with Looks so dejected, that Nerea told
me afterward, she more pitied his so ill Entertaining his Misfortune, than his
having fallen into it; and that Statira her self, through all her reservedness,
seemed to think much more of it than she would speak. The Cyprian Prince,
having with all imaginable Humility paid his Respects to Mithridatia, folding
his Arms the one within the other, and breathing some Sighs, told her; I
thought, Madam, to have been called one moment from the Temple, considering the
glorious occasion that carried me thither, had been infelicity enough to punish
all my Sins, but those of daring to lift up my desires to the Princess Statira.
But it seems the gods have placed a higher punishment upon that noble and
unavoidable offense; for they have not only defeated my Fleet, which had the
great honor to fight for you, but even before your Eyes; and have made my
Enemies surprise me into the infamy of out-living it. But alas! I sadly find,
they have reserved for me other miseries, which make these hardly deserve that
Name: for these chiefly, if not wholly, relate to my self; and so much duty and
veneration I owe your Beauties, that these infelicities I could suffer as a
just punishment of my happy presumption, and as an easy purchase of that
blessing your extreme mercy and condescension had raised me unto. But when I
find, that to all these Sorrows, I was reserved alive but to see my Princess in
captivity; and that that calamity is an undeniable effect of my
unsuccessfulness in her Service (for, had I been victorious, where could the
treacherous Nicomedians have carried, and where could Nicomedes have detained
her?) That, Madam, wounds me above the Cure of Art, Reason, and Time, and makes
me esteem my Enemies saving my Life, the highest torment could befall it. Sir,
(replied the Princess) I am sensible of your misfortunes, and of the grief with
which you bear them; but cannot upon any terms ascribe them to that cause to
which you do: Though sometimes we do not know what those Sins are for which we
are punished; yet we still know, and should always confess, The gods are just
even in their punishments; and oftentimes repining at what is done, we provoke
them to do more. To do more ( Ascanius hastily replied, interrupting her)! Ah
Madam, what can the gods do more than they have done? And what can they make me
suffer more than now I do? When one endures a Torment which Death compared unto
is an ease, What can befall him worse, than by Life to be denied it? Oh gods!
(he continued) What has the wretched Ascanius done, that you have made him
feel, in the compass of a few hours, changes and miseries above whatever any
other did in the whole course of his life? What Triumphs and Glories was I
destined unto in the Morning? And what black and deep Calamities am I plunged
into in the Evening? Pardon me, Madam, I humbly beg you, that I do in your
sight give vent unto a sorrow which your sight does animate and heighten; and
let your mercy so far indulge to my condition, as to excuse me, if in an
extraordinary grief I give evincements of it which are not common. Statira was
going to reply, when she was interrupted by Nicomedes his coming in to acquaint
her, that he paid so much obedience to her Commands, that he was not contented
only to order them to be observed, but he even then came from seeing them
obeyed: That Rebadates's Wounds were not unpromising, but that mine were not
yet altogether so hopeful, yet that by Cordials I was brought from my fainting:
But that when he came from me, I had neither opened my eyes, nor spoken.
Statira for those new Obligations gave Nicomedes new Acknowledgments. But
Pharnaces and Ascanius not having heard of my being in the Galley, or wounded;
and the first of them expressing a desire to know how that misfortune was
befallen me; she gave them a relation of it in such advantageous terms for me,
that in it my Wounds and Sufferings were but too prodigally recompensed. At the
end of the Princess's Narrative, one of Nicomedes his chiefest Officers came to
advertise him, That the Gentleman he had sent to Mithridates, was returned with
an Answer from him, which made him withdraw to receive it: And not long after,
Pharnaces and Ascanius began to retire, to leave Statira to that quiet which
both her Mind and her Body but too much needed. But before they had finished
their parting-Ceremonies, Nicomedes returned again, and told Ascanius; Sir, You
are at liberty, at least you are no longer my Prisoner; for as soon as you were
made such, I sent to Mithridates to offer you in exchange for the King of
Cappadocia, which he has accepted of: Ariobarzanes will be immediately here;
and I have engaged my Faith to the Pontick King, to send you to him. Ascanius
(as Nerea afterward told me, from whom I had an account of those things, at
which I was not present my self) seemed at this advertisement to have a look
mingled with joy and astonishment; but immediately after, recollecting himself,
he told Nicomedes, I am too much obliged both to the great Mithridates and you;
To you, Sir, for offering so advantageous an Exchange; and to him, for
accepting it. But you have now Prisoner, a Princess, who ought, the first off
all to cast off that unhappy condition; and if you can esteem any, nay all
those in her Father's power, an equal Ransom for her, and accept of them, you
will thereby act a greater Victory over us, than your Sword has this Day given
you. Do not, generous Nicomedes, esteem me so unworthy of liberty, as to accept
of it, while my Princess has lost hers; or to allow for my exchange, of a part
of that, which I hope will purchase hers. I confess (replied the Bithynian
King) I propounded you for Ariobarzanes, ere I knew of the Princess's
misfortune; but had I known of it earlier, I should have made Mithridates no
other proposal: for I know too well to value the fair Statira, to think any
exchange in the Pontick King's power, can be proportionate for her: Nay, should
I restore her to him for a quiet re-possession of the Throne which he keeps me
out of, I should yet give him much above what I received from him. Will you
(replied Ascanius) accept of Ariobarzanes for me, and then me for the Princess?
that will in effect present you with two Kings for part of her Ransom, and I
shall eternally acknowledge I yet owe you more than I have paid you, or more
than ever I can pay. This I propound, has a mixture of both those Virtues, in
the manifestation of which, I know you are concerned; The serving of your great
Friend, and your obliging the admirable Statira; which you will abundantly
evidence, by taking so little for what deserves so much. And your obligations
to me, will not be inferior, since to lose my liberty to restore the Princess
to hers, will in some degree repair my having lost her liberty, by first having
lost my own. That which you have offered (said Nicom^^es) will doubtless be
better accepted of by the Princess, than it can be by me: She is, in her self,
and in my opinion, above all Ransoms; and when I shall pay her the Duty I owe
her, it shall be without mixture, lest that should be esteemed a Bargain, which
has nothing of so low a nature in it. This Noble Dispute (continued
Callimachus) lasted so long, that ere it was concluded, News was brought
Nicomedes, that the King of Cappadocia was so near the Fleet, that he could
hardly have time enough to meet him, if he any longer deferred going about it.
This made the Bithynian King tell the Cyprian, I wish, Sir, you were come to a
resolution, for I have passed my engagement to Mithridates, as soon as I
receive Ariobarzanes, to return you to him. My resolution is already taken
(replied Ascanius), and a captivity at the feet of my Princess, is exceedingly
preferable to a Liberty which must force me from thence. Here Pharnaces
interposing himself, desired Nicomedes to go and receive Ariobarzanes, whilst
he and his Sister would endeavor to persuade the King of Cyprus. The Bithynian
King, strangely perplexed at the Cyprian's resolution, went in great trouble to
receive his Friend, whom he was either to send back, having avowedly in his
power a sufficient exchange for him, or else must deliver up the Princess
Mithridatia, for whose Exchange he had entertained such high hopes. On the
other side, as soon as he was gone, the Princess Statira, and the Prince of
Pontus, had no small trouble to vanquish the Cyprian King's resolution; neither
could they ever conquer it, till Mithridatia her self, having told him how
fixed she found Nicomedes against her exchange; and that by his Liberty she
would entertain hopes, in a few Moons he would get together such a Fleet, as
might give her that freedom by his Arms, which his great Overtures had failed
of; and therefore, by all the power she had over him, she enjoined him not to
decline an Offer which also might be resented by Mithridates. In short,
Ascanius obeyed Statira's Commands, and Pharnaces Desires, which, when told to
Nicomedes, it gave him a satisfaction as great as his trouble lately had been;
and therefore he hastened away Ascanius, lest he should relapse, and lest his
stay in the Fleet, after Ariobarzanes's Arrival there, should make Mithridates
believe his generosity, and trust, had not had a fitting Return The King of
Cyprus, before he went, kneeling at Statira's Feet, made her many earnest and
high protestations of his Passion, and solemn Vows of speedily freeing her from
her restraint, or of losing his Life, in the Duty of that attempt; conjuring
her, by all those things she honored with her highest esteem, never to forget,
that the misery of his being free from all Captivity (but hers) when she was
not, was a pure effect of his Obedience, which he hoped she would believe could
not but be paid her in all things else, since 'twas not declined in this.
Mithridatia, with her usual reservedness, and civility, gave him a Return, and
soon after Ascanius embracing Pharnaces, with whom he had contracted a strict
Friendship, he took his leave, having first visited Ariobarzanes, Nicomedes,
and designed to do me also the like honor; but my condition rendered me
incapable of it, being not then come out of my fainting. Whilst Ascanius was
returning to Mithridates, Tomsones's Care and Art had been so successful, that,
by them, I was brought again to Life: Nicomedes, as soon as he heard it, came
to visit me; but being informed my weakness was such, that to be spoken unto,
or to speak, might be highly prejudicial to me; he forthwith retired again*
giving repeated Orders for my being used as if I were his Son: Civility in him
doing as much before he knew who I was, as Nature it self could have done, had
he known it. But being assured, that my Recovery would be much hindered, if not
endangered by the motion of the Galley, and the straitness of room in it; and
having also observed Mithridatia, even while they were at Anchor in a good
Road, felt a disturbance, which yet she would not complain of; gave Orders to
weigh and steer their course for the Island of Scyros, which was the only place
the Kings of Bithynia and Cappadocia had left; in which was a Castle, where
they kept all their Magazines for their Fleets, and where they usually detained
their most important Prisoners: And because this Island was so considerable to
them, as that the Loss of it would be the loss of all; they had fortified that
Castle in it so well, as it was esteemed impregnable; two sides of it standing
on a precipice over the Sea, and the other two being cut off from the Land, by
a deep Graft, forced through a main Rock, with three Fortifications, one within
another, consisting of Walls, and Towers, of a prodigious height and
thickness, which clearly forbad all hopes of taking that place, but by
Treachery, Surprise, or Famine. Nicomedes the rather hastened thither, because
Ariobarzanes had yet one Wound, whose Recovery needed rest and time. As soon as
the whole Fleet was moving, which by their late Fight needed the Recruits of
their Stores; the Bithynian King waited on Mithridatia, and told her, That to
render her misfortune the less uneasy, and more hopeful to observe her
Commands for me, he was going to Land her in a place where my Wounds might be
better looked after, and where she her self might resent less inconvenience
than in that Element she now was on. Ariobarzanes also at that time waited on
her, to acknowledge the noble Treatment he had received from her Father whilst
he had been his Prisoner, and to assure her of all the Respects he was able to
pay her. Statira was not unsensible of these Civilities, and by her Expressions
convinced them of it: But whilst she was in the midst of them, she was
interrupted by the hasty coming in of Tomsones, who told her; Madam, I hope you
will pardon this confidence, since it is in Obedience to your Commands; for
having done for Callimachus all that my Art has taught me, and having had
Success almost above my Hopes, he was no sooner come to Strength enough to
speak, but he asked a particular account of all that had passed since his first
fainting; and though I endeavored all I could to dissuade him from a Relation,
which I knew would have some fatal Operation on him, yet his resolution was not
to be conquered; and fearing, lest by an obstinate silence he might imagine
what was too bad, to be yet worse, I gave him a particular relation of all,
except of the Danger you had exposed your self unto, in saving him; which was
no sooner signified, than he cried out, with much more Strength than I thought
he had been Master of; Great gods! Did you then reserve the unfortunate
Callimachus to the highest Honor, that of defending the Princess Statira, only
thereby to involve him in a proportionate misery, that of letting her by his
fault become a Captive! Yes, yes (he continued) You may be severe to her, you
may be cruel to me; but you shall not any longer make me such unto my self: You
may Cloathe me with Infamy, but you cannot force me to wear it; that ought only
to be the Livery of guilt: But since you have made it the Livery of misfortune,
thus I cast it off. At these words, he began to tear off what bound up his
Wounds: and finding that our holding him by force, was as dangerous to him by
his struggling, as if he had left him at liberty to act his Despair; and that
the horror of having been unsuccessful in your Service, only created it; I
ran, Madam, to inform you of it, that by your Presence, and your Commands you
may suppress it; for it is incapable of any other Cure. These words were scarce
out of Tomsones's mouth, when another of the Surgeons came running to
confirm their truth; and to add, that I had already, in spite of all their
opposition, opened one of my Wounds, and that if I did the like to the
greatest, such a Flux of Blood would run from thence, that with it my Life
would go away. Statira transported with fear, and filled with an excess of
goodness, having begged the pardons of the two Kings for leaving them, went
precipitately to my Cabin, which was not so far from hers, but that she could
hear the Cries of those that tended me; and as soon as she came thither, she
found me in that condition she had been informed I was in; and therefore,
holding one of my hands, she told me; Is it thus, Callimachus, that you evince
your Acknowledgments to the gods for their late preserving your Life! A Life,
they showed themselves so much concerned in, that rather than lose it, they
chose to save it by a Miracle! The sight of the Princess, with the words she
spoke, and the action she did, put a period immediately to all those effects of
my sorrow and despair, and made me in Gestures full of Humility, reply; Can you
still, Madam, can you still have any care for a Person, who wanting success in
the Honor of your Service, could outlive that misery? Or, do you esteem that
Sin merits the punishment of surviving it, as the highest can be inflicted on
it? You have committed no Sin, (said Mithridatia) but in endeavoring to act
that, which therefore has forced me to come and hinder it; not as a punishment
of what you could not do, but as a Duty for what you have done: I have seen
your Virtue shine in all Conditions, but Captivity; and in that it chiefly
evidences it self: the gods therefore have chose sooner to deny your Courage
its ordinary effects, than to deny your Merit so extraordinary a Rise to
manifest its greatness. Ah! Madam, (I replied) interrupting her, Can you then
so much as add unto my Affliction, as to think it can proceed from my own being
a Prisoner, when even you your self are one, and made one by my fault? He,
Madam, that wanted not Fortitude to sustain the unhappiness of being Ignorant
what or from whence he is; of having in an object, or unknown extraction,
Ambition fit for, if not transcending the highest; and that could without
Dying, see a misery to which Death is infinitely preferable; He, I say, that
could endure, and not sink under these Burdens, cannot be suspected to fall
under any others, abstractedly relating to himself: No, Madam, they are your
Sufferings, occasioned by my Crime, that weigh me down unto Death; which I hope
you will not deny me to embrace, since I have no way but that left me to evince
to the World, my misery is not my fault; for none can justly believe he that
elected Dying, because he did not serve you as he ought, did neglect to serve
you as he ought for fear of Dying. Since (replied the fair Statira) it is my
condition only which inspires you with such Criminal resolutions, I hall not
much doubt to suppress them, when I mind you, that to endeavor to remedy it,
is more suitable to Callimachus, than to despair of it. Can you think my
Imprisonment a deep Affliction? And can you deprive me of that Arm, and Sword,
by which I chiefly hope under the gods to be delivered from it? If you act any
thing against your self after this assurance, I shall believe a despair from
your own Condition, rather than a sense of mine, invited you to it. Alas!
Madam, (I answered) What can be hoped for, from a Sword and Arm, which could do
nothing in your Service? It is now incapable of any thing, but that only, to
which therefore I would employ it. Callimachus, said Mithridatia, You are too
unjust to your self, and thereby would become the like unto me; because when
Wounded, and Single, you could not for me destroy a multitude, you will
therefore destroy your self; you would thereby do more against me than Fortune
has done; for she has but robbed me of freedom, but you would rob me of the
best, if not the only means of recovering it; She has flung me into the misery,
but it is you will fling away the Cure of it. Tomsones here whispered the
Princess in the Ear, That these Discourses, if long continued, would prove
destructive to that end for which they were made; She therefore putting on that
Majestic Look, with which she not only used to enjoin Obedience, but by which
she always obtained it, told me; Callimachus, Believe me, I have use of your
Life, and therefore I conjure you, and if that be not enough, I enjoin you,
nay, I command you to act nothing against it; but observe all that Tomsones
shall prescribe you for the preserving of it; and if you have any value for me,
show it by your Obedience in this. Ah! Madam, (I replied, with a deep Groan)
since you command me, you must be obeyed; but, I believe, when you find me
plunged in these miseries to which these Orders do reserve me, you will then as
much Lament the having enjoined them, as I do that you have done it now. If
ever (said Statira) I should be so unhappy as to see what you say, I shall be
so Ingenuous as to acknowledge it, and so Just, as to free you then from this
Injunction: But (she continued) I have in my Care of your Life, I fear, too
much endangered it: I will therefore leave you to that Rest which your Health
cannot more need, than I do wish it you. She retired, having said so: And
Tomsones found me ever after perfectly obedient to the Princess's Commands, in
an exact observance of all his prescriptions. The Wind favoring us, it was not
long ere we arrived at the Island of Scyros; and soon after, the Princess was
conducted to the Castle of it by Nicomedes, with as much honor and respect as
if the place had belonged to the Pontick King. Statira's Appartment was
Magnificent, both for the Largeness and the Furniture of it, and had an
unlimited Prospect toward the Sea; next to hers was the Prince Pharnaces's,
and a little beyond his I was Lodged: But though it were at some distance from
the Princess, yet by the obliging Neighborhood of a long Gallery, I could go
to her Antichamber, without passing through the other Room. In this place my
Wounds, as obedient to Mithridatia's Commands, as I or my Surgeons, began
daily to mend, and so fast, that I found I should be sooner ready to serve her,
than restored to the capacity of doing it. Every day, Nicomedes and
Ariobarzanes gave me the honor of a Visit; and the Princess manifested her
concernment in my Recovery by often sending Nerea to enquire after it. I
thought it not strange that the King of Bithynia continued in the Island,
whilst the Defects of his Fleets were repairing; nor, that the King of
Cappadocia did it longer, because his Wounds were not so fully consolidated,
but that the motion of the Sea might be both troublesome and dangerous to him:
But I admired that Nicomedes, when his Galleys were fitted, did not employ them
to improve by a new Success, the fresh one his Conduct and Courage had given
him, which was not more contrary to his Interest, than his Practice. But alas!
I had too many sad Thoughts relating to my own Condition, to admit me to employ
often any of them upon another; and I could not fancy for what end Statira was
so concerned in my Life, resolving to give her self to Ascanius, which would
make it my Torment; neither could I imagine why the gods had so strangely
preserved me from Death; and as strangely, twice in one Day separated
Mithridatia from the King of Cyprus; and by such admirable ways had brought me
to wait on her in her misfortunes; as well as in a high Degree, to have been
the unhappy cause of them. These Generals, you may easily believe were not
unfruitful in affording me Particulars, which never left me unentertained; and
never entertained me with any thing that was clear, but that my Condition was
incapable of any Remedy, but that only which Statira's positive Commands had
forbidden me. Oh gods! (continued Callimachus) Had I then known I was Nicomedes
his Son, how many Miseries might I have avoided? How many Battles by Sea and
Land had been unfought? And some Lives had been spared, for which I joyfully
would have laid down my own: and for the loss of which, I shall mourn whilst I
have any Life. Callimachus, at these words, could not resent a higher Grief,
than invaded Artabanus and Artavasdes by their sympathizing with him: which he
saw so evidently, that it brought at once an Accession to his Sorrow, and made
him the sooner hasten to conceal the effects of it by thus prosecuting his
Relation. One Evening, the Princess having sent the fair Nerea to visit me,
(who was much my Friend) I endeavored, as I had unsuccessfully several times
before, to win her to such a sense of, and concernment for my Condition, as
thereby to learn something less obscurely what Statira's Inclinations were
toward me, than her own excessive Reservedness would allow me to discover from
her self; and finding Nerea was less unwilling then to listen to words of that
nature, than she had been before; after some Introductory Discourses, I spoke
to her to this effect: That great Goodness which you have on all occasions
manifested to me; and that great Necessity I shall have to hope in it
hereafter, will give you the trouble of my disclosing to you some Thoughts and
Secrets, which I am so far from imparting to any other, that I dare hardly
impart them to my self: Yes, fair Nerea, I have the highest and the most
improbable Design of any man living; and having told you so much, I need not
tell you any more to acquaint you with it. A Design, which cannot promise more
felicities, if it succeeded, than there are impossibilities to prohibit so much
as the hopes of its Success; a Design I so much despair of effecting, and am so
criminal in undertaking, that I would now have Died of these Wounds, as much
upon the account of the last of these Causes, as the first, had I not received
an absolute Command to the contrary from the Princess, whom to disobey would
hardly have been a greater Sin, than to obey will be a Punishment to me. But,
Oh gods! Nerea, if you have any pity for this unhappy Callimachus, Tell him,
tell him, I beseech you, for what end it is he is enjoined to Live; since he
sees nothing in Life, which makes not Death as desirable to him, as it ought to
be dreaded by the too happy Ascanius. Since (replied Nerea) You are pleased to
make me your Confident, I shall endeavor to deserve that Trust by all ways,
but those, which in my opinion may render me unworthy of it; and therefore I
will not scruple to acquaint you, That my own Observations of you, told me that
long since which now you tell me; and from the first hour I had reason to
believe what now I do, I had as much reason to deplore the Design you engaged
in: Such a confluence of Obstacles being visible, and many more invisible, that
the Result was not more apparent to me, than I doubt it will be unsupportable
to you. It Is not that your Services have not been highly Eminent, and many; nor
that they have been paid to a Person insensible of them: But -- Here Nerea
stopped; and therefore I did by fresh and vehement Implorings, beg her to
continue; and at last vanquished by my Prayers or Importunities, she thus
proceeded: But, the power of the Father, and his Engagement also; the punctual
obedience of the Daughter, and the Ignorance of your Extraction, outweigh all
your Actions, and turn the S^ale so heavily, that the possibility is not great,
it will ever be raised again: You see (said Nenera) I flatter you not; for
having professed a Friendship to you, and Sincerity being the noblest part of
Friendship, I had rather practice it, though it might afflict you, than the
contrary, though it might please you. That (I replied, fetching a Sigh) which
you now have told me, has been hitherto my highest Apprehension; and by your
telling it me, it becomes as high a Certainty; and since it is so, How can
Statir^ enjoin me to Live? If she says, I have been too presumptuous in daring
to lift up my Eyes to her; I am so far from denying it, that I would have Dyed,
that I would have Killed my self to have revenged her, and to have punished my
self: And possibly a voluntary Death embraced by an Offender, should be a
sufficient expiation for an unavoidable Offense. It Is in this only, obliging
Nerea, that I will now beg your Assistance; and since so many invincible
Impediments deny me the expectation of obtaining her Esteem, I will not
despair, but by your Intercession to obtain her Mercy; and that is, her
Permission to Dye. Possibly (said Nerea) you could hardly ask any thing of her,
which she would not sooner grant you; I say, any thing whatever; and even all
those Obstructions I so lately particularized, might be sooner vanquished, than
this one Request yielded unto. No, Callimachus, she has a Value for you, and
such a one, that had her Inclinations the Liberty of a free Acting, possibly
you would not have too much cause to complain; Think not therefore to employ my
Services in so fatal and ungrateful a Request; for she that to save your Life,
so recently exposed her own to an eminent Danger, will not by a voluntary
consent give that away, which she has showed is not indifferent to her. I was
strangely surprised at these words, and therefore raising my self up hastily, I
begged her to explain what they meant. She therefore told me what Tomsones had
concealed from me, and thereby filled me with so much Trouble, Satisfaction and
Amazement, that for a while I remained as Moveless and Speechless, as after I
came to my self, I found I had too much cause to wish I had eternally
continued. As soon as I could speak, I cried out, Great gods! Was I not
miserable enough in the disability of not preserving Statira's Liberty, and in
surviving that Crime and Misfortune, but that thereby I must also have been the
occasion of hazarding even her Life? Ah! Farewell those Griefs which hitherto
tormented me: Mithridates's Authority, Statira's Obedience, Ascanius's
Felicity, and my own concealed Extraction; These deserve no longer that Name,
nor can any longer act their usual Effects, compared to what now I have
resented. Those only related to me, but this to my Princess; for whom my
Concerns are higher than any I can have for my self, as much as she is above
me, or my Designs above my Birth or Merit. Nerea, who hoped what she had
acquainted me with, would have had a contrary Effect, to that she now too late
found it had produced in me, left no Reasons unspoken to suppress that Despair
she had so unexpectedly cast me into; and though she did long insist upon the
too great Right and Empire, which Statira had over that Life she had saved, for
me to destroy it without, nay, against her Permission; and how by that Action
of hers I might be convinced, my Preservation was not inconsiderable to her;
since even, to preserve an unfortunate Life, as I termed it, she eminently
endangered her own: Yet it was a long time ere she could reduce me to any
moderate Thoughts; neither had she ever brought me to that desired Condition,
but upon reiterated promises of her Assistance, and of embracing my
Concernments with her best Care and Affection; which by that high and great
esteem Mithridatia had for her, gave me some hopes; but such faint ones, that
though I could not but entertain them, yet I could not tell why I did so. Nerea
having staid much longer than she had used, or than she had designed, no sooner
found me fit to be trusted with my self, but she left me to my self: The only
Company I could justly desire, and the worst I could keep.

The End of the First Book of the Sixth Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA.
THE SIXTH PART.
The Second BOOK.
I Fear (continued Callimachus) thus retailing my Story, I shall make the
Relation of it as unsupportable to you, as the Events in it are to me; I will
therefore acquaint you, that after a few days, I recovered Strength enough to
walk the length of that Gallery, which was between my Lodging and the
Princess's Apartment; and welcoming that dawning Health I then enjoyed, only as
'twas an effect of my Obedience to her Commands; and in hope, that I might by
it be enabled to serve her: I sent to beg her Permission to wait on her, which
she was pleased to send me; and I, soon after, to make use of. By accident
there was none but Nerea with her, when I came into her Chamber; and therefore,
with the less constraint, I had the opportunity of Kneeling before her, and of
telling her, I am come, Madam, to lay that Life at your Feet, which is yours
upon so many Accounts, that I durst not end it without your leave, much less
against your Commands; though by its great unhappiness in having failed serving
you, and its infinitely greater, in thereby having engaged your Goodness to
endanger yours, it merited a thousand Deaths; and if I can support its being
unextinguished, it is only because thereby I suffer a more signal Punishment,
than by the most tormenting Death could be inflicted on me. Statira having made
me Rise by her repeated Commands, was then pleased to answer me: Since by your
belief that I have a Right to your Life, I have thereby obtained a power to
preserve it; I will not deny a Title, which though no just one, yet is very
advantageous and obliging to me; and though as yet I see no visible means for
my deliverance, yet I will not despair of it, the gods having given me so
powerful an earnest of it, as your recovery of Health: which when you enjoyed,
I have been freed from a more hopeless and more unpleasing Condition than now I
am in. Madam, (I replied) That eminent Virtue and Innocence, which has shined
so bright in the whole course of your Life, may well invite you to believe,
though the means of your speedy Releasment is not now visible, yet it is
certain: But alas! Madam, my Crimes make me despair of the honor of
contributing to it; for he that could not rescue you at first from being a
Prisoner, and could afterward survive that Infamy, cannot, I fear, be reserved
for a happiness even too great for a Person of the most unblemished Fortune:
But yet, Madam, this I do promise you, if ever I am blessed with the
opportunity once more to draw my Sword for your deliverance, if I be not so
happy as to Act it, I will avoid being so miserable as to outlive it; and by a
second Attempt, repair You, or punish on my Self, the misery of my
unsuccessfulness. But, Madam, since yet we hear nothing from Ascanius, nor that
the generous Ataphernes has yet a probability of getting together a Fleet able
to force his passage with an Army hither; Why may there be no endeavors used
by Treaty, to win Nicomedes to pay you the Duty of restoring you to Freedom,
since with so much cheerfulness he pays you every one else? And though the way
by which you lost it, being by Arms, seems to require by the like way your
Restoration, and that by no other means but those, I have so much as an
expectation to serve you; yet so much I prefer your Satisfaction before all
things else, that I cannot but pray for any way which may lead to such an End.
I confess, (said the Princess) that Nicomedes's usage is so full of Generosity,
that since there wants nothing to complete the Evidencing of his, but restoring
to Liberty a Person, whose loss of it is neither considerable to him, or his
Enemies; neither would her Recovery of it be otherwise. I have admired at my
Detension, especially Ataphernes having so far prevailed with Mithridates, as
to offer him so high a Ransom for me, with the choice of having it, either in
Treasure, or the Value thereof, by restoring some Towns and Countries in
Bythinia to his immediate Possession: But it seems nothing will satisfy
Nicomedes in Exchange for me, but the entire Resignation of all Bythinia, and
Cappadocia; so that by asking so much, I begin to fear he has no mind to part
with me; nor can I ever get out of his hands, but by force; and therefore could
I any way contrive your Enlargement* I should hope, that a Fleet led by
Ataphernes and Callimachus, would soon win what an unfortunate Fleet had the
unhappiness to lose: And in this desire I have not been Idle, though I have
been Unsuccessful; for though Ni^omedes over-values me, yet he knows justly how
to value you; and therefore, though but a little before your coming now to
visit me, I was empowered by Ataphernes to propose to him as much for your
Releasment, as Ariobarzanes offered for his, when he was my Father's Prisoner,
yet I received a positive Denial, with an assurance, that nothing could put an
end to your Imprisonment, but the end of the War between him and my Father; and
that his Friends in Nicomedia, by presenting you unto him, had given him that,
which he more valued than his Victory over the King of Cyprus and my Brother,
and his having made them both his Prisoners. Madam, (I replied) prostrating my
self again at her Feet, (from whence she immediately made me rise) I am not
able sufficiently to admire your Goodness, or deplore my own Infelicity, that,
where I owe both my Life and Liberty, I must, instead of paying them to you,
receive them from you; and though those immense offers you were pleased to make
Nicomedes for a worthless Person, be above all things, but your Goodness, and
my Wonder and Confusion at it; yet I cannot but esteem my self more obliged to
him in the refusal, than I could have been in the acceptance of them: For I
know not, if I were at liberty, whether my usual unhappiness might not involve
me in that greatest, of being unable to serve you; but by being in restraint, I
have the honor to suffer with you; and therefore, I had rather have a
certainty of this, than run a hazard of that: But, I confess, Madam, I have not
been without Thoughts, Why so active a Prince as Nicomedes hitherto has been,
has continued so long uselesly here, after his Navy was repaired, and after his
late Victory had offered him so large a cause for hope, if in the heat of that
Success, he had vigorously improved it: It may possibly give me occasion to
believe, there is something in this place which he prefers to his Revenge, his
Glory, and the Recovery of his Throne: I admire also, at his setting a Value
upon what is above all; for nothing can fully pay the setting you at liberty,
but the satisfaction of having done that Duty, without any other Consideration,
but the honor of the performance. Nicomedes has Acted a double Ill; to detain
you a Prisoner at all, or, daring to detain you, to offer your Redemption at
any Rate. And, Madam, if I may presume to tell my humble Apprehensions, I must
say, I know not which has done worse; Nicomedes, since he will Sell you, asking
no more; or Mithridates, since Nicomedes will Exchange you, proposing so
little: The Kingdoms of Bythinia and Cappadocia, ought not to be put in Balance
with one moment of your Trouble, much less with your Liberty: The common
Consequences of Battles, are the winning of Kingdoms, which is a happiness not
to be named in comparison with the Guilt of letting the Princess Statira
continue a Prisoner. Ah! Madam, Why have the gods made those only which have
the Power to serve you, so unwilling to do it? And him that has so highly the
Will, so little the Power to do it? Were Bythinia and Cappadocia mine, and were
the giving up those two Crowns the Price of your Ransom, I would pay it with an
unexpressible Contentment, and resent more Happiness in being so divested of
Monarchy, than any could enjoy by possessing that of the whole World. That
which I had spoke of my Apprehensions, concerning Nicomedes's continuance in
the Island, and what I had spoke in the latter part of my Answer, had covered
Mithridatia with Blushes; and therefore the sooner to take me off from an
intent considering of them, She replied, with a little smile; I perceive,
Callimachus, though I am unlikely to recover my Liberty, being Nicomedes's
Prisoner, I should have been much more unlike, had I been Yours; for, by
condemning my Father in refusing so much, you thereby show, you would have
demanded more: But let us not mispend our time in discoursing of things which
are past, and on things that will not be; but rather employ it, to mind what
may be, that is, your Deliverance; and as a consequence of that, I shall hope
for mine: It Is not improbable, but some of those Officers, to whose Care you
are committed, may have their Fidelity to Nicomedes conquered by that Ransom
Mithridates was offered him for you; and that I will assure them of, if they
will act your Releasment any way. Madam, (I answered) Possibly in what I said,
you might have found more cause to believe I detested Nicomedes's Crime, than
that I would have increased it, had it been in my Power. Could such a vast
Misery have again befallen you, as to be a Prisoner; And could such a vaster
Guilt have befallen me, as to have made you mine; You could not, I hope,
imagine, I would practice more wickedly that Sin I condemn in another; nor that
I would part with Kingdoms to purchase you from a misfortune, which, had I the
Power to exempt you from, I would continue you in: Let it, Madam, I most humbly
conjure you, suffice, That I am so criminal, and miserable in my Condition, and
Actions, and make me not more so in your Thoughts, where I would appear to You,
what I am to my Self in my own, that is, a Person, who, during the whole course
of his Life, would serve you as perfectly in all things as you can imagine; and
would sacrifice it a thousand times, rather than one moment admit of a contrary
Thought. I believed, (said Statira) That the manner in which I spoke, would
easily have convinced you, that my Words, and my Intentions, were different;
but since you entertain them otherwise than I meant them, I will seriously
assure you, I have no ungrateful Esteem for you; nor will I believe, it is in
the power of Fortune ever to force you to an Action which may invite me to
alter it: But since you do renew your Promises of obliging me in all things, Do
it, I beseech you, in this particular I so lately mentioned to you, and desired
of you. Madam, (I replied) I pay you my humblest Acknowledgments for the
Justice you do me, in believing what you now said you believed of me; and for
your extreme Goodness, in giving that belief so prodigal a Reward, as the high
honor of your Esteem. But, doubtless Madam, I should too certainly deserve to
be eternally deprived of it, if, having a hope, that Nicomedes's Officers could
be won, I did not endeavor to win them for your Liberty, for the recovery
whereof I would for ever with Joy lose even the very hopes of my own. Banish, I
beseech you (replied the Princess) all expectations of that nature, unless you
can hope to win Nicomedes to be unfaithful to himself; for of late, he has
Dismissed all his Officers that Guarded me, and performs that Trust himself
with a greater Assiduity than all of them till then did; and therefore, to
design my Freedom any way but by force, is so far from being fit to be
attempted, that it is not rationally to be hoped: But if my Enlargement be
considerable to you, evince it, by a speedy endeavoring your own, and omit no
ways to obtain it; that in your Liberty, I may have grounds to believe I shall
speedily after recover mine. I was about to reply, when Pharnaces came into the
Chamber to visit his Sister: He was very much surprised to find me there, and
seemed much more pleased to see me so well recovered; soon after his Arrival,
there came in also Nicomedes, and Ariobarzanes: The first of them, after having
paid his respect to the Princess, told me what noble Offers she had made him
for my Enlargement; and that the high Value he had for me, not any Hatred to
me, had made him decline them; which, if ever an Agreement was made between the
King of Pontus, and Him, should be manifested, by giving me an unransomed
Liberty. I gave him a Return suitable to his Degree, and to his Civility, and
soon after, went back to my own Lodgings; having now in the fair Statira's, too
many Witnesses to permit me to continue those Discourses which they had so
disobligingly interrupted. Several Days things continued in the state they then
were in; and yet, to our Admiration, we heard nothing of Nicomedes's intention
to leave us, or of Ascanius's preparations to help us; though almost every Day,
by our Conquerour's civility, an Express from Ataphernes was admitted to the
Princess, to bring him an account of her Health, and to acquaint her with his
yet unsuccessful Endeavors for her Enlargement. That generous Prince had also
the Goodness, by the same opportunities, still to be inquisitive after my
Recovery; and to assure me of his utmost Assistance, toward the freeing me
from my Imprisonment; which because Mithridatia had so positively and
repeatedly commanded me to endeavor my self, I did busy my Thoughts about it,
and was not over-troubled, that the more I reflected on it, the less likelihood
I found of it. For had I escaped, I had fallen into two of those misfortunes
which I most apprehended; The being banished from the happiness of waiting on
her; and by Mithridates's wanting a Fleet, from the hopes of serving her; nay,
I knew not whether sometimes I were not almost so unworthy, as not to grieve at
her Imprisonment, rather than that my Rival should deliver her, and after marry
her.

One morning, when I was alone in my Chamber, Rebadates came into it, being
recovered of his wounds, and having obtained of his Keeper leave to do it. I
was pleased to see so good a friend past that danger, which his kindness to me
had in part cast him into: But the business he came about, did not a little
perplex me; for he came to tell me, That having found his Keeper was a Person
to be wrought upon, he had therefore made him such large Offers, if he would
connive at his escape, that he had embraced them, and promised the succeeding
night so to order all things, that without interruption he should get away;
that he had given him a rich Jewel he wore about him, so concealed, that none
of Nicomedes's Soldiers had discovered it, as an earnest of the rest, when he
was free. But, said Rebadates, I have thought that he which could do this for
me, might do it for you; and therefore I am come to assure you, I had rather
you should have your freedom, than I mine; for an easy Ransom may deliver me;
but I am assured you are valued above any. Therefore I conjure you, Sir, deny
not this proffer of my Service, having by my now Condition no other way but
that, to pay you any. I embraced and thanked Rebadates for this high evincement
of his kindness, though I wished perfectly he had never conferred it on me; and
then told him, That if his Keeper could employ his Industry for acting the
enlargement of the Princess, it would be a Service indeed, and should be paid
with Treasures which should enrich him and his Posterity. I did already (said
Rebadates) propose that unto him, but he cut me off with an assurance that it
was impossible, since his King himself guarded her. But when I proposed you
unto him, he seemed not to be out of hopes thereof, and has within an hour
promised to bring me a good account of his Endeavors therein; and I have
promised him he should receive from Mithridates a proportionate Reward to the
greatness of that Service; for he assured me, if he could contrive your Escape,
he must accompany you in it; since that would be a Crime above the hope of
pardon, though it were attributed to Carelessness, and not Design. I will not
trouble you (said Callimachus) with the Dispute I had with Rebadates, to
persuade him to embrace the opportunity of his Deliverance; nor in telling you
the Trouble I was in when I could not prevail with him: for he was
unconquerable in his Civility to me. And soon after he withdrew, to learn from
his Keeper what success he had met with, that he might acquaint me with it,
whereby I might accordingly provide my self for that appointed hour. To be
short, after he had with some impatience waited for his Keeper's Return, some
hours beyond the prefixed Time, his Chamber Door was hastily opened, and
instead of his Keeper, a rude Stranger came to him, and told him, his whole
Design was discovered, and the Manager of it put to a painful Death for his
intended Treachery; and that, since he and I so unworthily abused that Liberty
the Kings had allowed us, we should suffer for that Offense: I being now
confined positively to my Chamber, with new and more numerous Guards; and he
being expressly sent to keep him from the hopes of any new design. This which
this Officer told Rebadates, was too true: for the unhappy Keeper, sounding the
inclinations of one whose help he was to need in my escape, did it so
uncircumspectly, that he discovered his own, which the other went and revealed
to the two Kings, who punished the Keeper with death, and confined us to our
Chambers, with Guards too numerous and too faithful to be deceived or
corrupted. I did indeed with much more trouble endure the being denied the
Happiness of waiting on Mithridatia, than my loss of liberty, or the narrow
limits I was confined unto. But one evening when I was in a deep sadness for
Mithridatia's and my own Condition, Nicomedes alone came into my Chamber, and
having locked the door after him, he told me; I am come, Callimachus, to act a
thing which possibly you will wonder at, and possibly you would more wonder at,
if you were acquainted with the cause, for I come to restore you to your
Liberty; and that which lately Mithridates's great Officers, and which is much
more, the Princess Statira's Commands, could not prevail with me to do, I now
perform of my Self, without any consideration, but that of obliging so worthy a
Person, and perhaps of saving him too. But I doubt I have said too much, in
those last words; at Midnight therefore, fit your self to follow Ostanes, the
Officer that now Guards you, who will bring you a Disguise, by which he will
safely conduct you to a Vessel in a small Creek, which has Orders to carry you
where ever you will go. All that I ask of you, is, that you keep an inviolable
Secrecy concerning the means of your Escape: Let it always be believed, an
effect of your having corrupted the Fidelity of Ostanes, who is one I entirely
Trust, and much Esteem; and whom I recommend to your Favor, till I may again
by some fortunate Accident, openly restore him to mine. I confess, (continued
Callimachus) few Accidents in all my Life surprised me more than this; and the
longer I reflected on it, and every circumstance of it, the more cause I had
still to continue that Reflection: I told Nicomedes so much; and after, by many
Acknowledgments I had endeavored to exalt the Gallantry of this Action, and
the gratitude I had for it, I said unto him; Generous Prince, though after what
you have done, there might seem nothing left for me to do, but to endeavor, by
continued Services, to pay you some part of my vast Debt; yet I must by an
humble Request add unto, and increase it: It Is, that you will pardon me, if, as
soon as my hands are free, I use them against you; or else, that you will not
restore me to a Liberty, which I must forthwith employ against the Giver of it:
For whilst you keep the Princess Statira a Prisoner, I must as certainly be
your Enemy, as in all things else, I will be your Servant. When I told you,
(the King of Bythinia replied) That I would set you at Liberty, I told you too,
I exacted nothing of you, but your Silence; neither after the Declaration you
now make me, do I expect any thing else, but a Grant of that which I desired of
you before. This (said I) is a Gallantry worthy of Nicomedes; and this is a
higher Favor, than his free Breaking of my Imprisonment; and therefore Loads
me with a greater Trouble, than by it he has freed me from: A Trouble which
shall never cease, but with my Life, unless by some retributions, as eminent
and signal as the Sense I have of your Generosity, I be enabled to act my
Gratitude for it. That silence you enjoin me, I vow Religiously to observe, and
by my kindness to Ostanes, I shall endeavor to make him endure his absence
from you, as little inconveniently as may be, and in some degree convince him,
by the respect I shall pay the Subject, how highly I esteem my self indebted to
his Prince: Of whom also, I will not beg to know why such a Secrecy is enjoined
me; because I perceive, that ought to be as much a Secret to me, as from whose
obligingness I owe my Deliverance, ought to be to every one else: Though, Sir,
I must assure you, it is no small Trouble to me, being so deeply in your Debt,
to be prohibited from publicly acknowledging it, till I shall be so happy as
to pay it: But, Sir, since this Action, when known to the Princess Statira,
will, I hope, procure you her Thanks for it, which will be no ill Reward of it,
though it will not at all diminish my Score; May I not beg your Permission
before I go, to tell her of my going, and from whom I derive that Liberty, that
in her Acknowledgments to you, you may have cause never to repent what you have
done to me, if my own unhappy Condition should not allow me the satisfaction of
doing any thing by way of Retribution for my self. I am sorry, Callimachus,
(Nicomedes replied) That you should ask me any thing I should deny you: But I
hope, when you remember, that for above twenty Days, you have been kept with
such strictness, that you have not been permitted to see any one, nor to be
seen by any, should you just before your Escape, have that Freedom allowed you
by me, for it cannot be by any other, it might raise a suspicion, by what means
you obtained it; and by destroying that end, for which I have desired so
perfect a Secrecy from you, draw a greater inconvenience upon me, than I
believe, could I acquaint you with it, you would have me run into. But to omit
nothing for your satisfaction, I will possibly contrive some way before the
hour of your departure, whereby you may acquaint the Princess with it, and
receive her Commands before you leave her; though neither She her self, nor the
Person employed between you, must upon any terms know I have the least hand in,
or so much as knowledge of your Escape. Perhaps (continued Nicomedes) one Day I
may live to tell you, Why I have thus dealt with you: But if such a thing
should never happen, oblige me, in believing there was reason for it. As soon
as he had done speaking, he immediately withdrew, and with as little Noise as
he had made when he came in; leaving me, not so full of wonder at the Action,
and the Circumstances accompanying it, as of Trouble, that now I must forsake
either my Princess, or highly Disobey her. The unhappiness of this ill Choice,
entertained me till an hour before Midnight, when I was interrupted by my Doors
being opened, and by seeing Nerea come into my Chamber, who, in many Blushes,
for so undue a Time to give me a Visit, told me, She now did it, because
Ostanes a little before had whispered to her, there was a very great and real
necessity of her coming to me immediately, where, possibly she might hear of
things not unpleasing to her; but that she was to come then, or never: She told
me, that having informed the Princess thereof, she had forthwith enjoined her
to come to me, which Orders she had obeyed, being conducted to the Door by
Ostanes, who had opened, and then was waiting at it for her Return. After that
I had paid her my Acknowledgments for the favor of her Visit, which could not
be so unseasonable, but that her Virtue would preserve it from being thought so
by any, that had the happiness to know her; I gave her an Account, how that
above my Expectation, and even above my Desires also, a certain way was offered
me, of escaping that Night; the Overture whereof I could not decline listening
to, because it was Mithridatia's repeated Commands; but that I so much
preferred being a Prisoner when she was one, before Liberty, when she was
denied hers, that at the same time, I told her, probably I could Escape; I
begged her leave, not to do it, though by being of late deprived of the high
Duty and Happiness of waiting on her, I had been deprived of my only comfort in
my Imprisonment, which yet I supported without repining, as a righteous
Judgment, for having been Guilty of the Princess's. Nerea told me, she would
carry my Message, and durst tell me my Answer before she had received it. To be
brief, she went immediately to Mithridatia's Chamber, told her what I had said,
and brought me a positive Command, to lay hold of that opportunity which was so
happily presented me, by which she now had more than hopes of soon being
restored to her Liberty also. Nerea told me at the same time, if I should delay
my Obedience to these Orders, it would trouble the Princess almost as much as
her restraint. She did acquaint me too with a particular I did think somewhat
strange, which was, that as she was returning to me, passing by Pharnaces's
Chamber Door, she perceived Nicomedes gently coming out of it, who no sooner
saw her, but he hastily shut the Door again, and seemed by his Looks to be in
no small disorder at his having been seen by her at that hour in that place. I
had not much leisure then to reflect upon this assurance, being so incessantly
pressed by Nerea to that Obedience Statira had commanded me, and so concernedly
expected from me; which at last I resolved to pay her, and begged Nerea to
acquaint her therewith, who immediately retired to do it. And not long after,
Ostanes came into my Chamber with a Livery-coat of one of Nicomedes's Guards,
which I put on, and being led by him, I past all the Soldiers, and came to that
Creek where the Vessel staid for me; and all things being in readiness, the
Wind too favoring us, I desired them to direct their course for Nicomedia, to
which City in two Days we arrived without meeting any Impediment: I went first
to the Appartment of the generous Atafernes, whom I found in a deep Melancholy
in his Closet; and because he protected to me my Absence and Imprisonment did
partly cause it, he forthwith cast off so large a proportion of it, as did
evidence the reality of that assurance; and after many Embraces he honored me
with, and many Inquiries after the Princess Statira's Health and Condition, he
was pleased to acquaint me, how many ways he had endeavored to to get a Naval
Force able to Land his Army in the Island of Scyros, to restore his Sister, his
Brother, and me to our Liberty: But that the late Victory Nicomedes obtained,
had so terrified all Auxiliaries from serving against him, that even in that
Success, he not only ruined the Cyprian Fleet, but almost the hopes of ever
getting another together to oppose him: He further told me, That as soon as
Ascanius was defeated, he had prevailed with Mithridates to post away Betuitus,
then somewhat recovered of that tedious Indisposition he had so long Languish'd
under, into Cylicia to engage all the Naval strength of that Nation; in which
Betuitus had been so diligent and successful, that whilst Ascanius was here
Visiting the King and Court, acknowledging the high Favor of his enlargement,
excusing his Loss to them, and making many positive Assurances of repairing his
Defeat, and restoring Statira and Pharnaces to their Freedom; Betuitus had so
far engaged the chief Cylician Seamen, that when Ascanius was returned to
Cyprus, he found in his own and his Brother's unsuccessfulness, his Maritim
Strength so exhausted, that he was necessitated to send to hire a foreign Help;
but he could procute none, by reason of their pre-ingagement to my Father's
Admiral. But the Cylicians hired by ^etuitus, are not near enough with that
little Sea-strength Mithridates has left, to form a Fleet strong enough of
themselves to oppose Nicomedes; so that, though by preventing Ascanius, we have
not done our selves much good, yet we have hindered him from wholly engrossing
that Force, which is necessary to reduce the Island of Scyros. Betuitus, who is
a faithful Servant to our Family, and particularly affectionated to Statira and
me, having received a private Advertisement from me, how passionately I desired
her Deliverance, without being indebted to Ascanius for it, but only to
himself; had no sooner assured the Cylicians to Mithridates's Service, than he
forthwith went to the Phoenicians, and has prevailed with many of them to come
under my Fathers Pay; and whilst these are sitting their Galleys, he is
returning to Miletus, where, if he can have the like Success, he assures me,
not only to have a Fleet able to oppose Nicomedes, but to have it ready before
Ascanius has his: who, by a double disappointment in Cylicia and Phoenicia, has
been compelled to send into Egypt to hire Galleys there. And now (continued
Atafernes) We hourly expect to hear of Betuitus's Arrival at Miletus, and what
Success his endeavors will meet with there. I was not (said Callimachus) a
little pleased to find what I most desired, in so hopeful a way toward a good
Result; nor was the Prince less pleased, when in Obedience to his Commands, I
had acquainted him, how by the means of Ostanes I had acted my Escape, even
when I had not only lost the hopes, but the desires of it; neither would he be
satisfied, till I had called in Ostanes to him, whom he Embraced with many
Thanks for what he had done, (for I never mentioned any thing to him of
Nicomedes, because of my solemn Vow) and forced him to take such rich Jewels,
that even those had been of themselves too Prodigal a Ransom for me. Atafernes
soon after told me, how he intended, and had gotten Mithridates's leave to
Imbarque his Army in Betuitus's Fleet, not only to Strengthen it, but if it
were blessed with a Victory, immediately to Land, and prosecute that End, for
which chiefly, if not only, 'twould be a Blessing to him. I was exceedingly
joyed at this assurance, because the Duty of my Office led me, where the Duty
of my Passion called me; but the Prince, who knew how much I should rejoice his
Father by waiting on him, made me attend on him to Mithridates, though it were
very Late; We found the King in his Nightgown ready to go to Bed; But as soon
as he saw me, he ran and embraced me with this flattering Complement, That he
never had received more refreshment from Sleep, than he now received in seeing
me. I will not Enumerate all the Questions he asked me concerning the Princess
Statira, the Prince Pharnaces, their Usage, What had made Nicomedes of late so
unusually Unactive; nor how inquisitive he was of the means of my Escape; to
all which I gave him the truest Answers I could; and when I had mentioned to
him the Obligation I had to Ostanes, he sent for him into his Closet, loaded
him with rich Gifts, and settled a plentiful Pension on him during his Life.
Mithridates by my Return, had been so long interrupted from his intended Rest,
that I thought it a Duty to Retire, which, whilst I was ready to perform, an
Express came to him, and Atafernes, with the sad News of the Death of Betuitus,
the same Day of his Arrival at Miletus; His Age, and the excessive Diligence he
had used in preparing a Fleet in so many Regions for his King's Service, and
the Deliverance of his Prince and Princess, had cast him into a Fever which
ended his Life, just as he was come to that City, where he hoped to increase
his Navy considerably, and before which he had appointed all his Ships and
Galleys, waged amongst the Cylicians and Phoenicians to Rendezvous. This sad
Intelligence wounded sensibly the Pontick King for he had no Subject to whom he
could entrust his Fleet; and he feared, lest those Auxiliaries engaged by
Betuitus, might esteem themselves absolved by his Death; and the Miletians
also, wanting the presence and solicitations of the Pontick Admiral, might
decline that Assistance, in which Mithridates had his Rationallest hopes. I was
not unmoved at the loss of so worthy a Person, and in such a juncture of time,
(and possibly those two Reasons gave the Prince opportunity to move his Father
to employ my Service) ere I could present him an Offer of it: He told
Mithridates, That my longest practice in War had been by Sea; that in several
Actions I had gained some repute in the minds of those which frequent that
Element; and that by my Education and long Residence in Miletus, my Interests
there were likelier to contribute to his Service, than any other he could
employ: He could have added, with at least as much probability, that my
concernments for the relief of the fair Statira, and succeeding my Rival in
that Duty, would add Wings to my haste, as well as Courage to my hopes. In
brief, Atafernes said so much, and Mithridates believed so much, that
immediately he declared me Successor to Betuitus, and gave Directions forthwith
to dispatch my Commission and finish my Orders and Instructions. I was a
thousand times ready to have prostrated my self at the Ponti^k King's feet, to
evidence my Joy and Gratitude for an Employment which I valued more than all
his Empires; for by it I was enabled to dispute Statira on that Element on
which she had been forced from me, and in a possibility to recover that Glory
which my Rival then had lost. Never did Atafernes so sensibly oblige any, as
then he did me; and never did Looks speak more acknowledgments than mine did to
him. The generous Craterus newly recovered of his Wounds, hearing of my
Arrival, came to Visit me, and to give me new Assurances of an old Friendship;
I met him just as the Prince and I were coming out of the King's Appartment,
where in Embraces he celebrated my Return, and the honor Mithridates had so
freshly bestowed upon me, which in a moment was dispersed about the Court: So,
that the news of my Liberty and Succession to Betuitus, went together. I had
only the next Day allowed me by the King to visit and take leave of all my
Friends; and though the time was short, yet the Duty of my impatience made me
esteem it too long. My faithful Demetrius I found recovered of his Wounds, and
ready to go my Journey. When Atafernes retired to his Chamber, I waited on him
thither, and in renewed Repetitions of Gratitude, I endeavored to let him see
I was not unsensible, though unworthy of his Favors: The assurances I gave the
Prince, that I would not mis-imploy one moment in the relief of the Princess
Statira, made him give Craterus Orders to have his Army in a readiness to Ship
on twelve hours notice, when ever I came upon the South-west Coast of Bithynia;
that if the gods favored my Am^ by Sea, the Land forces might be ready to be
transported into the Island of Scyros to perfect that Deliverance, which
chiefly occasioned the War; in which Atafernes was resolved in Person to appear.

This Night when I retired, Demetrius told me, amongst many other things, that
he was exceedingly deceived, if Monyma had not some sensible Relics of that
Affection she had once conferred on me at Miletus. I wondered to hear a
Discourse of this Nature from him who never had practiced the like before; and
knowing of how dangerous a consequence the least vent of that belief might
prove, both to her and me; I told him so much in terms which might let him
understand how highly I was concerned in his Cautionsness therein; and then
as'd him, What Rise that Apprehension of his had? (for, possibly by my knowledge
thereof, I might be better instructed how to carry my self toward her and
others; for, though those Beauties which had first conquered me at Miletus,
were still as Flourishing and Charming as ever, and had received no small
Accession by the noble Ornaments of a Crown; yet I confess, her inconstancy to
me, and the resistless and triumphant Graces both of the Princess Statira's
outward and internal Beauties, had so entirely possessed all my Affection and
Admiration, that Monyma's favor was so far from being my desire, that it would
have been my trouble).

Demetrius in Answer to my Question, told me; As soon, Sir, as the Queen had
heard of my Wounds and Danger, she sent her most experienced Physicians and
Surgeons to me, and commanded their constant attendance on me, till I was
enabled thereby to attend her; which, as soon as ever I was, she sent for me to
her, and without permitting me to pay her my humble acknowledgments for that
Recovery, which (under the gods) I owed unto her favor, she began a Discourse
of you; and knowing I was not ignorant of that Affection she had for you at
Miletus, she did the more freely speak unto me; there being then either by
design or accident, none of her Women in her Cabinet: Her first Questions were*
Whether yet you had discovered from whence you derived your Extraction? How you
had resented her necessitated Marriage of M^thridate?s (For, continued
Demetrius, she spoke in such an Accent that word Necessitated, as I perceived
well, she had a desire I should observe it). And whether you had ever had a
Passion for any before her, or had ever resented any since?

I easily found she was more intent in my Return to the last part of this
Question, than to all the rest; and though I gave her the best Answers I could,
yet still me-thought she had something to say which she had not said, or would
not say. ^And though in her whole Discourses, her Words had they been written,
could not have strictly born a sense which could have manifested any thing more
than a common Affection, and a concernment for you: yet in their Tone, in her
Looks, and in her Dwelling more upon some parts of her Demands, than on others;
I had abundant cause to believe her Inquiries after you, were the productions
of more than an ordinary Curiosity. And by several other Discourses at several
other times, (for ever since I was able to endure the Air, I was daily
commanded to wait upon her) I perceived she still retained her former Passion
for you; and was not a little Jealous you had dedicated yours to some other
Beauty.

Demetrius having ended speaking, I did again with earnestness repeat my former
Orders to him; and though I needed Rest, yet before I would take any, I did in
my Thoughts propound a thousand ways how to carry my self toward Monyma, from
a continuance of whose Affection to me, I more easily foresaw the Prejudices,
than their Remedies: And after all were examined, I found none attended with
less inconveniences, than never to wait on her but in Atafernes's Company, or
the Princess Statira's when she should return, for thereby I should not decline
the Duof attending her, and yet do it in Company, where she would be confined
from evidencing any Inclination for me.

The next Morning I attended Atafernes at his Rising, and begged him, that in
the Afternoon he would let me wait on him to the Queen, to kiss her Hands, both
as my first Visit, and my last. He promised me this favor; and then we went to
the King's Appartment, who had sat up so Late in preparing my Orders, that it
was Noon ere he Rose; and then finding himself unfit for Business, he told me,
'Twould be the next Morning ere I could begin my Journey. That Afternoon
Atafernes led me to the Queen's Appartment, who received me with many obliging
Civilities, and with Looks, which nothing but Statira's Idea could have enabled
me to resist; the whole Discourse consisted of such usual things, that I shall
not repeat any of them in particular: And after an Hour, the Prince rising to
take his leave, I desired the honor of the Queen's Commands, and acquainted
her, That being by the King's Orders to go to Miletus, 'twas not improbable but
he might have some Services to command me thither. Monyma instantly replied,
You have not a little obliged me, Callimachus, in letting me know you were to
go to Miletus, for I hear Irene's Father being Dead, she inheriting all his
Riches is returned thither with her Husband, where most of them were left her:
I intend to present her something, which may let her see she continues in my
remembrance and affection; and therefore I will desire you this Evening to come
hither and receive it, for I know your delivering it will give it a double good
reception. I was so confounded at this Command which had defeated all I had
built, and so vexed at my Self for having given a Rise to it, that I had like
to have discovered to the Queen and Prince my Disorders; which the better to
conceal, I told her, I would not fail to come and receive the Honor of such an
Employment; since to observe her Commands, and oblige the fair Irene, were
Duties in which I found a high Contentment. Atafernes hereupon retired, and I
durst not beg him again to go in the Evening to Monyma's, left that might have
discovered, what I was so desirous to keep from his Knowledge.

From the Queen's side we went to wait on the Princess Nisa, and the Princess
Cleopatra, who then began to disclose Beauties, which but for the fair
Statira's, had not had any Superior in the World. Both their Entertainments
consisted in things relating to the Danger their Sister had been in; and
inquiries, how she endured her Imprisonment, and what hopes there was to free
her from it.

By that time these Duties were paid, and other Visits I owed to my Friends, it
was Evening; and therefore I sent Demetrius to discover whether there were any
Company with Monyma, resolving when there was most, to wait upon her, that I
might not be engaged in a particular Discourse with her, which I so much
feared, and she, I found desired: I waited so long, that at last he returned
with assurance, that both the Princesses, Nisa, and Cleopatra, were with the
Queen, attended by all the greatest Persons of the Court. To embrace therefore
this desired opportunity, I went directly toward the Queen's Appartment, and
crossing a long Gallery which was in my way, I found Mithridates in it, who
seeing me, called me to him, as he said, to make me a sharer in the good News
he had then received: which was a Packet sent by an Express from Ascanius, to
assure him, Though he had met with many difficulties in forming a Fleet for the
Princess Statira's Deliverance, and his Service, yet now he had vanquished them
all, and would in twenty Days present him a Navy, which he was confident would
cure the Wounds of his former Misfortunes, and present his Princess and her
Brother with that Liberty, the loss whereof was more insuppotable to him, than
it could be to them. I was not (continued Callimachus) generous enough to
rejoice at such an additional Strength to the Princess's Deliverance; I had
rather have had it left to my Fleet, than have had the Assistance of my Rivals:
But this Packet made the King detain me a long hour, in resolving where the two
Fleets should Rendezvous; and when, and how they should prosecute the War.
Miletus was judged the most fit place for the Fleets assembling; that being in
the way for the Cyprian Fleet, and the appointed Rendezvous by Betuitus for all
his Phoenician and Cilician Galleys, as well as the place from whence we
expected so considerable a Force, which I thought would the sooner be much
Augmented by their seeing how considerable a Navy we had got together. The
Fleet in the Hellespont had Orders sent forthwith (Wind and Weather serving) to
Rendezvous in the Great Bay before Miletus, there to expect further Commands.

The taking up these Resolves, and the dispatches for putting them in
Execution, took us up a full hour; so that by the time I came to Monyma's
Chamber, I found the two Princesses and all the Company had left it; which
necessitated me wholly to disobey her Commands, and break my own Engagement; or
else to do that, which next to an Incivility and breach of Promise, I most
apprehended.

Whilst I was debating with my Self what to do, one of the Queen's Women, who
thought my stay near the Door, was only to know whether the Queen was at
leisure to receive my Visit; was so-over officious as to go in to Monyma, and
to tell her I waited at the Door to kiss her Hands. Monyma forthwith sent the
same Woman to desire me to come in, which cut off all Debates, and made me
follow my Guide, who led me into the Queen's Bedchamber; who no sooner saw me,
but she rose and came to meet me: But so lovely, and so charming, that had not
the remembrance of her Inconstancy been as much my Preservative, as my Flame to
my Princess, I must then have Acted that Sin myself, which was my only quarrel
to her. An hundred Crystal Lamps shined in the Chamber, and yet gave it a less
Light, both in degrees and quality, than the Queen's Eyes: Her Dress was at
once so negligent and advantageous, that I found a great Art consisted in
seemingly declining of any: Her Looks had an equal mixture of Sorrow and
Obligingness; and yet I never saw any Face covered with Joy, inhabited with
more Luster and Empire. I must confess what I saw, made me often willing to
have exchanged the hopes of the Glory of Triumphing over such an Enemy, to have
avoided the Temptation of her Conquest; and if ever I knew the power I had over
my self, or rather the power the fair Statira had over me, 'twas in that Night
remaining (I will not say Unmoved, but I may say) unvanquish'd.

After my little Disorders were over, I told the Queen; Madam, I should not
have been guilty of twice troubling you in one Day, had not the honor of your
Commands occasioned it; nor have paid you this last Duty at so uncivil an hour,
if the King had not unexpectedly kept me so Late, and enjoined me to begin my
Journey so Early, that I must now have obeyed you, or else have been incapable
to do it.

Monyma walking toward a part of her Chamber, where, though some of her Women
had continued in the place they were, yet they could neither see nor hear us;
and there seating her self under a great Cloth of State: she told me; I did
indeed, Callimachus, expect this favor from you somewhat Earlier; and your
staying thus long, might have made me doubt you would not have come, had I not
remembered, that you so detested a forced breach of Promise in another, that you
would not have acted a Voluntary one your self. But you see Mithridates has the
power to hinder you from performing, at your own time, your intentions to me,
as well as to hinder me from observing mine to you: I am so good Natured, (she
continued, with a Smile mixed with a serious Look, that what she said might be
taken either way) that I freely forgive your failer; and I will hope, that your
Reason, your good Nature, and my Example, will invite you to practice the like
toward me. This Answer (said Callimachus) made me judge what the whole
entertainment of my Visit would consist of; and though it was but what I
expected, yet it was also what I feared; and therefore the less to entangle my
self in Discourse, I only chose to answer such parts of hers, as might give her
the least Rise to dwell upon those particulars on which I apprehended she would
most insist. I therefore only replied; I will hope, Madam, by that power you
have found Mithridates has, you will the sooner pardon an Incivility in me,
which is but an effect of that Cause. I shall never (replied the Queen) esteem
your Visits an Incivility, but an Obligation; yet, lest you should think them
otherwise, (for I find you have some Thoughts of me concerning you, which you
ought not to have) to silence those Scruples, I do grant you whatever
forgiveness you desire: Then listing up her Eyes, and fixing them on me, she
said, May I have that satisfaction, to receive from you as full a forgiveness,
as I have given you? This is the second time I have asked it; and if your
Answer be not as positive as the Desire, whatever words your Civility or Wit
may disguise it in, I shall esteem it a flat Denial, and deplore it at that
Rate. Then casting down her Eyes, which began to swell with some Tears, she
added; Callimachus, before you make me any Return, remember what I acted was in
obedience to the highest Duty; was a performance of necessity, not choice; and
is a punishment as great as the fault.

At the end of these words, Those Tears which a little before had but appeared
in her fair Eyes, now began to give way to those which were to follow; which
did so in such abundance, that though she strove, by wiping them away, to
conceal them, or at least their excess, yet both were so visible, that they
melted the violence of all my Resentments: And in an Accent, which might as
much evidence Truth in one of my Sex, as Weeping could in one of hers, kneeling
at her Feet, I told her, Whatever, Madam, my Griefs, whatever my Resentments
have been, I hope neither of them have been so rude, as to make you doubt my
Obedience to any of your Commands: If they have been so undesignedly
unfortunate, they have as much Wounded me in you, as for you; and if an
assurance of an entire observance of those Commands you have mentioned to me,
can repair that unhappiness, I shall find in my Duty my contentment.

At the end of these words, Monyma casting one of her Arms over me, she
replied; Callimachus, What you have promised, cannot be a greater Justice than
it is an Obligation; an Obligation of so noble a Nature and Efficacy, that I
ought to cast my self in the like posture, to speak my Gratitude, as you have
been in, whilst you performed that which caused it.

I was not (continued Callimachus) a little confounded and surprised at what
Monyma said and did: But though I were in the Arms of one of the greatest
Beauties of the World, and of the greatest Person in it, the Effects of whose
kindness, in the then Dictates of it, I might possibly have carried to a higher
degree; yet I had so entirely resigned up my self to the fair Statira, that the
highest satisfaction I took in the Queen's favors, proceeded from a knowledge I
attained thereby, that nothing was capable to alter or diminish my Passion for
my Princess, since Monyma's Charms and Kindness wanted that Power; Charms, I
say, which consisted of those almost resistless Ingredients, of Beauty,
Kindness, Opportunity, and Quality: And though I were not a little concerned,
that Mithridatia should have seen the small transports in which I entertained
my first Mistress's favors, that thereby she might have read the intireness of
my Flame for the last; yet I had so much respect for the Queen, that I would
not have purchased such a satisfaction, at so dear a price to her.

But after she had a while continued in that Fashion I have mentioned, and I
speechless, occasioned by what she did, and what I thought; She raised her self
up at last, with a Face so covered with Blushes, that I have since believed,
what by surprise she had Acted, having caused that Vermillion, she so long
continued what she had done, to give it time to retire: She had no sooner
recovered a little out of those disorders she had been in, then she told me;
Rise, Callimachus, lest some unexpected Witnesses of the postures we have been
in, might mis-interpret them. These words waked me out of my Thoughts, and
whatever else had entertained me; and having paid an Obedience to her Commands,
she told me; I hope, Callimachus, you believe, that great Joy does bring some
Madness with it; and therefore, that you will attribute to what you have
promised me, all those Productions that assurance has made me guilty of; and
since I am now (I hope) restored to your good Opinion, you will permit me, as
an effect of that vast Concern I have still had for you, which always continued
its first Luster in me, though clouded to your Sight, to be inquisitive after
whatever relates unto you, and to offer you all the interests I have in
Mithridates, to establish any of yours, which you are to derive from him: And
because, when I left you at Miletus, (at which words, said Callimachus, she
Sighed) you were in no small perplexity, at your Ignorance of your Extraction;
Tell me, I beseech you, whether yet you have had any Light of it. Madam, (I
replied) I am yet as great a Stranger to my Birth, as I was then; but having
lost the generous Telamon on the Sea, as soon as I had in some degree conquered
my Sorrows, I resolved on that Element to make a diligent Inquiry after him; in
which search I continued, till the gods presented me the occasion to serve the
Princess Statira; and ever since that time, you have seen and known my
Adventures.

Those gods (the Queen replied) were not a little concerned in the
manifestation of my Innocence, and in restoring me to the happiness of your
Friendship, since, as the way to the end, they permitted so excellent a Person
as the Princess Statira, to be reduced to a danger, which only Callimachus's
Courage was able to free her from: But, (said Monyma, fixing her Eyes on me)
confess to me, I conjure you, Were you not in the same Action, Conqueror, and
Conquered? I was not (said Callimachus) a little confounded at so unexpected a
Question; which made the Queen thus to continue; Blush not, Callimachus, at
what I ask you, I know nothing greater than the impossibility of not adoring
Statira, but the Sin of being ashamed at it: You that did not resist that
little Beauty the gods had favored me with, How could you resist those Graces,
which disclose themselves with such triumphing Luster in that Princess? I tell
you not this, to discover your Inclinations, but by letting you know I am
acquainted with them, I hope to invite you to make me your Confident: For by
the Laws of the Gods, of Men, and of Virtue, being indispensably confined from
even the Thoughts of possessing you my self, it will be my happiness to
contribute to the making of yours. I know the height of her Birth, and your
Ignorance of Yours, are vast Impediments; but I know also your Person, and your
Actions, are above all other Men's, as much as her Quality is above Yours: I
know too, that her exact Obedience to the King, and the near consummation of
her Nuptials, are considerable hindrances; but I know also, that Love is more
considerable help: And all my exactest Observations abuse me, if she had not
gone with less trouble to the Temple, had she been led thither by Callimachus,
instead of Ascanius. Who knows, but that the Glory of her third Deliverance is
reserved to you? And who knows, but that those gods, which so miraculously
separated her from the King of Cyprus for a time, may, in the next Battle,
separate him from her Eternally? It Is not impossible too, but that Mithridates,
to reward your Services, and to repair the intended fatal Obedience of his
Daughter, may be induced to make that Happiness for you, which the gods, by so
many repeated and admirable Events, have seemed to declare they design you to:
Possibly also, some happy Accident may discover to you in the progress of this
War, it being Naval, and Tellamon being separated from you on the Sea, from
whence you derive your Extraction, and the Knowledge of your Quality may give
you as free an admittance to make your Addresses to Statira, as your Services
have given you an interest in her. These (continued Monyma) are the Hopes I
have for you; and if, by the affection Mithridates honors me with, I may in
any degree contribute by my endeavors to change them unto Certainties, if you
esteem me worthy of your Trust, you shall find by my Actions, that I have
afresh desired your Friendship, but the more hopefully to place on you the
effects of mine; and by my future Deportment, in some measure, to repair you
for the Sins of my past Carriage: For though, Callimachus, I confess I love
you, and possibly more than I ought for my Quiet, and perhaps for Yours too;
yet, since such an Affection is a Guilt, I the sooner take this way, to free my
self from it; and it is no small satisfaction to me, that what is the intended
remedy of my Fault, should be the evidence of my Esteem and Concernment for you.

Never, (said Callimachus) never was I reduced to a greater Trouble in forming
an Answer, than at that time: The first part of her Discourse had so flattered
my Passion, and my Hopes, that I listened to it in Ecstasies; but the latter
part, reducing me to the necessity of owning my Flame, or of disobliging the
Queen, who so generously offered me her Assistance, and seemed in what she had
spoke, to have taken off the Veil from all Disguisements, and to express a
Tenderness for me, which at least required Truth and Respect from me; that,
between those extremes, I remained in Troubles so unexpressible, and great,
that the gods pitying me, sent me an unexpected Relief; for just as I was going
to speak, and yet not fully resolved what I should say, one of the Ladies of
the Queen's Bedchamber came hastily to her, and told her; Madam, the King has
sent to tell you, that, having all this Day wearied himself in Business, he
intends to give himself the contentment of passing this Night in your Company;
and is now coming through the Gallery hither.

Monyma casting her Eyes upon me, seemed, by them, to say something, which, I
interpreted, was to express more trouble than satisfaction at the King's
message; and rising hastily up, gave me a Present for the fair Irene, and
commanded me to tell her, She sent her that, as an assurance, that whomsoever
she loved perfectly once, she would always love in that degree. And then
hastily taking leave of me, she went to meet the King, who was almost at her
Chamber Door; where she entertained him a while, that I might have the more
leisure to retire; which I did with a Joy equal to the Trouble I was then freed
from.

I will not trouble you, with all the various Thoughts which employed me, upon
what the Queen had done, spoken, and offered; but to repair having so long
insisted on this Visit, I will hasten generous Princes, to tell you, That the
Night, I took my last leave of Atafernes, and having dispatched Persons of
Quality and Parts, with Mithridates's desires to the Cylicians and Phoenicians,
to hasten their Fleets to the Bay of Miletus; I sent also by expresses of great
Trust, Orders to Galatides, Admiral for Mithridates of the Euxine and
Hellespontick Squadrons, that, because his Fleet was to pass by the Island of
Scyros, where all Ariobarzanes and Nicomedes's Fleet lay, lest they should
attempt to intercept him, to keep the Western-Coast of Asia close on his left
hand; to have Scouts so far advanced, as to receive timely Allarms; to take up
all the small Vessels of Bithynia, and Fisher-boats a long the Coast, with as
much privacy as possibly he could; and in the beginning of the Night, to give
all those small Vessels the Lights of his Fleet, with Order to keep as near
that Coast as they could; which might not only delude the Enemy, but endanger
them: For his Ships and Galleys being of the largest in the World, they would
boldly (possibly without Sounding) follow such; and that with all his Fleet,
during the Night, he should strike over to the Eastern-Coast of Greece, and
keep that on his right Hand, till he were gotten so far to the Southward of
Greece, as the length of the Bay of Miletus, for which he should then hasten,
as fast as his Oars and Sails could carry him. These Orders, soon after my
coming to Miletus, I found had not been needless; for, by them, Galatides
assured me, he not only escaped Nicomedes, but the Lights in the small Vessels
so well abused him, that not a few of his were Stranded, and others Cast away,
in their Chase, ere the rest of his Fleet perceived the Delusion. The
Miletians, who were a People wholly, of late Years dedicated to their Trade;
though they received Mithridates's Letters to them, with all the formalities of
reverence, and respect, yet could not be induced to let that King have any help
under their public Flags; for Nicomedes seemed to give the Law on the Sea,
and their greatest Trade was on that Element, and his Ships had been so Civil
to them, as thitherto, not to have interrupted it. Yet by the help of the fair
Irene, and her Lord, together with that Interest I had gained newly, and
formerly, amongst some of the Chiefest of that City, I procured leave to raise
what Volunteers I could engage, and particular Vessels I could hire, which was
a Privilege also, they gave at the same time, though unsought after, unto
Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes; but they made not use of it, either as not wanting
it, or not having timely notice of it.

From Miletus I daily renewed my Solicitations to the Cylicians and
Phoenicians; and whatever time I had to employ from the Duties of my Charge, I
dedicated it to the fair Irene; in the happiness of whose Nuptials, I saw
enough to make me at once rejoice at her Condition, and deplore my Own. But
when I delivered to her Monyma's Present and Words; she told me smiling, If the
Queen's assurance be without Limitation, Mithridates has a double Reason to
engage you to Command his Fleets and Armies abroad. But I assured her, all that
had been Passion on my side, was turned to Respect; and all that had been
seeming Affection on her side, was turned into real Friendship. She told me,
she was perfectly glad thereof, both for Monyma's sake, and mine.

The last Evening that I waited on her, the joyful News was brought me in her
Company, that a great Fleet was discovered in the South-east, making for the
Bay of Miletus: This Advertisement drew me hastily from that excellent Person,
and her Lord, and made me take a final leave of the Magistrates of the City,
having that Morning sent into the Bay all those Men and Vessels I could engage
there to join with Galatides, then Riding there; and though I flattered my self
with a Belief, that this appearing. Fleet was from Cilicia and Phoenicia, yet
lest it should be Nicomedes which might come that Course, either from having
pursued Galatides, or at the least to Alarm me, by taking that way by which my
expected Helps were to come, I hastened on Board, and put my Fleet in the best
post posture I could to receive them as Enemies or Friends. But the uncertainty
soon ceased, my Scouts bringing me word it was the conjoined Navies of Cyprus
and Egppt, led by Ascanius in Person; and soon after, I perceived in the Flag
of the Admiral, a Venus ascending out of the Waves; but a Venus fairer than she
which sprung out of the Sea: For the lovely Image as perfectly resembled the
Princess Statira, as the noblest Piece of Art could the noblest Piece the gods
did ever Create.

Ah! How I envied the high Honor Ascanius had assumed of Fighting for the
Princess Statira under her Picture! and did a thousand times repine, that by
the Barbarous Maritim Laws I could not change my Flags! And that the King of
Cyprus, by observing those of his Country, might bear such glorious ones! Had
I not been confined to those miserable Ties, I could have hoped by imitating
Ascanius, to have raised the Valor of my Soldiers, by letting them see in the
Copy what the Original was for which they Fought: My Flag displayed a
Terrestrial Globe; Mithridates thereby intimating his aspiring to the universal
Monarchy; so that I bore the World, and Ascanius bore mine: Yet 'twas no small
consolation to me, that though I carried not her Image in so conspicuous a
Place, as my Rival did; yet I carried it where it was more Lively drawn, and
where I could not outlive the Loss of it.

Whilst I was thus entertaining my Self, the Cyprian and Egyptian Fleets cast
Anchor, at which I knew not whether I was more pleased, or troubled; This, that
their Admiral did thereby confess he stood in need of my help; That, because
some precious time was lost, in acting for Statira's Deliverance. But the
various Thoughts I was in, hindered me not from paying to the Cyprian King the
Duty I owed his Title. Wherefore I went forthwith Aboard him, where I was
entertained with all imaginable Civility and Honor; and with no small
expressions of his Trouble, that the Cilician and Phoenician Helps were not yet
Arrived; which, he said, He esteemed advisable to stay some Days for, that they
might lose no accessional Force in so Ambition'd a Victory. I assured him, that
it was more desirable, with the Force we had, to proceed in so Glorious a
quarrel, than to permit the Imprisonment of the Princess so long time, as must
be spent in the expectancy of their Arrival; that the Justice of the Quarrel,
and the Person for whom 'twas undertaken, were assurances of Success in the
Result of it; and if we thought a good Cause was favored by the gods, we could
not but believe thereby, we were supplied with more Strength than even the
desired Addition could produce: And therefore I offered, with the Naval-Force I
had, to compose the lest Wing: that, to stay for those Fleets we expected,
would convince the Enemy, and our own Soldiers that we thought we needed them;
and if they can not, as 'twas as probable they would not come at all, as that
they should not come by the Day prefixed by Mithridates, and promised by
themselves, we must then either wholly decline the Action, or attempt it with
the evidences of our own doubt of Success; nay, possibly by a continuance where
we were, invite Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes to seek us out, when also by our
continuance where we were, we acknowledged we apprehended their Encounter.

These Reasons, and that Offer of mine, made the Cyprian King cast off all
Thoughts of delaying the Battle, or at least of presenting the Enemy with it;
Possibly their own Weight, possibly that none might appear more forward than
himself in that Action, in which he was to receive the greatest and highest
Rewards, made him resolve and declare, That the next morning he would set Sail
for the Island of Scyros: and there find the end of his Hopes, or of his Life.
And to evidence his Apprehensions sprung from his fears, that my Wing needed
assistance, not his, he offered me some eighteen Galleys to Fortify it: But
having paid him my Acknowledgments for that offer, I declined it, thereby to
convince him, his Fleet and mine, that I thought I needed no such Accession.

After we had resolved on all things for the Decision of the Battle, in which
he chose the right Wing, and assigned me the left, He showed me several rare
Inventions of his own Subjects, and of the Egyptians; both which had then the
opinion of the best and most experienced Seamen in the whole World, as well
for Navigation, as Fight. One of which I cannot omit particularizing, which
was, that the Egyptians, in most of their Galleys, had diverse great Earthen
Pots full of small holes: in which Pots they had enclosed great Serpents, which
by the Holes, received Air and Sustenance enough to preserve them. These were
to be flung into such Galleys as they grappled with. The fall of the Earthen
pots on the Decks of the Enemies Vessels, would infallibly break them; And then
the hungry Serpents being at liberty, would wind themselves about the Limbs of
the next they could seize on: and thereby not only hinder them from Fighting,
but in a short while put an end to their Lives.

This admirable and cruel Invention I commended, only because 'twas to be
employed against the Detainers of my Princess; though in it self, I did not
like it, esteeming it a Salvage cruelty, to employ venomous Beasts to destroy
the Lives of Valiant Men. Soon after I had seen some other like Inventions, I
retired to my own Fleet; and, according to the resolution taken Aboard
Ascanius, made all things ready to weigh Anchor with the Morning's light: which
accordingly we did, (I having first left Orders for the Cilician, and
Phoenician Fleets to follow me) And with Oars and Sails, we steered our course
to the Island of Scyros; where, to my unspeakable Joy the Day following, by
that time the Sun was two hours high, we discovered the two King's Fleets,
embattelling within the easy prospect of the Castle: and as ready to accept of
the Fight, as we were to present it them. I soon perceived the Bithynian Flags
composed the right Wing, which I was to Fight against; and the Cappadocian the
left Wing, which Ascanius was to oppose.

Elevated with the Glory of what I sought for, and before whom I fought; and
troubled at nothing more than at the glorious Flag which the King of Cyprus
carried, I began the Battle, which I might truly say, was replenished with more
various accidents than ever any which was fought before. And though the
Princess had the trouble to see her Deliverance was a long time in the Balance;
yet at last, she had the satisfaction to see the Pontick and Bithynian Admiral
engaged singly: and, though Nicomedes did all that became a King and a General,
yet being himself sunk under the weight of his personal Wounds, I entered his
Galley, and took him my Prisoner; though when I did it, he was by the loss of
Blood, incapable to see my Success, or deplore the want of his own.

As soon as ever that Admiral Galley was conquered, all the rest of his Fleet
confusedly fled to the Shore; in which Chase we sunk many, and took more; and
prosecuted our Victory as far as the Water would give us leave.

But the Success could not be more glorious on our left Wing, than it was
deplorable in the right; for on my Return to see whether our Friends needed our
assistance, I found the Cyprian and Egyytian Fleets, as totally vanquished, as
the Mithridiatick had the Bithynian: nay, I saw a Cappadocian Galley carrying
That glorious Flag at her Stern, which a little before had adorned the main-Top
of the Cyprian Admiral. The fury I was in at that sight, carried my Galley with
Wings to so desired a recompense and revenge; and the Enemy as proud of their
prize, as I was enraged to see it theirs, disputed their Purchase with at least
as much resolution, as that with which they had acquired it. The Fight was
such, that even the winning of this Galley, cost me not less blood and time,
than Nicomedes's: But at length she yielded, and presented me with an Effigies,
than which, nothing to me could be more acceptable, unless the glorious
Original. To recover that noble Trophy, was an Honor which needed not to set
it off, the Foyl of my Rivals having lost it.

In brief, that large Scene in which the Battle had been fought, was cleared of
all our Enemies, but five Galleys: for Ariobarzanes satisfied with his having
done that to our right Wing, which I had done to his; and having been
disordered in that Success too much, to attempt the changing of mine: or else
apprehending a Forest of Vessels, which then began to appear (and, which
afterward I found were my Phoenician and Cilician Fleets) retired to the
Island of Scyros, and left those five Galleys I had mentioned, engaged against
one single Egyptian Galley. Which, though it defended it self with much
Resolution; yet I saw at last those in it, did not more deserve than need my
assistance, I therefore hastened to afford it them. A young Gentlemen of that
Nation, and of the color of those Inhabitants, in splendid Arms, so animated
his, both by words and by Example, that in his Valor only the hopes and life
of their Party consisted. The Enemy observing my Approach, offered him all
honorable Quarter; and though he was Courted by many Civilities to accept it,
yet he declined it in words which testified his Resolution as much as his
Defense had done. And by that time I had joined his Galley, I heard the end of
the young Egyptian's Reply, which he finished in these words; That it was an
unavoidable Fate for every man once to Die, but he did not think it was the
like: for Gallant Men once to yield. This generous Answer, in my judgment, made
him and his the more worthy of my assistance; which I presented him with such
Success, that he was soon in a condition to afford his Enemies those
Civilities, which he had so lately refused to receive from them.

By that time I came into his Galley, to congratulate his Success, and give his
Valor those Elogies it merited, I found him weltring in abundance of Blood,
which he had drawn from others, and lost himself. The taking off his Helmet to
give him Air, discovered a Face as remarkable for the noble features of it, as
any I ever saw; and which, though black, and in the Arms of Death, retained
Charms enough to make me admire it. I gave all my Surgeons express and
repeated Orders concerning him; and though I strictly examined all his Soldiers
who he was, yet none of them would or could satisfy my Curiosity, protesting
they had never seen him before that Morning, in which by the Egyptian
Vice Admiral, he was put to Command that Galley upon the Death of the late
Captain of it. But, continued Callimachus, I doubt generous Princes, my
concernment for this eminent Stranger has too long carried me away from the
direct Sequel of my Relation; which therefore (having begged your pardons for)
I will reassume by telling you, That several of the Cyprian Commanders which
had fled under my Flags, to avoid the Cappadocian King's Navy, assured me, that
their own Prince was fallen dead on his Deck, ere Ariobarzanes had taken him:
and that his last words were, It more troubles me to lose my Flag, than my
Life. His last consideration being so worthy of an Adorer of my Princess, made
me Celebrate his Fall with a grief as real as great; and the abhorred Name of a
prevailing Rival, hindered not my paying his Merits the acknowledgments due to
his Title, and Unhappiness. I offered all those Cyprian Commanders, to employ
my whole Fleet to recover his Body; that those which could not Conquer him
whilst alive, might not possess him when dead: But they all assured me he was
past recovery, as well out of the Enemies hands, as out of the hands of Death;
for they had seen the Cappadocian Admiral carry under the Castle in the Island
of Scyros, the Cyprian Admiral's Galley, in which their dead King and General's
Body was.

This loss appearing past remedy, I went to enquire how the generous Nicomedes
was; and how my Physician, and Chirugeon's care of him had succeeded: but alas,
I still found him in that swoon in which I had left him, and in so little hopes
of Life, that hardly any misery had befaln me in the whole course of my own,
had been more intolerable or sensible to me. But those about him, either as it
was their belief, or else to lessen that grief which his condition so visibly
invaded me with, assuor'd me he was Alive; and that none of those Wounds they
had sounded, appeared mortal: so that his Escaping was not only possible, but
hopeful. And though these words were very welcome to me, yet the gods were
pleased to send me something else, which was much more; for even whilst I was
under my fears of his Death, by a deep Sigh, and opening of his Eyes, he
manifested he had Life. The eminent generosity of this Prince to all men, and
the particular effects of it to me, which also were in some measure the Causes
of his then Condition, gave me as high a satisfaction, as my sorrow for him had
been before; both which, could not have been more sincere and eminent, had I
then known the Relation I had unto him. And because the motion of the Sea, and
the small accommodations in a Galley, were incommodious, if not dangerous to
him; I forthwith sent a Trumpet on Shore to Ariobarzanes with this Letter.

Callimachus, to the King of Cappadocia.
I Was till even now in no small apprehensions that I should have done that to
you, which now upon the score of your Generosity I will hope for from you; and
by sending to you the Body of Nicomedes, have expected from you the Body of
Ascanius: But the gods having restored your great Friend to Life, and my best
Physicians and Chyrurgeons giving me more than hopes of his Recovery, I was
unwilling to keep so welcome an assurance from you. I believe you will not
esteem the Restoration of the Princess Statira, and the Prince Pharnaces, too
disproportionate an exchange for him; I have therefore sent this Letter to
propound it to you: And because it is below the generous Ariobarzanes to detain
the body of a dead Enemy, or receive any exchange for it, I will with Certainty
wait for those effects therein, that his Virtue will give me; which cannot be
greater, than my esteem of it, and confidence in it.


I was necessitated, both to cloud my passion, and not to appear too unworthy
of Mithridates his trust, to add Pharnaces to the exchange of Nicomedes; and
only to mention the name of my Princess, without particularizing those
inducements for her deliverance which her Innocence, her Beauties, and other
admirable persections might have excessively furnish^ me with. Whilst my
Trumpet was going, and returning, I was visited by the Cilician and Phoenician
Admirals, who in such humble and moving Expressions, evidenced their sorrow for
coming some hours too late, that I was more troubled to console them, than I
had been at their absence; which was occasioned by an unhappy Difference had
fallen out between the Chiefs of both their Countries, which had already drawn
some Blood: and they doubted would draw more ere it was extinguished. Nay, they
had not now come, but that a religious Person, who for being such, was eminent
to both their Nations, represented to them, That whilst they strove about what
was doubtful, they acted a Certain evil, by employing those Forces against each
other, which were mutually engaged to serve Mithridates. This being spoken from
so reverend a Person, produced this effect, That they all unanimously engaged
to perform their Contract, and to serve the Pontick King in his first Naval
Engagement. But then by solemn Oath, they tied themselves the next day to
return, whatever their Success was, and to obey whatever their Superiors
should enjoin; who they hoped by this short Peace, would assume thoughts of a
perpetual one: and by their Absence, might be invited to extinguish that Flame,
which their Presence did but kindle and animate. That therefore they were come,
not only to implore my pardon for their having been absent; but to beg my
permission to return, that they might therein satisfy their Oaths to their
gods, and their Duties to their Chiefs.

After I had acquainted them with my trouble for their absence, and for the
cause of it, I began to endeavor to make them sensible, that even by their
Vows, they were confined to see one Engagement more; for this that was past,
they had rather heard of than seen: That our Fleets which had engaged, were so
shattered, that without their help we could not continue the Siege of the
Island, till it was reduced: which to effect, we were to employ half of our
number to transport at once the Prince Atafernes's Army; since to Land it in
parts, were to expose it to the Army there, who by that worst proceeding, might
soon repair on the Land, what they had lost on the Sea. I did not omit to add
to these Motives, all those others which I thought might engage them; But
pleading their Oaths to the gods, and their Superiors, as soon as the first
Engagement was over, and binding themselves to me by the most Sacred Vows they
could make, as soon as their domestic differences were ended by the Sword, or
by Agreement, they would immediately return to Mithridates's Service if called,
and face the Island for five days before they returned, which was a competent
time to transport the Prince's Army into it. Not being able to prevail for
more, I accepted so much; and forthwith sent an Express to the King, to
acquaint him with our Success, and at what at Rate we had bought it. I likewise
employed another Express to the generous Atafernes, with an account of all
things; and how that in two days I intended to bring into the Bay of Nicomedia
so many of his Father's Fleet, as would transport into the Island Forces enough
to Conquer it: and that I would leave the residue of the Fleet with the
Cilician and Phoenician Navies, to block it up in the mean time, that none in
it might get out of it, and no new Supplies might be received into it. By that
time I had informed these Resolutions, and dispatched these Expresses, the
Barge I had sent with the Trumpet, returned; and he brought me this Letter.

Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia, to Callimachus, Admiral of the Pontick Fleet.
I Had now returned you the dead Body of the King of Cyprus, if two Noblemen
his Subjects, and my Prisoners, had not begged it of me; that they might
perform the Cyprian Funeral-solemnities due unto his Quality; and after that,
carry it to receive the like Obsequies in his own Country; for which end I
have given them their own Liberty, and their own Galley, with my Pass to return
to Cyprus, as soon as these intended Ceremonies are finished here, and that his
Corpse is Embalmed. I acknowledge your great Civility, in sending me news of
Nicomedes being alive; which yet does therefore hinder me from being able to
dispose of so considerable a Prisoner as the Prince Pharnaces is: But for the
Princess Statira, as it was always against my will she was detained (Women
being neither the Cause, nor the continuance of our War); so I shall willingly
exchange her, and all the Prisoners with her, for Nicomedes; Who, I am
confident in your judgment, and in her Fathers also, will be a sufficient
Ransom for the King of Bithynia, if he does not recover of his Wounds: And if
he do, you may with reason expect from his justice without a bargain, what ever
he esteems this Exchange will fall short of the value of his Liberty.


The gods, continued Callimachus, only knew my transports at the reading of
this Letter; For had the King of Cappadocia demanded for the Princess, not only
Nicomedes, but also Callimachus, and the whole Fleet he commanded, he had in
raptures of Joy delivered them up to Ariobarzanes; and esteemed that Purchase
too low a Price for the honor of her Redemption. I therefore immediately
accepted of his offer on the Conditions he proposed; and having received his
assurance of delivering the Princess on his receiving Nicomedes, I forthwith
sent that generous King to the Island in his own Galley, lest his removal might
have been at once painful and dangerous to him; and as some small Evidence, how
disadvantageous an Agreement I thought my Enemies had made for themselves, I
cast their Admiral-Galley into the bargain; And I did with all my Fleets
accompany the King of Bithynia toward his Port. And having attended him, as
far as with safety I might, and paid him all the Sea-honours I was capable of,
which yet-his Condition made him ignorant he had received, I then cast Anchor,
and in impatiencies above description, waited for the arrival of the Princess;
to whom I had ordered the Fleets to pay Submissions and Honors, which they
never had before presented to any Admiral.

Whilst this ambition'd happiness was expected in Raptures due unto it, or
rather short of it, I perused a Letter brought me by my Trumpeter from those
two Cyprian Noblemen, to whom Ariobarzanes had given their King's Body; who
therein did acquaint me, That the necessary Honors due by their Laws to their
King's Embalming, would consume at least thirty days: by which time they
desired, if any occassions called me elsewhere, I would appoint all the
remainder of the Cyprian Fleet to be where now they Anchored, to receive their
King's Body, and to attend it into Cyprus to the Tomb of his Predecessors. My
Trumpeter also told me, That he learned Ariobarzanes, having as totally
defeated our right Wing, as I had his left, had determined by a new Combat to
have forced from me my Success, or increased it; but that the then appearing of
the Fleets of the Cilicians and Phoenicians, which they knew was not for their
assistance, they having then all the help they could expect; But chiefly the
Cappadocian King's Wounds, which he dissembled till their effects then revealed
them, and a large Leak his Admiral-Galley had received, made him retire with
the glory of that Victory he had obtained over the Cyprians. That he had seen
the Body of Ascanius wept over by all his Subjects, which were Prisoners, who
in the greatest of their Griefs, had evidenced the greatness of their Loves.

Whilst my Trumpeter was entertaining me with these Relations, I perceived a
Magnificent Barge appear from the Shore. I concluded the Princess Statira was
in it; and having drawn up my Fleet in a Cressent to receive her, leaving them
in that Figure, I advanced with my own Admiral-Galley, to wait on her: And as
soon as I saw she was there, I descended into my Barge, and in unconceivable
Raptures went aboard hers: where casting my self at her Feet, I did more by
Actions than Words, endeavor to show her my Transports at her Restoration,
and at my having been Instrumental in it. She had the goodness to receive me
with that Empire and Modesty, which still accompanied her highest Favors to
me; and having with acknowledgments dismissed the Cappadocian and Bithynian
Nobility, which had till then waited on her, as Ariobarzanes, notwithstanding
the pain of his wounds, had done to the Barge, she ascended my Galley, and in
it went to the Fleet* who received her with shouts and clashing of Arms, and
all the other Military Evincements and Complements of Joy. Nay, all the
Flag-ships struck their signs of being such, and only let them fly again when
she commanded; to show, that she only gave Laws where I was Admiral. All
Ceremonies of her return being ended, she retired unto the Stern-Cabbin of the
Galley, and none being present but Nerea, I did again prostrate my self at her
Feet, and told her: Madam, I now find the Honor of fighting in your Quarrel,
cannot be greater than is the Certainty of Success in so glorious a Cause; and
if I failed of that happiness once, it proceeded from the mercy of the gods:
which though intolerable to me, when dispensed; yet by what has happened
since, I have found abundant cause to admire. But could I have prevented my
highest misery, at so Criminal a Price, as by wishing of your suffering, I
should have esteemed that sin equal to this Success; for such is the Respect
and Veneration I pay the Princess Statira, that to have prevented her
Captivity, I would joyfully (had it been left at my Election), have suffered
what the gods destined, her Captivity should prevent. The fair Statira by her
blushes seemed to tell me she understood what I meant; and she had too the
condescension to give me this Answer.

If you have received any advantage by a Captivity you then so much deplored,
and would have so fatally revenged, on him who had been so far from acting it,
that he almost lost his life to prevent it, I shall find that contentment in it
upon your score, which I could not on my own; for it is but reason, that he who
frees me from Captivity, should receive some consolation in my having undergone
it: and that my sufferings should pay some of that Debt, which my Actings could
not. And since by experience you have Learned, that even the bitterest things
which the Gods cast upon us, have by patient waiting on them, a sweetness in
the Result, I will nope, that thereby we shall be prepared with an entire
Resignation, to submit to whatever portion they snall think fit to allot us.
It Is in the force of this Duty, that I find strength to submit to the loss of
the unhappy Ascanius; and though he perished for my Relief, and though by
designation of my Father, his nearness to me might apologize for my Tears, nay,
render them a Duty: yet so much I mind that hand from whence I received that
stroke, that in as little Emotions, as the frailty of my Nature is capable of,
I desire to submit unto it. At these words, said Callimachus, her Eyes were
obscured, which made me say, Madam, In those admirable Expressions, you do not
more evidence your piety to the gods, than by those unvaluable Tears, you
manifest your kindness and Esteem for Ascanius; whose fall thereby is
Celebrated with nobler Obsequies, than all his Friends and Subjects can design
for him. To be loved by the Princess Statira whilst he was alive, and to be
wept by her when he was dead, are Felicities which render him a fitter object
of Envy, than of Sorrow: And since, Madam, you are so Charitable and Just to
the Dead, Permit me to beg you to be the like to him that yet is alive; which
is, to believe, though had I got as much by your Captivity, as the King of
Cyprus lost; yet even therein I should have condemned your Fate, and my own
too, for being so mistaken, as to think I could raise any joy, by your sorrow.
In that particular, the power of Destiny is limited; for it can present nothing
of contentment to me, which is caused by your suffering. Could you, Madam,
believe the contrary, To lead you out of that injustice (pardon the Zeal of
that expression) I would elect Eternally to be miserable, rather than be made
happy by a cause, which might confirm you in that misbelief; and might reproach
me with having valued my self above you. But, Madam, I continued, whilst I
ought to employ all my time in expressions of my Trouble that you were made a
Captive, and of my Joy that you are no longer one; will you pardon me, if I
employ some of it, in imploring a concession from you, which only can be
granted by you; and which I fear you may with Justice deny me. It Is, that by
your Order I may enjoy a part of this days Victory, which by the Law of Arms
is mine already; yet only by your decree, can Authentickly be made such. The
Princess again was covered with Blushes, fearing my Confidence had been greater
than my Success; and that my implorings would have been more suited to my
desires, than my merit: therefore to free her from those wounding imaginations,
I told her, by the fate of War Ascanius lost his Flag, and by the chance of War
I recovered it. It Is the Effigies of a Venus ascending from the Sea; but a
Venus so like the Princess Mithridatia, that no Production of Art was ever
comparable to it. I thereupon presented her with the King of Cyprus's Flag,
which contained a Copy, nothing but the Original could transcend. She
considered it a while, more I believe to gain time to form her Answer, than on
any other score; for her Glass could always entertain her with a nobler
Prospect: though whilst she was unresolved what to say, she might the sooner be
induced to grant my suit, than give Reasons for denying it; and therefore I did
with no small importunity, seek a Return to my Request; which at last obtained
from her these words.

I am wholly ignorant, Callimachus, of your Maritine Laws; but I suppose you
are so just, as not to ask any thing from me, contrary to them; and since you
are on that Element where you give the Law, I must not contradict what you
assure is yours by it: though in my own Judgment, I think it little just, that
two Fleets which came to Fight in the same Quarrel, the misfortune of the one,
should compose the Trophies of the other. Madam, I replied (expecting at least
as much reservedness as I found) it is not time, but possession which gives
Armed numbers a Title to what they possess; else those which did wrong the
longest, should have the greatest Right to what in wrong-doing they acquired.
And therefore the Enemy being a while possessed of this Flag, Ascanius lost his
Title to it, and the property was altered; which when it was our Adversaries,
was both lawful for me to recover, and keep when it was recovered. I know not,
said the Princess, whether the Laws be not proportionate to the Element, on
which, or for which, they are made, and therefore that being wild, those may be
the like also, as best suited to it; and being received as such, Custom may
authorize what reason could not; else if the possession of an Enemy* alters the
property of what is possessed, and that this Rule went throughout in all Cases,
(as what is Reason in one particular, ought to be the like in every other of a
parallel nature) then Prisoners of your side which are taken by an Enemy, if
recovered by you, are Prisoners also to you; and so the success of their
Friends changes not their Condition, but their Masters. By this Law too, said
the Princess smiling, Tomsones, Rebadates, and to say no more, even Nerea her
self must be that to you, which your Valor and Civility have presently freed
them from being to another; and thus make one of the noblest Actions of
Friendship, become in its effect one of the highest impositions of Enmity; and
thereby make what should nourish and increase Friendship, totally destroy it:
by this rule also Ariobarzanes must be Nicomedes's Prisoner; and had both those
Kings been recovered by their Soldiers, they must have been such unto their
very Subjects. I must acknowledge, said Callimachus, this reasoning of the
Princesses did not a little surprise me; and her particularly specifying no
higher than Nerea, with that smile which accompanied it, seemed to tell me what
she would not speak. I therefore made no small haste to tell her, There is,
Madam, a vast difference between the exchanges and acquisitions in War; that
which is by Pact and Agreement, relishing more of the Civil, than the Military
nature, is exempted from these wild Rules which Force has imposed, and Custom
has authorized amongst Soldiers: besides, Madam, things which men may buy and
sell, and thereby may transfer the property of them to the Master which last
acquired them, may well have that property transferred by the purchase of men's
Swords, which may be transferred by common ways of bargaining. But Women and
Men, not being vendable, are not subjected to the like rules that things which
are so, are liable unto: for liberty being not to be valued, ought not to be
sold, though it be lost: and so life, though it be above price, is not thereby
exempted from deprivation. But, Madam, I hope you will remember, that when I
first moved this unfortunate request, I told you what I was to beg, was fit to
be denied: and since I find the invinciblest Argument against me, is that of
your not approving what I have implored, I here put a period to my suit, and
change those Prayers which I made to obtain it, into as fervent ones for your
pardon, that I durst desire it; only Madam, I will earnestly beg that you will
so dispose of it, that whatever has the glory to bear your Image, may never be
exposed to the hazards of composing a Trophy to your Enemies; and for my
particular, I shall find my contentment in my obedience, and in carrying about
me an Image which much more resembles you, and which lies not in the power of
fate to take from me. Statira receiving the Flag which I then presented her,
told me; though I know few things I more desire, than to receive evidences that
Callimachus is of my opinion, yet not to appear too unworthy thereof; and to
owe that in some degree to his Justice, as well as to his Civility; I will only
mind him, that there are Slaves amongst men, and made so by no law, but force;
but yet are bought and sold, as merchandise is; and though liberty to him that
loses it, is above price; yet he that takes it from him, values it to him that
buys it of him: Though things inanimate taken by force of Arms, become the
property of those who take them, and are no longer so to those that lose them;
yet all such things are not subjected to that Law: for then the Images of our
Gods, in which we reverence themselves, might by the fate of War become the
property of men. It Is upon this score that I accept of this Present; had it
born any Image, but that of a Deity, I should have rejoiced at your possessing
of it. But since it carries the Effigies of a Goddess you have formerly adored,
in reverence to what she is in her self, and for what she has been to you,
allow me to restore her to her Temple, from whence I shall oblige all the
Cyprians, by solemn vow, never to remove her; lest the needless exposing of
their Goddess, may make their whole Island endure the like misfortune, which
their unhappy King has been involved in; and whose fall I attribute to the
impiety of carrying that power he Worshipped, to a Foreign War, which should
have still resided in her Temple at home. The piety of my Princess in giving me
this refusal, and at the same time, confecrating her Picture to a Temple, the
just, though undesigned reward due unto it, gave me a full Consolation, and
made me admire the goodness of the gods, that in the duty of taking their part,
made her receive ever after her self, the Oblations due unto themselves. For
that noble Effigies being accepted of by the chief Commander of the Cyprian
Fleet, on the terms the Princess prescribed, was by him sent unto Cyprus, and
in the Temple at Paphos is worshipped unto this day. Yet Statira, to hinder as
much as in her lay any Glory, which her resemblance to that Picture might cast
upon her, Caused to be written over it in great Letters of Gold, The Goddess
Venus. The fair Mithridatia having thus taken, or rather accepted from me, the
highest prize of that days Victory, did by many repeated Civilities convince
me, that that Action proceeded from her respect to the gods, and not out of
want of it to me; so that I received more from her denial of what I had asked,
than I could have received in the grant of it. I decline particularlizing all
those discourses which then past between us; mine chiefly consisting in the
expressions of my Joy for her Deliverance, and hers in expressions of
Acknowledgments to me for it.

Whilst we were making ready to Sail for Nicomedia, whither the necessity of
Mithridates's Affairs did call me, as well as the restoring the Princess to her
Father; I entertained with many embraces, Rebadates, Tomsones, and those other
Gentlemen, to whose Valor and Friendship I owed so much; and having ordered
the Cilician, and Phoenician Fleets their Stations, for blocking up the Island,
and residue of the Enemies Fleet, till with mine I had transported the Prince
Ataphernes's Army; I assembled the chief Cyprian and Egyptian Commanders, and
desired to know of them, what instructions they had in case of their King's
death, which now was happened; and if they had none, what resolutions they had
Elected, in which if any assistance of mine were necessary, I might pay it
them. They told me their Instructions were, in case that misery should befall
them, which now had happened, never to stir from Mithridates's Service, till
the Princess Statira was at liberty; and then to obey her Commands, whilst his
Successor allowed them that Honor. This made me accompany them to the
Princess, who was not a little surprised at this assurance; but having declined
that power Ascanius had given her, and they protesting a perfect Obedience to
it; She told them, that she thought she could no way better use that unexpected
Authority which their dead King had given her, than employing it in Orders
which might evidence the Value and Honor she had for him; that therefore they
should keep about the Island, till the Solemnites there, of his Funeral were
ended, and then attend his Body to Cyprus, and obey the Orders of their new
King. This they all declared they would punctually obey. Having thus settled
things, that Fleet which was to wait on the Princess, and transport her
Brother's Army, weighed Anchor, and steered their Course toward the Bay of
Nicomedia, which the nearer we came unto, the more I found my Joys clouded; the
^igh Honor of the Pontick King's Alliance, and the higher of possessing the
Princess Mithridatia, would, I knew to well, draw all the Eastern Kings to his
Court; and thereby only alter my Rivals, not suppress my Fears. Whilst I was
entertaining my self with these sad thoughts in my Cabin, which was under the
Princesses, they forced from me such loud and violent sighs, that even Statira
heard them; which persuaded her to send Nerea to visit me, lest some unexpected
indisposition might have seized me. I was ashamed when Nerea came with this
message, that my troubles had been so loud in their effects; and therefore
finding by her, that Statira was not in any entertainment, which my waiting on
her might offensively interrupt: I went to her Cabin with Nerea, to apologize
for the rudeness of my Griefs, which yet had obtained the honor of her sending
to enquire after me.

I thought, said Statira, that the Glory you had this day acquired, and the
Obligations which you have laid upon me, would have exempted you from troubles
like unto those which you have often assured me, my Captivity did only
occasion. I observed when the Princess was speaking these words to me, that the
motion of the Galley having disordered Nerea, she retired to a small Cabin at
the door of the great one; which made me to kneel at Mithridatia's feet, and
tell her; I confess, Madam, in the Day of your Deliverance, I ought to
entertain nothing but raptures of Joy; and that I ought not to admit of a
grief, whose troublesome productions have even reached your Ears: Judge, Madam,
what my Griefs must be, when in such an occasion of Joy, I cannot suppress
them, nay, from coming to your Knowledge. Had they been confined to my own
Breast, they would have acted that miracle of becoming at once the more great,
and the more supportable; the giving of vent to Sorrow, which to others is an
ease, in me is a sin: For my afflictions are of such a Quality, that they
appear as great a Crime, as a Punishment to me; and could I tell the Cause of
my Sorrows to any, they could no more pity, or advise me, than I can pity or
advise my self. Yes, Madam, the knowledge of what I ought to do, is not more
evident, than is the impossibility of doing it; I am necessitated at the same
time to condemn what I act, and still to act what I condemn. I thought, and
hoped, replied the Princess, that since you could find by your own confession,
even my Captivity a mercy from the gods, which at first you had considered as
their sharpest Judgment; you would in that past Event, have found wherewith to
have raised your Faith in any other in the future; I rather expected you would
have contributed to ease those Sorrows Ascanius's death has raised in me, than
add unto them, by acquainting me with your own. I could bring, Madam, I
answered, but a few reasons to console you for the Death of one, whose
Condition has always had, and now does deserve rather my Envy, than my Sorrow.
That Generous Prince lived in your favor, and died in your Service; what life
could be more happy, and what Death could be more glorious? Do not therefore,
Madam, I humbly conjure you, expect that I should console You for that Fate in
another, which I ambition for my self; and if you are capable of such a
condescension, as to entertain a grief for either, bestow yours upon him, who
aspires at no better a Destiny than that, which even in another you think fit
to lament: If he deserves your weepings, who had all that I wish; what then do
I, who want all that he had, and wish no more than what he possessed? You are,
said the Princess, casting on me a languishing look, too too ingenuous to
torment me; Ascanius's death, which is my Sorrow, you tell me is your Envy; And
Callimachus's life, which is my contentment, you tell me is his Trouble. But, O
gods! Callimachus, What new afflictions can those be, since I saw you last,
which can raise such a storm in you? Madam, I answered, no new afflictions have
befaln me; But only a more clear contemplation of those I am already involved
in: whilst you were in troubles, the duty I owed you, and the care of ending
them, so entirely took me up, that I neither had the time, nor the will to
reflect on my own; as the greater Sorrow suspends the Actings and Effects of
the lesser: But now that the Justice of the gods have put a period to yours;
the same Justice revives mine: For I have that sensible accession to my
sufferings, as to be convinced, my Ambition does deserve them: And I think by
the rest they have had, gathering new strength, they assault me with the more
unsupportable Violence; possibly in revenge, that having been so vast, I could
so long neglect them. Alas, Madam, could you condescend to a thorough
consideration of the causes of my Sorrow, you could not but pity, if not excuse
their production; for what is there now for the unhappy Callimachus to expect?
He has nothing which can be so much as acceptable by you, but his Services to
you; and those, the height of your condition, and the lowness of his own,
renders his hopes of paying, equal impossibilities: I am so far from the
expectancy of Happiness, that I am not within the wishes of it; for though by
the Crime of Fate, my Sword has been rendered serviceable to you, yet I cannot
be guilty of the Crime of wishing you may ever be reduced to a condition of
repeating that misery, though I were certain of repeating that Honor. You see,
Madam, how desirous soever I am to serve you, yet I am much more desirous you
may never stand in need of being served by me; And even whilst by the sin of
your Destiny, I derived an occasion to serve you, yet I shall call it the Sin
of your Destiny; and the Obligation it presented me, could not bribe me to call
it by another Name: Nay, the sorrow that you were in captivity, silenced the
Joy of my being instrumental to end it. Sure, Callimachus, said Statira,
interrupting me, you cannot notwithstanding all that you have said, esteem your
self more unhappy, than you esteem me unjust; you first make me bad, thereby to
make your Condition worse: Do you think your Obligations are so small, and my
sense of them the like, that unless you still present me with new ones, those I
have already been loaded with, will lose their Efficacy; I am not a little
pleased you have told me the cause of your Troubles, how wounding soever they
are to me, both upon your account and mine also; since thereby I find in
freeing you from being unjust to me, I free you from being the like unto your
self. And in believing I need fresh and unintermitted Obligations from you, you
injure me as much as you oblige me by your favors to me: which are of a
nature, that whilst I have life, I must remember them; and whilst I remember
them, I must rather be troubled, considering my incapacity to acknowledge them
as I ought, and as they deserved, that they are so many, than that they are no
more. Your past Actions have hitherto obliged me in a degree, that nothing can
equal, but the generosity with which they were conferred, and the sense with
which they were received; and for the future, what can be more obliging, than
after your eviden^ing your great concernment to serve me, you evidence a
greater, that I may never be in a Condition to be served by you? By which its
imposible, but that I must still be obliged to your performances, or to your
wishes. Alas, Madam, I replied, if my Services be valued by you, how unhappy
have I been, that I have paid you so few; and how miserable am I, that I can
neither hope, or so much as wish ever to pay you any more? I see your goodness
endeavors to repair the Deficiencies of my Fate; and finding I am never likely
in the future to serve you but in wishes, you would have me believe, that even
those are accepted of by you; when that Condescension rather increases my debt,
than any way lessens my Trouble: But, Madam, since by your Mercy, you seem not
to be unmoved at my Sorrow; and since it is above me ever to cast it off. I will
endeavor to cloud that which I cannot conquer; and so confine my Afflictions
to my heart, that I will keep them as invisible to your Eyes, as I have begged
of the gods I could have kept that Adoration which cannot be a greater
confidence in me to acknowledge, than it was an impossibility to avoid. Perhaps,
Madam, I may not tell you an untruth, if I should assure you, that my Ambition
cannot be more strange than is my entertainment of its punishment: For whereas
in other Afflictions, it is a consolation not to deserve them; in mine, the
contrary is the only one I receive: for by the knowledge of the vastness of my
Crimes, I derive some support in the enduring of their Punishment. For since
all that I do suffer, nay all that I can suffer (if at least both those be not
the same in me) is in my own Estimation much disproportionate to the height of
my aspiring, the Justice of the punishment hinders me from repining at it,
though not from being sensible of it; and the less you condemn my offense, the
more just I esteem my sufferings, and the less impatiently I will bear them.
Yes, Madam, though I know by attending you back to Mithridates, I shall restore
you to the capacity of repeating that fatal Obedience for some other King,
which the Justice of the gods has punished Ascanius for soliciting and
accepting; and though by my waiting on you to your Father, I am like to see
what I most fear; yet I will go: yes, I will pay you my duty, though to the
increase of my Torment. But, Madam, if some dejected look, if some
unsuppressible groan force it self from me, pardon, I beg you a Fault, which
you cannot be so much troubled to see, as I shall be to commit; And ascribe all
to a sorrow which possibly will not be above your pity, since it is for having
offended you, that it is so great and unconfinable: Or else, Madam, permit me,
rather than to be still a trouble to you, and a greater to my self, because I
am such to you, to seek that Death on some Enemies Sword, which you have
prohibited my own from acting; you shall then soon be convinced, that I have
not so willingly offended you, as I am ready to punish my self for having done
so; and that nothing is more preferable to me, than revenging of you. But fair
Princess, if my sin be such, that your Justice decrees me rather to a lingering,
than a speedy Death: and that you therefore condemn me to see all those Kings
prostrate at your Feet, which the privilege Mithridates gave Ascanius, will
invite unto that happy Posture: (For no Monarch that knows the Princess Statira
is to be obtained, but will fly to be that happy Person that shall obtain
her). If, I say, Madam, you Destine me to this misery, I have destined my self
to an entire submission to it; and I shall think my Torments my Happiness, if
by undergoing the greatness of them you may be convinced, my Passion, and my
Obedience, are proportionate to your Beauties, and to the Duty I owe you.

Though possibly, said Statira, this Discourse might as much trouble me, as the
condition you apprehend your self in, does you; and that some parts of it might
justly exempt me from answering any of it: yet to let you see, That your past
Obligations, and your present Wishes have that Operation on me which I even now
assured you they had, I will not only pass over, without any further notice,
what you have spoke; but advise you too, not to afflict your self with
antedated fears, which is to abuse your Reason, and make that wound you, which
should help you. Our highest Prerogative so employed, will make the condition
of Beast preferable to that of Man; they feel nothing but what actually is: and
if you so injure that noble Gift, as thereby to sink your self below the state
of irrational Creatures, it is but just that even that blessing should be your
Tormentor.

Ah Madam! I replied, Judge then of my condition, when that which in it self is
given for a Preservative against sorrow, and often a Cure of it, changes its
nature, and becomes the cause of that, whose effects it should remedy. Reason,
replied the Princess, is still it self, and therefore still a help; if ever it
be other, it is in the abuse, not in the nature of it. If by a consideration of
things to come, I have more reason to fear the Ill, than to hope the Good, I
have then Reason not to entertain those considerations; and if it cannot hinder
me from being miserable, when I must be so, it shall hinder me from being so,
before I am so: Nay, after I actually am miserable, Reason leads me into a
contemplation of the gods, who inflict the punishments, as well as they bestow
the blessings; and who being just in all their ways, I am taught by it to
believe, I deserve what they impose; and therefore should with cheerfulness
submit to what they determine, especially, when by repining at what I must
acknowledge, I deserve (or else I must not acknowledge them to be just; and to
deny any of their Attributes, is in effect to deny them), I provoke the
continuance of their Judgments, and by an entire resignation I hasten their
forgiveness. Possibly, Callimachus, I teach you the Theory of what I have
practiced my self; and when I advise you to that which I follow, though you may
suspect the advice, yet you cannot the Adviser. Since, Madam, I replied, your
goodness does not decline the condescension of giving advice to so unfortunate
and low a Person as I am, permit it, I beseech you, to continue its actings;
and having told me what I should not do, that is not reflect upon what is to
come, and not express a sadness for what is, let it also tell me what I shall
do. Wait upon the good pleasure of the gods, said Statira, they know better
what is fit for you, than you know what is fit for your self; and their Time is
the best. But to fortify you in the duty of this Attendance, remember, That
nothing can be more improbable in the time to come, than you have seen Acted in
the time that is past; and this also you may believe, if you please, That he
whose Death I deplore, and whose condition you say you envy, had not more of my
esteem than you have: and perhaps had not so many assurances thereof from me,
as you have had. Let this suffice, continued the fair Statira, rising up, and
Blushing; and if you have that Friendship for me, that I believe you have, do
not force me to give you such (I will only say) uneasy evincements of mine.
These words, said Callimachus, and the obliging Majesty with which they were
spoke, charmed all my despair, and my Tongue also; for I had not words to
declare my thoughts, nor gestures to express the raptures of my Gratitude:
which possibly yet might expose my Acknowledgment to her apprehension, in more
lively and significant Characters, than any other way they could have been
expressed in. As soon as Statira was risen, she told me, I doubt Nerea will think
I am more concerned for your indisposition, than I should be, and less for hers
than I ought to be: Let us therefore go and visit her. Statira went immediately
to her Cabin, which was at the door of her own, and finding She was at most
ease, when she lay on her Bed, would not permit her to rise; but went her self
upon the Deck, to take the fresh Air; and to see at what rate she hastened
toward Nicomedia.

As soon as we were come upon the Deck, an Egyptian Captain came close up to my
Galley in his own; and told me, That the young Gentleman whose Valor I had so
much esteemed, was recovered out of his fainting, and was desirous to be
carried to Nicomedia to be cured of his Wounds. The Sea, and the ill
accommodations on it, being not only troublesome, but dangerous to him; I
forthwith stopped my Course, hoised out my Boat, and received the Valiant
Stranger with his Servants into my Galley; but the motion in his removal, made
him again to swound; and Tomsones being present, calling hastily for some
Vinegar, and chafing his Temples and his Nostrils with it, he perceived the
Blackness of his Face to vanish with the force of his rubbing, and the
sharpness of the Liquor: and by degrees the whole coming off, he discovered a
Countenance which even in the paleness and disfigurings of Death, was not
without Graces and Charms which merited an Admiration. The Princess Statira at
so unexpected an Accident, went to see this strange mutation; and while we were
in the discourses of it, His chief Servant who was gone under the Decks to
prepare a Cabin for him, returned: and finding what Tomsones had done, expressed
so much of grief more than astonishment, that we all concluded, he was not a
stranger to that Disguisement, nor a little troubled at our discovery of it;
but his Master's fainting beginning to leave him, he carried him to his Bed.
The Night of this day I sent for the wounded Stranger's Servant, who called
himself Photinus, and desired him to acquaint me with his Lord's Name and
Condition, and why he had assumed such a Disguse? Photinus replied; I am Sir,
confined to Secrecy in all these particulars, by such Sacred Ties, that should
I break them, I believe you would esteem my Obedience a greater Crime than my
Disobedience, for which yet I most humbly beg your pardon: But this I will
assure you, that his Quality and his Merit is such, that you will not I hope
repent your care of him; nor possibly, when he knows how he ows you his Life or
Liberty, and your Curiosity to be acquainted who he is, will he decline
satisfying you therein. This Answer made me press him no farther, and made me
enjoin him to acquaint me from time to time, how his Lord did, and whether any
thing was in my Power to serve him. I further desired him when we came to
Nicomedia, that he would carry him to my Appartment; where Lodgings should be
provided for him, and all other Accomodations. Photinus promised me all that I
expected, and having made me many Acknowledgments, went to pay his usual care
to his wounded Master.

The End of the Second Book of the Sixth Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA.
THE SIXTH PART.
The Third BOOK.
OUR Navigation was so prosperous, that the Sun at his rising the second Day,
discovered unto us the North-west Promontory of the Bay of Nicomedia; and by
Noon we were come so near it, that to our wonder we perceived several Horsemen
quit their Horses: and with their Swords drawn, run into a Wood, in which
Mithridates had made a Wilderness, and often delighted himself in visiting it.
Remembering this, and seeing what I did, I told my Apprehensions to the
Princess, who was come on the Deck at this News; and though we could not
imagine the Cause of what we beheld: yet the late Treachery that had been acted
on her self, made me doubt something of the same nature might have been
practiced toward the King. Which being her apprehensions as well as mine, I
commanded, that my Galley should be rowed as near the Shore as might be; and
ordered all that Gallant Nobility, and Youth which was in it, to Arm
themselves, and follow me. This was immediately performed, and our Boats had no
sooner set some fifty of us on Shore, but we were too well guided by the
Shreeks of some Women, to the Center of the Wood, where we found all the King's
Guards killed, or routed: and by one that was flying away, we learned, that
about three Hundred select Men had lain in Ambush in the Wilderness. And when
the King with the Prince Atafernes, the Queen, the Princess Nisa, and the
Princess Cleopatra were diverting themselves in that pleasant Place, they were
forthwith assaulted by unknown Men; And the Guards running to their Rescue, not
being able to make use of their Horses by reason of the thickness of the Wood,
were after a brisk Fight, killed and dispersed; only the King, and Prince with
some of their Attendants, getting into a Summer House where the Queen and
Princess were, defended the door of it in hope of Relief; but he had even then
seen it forced, and many of the Enemy enter it. This Relation he told us,
whilst we were running to their Rescue; and lest our endeavors might be
fruitless, I sent forthwith Orders to my Galley, which was advanced a League
before all the rest of the Fleet, to make all possible diligence to the Western
part of the North-west Promontory, to hinder any Vessels from escaping that
way: for the place in which this Attempt was made, easily persuaded me to
believe it was from the Sea that these Enemies were come. These Orders given,
we continued our March with such speed, that we discovered our Enemies, whom
immediately we assaulted; and who received us with that Resolution which became
Men, that attempted their Design. The Fight was bloody, and my small Troop
being heightened by the glory of so Noble an occasion to evidence their
Courages, did it in so unresistable a degree, that the resolutest of our
Adversaries began to lose their Ground as well as their Number, though still
fighting and retreating toward the Seaside. I easily judged thereby, that
their intentions was to recover their Vessel; and therefore by a resolute
Charge, we so discomposed them, that they turned their backs, and made
precipitately to their Boats, into two whereof some of them got, and
immediately Launced out toward a Galley, which then we discovered riding in a
Creek in the Promontory. The trouble we received by their then Escape, was
raised to a height above my description; when by one of our Prisoners we
learned that in the largest of those Boats they sent away the King, and Prince
much wounded; and all the Princesses, Prisoners. 'Twas time to act, and
therefore though we had cause, yet we had not leisure to grieve: we seized upon
one Boat that remained, and pursued after them, as well as four Oars could
carry us* which were all we could find. But alas! we soon found how fruitlesly
we labored; for before we could get half way to their Galley, we saw them
enter into it with their Noble Prize: and cutting their Cables with as much
have as Oars and Sails could lend them* bent their course for Greece. Whilst we
were in the trouble of this Prospect, I was revived by the fight of my own
Galley, doubling the Point. Her Celerity in the obedience of my Orders was
unspeakably welcome. I hastily got on Board, told the fair Statira what we had
done, and what we had failed of; and promising all the Slaves their Liberty if
they overtook the flying Galley, they so powerfully plied their Oars, that we
immediately found we gained visibly of them. The rest of my Fleet, which were
above twenty Furlongs behind, seeing me alter my course, and not knowing the
cause of it; for though I saw the Galley I pursued, and my Fleet saw mine, yet
by the interposition of the Head-Land they saw not what I chased: And having
positive Order to sail directly into the Bay of Nicomedia, and none to the
contrary, continued their Course thither; so that by the time I was gotten
within half a League of the Enemy, they could discover no Veslel was within two
Leagues of me; and therefore scorning to fly from a single Galley, saved me
the labor of following them, and turning about their Prow, came as fast
toward me, as a little before she had fled from me.

Over-joyed with this unlooked for Gallantry, I went into the Princesses
Cabin; and told her, I hope now, Madam, (telling her what the Enemy had done)
to do you that Service on the Sea, that I failed of paying you on the Shore:
and I am come now only to beg you to permit the lights of your Cabin to be
stopped up, lest any Darts or Javelins of the Enemy might fly into them. You see,
Callimachus, she replied, how the sins of our Family afford you too often
occasions to oblige it; and you may perceive how fallacious even the best
judgments are in Humane things: when you could yesterday believe, I was in a
Condition above your Services, and this Day all the Royal House of Pontus,
depend upon your Sword. The gods, I replied, who have destined it to so high a
Glory, will, I question not, give it a proportionate Success: And having only
permitted the Royal House of Pontus to receive some of their frowns, that it
may be the more sensible of their smiles; they had raised it so high, that it
being incapable of accessions, they have subjected it to Changes, and then to
Restaurations; that in those vicissitudes, the impossibilities of additions
might be repaired. Your Virtues, Madam, are a security to your whole Family;
and since I now fight to restore them, and to preserve you, to doubt Success
were to entitle me to a denial of it. The Princess at the end of what I had
spoke, perceiving some blood trickle down from a Wound I had received in my
left Arm, had the mercy to lament it, and the condescension to take off a
Ribband of her own, and to bind it up; which unvaluable Civility was no sooner
conferred, than Demetrius came to the Cabbin-Door to tell me the Enemy was at
hand. I therefore hastily took my leave, and was scarce got at the head of my
Men, when our Galleys shook one another with their Brazen Prows; and then, as
if it had been by mutual consent, grappled so strongly, that nothing but
Victory was able to unloose them: never possibly in so little Room was
performed so great things; our Numbers seemed equal, and our Resolutions the
same, which were to Conquer or to Die. Twice they got into my Galley, and once
oftener I got into theirs, which in the End proved fatal to them; for perceiving
with how much difficulty we had purchased that advantage, we as resolutely kept
it; and so many of mine got in after me, that the Commander of our Enemies,
called Enastes, who was a Lord of Pontus, who was in highest esteem with
Nicomedes, and his Vice Admiral, perceiving since they could not keep us out,
it would be difficult, if possible to keep us from vanquishing them now we were
got in, with a loud Voice called me twice by my name; and told me, Callimachus,
There is already too much blood spilt on either side; but since that precious
loss is not to be repaired, Let us prevent the increase of it, and let thou and
I decide the Quarrel. I was not a little pleased at this motion which gave me
an opportunity singly to do a Service to my Princess and all her Family, which
otherwise had been divided amongst so many, that my share of it had been
inconsiderable. I therefore told him, The advantage which my Friends have over
thine, is already so visible, that in this Combat they have acquired as much
Honor as it is capable to present them. A farther progress may increase the
number of the Dead, not the visibility of their Success; and though thou
esteemest it no unhopeful expedient, in the ruinous Condition to which thou art
reduced, to bring the decision now to an equal number, which the Valor of my
Friends have reduced to an unequal one: Yet to let thee see the justice of my
Quarrel needs no advantage to end it, I accept of thy desire.

Both parties at what we had said, suspended fighting; and mine having gotten
the Prow of his Galley, and his defending the residue of it, we had close by
the Mainmast a Stage for our Duel, in which Enastes was as Unfortunate as
Valiant: and after no inconsiderable resistance, he fell dead under my Sword,
oppressed with Wounds. I was sorry at his Death for the obligation he had laid
on me, by inviting me to the Combat, and by declining a further Flight. When he
saw himself pursued by one Galley, all his Soldiers when he was vanquished, in
the fury of that loss renewed the Fight with much obstinacy; and one of them
seeing all was lost, resolved to accompany his own Death with an Action which
might take from us all cause of rejoicing at it; for running hastily to the
Stern-Cabbin, where the Queen, the two Princesses, Atafernes and Mithridates
were kept Prisoners; he opened the Door, and in a furious Voice he cried out,
King of Pontus, I must now be revenged on thee, for having so long usurped the
Throne of the King of Bithynia; and Thine, and thy Sons Blood, must answer for
the Blood of so many of my Friends, as thine have spilt, and which but in this
way I cannot revenge. This threatening was not more Cruel, than Friendly to
those against whom it was made; for the warning it gave them, not only raised
them from their Beds on which they were laid for the ease of their Wounds: but
also gave Monyma, the Princess Nisa, and the Princess Cleopatra, leisure to put
themselves before the King and the Prince; and by their shreeks to call for
assistance, which admitted no delay. The Galleys being grapled, the sides of
each of them touched one another; and therefore those Cries reached the fair
Statira, who abandoning her Cabin, came upon the Deck, and told me, Alas
Callimachus Whilst you dispute my Father's and Brother's Liberty, they are
losing their Lives. This Advertisement made me fly to the Cabin, and so
timely, that the Monster in it having flung down all those weak impediments
which had opposed him, had his Sword bloody with one Wound he had given the
King, and with another he had made in Atafernes's shoulder; who being unable to
stand to defend Mithridates, had generously cast himself on his knees before
him: and with some of his Bed-cloaths wrapped about his Arm, endeavored in
that posture, and with that pitiful defense, to save his Father's Life with the
loss of his own. The horrid Cruelty of this Bithynian, and the admirable piety
of this great Prince, gave such Wings to my Revenge, that they saw that Monster
killed, before they saw him who did it; But as soon as I had lifted up the
fight of my Helmet, and that thereby they discovered who had paid them so
seasonable a Service, I saw in Atafernes's Countenance a Joy as great, that I
had saved his Father and him, as that they were so unexpectedly saved.
Mithridates too, though much wounded, took me in his Arms, and in Elogies and
Embraces testified his Joy and his Kindness. The Queen in the raptures of this
unlooked-for Safety, gave me Eminent marks of her Satisfaction and Friendship;
And, though possibly they might have been mixed with foam other Ingredient; yet
all was attributed merely to the Transports of their then Condition, compared
with what so lately it had been. In the midst of this Noble Entertainment, the
Princely Statira came into the Cabin. The sight of her filled all that were in
it with new Wonder; for the King having in the cool of the Morning left
Nicomedia, the Galley I had sent to advertise him of our Victory, was not then
arrived, which had hindered him from receiving an Account of it. Mithridatia
therefore told him of our Naval Success, of the rate at which we had bought it;
and how she was exchanged. The loss of Ascanius, who the Pontick King entirely
loved, qualified not a little the Extacies he was in; and even in his Sorrow
for the King of Cyprus, he evidenced how much he had esteemed him. But at last
Mithridates thinking 'twas to be ungrateful to the gods, to let one cause of
Trouble cloud so many causes of Satisfaction, He wiped off those Tears he had
shed for his intended Son-in-Law; and in embracing his Favourite-Daughter,
seemed by that happy privilege and posture, to know and act a certain Cure for
the deepest Afflictions. I therefore told him, Now that you have the Princess
Statira in your Arms, I believe Sir, you will think your Civilities to
Ariobarzanes whilst he was your Prisoner, were not misplaced; for but in the
Duty he owed her, and the retributions he owed you for them, he could not have
made so unequal a Bargain, as to have exchanged a Princess above Ransom, for
the dying Body of Nicomedes. And if I presumed to dispose of such a Prisoner
without your knowledge, I will hope for your Pardon upon two Accounts; The first
is, his Wounds were so many and dangerous, that had I sent for your Orders, he
might have been unexchangeable before I had received them. The second is, That
having an offered Exchange for the Princess, the Crime of afterward permitting
her so long to continue Prisoner, as must have been employed in sending for
your Commands, and receiving them, would have been greater, than the releasing
her without them. These were my Inducements, Sir, to do it, when I lay before
the Island of Scyros; but now I find that the gods themselves have approved
thereof. For had I not done what I did, the Punishment would have equalled the
Sin; for the Royal House of Pontus h^d now been what the Princess lately was:
whereas by her freedom the gods have acted yours, and made that a Consequence,
or Product of this.

Mithridates, though the Chyrurgeons were dressing his, and the Prince
Atafernes's Wounds, made me this Reply. You have, Callimachus, employed that
Power I gave you, so much to my Honor and Satisfaction, that your desiring a
forgiveness is really a greater Offense, than that for which you ask it; and to
evidence you have not only obliged me to the height, but that I am sensible you
have done so, I promise before the gods and all these Witnesses, that whatever
you ask of me, without any exception, I will grant it you; for you have given
me more than you can ask of me. And lest your Modesty might hinder you from
asking, I enjoin you to ask; nay, by that Friendship you have for me, I command
you to do it: but lest this Injunction might be a surprise, I give you three
days time to deliberate, that you may think of something worthy your
mentioning, and worthy my giving. To convince you too, how fixed I am in this
Resolution, and how knowing I am in your Virtue, I conjure you make me no
Reply, nor Excuses; and grant me this Request, as an Evidence you believe, I
will grant you yours. All the while the King was speaking these charming words,
my Eyes were fixed on my Princess; and her Blushes thereat told me her
Apprehensions were, I would fix my Request where I had fixed my Sight: But
Mithridates having done speaking, to obey him, I only bowed my self to his
Feet, as an evincement both of my Joy and Obedience. The generous Atafernes
diligently observed my Looks, and his fair Sisters Blushes; and had the
goodness to whisper me these ravishing Words: Your Eyes, Callimachus, have
spoke your Request; and Statira's readiness seems to be no Irreconcilable Enemy
to it: Leave the Management of your happiness to my care. I whispered to him
this Answer, It Is the Company, Great Prince, and not the want of resentment,
that hinders me from prostrating my self at your Feet, as some sign of my
acknowledgments. My Fortune cannot be but glorious, since you have undertaken
the care of it: And what I despair of on my own account, I will presume of upon
yours. I will not, generous Princes, continued Callimachus, particularize all
the Discourses which then entertained the Company; Only I observed the Princess
Statira, who in less Services had honored me with her taking notice of them,
did not so much as speak to me of this; which I durst not so flatter my self,
as to attribute to her intentions of giving me more lively and ambitioned
Characters of her Resentment, than Verbal acknowledgments could be: But rather
to her fear, That I would by my request to the King, owe that to her Obedience
which I could not hope for from her Inclination or Justice; and thereby punish
my offense, before I had committed it. To remove therefore from the observation
of others, those disorders which such thoughts raised in me, I told the King,
That all his Enemies having paid by their Deaths the last Crime of their Lives,
I came to receive his Commands for his return to Nicomedia; and how the Enemies
Galley, and their dead Bodies should be disposed of: begging him to remove into
mine from the blood and noysomness of that he then was in. He forthwith
appointed all those dead Bodies to be flung Overboard, That they might, as he
said, receive their Burial where they had acted their Sin, and suffered their
Punishment; and that if any one of them were alive, he should be brought to
him, who should save him the sending of an Herald to Nicomedes. The Galley
being diligently searched, one Soldier was found, who having bloodied himself
all over, lay amongst the Dead to avoid increasing their number: But when he
found they were casting his Companions into the Sea, he discovered himself,
hoping the fury of the Execution was over. He was therefore brought to
Mithridates, who told him, I thought thy King would have endeavored to recover
Bithynia, only by such Arms, and by such ways as he lost it: but since with the
loss of his Kingdom, he has lost his Kingly Virtues, and employs his Soldiers
to surprise Women, and murder his Enemies after they are his Prisoners; Tell
him from me, That by all the gods, and the Sacred Ashes of my glorious
Ancestors, if ever he comes into my hands, he shall suffer that Death which it
seems he had appointed for me. I give thee, he continued thy life and liberty,
to carry Nicomedes, if living, this Message; and I shall appoint thee a Vessel
to transport thee to him. The trembling Prisoner, who expected Death himself,
was so confounded with the assurance of life and liberty, and at the rate at
which he was to buy it, that he could not speak: and his silence being taken
for his consent, the King appointed the Captain of my Galley to see him sent
away from Nicomedia.

The Obligation I so recently had received from Nicomedes, and the high and
just Value I paid his Gallantry, made me abhor this Oath and Message; And
therefore I began to move the Pontick King to consider, how much better it
would be to stop, than to send such a Denunciation. I represented to him, That
if Nicomedes had given Orders to kill him, he had not been made a Prisoner; for
it was easy to have acted the first. Therefore that his having been taken
alive whilst Enestes Commanded his Enemies, and his being in danger of being
Murdered, but Enestes was killed, evidenced that the first proceeded from
Nicomedes's Orders, the last from a Soldiers despair; that the Noble usage the
Princess Statira had received, and the Prince Pharnaces does receive, were
sufficient Manifestations how much a friend he was ever to Civility: and
therefore could not be capable of a Sin so far below a King, that it was below
a Man. Consider, replied Mithridates, Whether one of Nicomedes's Subjects durst
kill a King that was his Prisoner, had their Orders been only to have made me
such; and had he not known that performance, entitled him rather to Rewards
than Punishments. To which I answered; Consider also, I beseech you, Sir, that
when that Monster was about to kill you, you were not likely to be his King's
Prisoner, nor he himself ever to see his King; and therefore neither to receive
Rewards or Punishments from him. Even that, said Mithridates, evidences the
Truth of my belief; for it is not probable, that a Subject which endures
Banishment for the Love and Duty he owes his Prince, and daily in his Service
ventures his Life, would make the last Action of it a violation of his
Commands. If he thought you should be Victorious, how durst he have robbed his
King of such a Prisoner as I was? Nay, and believing what you believe, against
his Kings Orders: And if he thought you would be Victorious, how drust he
contrary also to those supposed Orders, have taken away a Life which he could
not but know you would revenge by the loss of his, and all his parties. No, no,
Callimachus, he was confined to what he did by Nicomedes; and nothing but
Obedience could have tied him to his Attempts. Sir, I replied, even the
unseasonableness of his Attempts, evinces it rather an Action of despair, than
obedience; no Duty to reasonable Men being greater, than the Duty to Reason.
His was a fury, and pardon me if I say, it is not fit to judge by the Rules of
Reason, of an irrational Action: But if the contrary were allowable, I might
say, he never began his Villainy, but when he was certain never to be
accountable for it to his King. And since the design denied him the hope of
Life, if your Servants had Success; and that he was so confident of their
having it, that he fled from the Combat; we may well ascribe his Action to
despair: and having failed of being Famous for succeeding in a bold attempt, he
resolved to make himself so for an impious one: The height of wickedness is not
attained unto at once, but gradually. The attempt against your person being
such; and Nicomedes in the whole course of his life, having never done what
misbecomes a Prince, proves him free from Commanding, or permitting such a
Crime. It Is but a Justice due unto the whole course of his Gallantry, to
believe him free from one Action of the highest Guilt; at least, Sir, whatever
you judge him to be in your own thoughts, it will be but consonant to your usual
Justice, not to condemn him till you hear him: you would not deal so with your
meanest Subjects. Therefore I will believe you will not use a great Prince
worse; if he owns the Action, he Authorizes your intended Revenge of it: and if
he denies it, why should you credit the despair of a Subject, more than the
word and assurance of his King.

Whoever, replied Mithridates, has the wickedness to Command such an attempt,
will not want enough to deny it: And though I have not a sufficient proof
thereof judicially; yet I have as much proof of it as the Nature of the Design
can, or will admit. Actions of Darkness are rather judged by Circumstances,
than Proofs. It Is enough I am satisfied of Nicomedes's guilt; and the Oath I
have sworn, is too Sacred to be recalled, or violated; therefore I conjure you
speak to me no more of it. I was, continued Callimachus, silenced, but not
convinced; and the King, whose Wounds hindered him not from being able to go
with help, led Monyma out of the Galley he was in, into mine. The Prince
Atafernes supported by two, was able to remove thither, and the Princess
Statira I led. But as if Mithridates's Vow of granting me my request, what ever
it were, had a Magick-Charm annexed unto it, I neither had the confidence to
speak to her, nor she the condescension to speak to me. Rebadates led the
Princes Nisa, and the Captain of my Galley the Princess Cleopatra. By that time
we were moving toward Nicomedia, we discovered the whole Fleet making toward
us with all the celerity their Sails and Oars could give them; for being come
near unto the Shore, they learnt how the King had been surprised, and therefore
came to his Rescue. Galatides assured me, that when I had doubled the
North-west Cape, he thought I had Rowed close along the Northern-shore; and
that the darkness thereof had taken away his sight of us, else he had steered
as I did: but as soon as they found their mistake, and learned the sad accident
had befaln Mitbridates, they flew to serve him, and follow me. The whole Fleet
being met, Mithridates made a Triumphant entry into Nicomedia; and to avoid the
like hazard again, ordered a Fort to be built at the end of the North-west
Cape, where the Enemies Galley had concealed it self: and such of his Guards as
had fled from his defense, he put to death in Torments.

The Pontick King was no sooner come into his Palace, but the Princess Nisa
cast her self at his Feet; and in Tears and Prayers as moving as her Tears,
besought him to permit her now, to accomplish her Vow of retiring into the
Temple of Diana in Ephesus, which his Commands only had so long hindered her
from accomplishing; and she made use of the late danger he had been in, as an
Argument to persuade to allow one of that Family, to be constantly interceding
with the gods for the safety of the rest, which had been so many times, and now
so recently was endangered: but the King not denying her Request, but only
putting off the acting it for a season, so grieved her, that she said, Since
she was denied to fulfill her Vows at Ephesus, she was resolved to pay them to
the gods at Nicomedia; and since she could not be allowed to go from a Court to
a Temple, she would change a Court into a Temple: and from that hour so wholly
confined her self to her Devotions in the Palace, that she manifested no force
can hinder a resolved mind from serving the gods; and that they can be adored
out of a Cloister, as acceptably as in one. The Kings Wound requiring his
silence, as well as bodily rest, all the Company that waited on him, paid him
the Duty of retiring as soon as he was come to his Chamber; and the Queen,
either to take from me the opportunity and happiness of conversing with my
Princess, or to evidence the delight she had in being with her, accompanied me
to her Appartment: where perceiving those slight hurts I had received, were
still undrest, they united their Commands unto me to retire to have them looked
after. This Injunction gave me, a deeper Wound than any which their care was
concerned for; But before the Surgeons visited me, I visited the Generous
Atafernes, who was environed by Craterus, and such a great crowd of
congratulating Friends and Servants, that I was unable to obtain a particular
Entertainment with him. The best Lodgings in my Appartment, I had resigned to
the Egyptian Stranger, of whom I then acquainted the Prince; who therefore
enjoined me to lodge in the next Chamber to his: which I obeyed until the hour
destined to rest was come. Atafernes received the intermissive respects of his
Friends and Servants; and when it was come and they gone, I thought it too rude
by my waiting on him, to keep him longer from it: and therefore withdrew my
self into the Chamber designed me, where most of the Night I had but too much
Entertainment. To make no request to Mithridates, was to disobey him: to make
any but that which I had not the presumption to make, was to injure my self: to
beg to know of Statira what I should ask, was if she vouchsa^ed me any answer,
certainly to receive one I wished not for; and which yet I must not disobey. To
speak any thing to Ataphernes after what he had spoken to me, was to doubt he
intended not what he profer'd and promised; especially too, when what he
mentioned was the only thing I could desire, and his mentioning it freed me
from the guilt of having solicited him to so unjust an Action: and left me no
other Crime, but not having declined what I acknowledge my self too too unworthy
of. After having turned my affairs into all the postures my Reason or Fancy
suggested to me, I determined it was best to wait the result of the Prince his
undertaking: And if nothing could be acted by him before the time limited by
the King for me to make my request in, then by a strict silence to evidence my
request was of a Quality not to be spoken: and thus by not speaking, manifest
what only I could speak for.

The succeeding day I paid my duty to Mithridates, who used me at a Rate, which
might have assured me he would deny me nothing, but that alone which I feared
to ask; And yet when I was going away, as if he had read my apprehensions to
suppress them, he told me: Callimachus, you have now but a little time left to
acquaint me with your desire, which again I protest before all the gods, I will
grant whatever it be. Nothing could have been more welcome than that repeated
Oath, unless to have had it reiterated. After I had made my Request, or rather
after the Prince Ataphernes had made it for me, from the King's Appartment I
returned to my own; where I learned Monyma, and the fair Mithridatia had sent
two of their Gentlemen to visit me, and know how I did. All that afternoon
Ataphernes was visited by Statira and Cleopatra; for Roxana stirred no more out
of her Lodgings: and toward the Evening Monyma came thither. I do not acquaint
you with the particulars of their discourses; for as soon as I found they
consisted chiefly of those Obligations they all had to me, and of the Frights
and Dangers they had been in, I gave my self wholly up to contemplate my
Princess: in whom appeared a sadness so visible, that some of the Company took
notice of it; and then of mine, as a consequence of it. Statira to take them
off from that consideration, desired me to give the Queen some news of the
Aegyptian-Gentleman; to whom I gave in brief an account of his Gallantry in the
Battle: and how fainting in his being removed to my Galley, in the absence of
his own Servant, Tomsones having cast Water in his Face, and rubbed his Temples
and his Nostrils with Vinegar, the seeming blackness of his Skin had vanished;
and he discovered a mien, that even in the paleness of Death appeared lovely,
and therefore could not be but charming in a perfect Health. And though I had
done what Civilly I might, to learn from his Servant his Quality, and the
Reason of Disguisement; yet could I not make any discovery of either, he having
been tied to a strict secrecy: But he gave me hopes, as soon as his Master was
in a condition to do it, I might be satisfied in those desires from himself.
All that generous Company after this short Relation, did express no small
Concernment to know who this stranger was; which made me promise them, That the
next day (which my Surgeons had assured me, would be the soonest that he
could be able without danger to discourse) I would endeavor to learn of him
that which every one of them seemed so intently curious to know. I was not long
after called away from At^phernes by Craterus, to whom the King had left the
care of drawing to the Seaside so much of the Prince's Army, as was esteemed
convenient to be landed in the Island of Scyros, to reduce it, and suppress the
King in it; Ataphernes's own wounds denying him the strength to undertake that
expedition, I found by the Generous Craterus's diligence, that by the Evening
of that day, in which I was to make my Request, all would be in a readiness to
set to Sea. At my return to the Prince's Chamber, I found none in it with him,
but the fair Statira; and they were so taken up in what they were discoursing
of, That though I presented my self before them, yet neither of them took any
notice of me: which made me retire into my own Chamber, imagining what was the
occasion of their entertainment. I had not been long there, but the
Aegyptian-Strangers Servant came in to me from his Lord, to tell me, That being
now in some degree recovered out of his fainting weakness, he begged me to
oblige him with my company for a few Moments. I obeyed him, and was no sooner
come to his Bedside, than he told me, I have learnt, generous Callimachus,
from Photinus, all that you have done for me; how, That by your generosity I
live, and by your Civility I am now in this place; I owe you so much, That not
to acknowledge to you my Obligations, and the sense I have of them, would have
more endangered me, than the Surgeons tell me I may endanger my self, by so
much, and so soon speaking. Generous Stranger, I replied, the Valor you
manifested in that glorious Quarrel in which we bore Arms together, and those
fatal, yet noble Marks you carry about you, of having so prodigally acted in
it, con^ined me to those Services which are so much my debt to you, that they
merit not your Acknowledgments to me; Especially such, as while you give them,
you prejudice the giver of them. I conjure you therefore, not to hazard a Life
by an excess of Civility, which by what I have already seen of it, is too
precious to let it be endangered on any Account, especially on mine. Though I
know few things, the other replied, which I more Ambition, than to assure you
of my acknowledgments, unless it be the Acting of them; yet I should not, to
have told you so much, been guilty of the confidence of inviting you to this
place to have done it; but that Photinus having told me how desirous you were
to know who I am, I have begged the honor of your Company, only to pay you that
Obedience which his duty to me hindered him from; and thereby to convince you,
by satisfying you in what is within my power, I would do it in all things, were
my ability proportionate to my resentments.

I shall, he continued, (having first made me sit down by his Bedside in a
Chair which Photinus brought me) trust you with a secret, which is such to all
the World, but to these in this Chamber; and which I will not beg you, may be
continued such, because you will find how requisite it is, and that will exempt
me from the need of making such a request. My true Name is Auletes, my
disguised is Achillas. I am by birth Prince of Egypt. Ptolomy my Father, who
possesses that Kingdom, found from my infancy something in my humor or mien,
that made his Natural affection receive so large an Accession, that possibly
never Parent loved a Son more than he did me. All that Education could confer,
it is my own fault if I received it not; and finding my Proficiency in what was
taught me, was as much his contentment as mine; it doubled my Inclination, and
my Endeavors: but as soon as I was capable to endure Traveling, I had a
longing to form my self by the choice of my own Judgment, having first seen and
experimented whatever was most considerable in Asia, Greece, and Italy. This
intention I communicated to my Father, but his fondness of me, made me receive
a Denial, clouding what disgusted him, with an assurance that it would disgust
all Egypt; who having no Prince but I to succeed, he would not expose me to the
hazard of Traveling in remote Countries. I would not disobey a Father, to whom
by Nature and Friendship I was so bound; and though I paid him an actual
observance, yet I could not hide my sorrow for his Denial: the visibility
thereof, though it could not produce what only could end it, yet it made
Ptolomy seek out all those Divertisements for me, which he thought might
mitigate it. Alexandria was therefore filled with all things which might invite
me to esteem it a more agreeable residence than any else I could elect; amongst
other things, the greatest Gallery in the Palace was furnished on one side with
the Pictures and Stories of all the great Men and Women of our Family, from
Lagus to my Father: and on the other side, with the Pictures of all the
considerablest persons of either Sex in that Age in which we live: And because
Ptolomy found that in this Room and Furniture I took most satisfaction: he
built another Gallery, which he intended to imbellish with the like Ornaments;
and therefore employed skilful Painters into the most eminent parts of the
World to Act this Design: who performed so well what they were employed about,
that when those sent into Asia were returned, they boasted the Furniture of the
new Gallery, would much transcend that of the old: But above all the rest, The
Artist which had been at Heraclea publicly avowed, that the piece he had drawn
of the Princess Statira, had nothing comparable to it but the Original. It
happened at the same time the Prince Ascanius was then in his Travels visiting
Ptolomy's Court; for his Father had permitted that to him, which mine had
denied me. He expressed a curiosity of seeing what was so much commended, I
waited on him to satisfy it; and having considered with much intentness all
those pieces which adorned one side of the Room: at the last the Picture he was
so impatient to look upon, was showed him. I never saw any surprise like unto
his, even at the very first sight of it; and after he had a while contemplated
it in silence, he broke it off to ask him that drew it, Whether Statira owed
nothing to his Pencil? Yes, Sir, the Painter replied, She owes a Pardon to it
for having done so little, where I should have done so much; for I could never
get any opportunity to draw it, but when the Princess was at her Devotions: and
then too, but by stealths and in imperfect lights. I must acknowledge, He
continued, that till I saw her, I believed I could produce a greater Beauty
than Nature; for by my Skill I could make a Collection of all the exactest
parts of every Woman, and draw them in one: so that Nature, whose productions
are subjected to a Thousand casualties; and who cannot repair the least if it
happen, which is an infelicity the Pencil is not confined unto; I did esteem my
belief was rational: But when I saw the Princess Statira, and began to draw
her, I found experimentally she had an Air, a Vivacity, and such a Harmony
springing from the result of all her Motions and Graces, that I owned my self a
Convert, and must own her above the faint representations of Art. And therefore
I have endeavored by my Words, to draw her better than I have done by my
Pencil.

All the while this Artist was thus speaking, methought I saw Ascanius receive
Love by two senses at once; and indeed he was so wholly taken up with what he
had heard and seen, That I think he had not stirred out of the Place all that
day, had not he been summoned thence to a Ball, which only waited his coming to
be begun: And though he danced in it, yet it was with a face so full of
thoughts, and so little like unto that, in which in former ones he had
assisted, that the effects were not more visible to Ptolomy, and all the Court,
than the cause was to me. Seven days he continued at this rate, and the eighth
a Cyprian Lord brought him the news of his Father's Death, who dyed of an
Apoplexy; and the desires of all his Subjects by his presence to repair that
loss, and fill the Throne. This sad and hasty Summons, accelerated his return
to his Kingdom; from whence he sent Ambassadors to obtain Mithridates's
permission of making his addresses to that admirable Princess. His going
thither after he had obtained that leave he so passionately ambition'd; his
losing his Brother in a Naval battle against the King of Bithynia; and on the
day of his intended Nuptials, losing another within the prospect of Nicomedia,
and his liberty also; the Princess being carried away by the Treachery of some
of the Inhabitants, and his Exchange for the King of Cappadocia, are better
known to you than to me. I have therefore only to add, That he being engaged by
three the most powerful Motives to repair his Misfortune* Those of Love, Glory,
and Revenge, he left no means unattempted to assemble a Fleet powerful enough
to act his desires; and because the Cilicians and Phoenicians were pre-engaged
in the service of Mithridates, though in the same War; yet coveting as much to
end the War by his own Forces, as to have it ended, he came himself to Ptolomy
to desire his permission to form a Fleet of his Subjects, which more through my
persuasion than his own, he procured leave to do. The growing-greatness of the
Romans, and the Universal Government of the World, which they aspired unto,
making it the Interest of all Princes to oppose them that had not resolved to
submit unto them. I had too a particular Interest of my own, which engaged me
to join my request to Ascanius; for I desired to command this Fleet in this
Action: But the first motion I made of it to Ptolomy, I found the impossibility
of its success; intending therefore to do that by stealth, which I perceived
was not otherwise to be acted, I seemed not much concerned in the refusal, to
take from my Father the jealousy of my intentions. As soon as the Fleet was
formed, without acquainting any Person living with it but Photinus, no not the
Admiral, lest his knowledge of it might have been penal to him in Ptolomy's
resentments, disguising my Face with a Color as black as any Egyptians, I went
on Board the Galley of the Vice Admiral, who was a particular Friend to
Photinus; and who in the first Fury of the Naval-Battel being killed, I assumed
his place: and had no other Honor, but a while to fight Single against some of
the Enemies Galleyes, and to avoid being made a Prisoner by part of a conquered
Fleet. But I owe the avoiding of that unhappiness to your Civility and Courage,
which I can in no way requite, but in owning it to all the World; and in
assuring you, That what I owe unto you, I will on all occasions employ and
hazard for you: and in acquainting you that my chief Motive to this Voyage and
Disguise, proceeded from a passion I had assumed at the Noble and high
Character which Ascanius when last in Egypt gave me of the Princess.

At this very word, continued Callimachus, the Prince of Aegypt's senses
abandoned him; which made Photinus and I hasten to afford him all the help we
could: but finding ours was not proportionable to his necessity, we called in
the Physician and Surgeons which were in the next Room; who having done all
that their Art suggested to them, desired us to withdraw, and to leave him to
that silence, the breaking whereof had cast him into that faintness, Photinus
and I observed a little before, that his words came more languishingly from
him, than when he began his Narrative: But both of us attributing it to the
sense he had of his being reduced to need my assistance in that Battle, in
which he had promised himself so much Glory, we did neither of us desire him to
forbear prosecuting his Relation, till the swound he fell into, put a period to
it. I was not a little concerned to ask of Photinus one word more than his
Prince had spoke; But he protested to me, that was as great a secret to him, as
it was to me. He only knew that as Ascanius had fallen in Love by the sight of
a Picture, his Prince had assumed the same passion by a Relation of the King of
Cyprus; but who the Object of his Passion was, he was a perfect stranger unto.
Photinus having accompanied me to my Appartment, returned to pay his Duty to
his Prince, and left me in no small perplexities; which had he spoke one word
more, might have been increased or suppressed. I was not without my Fears, that
the Princess Statira's Beauty had engaged him in this Voyage; for since the
Description which had kindled his flame, had been made by Ascanius, 'twas but
too likely he would most exalt that Perfection which in captivating him, had
evinced it self to be the greatest, as well in Truth, as in his Estimation.
Neither could I believe that the fear of speaking the Truth to Auletes, might
have any Operation on the King of Cyprus in raising him so dangerous a Rival;
since he had already engaged Mithridates, and secured his raptures to a degree
above the apprehension of Danger. I was too the more confirmed in that belief,
by reason that Auletes kept himself disguised to Ascanius as well as any other;
which sure he had not much cause to do, if his Aims had not been such, as
necessitated him to such a proceeding: for if his Love was paid to any else, he
might expect from the King of Cyprus's assistance, a powerful help; which by
his not discovering himself to him, he was certainly to fail of. This
consideration left me abundant cause to believe my apprehensions were but too
rational; and therefore in Auletes's Person and Quality I found cause to think
Ascanius had raised me as powerful a Rival as himself: and I remained only with
this consolation, That by Ataphernes's favor I should know my Fate, before the
Prince Auletes could be an obstacle to the felicity of it. With these thoughts
I went to wait upon my Prince, who though I had left in his Bed; yet I found
him not in his Chamber. Some of those Gentlemen that waited on him in it,
telling me he was gone to Mithridates's Apartment in no small pain, I feared I
was the cause of this trouble; for the time of making my request was to end the
next day: and he had undertaken my Destiny. I learned also, That all that time
I had spent with the Prince of Egypt, He had entertained in private the
Princess Statira. I resolved therefore in his Chamber to expect his return,
which I did in impatiencies and fears that were almost equal. I never had been
in such troubles. When I was ignorant to what the gods had reserved me to, and
when I thought they had allotted for me the deepest Affliction, as now I was in,
when I was positively to learn what I was designed unto; My entertainments on
this subject were so confused and irrational, that I will not trouble you with
a repetition of them: neither did they cease, till the Gentleman came from
Mithridates to call me to him.

I found the King of Pontus in his Bed, and the Prince Ataphernes sitting by
him; as soon as I came in, the King commanded every one besides to withdraw:
then calling me to him, he told me; Callimachus, you may conclude it was an
important Affair which made me send to my Son to come to me, considering the
indisposition he is under; and to let you see I will have nothing in reserve
for you, I will now communicate to you what I have imparted to him: for owing
all that I have to you, I will conceal nothing from you. There is at this hour
in this Palace, three persons disguised, who have brought me strange news, and
presented to me glorious offers, they are all three Romans: The first is
Martius Variu^, Lieutenant General to the Great Sertorius; the other two are
Lucius Mannius, and Lucius Fannius, Senators of Rome, and Cabbinet-Councellors
to Sertorius. They assure me, the gods by an immediate judgment of their own,
have taken out of this World my only dreaded Enemy, Cornelius Sylla; which has
filled not only Rome, but even all the Roman Empire with such high confusions,
as every one is now striving to diminish that entire greatness which so lately
every one endeavored to augment. Sertorius has already appropriated to himself
all the Kingdoms of Spain, and raised so powerful an Army there, and of his
other Confederates; as even at that distance, the Capitol does tremble. He has
got together so many of the Senatorian Order, that he has already constituted a
Roman Senate in Spain; and disowns any Senate but that: so that he has not
alone the power, but the Authority of the Roman People. He intends immediately
to carry his Ensigns to Rome it self; and wants not Friends and Confederates
there, nor at the East and Western-feet of the Alps: so that he is not only
confident of an uninterrupted passage thither, but of Success and Victory when
he comes there. Yet to expose his attempts to as little incertitude as actions
of War can admit, He has sent to invite my assistance; assuring me, that if my
Forces from the East, and his from the West, do unite in one common Design, the
success cannot be more great than it will be certain: But then we must move at
once. He offers me for my Part, and to confirm it by a Decree of the Senate,
That I shall for ever without acknowledging any thing to Rome, possess Asia so
properly called, Bithynia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Comagena, Pamphilia,
Phrygia, and Galatia. He desires to oblige me to this, That if he needs my
Armies, or Navies, I must afford him their help under his Pay; and offers me if
I need his, he will afford me them under my Pay. These Proposals I did but this
morning receive, and have accepted of them; only I have insisted upon this
Addition of having into my Portion the Republic Cities and Countries of
Greece, that Asia may have another Sea and Bulwork between Italy and it. This
they have not a Commission to grant; But rather than not conclude the League,
they have assured me of their utmost endeavors to have it granted by Sertorius
and the Senate with him; or something else contented: and this Night I am to
sign that Agreement which is to make Sertorius Lord of the West of the World,
and me of the East. We must therefore divert to a Nobler End all our
Preparatives for the reduction of Scyros, which will be as a consequence of our
other successes; and if attempted now, would probably hinder us in one Moon,
from greater advantages than it can ever present us. I have therefore designed
out of Ataphernes and Pharnaces Armies, to compose two others which I will
strengthen with great recruits, that shall meet them on their March; and a
small Army drawn out of both, shall under Craterus attend my Person, and secure
Pithynia, which I find is so ready to revolt. To Ataphernes I have designed the
conquest of Paphlagonia, and Phrygia; to Callimachus I have designed the
Conquest of Galatia and Pamphilia: And because I will not always be obliged by
him, and never oblige him, I now require him to make his request unto me, which
I again vow before all the gods I will grant him.

Mithridates at the end of these Words, paused a while; and having then twice
commanded me to speak; and I as often looked upon Atafernes, but not answering;
the Pontick King thus continued: Since Callimachus, you will not make me a
desire, I will make you an offer. Your Friend here has acquainted me with that
great and respectful passion which you have for Statira; your not making her
your request, ties me to make her my grant. I do therefore not only give you my
permission to solicit her affection; but I will also enjoin her to give it
you: and if I mistake not, she has obeyed some Commands of mine with more
repugnancy than she will do this.

Judge, Generous Princes, continued Callimachus, Judge, if ever any Astonishment
could equal mine; if ever any Raptures of Joy could come near those I then
resented. I cast my self on my Knees by Mithridates his Bed; and having kissed
his Hand with transports, I told him; I confess Great King, I confess, That the
first hour I saw the Princess Statira, I adored her: but it was with an
adoration like unto that we pay the gods, who while we yield them all our
Services, we expect no return, or reward, but their acceptance. I found the
impossibility of expecting more, could not transcend the injustice of desiring
more; and having placed such Religious Limits to my Flame, I thought it not
unworthy of her; and therefore continued the duty of it: But this you have now
condescended to mention, is so infinitely below her, and above me, That to make
any other use thereof, than to admire your goodness, were almost as highly to
injure it, as her. No, Sir, my Passion and Ambition have not so much blinded my
Duty and my Reason, as to accept of exalting my own Felicity on so criminal a
Foundation as the making of you unjust, and her unhappy. If your intention be
to confine me eternally to your Service, the Offer more than the Acceptance
will do it; for in that, I have already received too vast a reward, both for
what I have, and for all that I can do: But in this, I should be as guilty as
happy; and the way would be destructive to the end. I have by your mercy a
double Glory, That of the Offer of the Princess, and that of having in duty
adjudged my self unworthy to accept it. I can now convince Her, as well as the
World and my self, That my adoration was as perfect, as it was great; and being
free from those common and mean ends which other passions are animated with, I
may in the future with the more satisfaction pay her mine: and she with the
less reluctance receive them. Rise Callimachus, rise, replied Mithridates;
whilst you thus plead against what I offer, you but the more entitle your self
to it. Besides I hope, you will allow that no man is a fit Judge in his own
case; and that a Father has the best right to dispose of his Daughrer. These
being granted, as they can hardly be well denied, I command you to dispute no
more against what I have as rationally, as resolutely fixed upon; and because
that either Nature, or the Ignorance of your condition has denied you a Crown,
and that I never designed my Daughter to less, I give you an Army to Conquer
Galatia and Pamphilia: and I give those Kingdoms to you and your Heirs for
ever, to hold of the Crown of Pontus; and wanting of Heirs, to revert unto my
Successors again. But because Statira was so near being Ascanius his Wife, That
mere decency will require she should for some time decline actually marrying
another; and that I would not by a delay make any suspect my intentions to you,
are no as clear and sincere as my Professions: to answer these two ends, I
declare, That the twentieth Day after this, you shall solemnly be contracted
before me to Statira; and as soon as by your Sword you have made your self Lord
of Galatia and Pamphilia, and thereby prepared a Throne for her to sit in, you
shall as publicly marry her: and govern there as a King, with the limitations
I have mentioned. Ah! Sir, I replied, since you Command me to dispute no more,
I will obey you; and in that Obedience I hope you will be convinced of mine in
all things else: for doubtless never man had at once so much Reason to be
ravished with Joys, and so little Title to them. For to be the Princess
Statira's Servant by your Commands, and consequently by her permission, is a
Glory above the Empire of Galatia and Pamphilia; nay, of the whole World: But
by what you have done, you have so transcended all that I can express, that I
must not only be obliged to you for my happiness, but also for believing my
sense of it is at once as great as it can be, and yet less than it should be.
Alas! Mighty Prince, Why do you confer Felicities on me which have no Limits?
and command me services which have such narrow ones? I am but to conquer
Galatia, and I am to be the happy Servant of the Princess: rather Sir, Command
me to carry your Ensigns to the Capitol; and cast that proud Senate as low by
your Arms, as they have exalted themselves by their own. Command me to make her
Empire as large as her Title is to Empire; and then you shall see I will
present her with that of the Universe, or perish in the duty of attempting it:
and thereby gain what she is worthy of, or lose him that is unworthy of her. I
do not, replied Mithridates, end your Victories in the conquest of Galatia and
Pamphilia, I do but begin them there; Comagena is the next Country to which you
shall carry your Conquest. And possibly by then, new Objects may be presented
to your Volour; and the occasions of Glory will proportionate your desire of
it. Retire your self now, Callimachus, and leave Atafernes with me; for Statira
by my appointment is coming hither, that I may signify to her, what I have
acquainted you with. This Command I obeyed; but before I did so, I again cast
my self on my knees by Mithridates's bedside, and kissed his hands with such
transports, that he told the Prince when I was gone, In those Actions he read
my resentments as visibly, as in all my other expressions.

I was not many steps out of the King's Chamber, when I met the Princess
Statira going thither; who asked of me, Whether I then came from thence? I told
her I did. She enquired then of me, Whether Atafernes, was there? I told her he
was. She then demanded, Whether I knew what the occasion could be which made
her Father send for her Brother in the unfit condition he was in to stir out of
his Bed; much more out of his Chamber? and whether I knew what She was sent for
about? Yes, Madam, I replied, with a deep sigh twice repeated, I can answer all
your Demands; but 'twill be less unfit you should receive an account of all
those Questions from the King, than from me. But yet, Madam, to obey you as
much as I can, I will presume to tell you, That you are now sent for, to be
either the most disobedient, or the most unjust person living; and I have
endeavored to prevent your being either: though you are too likely only to
find thereby, that your being made so, is rather an effect of my Obedience than
Solicitation. By this time we were come to Mithridates's Chamber Door, where
Statira saluting me, with no little trouble in her Countenance, went in, and
left me to pursue my first intention of going to Atafernes's Appartment, there
to wait the result of her attendance on the King.

I had not above half an hour entertained my self with the Felicities of my
then Condition, but the Prince was brought back to his Chamber: and immediately
being put to Bed, he commanded all his Servants to leave him and I alone.

The Room was no sooner emptied, than I cast my self on my knees by his
Bed-^ide; and there in innumerable Actions and Words, endeavored to assure him
of those Resentments which were above Demonstration. He had the goodness to
embrace me, and to assure me, though he had done all he could, yet he had done
too little in proportion to the friendship he had for me. He then was pleased
to acquaint me, how Mithridates had disclosed his pleasure concerning me to the
Princess; how he had particularized all those Services I had done for him, and
had paid to her; how Miraculously her intended Nuptials had been broken off;
and how when Ascanius was released, she was a Prisoner; and when she was
released, he was defeated and killed: All which seemed to evidence the gods
were not more concerned in interrupting that Marriage, than in my Services,
they seemed to design me alone to that Glory. That he neither would nor could
oppose what was so declaredly their Wills, and therefore whatever my extraction
was, my Actions and his Bounty had made me worthy of, and should make me
possessor of a Crown; and consequently not unfit for her Acceptance, or his
Alliance. That therefore he did not only desire her to receive me as her
intended Husband, but he enjoined her to do it; and that the more positively,
because she was not ignorant who I was, and that my preceding Services had
given me no small Title to the subsequent Honor he designed me to. I tell you
in brief, continued Callimachus, Generous Princes, what the obliging Atafernes
told me at large; But when he began to relate the Princesses Answer; The
confidence I had in her exact obedience to her Father, in her unequalled
affection to her Brother, and in that glorious Assurance when she was to marry
Ascanius, which she gave me in these never-to-be forgotten Words, I attest the
gods, had they made me the distributer of their Rewards, I would place
Callimachus in whatever he ambitions, and that without any Reservation; could
not secure me from a Fear which invaded me with Confusions; and those in such
excess, That the Prince taking notice of them, interrupted his Relation, to
enquire of me whether I were ill? I told him I was, and till I knew what the
Authoress of my Fate had decreed of it, I should be in Horrors, whose visible
Effects were the least uneasy part of them. I will then, replied, Atafernes,
hasten to free you from sufferings in which I sympathize, by telling you, that
after Mithridates had done speaking, Statira continued silent for some time;
which made him say, I will not so much doubt your Obedience, as to think I need
a verbal Assurance of it. I know you pay me an exact Affection and Duty; and I
have enjoined you by both those to observe what I have signified to you.

Within twenty days my Army designed for the Conquest of Galatia and Pamphilia
will be moving, and before Callimachus is at the head of it, I have resolved to
contract you to him; and when he has subdued that Kingdom, to place you and him
in the Throne thereof; Mithridates having done speaking, turned himself to me,
and told me; Atafernes, I doubt I have too long detained you from your rest; to
which now you may retire; I leave it to your care to perfect with your Sister,
what I have so far advanced for your Friend: I did therefore cause my self to
be carried hither, and desired Statira forthwith to follow me, which she
assured me she would: I believe she will be immediately here, therefore I would
have you withdraw into the next Room, and as soon as I call you, to come hither
again; for I am determined before I rest, to make my Sister give you such
assurances as shall leave you no grounds to doubt of her Obedience to
Mithridates, her Friendship to me, and her esteem of, if not affection for you.
I was going again by new Evincements of gratitude to show him some sense of my
Resentments, when I heard the Princess coming: I did therefore hastily retire
into my generous Friend's Closet which was contiguous to his Chamber, and had
no sooner shut the Door, than Mithridatia came to her Brother's Bedside; he
commanded all out of the Chamber, and to let none come in till he Called. The
Closet was so near the Bed, That I heard Atafernes thus discourse to his Sister.

The End of the Third Book of the Sixth Part of PARTHENISSA.
PARTHENISSA.
THE SIXTH PART.
The Fourth BOOK.
YOU have now, dear Statira, received a Command from Mithridates to permit
Callimachus his Addresses, and I have received a Command from the King to see
that finished which he has begun: though the distemper of my Body needs sleep,
yet the satisfaction of my mind does more need the placing of my Friend in a
Condition above the Reverse of Fortune. I am incapable of my Rest, till you
have established his, by such assurances as you may convince him you are not
insensible of your Duty to your Father, of your Friendship to your Brother, and
all his Services to you and your Family. I confess Brother (the Princess
replied) in the whole course of my life I never was more surprised, than at the
command my Father laid upon me; it was the least of my Expectations: not that I
think any thing in his Power, was too great a Reward for what he owed
Callimachus, but that he could think I was a sufficient one. And that with one
of the unworthiest of his Family, he could design to pay the Debts of all of
it. I shall also confess I am not a little troubled at the Injunction, not that
I do not prefer your Friend above any Man, but that I prefer a single life
before any other: both as it is most proportionate to my Nature, and that by it
I may be still in a condition to live near Atafernes, in whose Company and
Friendship I have established my highest Satisfaction. I can (replied
Atafernes) make you the like assurance; for it is in your Friendship and Company
I take most delight, and therefore in order to that end, I am the more
concerned in the Success of what I now solicit. You know Pharnaces is to
succeed in all Mithridates's Kingdoms, and you know how little I am to expect
from his Friendship when he comes to the Power; your being settled in Galatia
will be a safe and happy Retreat for me. And with you and Callimachus I can
enjoy a contentment preferable to all my Father's Empires; it is therefore that
by thus disposing of your self, you are most likely to continue in the
condition you desire, and I ambition. I know you will obey the King; I know you
will not deny my Happiness. But it is not enough I know it, unless I do so by
your assurance of it to me, and to my Friend. Before I will obey any of your
Commands (replied Statira) I must beg the knowledge of one particular, and in
that I must not be denied; it is to tell me, by what inducement Mithridates was
led to what he has now enjoined me: for I cannot imagine how he could know that
Callimachus had an esteem for me more than for any other; and as little
believe, unless he thought so, how he could fancy me, the Recompense he
intended him? And I can as uneasily believe, that Callimachus would make me his
Request, without having ever sounded my Inclinations therein, either by himself
or by you. Though I am certain ( Atafernes answered) That all the desires of
Mankind united, cannot transcend the passion which he desires to serve you; yet
I Will assure you, he was so far from making you his Request, that when the King
made you his Offer, he did so generously acknowledge his unworthiness of you,
and so civilly tax the King's Justice in that Offer; that had you heard what he
said, and seen what he did, you could no more have declined admiring his
Respect, than without Injustice you can decline rewarding it. But to obey your
Commands I will ingenuously acknowledge, that when Mithridates had acquainted me
with his new League with Sertorius, and with his intent, to employ Callimachus
in the Conquest of Galatia and Pamphilia, he commanded me to Acquaint him if I
knew what he intended to ask: I protested to him I was entirely ignorant
thereof; and that I was more persuaded he would ask nothing, than any thing.
The King then commanded me to tell him, what I thought would be most grateful
to him, and whether I had any apprehensions consonant to the Queens, of his
having a passion for you; I told him, if he was capable of any, for any,
possibly it might be for you. Mithridates having a while considered, told me,
That he intended him the greatest Gift, and he considered you to be That; and
because you should not be married to any but a King, he would with you give
Callimachus an Army to present you a Crown. This was so suited to my
Intentions, that I did all I could to confirm the King in his, and prevailed
with him to send forthwith for Callimachus: whom he enjoined three times to
make his Request, and he as often by an unconquerable silence declining it;
Mithridates then made him his greatest Offer, and was necessitated to make use
of his Command to make him keep that Silence after his Proposal: which three
reiterations of it, could not make him break before; having thus satisfied your
desire, I not only hope but expect you will satisfy mine, which is exacted
from you by Duty, Friendship and Gratitude; and which you cannot either deny or
delay, without giving me as much trouble, as by granting it you will give
Callimachus and me raptures of Satisfaction. You are so importunate (the
Princess replied) that I know not what particularly to say to you; and
therefore I will in General promise to be ruled by you. Ah Statira, (the Prince
answered) embracing her, You have now given me a greater and more welcome
Evincement of your kindness, than you can ever repeat.

I heard, Generous Princes, I heard distinctly this Ravishing Engagement, and
soon after Atafernes called me out of his Closet; from whence I came with such
Ecstasies, as nothing could transcend them, but their Cause. And being come to
the Prince's Bedside, He told me, I did acquaint you Callimachus, with
Mithridates Commands to Statira, and with my passionate Desires to her in your
Favor; and now I can tell you, you need no more doubt your Felicity, than my
Friendship; for she has promised to be Ruled by me in this greatest Concernment
of hers and yours. Sir, I replied; The Princess Statira esteems it some Mercy,
that I should not receive my Condemnation from her own Mouth, and therefore has
substituted you to pronounce it for her; but since I must receive the Fatal
sentence, I most humbly beg it may be from her self; for my perfect Obedience
to all her Commands, will make me that way embrace my Destiny with more
Resignation, and make you consider it with somewhat less sorrow when you only
see my Misery, and do not by speaking those words, act what must cause it. Yes
Sir, I know I esteem, nay, I admire that Friendship you have always blessed me
with; but I know also, I should be more unworthy of it by my Actions, than I am
by the insignificancy of my Condition and Services, could I solicit, nay,
could I so much as hope that to be the most obliging to me, you should be the
most injurious to her; and since my cruel Fate has denied my Actions the Power
to express the lively Sense I have of your goodness, Permit me to evidence that
high Truth by my sufferings, and by my silence under them. She has done much in
leaving it in your Power to make me happy above Imagination; and possibly I
have not done a little in desiring you, and that with earnestness, that you
will not abuse that unlimited Trust; She has too highly rewarded my unavoidable
Ambition in not punishing it, and you will highly reward my passionate desires
to serve you, in granting me a Request which must convince you I would not be
ungrateful; since as a Pregnant evidence thereof, I solicit to be the
miserablest of men, to preserve you from being the unjustest. Certainly
Callimachus, said Atafernes, Your memory is very bad, or you esteem mine so,
for you have so often and so signally served, nay, saved Mithridates, Statira,
and all the Royal House of Pontus, that it is more necessary you should receive
the proof of our gratitude, than that you should think we need any fresh ones
of yours; and if you longer persist in Pleading at this rate, we must believe
you esteem your Obligations above Reward, by declining the highest we can
present you. Do not think Statira has left the pronouncing of your Destiny to
me, because she would her self avoid ruining you; for I know she loves me too
well to lay such an Imposition on me, and she knows I love you too well to
accept it; No, Callimachus, she has Elected this way to satisfy both our
Debts: Mine, by speaking our happiness; and hers, by performing what I shall
speak; for she is not ignorant that my Engagements to you are too vast to be
paid by me alone; and that it will make my Joy proportionate to yours, by
ordering her self in such a manner as in one payment she may satisfy both our
Debts. Oh gods, Sir! I cried out, interrupting him: I had much rather you
should condemn me to death, than condemn me to hear expressions which are more
wounding than death it self. Esteem me not, I beseech you, so ignorant of what
my Services are, and what the Princess Statira is, as to fancy I think they are
above all Reward, because I decline the highest; No, Generous Prince, the
contrary of that belief ought to be yours, and is mine; I had much rather be
the miserablest of our Sex, than that she should be the like of hers; to bestow
her on any Man, is the greatest Sin; but to believe she can be any Man's as a
Debt; whoever were capable of entertaining such a Crime, deserves the greatest
punishment, as the lowest reward of it: And though I am as far from believing
what you said (pardon me Sir, the fault and duty of that Expression) as
deserving it; Yet to repair your offense against the Princess, I will revenge
it on my self, which is the Duty I should pay her, and the respect I owe you.
Oh miserable Callimachus, I continued! Oh Fatal Services! which has reduced the
greatest Beauty and Virtue that ever shined, to be disobedient to her Father,
and disobliging to her Brother, or unjust to her self! Ah Madam, (I proceeded
prostrating my self at her Feet and kissing them); At least be so Just to this
unfortunate person, as to believe the necessities to which you are undesignedly
reduced unto by him, are more wounding to him, than they can be to you; and
oblige your Adorer so far as to be satisfied, that for all those Services he
endeavored to present you, he ambitioned nothing else, but that you should
receive them, and that you would pardon their being so few, and so
disproportionate to the person to whom they were paid, and to the desires and
duty of him that paid them: Above this I swear by your self (too great an Oath
to be violated) I covet nothing; and if your goodness induce you to credit so
much, I shall never aspire at more, but that by a resolute denial of what the
great Mithridates has commanded you, and your Generous Brother has implored of
you, you would evidence to them and all the World besides, that you know your
self; and believe me, Statira, dear Statira, (the obliging Atafernes cried out)
Will you then by your fatal Silence manifest you have no Obedience for your
Fathers Commands, but when they are imposed on you for^ Ascanius? and shall
that Friendship you have always vowed to me, and still blessed me with, only fail
me, where I most desire and am most concerned to receive the effects of it?
Alas Atafernes, the fair Mithridatia replied, What is it you expect from me? I
thought I had at least done enough in leaving it to you to dispose of me; Yes,
yes, said Atafernes, that had been enough in any Man's Case but Callimachus's:
But you see it is not enough that you permit me to make him happy, you your self
must command him to be so, or else you must resolve to see me as miserable, as
he would make himself in his Respects for you. At these words, Statira at once
cast off all those disorders which had been but too visible in her Looks, in
her Words, and in her Actions, and with that Empire which still I admired, as
much as I heard; casting her Eyes upon me, she said, Callimachus, you are too
cruel in making Atafernes to press me beyond what I have already spoke; But
since -- Ah! Madam, I cried out, Do not call that my Crime which is my Torment.
If my Arguings, if my praying against my self, produced such guilty desires in
your Generous Brother; Be pleased to let me only endure the punishment thereof,
but do not impute to me the sin; I would have died, I would have killed my self
to have exempted you from those difficulties, your obedience to Mithridates,
and your affection for Atafernes have engaged you in; when you denied me that
just and only prevention, I held my peace; but then my Silence pleaded against
you, and for me; I then argued and prayed against my self; but both those
produced the like effect: what therefore does remain, but that now you permit
me to embrace that Remedy which hitherto your Commands, nay, your reiterated
Commands, prohibited me to Act; I am as ready now to present your Virtues, your
Beauty and your Quality, that cure as ever: nay, I am more ready to do it now,
than before, being more convinced now than ever, that the necessity of that
performance is now as great as the Duty; but if your goodness declines to
behold what I now mention, my Respect shall carry me into some remote Country,
where on the point of your Enemies Swords I will receive that Fate my Crimes
and your sufferings have made you deny me to receive from mine own hand.
Atafernes at the conclusion of these words, overwhelmed with the sorrow they
had invaded him with, sunk down into his Bed, and his spirits abandoning him,
he remained pale and speechless in his Sister's and my Arms, for we were both
run to his Assistance; which proved so effectual, that in a few Moments he
opened his Eyes again, and casting them languishingly on his weeping Sister, he
told her, Statira, You employ your goodness where it is not needed, and decline
it, where it is. But all these evincements of your Love to me, unless you confer
yours on my Friend, I shall receive as Manifestations of your Hate: for to live
and to see Callimachus miserable, is more cruelty, than to let me die. Since,
replied the fair Statira, you will have me speak that, which possibly were
enough in me if I obeyed, I will force my self to an entire observance of your
Commands. Then turning her self to me, she spoke these charming words:
Callimachus; The Duty I owe my Father, The Friendship I pay my Brother, The
true Sense I have of those eminent Obligations you have loaded us with, and the
more Eminent Virtues the gods have blessed you with, make me give you this
Immutable Assurance before them and him, That I will be as obedient for you, as
lately I should have been against you: And if I have that Empire over you,
which you still assured me I had, show it in making no reply to what I have now
promised you. The gods (continued Callimachus, speaking to his Generous
Hearers) only knew the Raptures with which I celebrated such a Promise and such
a Command; the first had made me still defend my self, if the last had not made
that great Duty a greater Sin; But yet casting my self again at my Princess's
Feet, I could not hinder my self from saying in unfanciable Ttrnsports: The
gods, Madam, shall be my Witnesses, that I never did any thing more with the
obedience of a Subject, than in the accepting that Felility which raises me
infinitely above the Condition of any King; nor had you any way to persuade me
to this happiness, but making me receive it as an effect of my Obedience; and
if ever I perform an Action; Nay, if ever I enterrain a thought, but what may
be Consonant to this high Truth; May my Miseries be as unexpressible as my
Joys, or which is more, as the Mercy which had placed me in them.

Why should I (continued Callimachus) speaking to Artabanus and Artavasdes,
trouble you with particularizing those Transports which are so far from being
describable, that they are not imaginable; Let it susfice you to know,
Atafernes at that assurance recovered out of his fainting, and heard his fair
Sisters words, with Ecstasies which nothing but Mine could transcend: and from
that hour the Princess Statira used me at a Rate which evidenced, she was
resolved to Act that Happiness she had then assured me of. Mithridates also the
next Morning visited Atafernes, and there enquired of, and learned from him the
Result of that blessed Nights Discourse, at which he expressed a satisfaction so
sublime; that I then was confident my Felicities were as far from being
reverst, as of admitting an Accession.

The next day I attended on Auletes, who then told me, what his Fatal
indisposition had interrupted when I last waited on him; He confessed the Beauty
which had conquered him was the Princess Cleopatra, and conjured me neither to
disclose his Passion, or his Quality, till by some happy Services, he might
find an opportunity to reveal both: and conjured me with all the pressings of a
Generous Lover and Prince, to take all occasions to prepare the fair Cleopatr^
to entertain his Adorations, when he should find the Ambitioned season of
paying them to her; This I faithfully assured him of; and as the hopefullest
way to that end, I advised and prevailed with him to permit me to acquaint the
Princess Statira and the Prince Atafernes, who he was, and what he aspired
unto; for I knew the lovely Cleopatra guided all her Actions by their Advices:
and if they could be engaged for him, his happiness would be half perfected. I
found Auletes so Worthy a Person, and I had found in my self how vast the
miseries are of a Lover in suspense, and his Joys when certain, as in all those
Knowledges I esteemed my self the more engaged to serve him; and did discover
his Secret to the admirable Sister and Brother, so much to his advantage, that
all things concurred, in the Prince of Egypt: which could make Cleopatra's
Happiness. They assured me, that to Act it should be their endeavors, and they
hoped should also be their Success. Auletes a few days after received a private
Visit from Ata^ernes, and such assurances both of his Esteem of him, and
desires to oblige him in his Addresses to his Sister, that those Promises made
him recover faster than all the Art of his Physicians, and made him ever as
much a Friend to the Brother, as he was a Lover to the Sister.

Whilst I was thus contributing to the Happiness of the Egyptian Prince, the
Glorious Day of my own advanced, and by that time the Army was raised, with
which I was to conquer Galatia and Pamphilia: The Eve of it was come; but the
nearer I came to my Felicity, the greater inspection I made into it, and
consonantly I judged my self more unworthy of it; I past much of the Evening
which preceded that Memorable Day, in the fair Statira's Appartment, where by
Atafernes's Conjurations, and her unlimited Goodness, I received such new
Evincements of her Esteem, that I knew not which was greater, my Joy that I
received them, or my Grief that I neither did, nor could so much as rationally
hope ever to deserve them: and though many admirable particularities were
contained in those few Moments, yet I will not retail them, reserving the
Honor of your attentions for those Prodigious Events, which a few hours after
were by the gods destined to follow.

The Morning at last came, in which by Sacred Contract I was to receive
assurances of a Blessing, my Enemies could not think me more unworthy of, than
I thought my self; That Justice against my self was as requisite to preserve me
from Death by an excess of Joy, as the Princess Statira's Promises and Commands
had been to preserve me from it by a contrary Extreme. But that Day no sooner
dawned, than I rose to Celebrate an Engagement, which was to give me more
pregnant Invitations to Solicit the Conquest of Galatia, than the wearing the
Crown of that Kingdom, and the Glory of that Victory could present me. Never
did War provoke the aspiring to success, with a Recompense proportionate to
Mine: neither could I have been more certain of Victory, after I had Acted it,
than I was before I began to court it; I considered whilst I was dressing my
self, that the Sacred Promises the Princess Statira was that day to give me
after my subduing of Galatia, as a certain evidence of my Conquering of it; And
methought no Obstacles which could oppose that end, but would be rather Foils
than Impediments to my Glory: nay, the suspension of my Joys, till I presented
her with a Crown, did not diminish them; for I thought it but just I should pay
my Debts before I received my Reward; and if any thing in that happy Morning
clouded my Raptures, 'twas only that I was designed to do so little, and to
receive so much. Had I been destined to present her with the Empire of Rome,
instead of that of Galatia, I should more joyfully have attempted that, than
this; and the length of the trouble would have been abundantly repaired by the
Glory of the attempt, and the proportionateness of the Present, if I succeeded;
and with the Honor and Justice of the attempt, if I succeeded not. Whilst I
was entertaining my self with these pleasing Imaginations, they were
interrupted by the visit of the Generous Atafernes who had so much joy in his
looks, that had I never received any other evidence of the height and reality
of his Friendship, I might even in those only have read the certainty of both;
A thousand times he embraced me, and seemed as happy in having made me so, as I
was in being so. I paid him all the humble Acknowledgments I was capable of,
and I believe he easily saw I was troubled I could present him with no more.
But I begged him, that the same goodness which had valued me above my Services,
would also accept of my desires, as my performances. To cut off such
expressions (as he told me), he led me soon after to Mithridates Appartment, at
the door of which he met him, and all the considerable Persons of the Court:
Who by the Example of my Princes Gallantry appeared in all theirs; which so far
exceeded what had been seen at Ascanius intended Nuptials, that I flattered my
self with a belief, their satisfaction at my condition transcended theirs for
his. The King of Pontus by many reiterated assurances of his Favor,
endeavored by word to oblige me, as much as he had done by Actions, and so
confounded me with the excesses of his Favor, that I hope he read in my
silence a livelier Character of my Resentments, than my words could have
presented him: from thence he led me to the Princess Statira's Appartment, who
that day having cast off her Mourning for the King of Cyprus, seemed to be the
goddess of that Island; and had she made the Fourth of that Number where the
happy Paris was Judge, she must have been the First in Beauty by his sentence,
or rather the other three durst not have stood in Competition for it with her.
Her Beauty so dazzled all our Eyes, and so blinded Mine, that I was a Thousand
times ready to have violated her last Commands, and again to have begged of her
to make me rather the Miserablest, than the Happiest of Men; But the Generous
Atafernes observing both in my silence and my looks, the height of my
confusions, and apprehending their effects, told Mithridates, all things were
ready for the Celebration of that Solemnity: who thereupon leading me by the
hand to the Princess Mithridatia, on whom I durst not so much as lift up my
Eyes; He commanded her to give me hers, which she did, and which I received,
prostrate at her Feet; and should have done it in a more humble and
acknowledging Posture, if any such had been. The fair Statira had the goodness
to Command me to rise; which after three Commands to do it, I obeyed. The
Pontick King then led the way to his Domestick-Temple; And by his appointment
immediately after him, I waited on the Princess. Atafernes led the Queen, on
whose face only any sadness was visible, which yet she attributed to an
indisposition which had hindered her from Rest all the preceding Night. The rest
of that Noble company followed in Order, till we came to the holy Place, where
at the Altar stood the Priest, who was to perform the requisite Ceremonies.

Mithridates having caused a deep silence to be observed; In an Eloquent speech
declared the perfect affection he had for his Admirable Daughter, and then in
Elogies was pleased to Magnify those low services I had paid his Family and
Crown, concluding with these words; That since my Actings had been the highest,
he had proportioned thereunto the Recompense of his Acknowledgments and Bounty;
And as well to pay my past Services, as to encourage my future, he had set this
day apart, to contract his best Daughter to me, whom he then declared he would
give me in marriage, as soon as ever I had with the Army then raised, conquered
Galatia and Pamphilia, and by my Valor and Conduct provided that for her,
which her Merit and Extraction deserved, and the ignorance of my Birth denied
me any other way to present her.

At the end of these expressions he commanded the Priest to do his Office; who
immediately pronounced those Glorious words which the Princess Statira, and I
on my knees spoke after him; By which I received an assurance before the gods
above, and before the greatest Assembly in the World, That the highest Beauty
in it had condescended to give her self to me, and that nothing but Death
should ever dissolve that contract: The contemplation of this Felicity made me
cast my self again at Statira's Feet, and there in Actions, rather than in
Words, I acknowledged her Mercy, and my unworthiness of it. In the midst of my
Acknowledgments, we heard many loud and repeated shouts of Joy in the City,
which still seemed to advance nearer to the Palace, and at last we heard them
continued even in the Gates of it; and soon after we distinctly heard in the
Court the like Cries, often intermixed with them the names Pharnaces and
Ascanius, which drew many out of the Temple to learn their Cause, which
immediately after was made evident, even in the Temple it self, by Pharnaces
and Ascanius entering into it. The first running to salute Mithridates, and the
last with the like haste casting himself before the Princess Statira, and
embracing her knees in Raptures, nothing in degrees could transcend but her
wonder and Mine at that Miracle: His weakness, or his joy was so great, That in
that Action only, for some time, he evidenced his transports; But as soon as he
could break his silence, he did it in these words. You see, Madam, at your
Feet, he that lately lost his life in the Honor of your Service, and he that
would not admit of a second life, but to employ and end it in the like glorious
Duty. My supposed Death in designing the Princess Statira's Deliverance,
manifests what I would have done to have Acted it; and it was more painful to
me, than those Wounds which gave me a seeming Death, that what was my
intention, was not my performance. I knew to dye for you, was fitter for me,
than that Felicity your Mercy had destined me unto: I submitted to the first,
as more just than the last; and being unworthy of the highest happiness, I
repined not that I underwent the highest Duty. But those powers which know he
is least unworthy of you, which does most perfectly adore you, have raised me
to life, that by your Mercy and Condescension, the World and Ascanius may know
by the Recompense of that Truth, how entirely you believe the reality of it; my
unsuccessfulness in your Deliverance merited my seeming Death, and my unequaled
Flame merited that Resurrection, without which your mercy in crowning it, would
have been rendered ineffectual; so that in those several Fates the gods have
imposed on Ascanius, you may see, fair Mithridatia, how equally just they are,
both to my unhappiness, and my Adorations. After these words, the King of
Cyprus told the Princess Statira, how whilst some of his Nobility were
preparing for his Body the requisite Solemnities due to the Monarchs of that
Island, they found some Symptoms of life remaining in it, which they improved
with such Art, Care, Diligence, and Secrecy, that in a few Hours their hopes
of his recovery had wiped away their Tears for his imaginary Death: That the
better to cloud the transports of that change, and the more successfully to
enjoy the fruits of their Endeavors and Duty, they caused the dead Body of a
young Cyprian Lord to receive all the Ceremonies due unto his own, and did not
communicate the Fallacy unto any, but those who could not but know it, who yet
they tied by sacred Oaths to inviolable secrecy, even from the rest of the
Cyprians themselves; whose tears and sorrows so well deluded the Subjects and
Servants of Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes, that they never had the least umbrage
of the Truth; whereby when the thirty days of the usual Funeral Rites were
efflux'd, the two Kings permitted a Cyprian Galley to transport his supposed
Embalmed Corpse to Cyprus. As soon as the Funeral Galley had recovered the
Cyprian Fleet, he showed himself unto them; their surprise was not greater than
his own, when he found in the same Galley with him the Prince Pharnaces; who
had also recovered his liberty by an unexpected Accident: For Enestes who was
Vice Admiral to Nicomedes, having lost his life, attempting to carry away by
surprise the Royal Family of Pontus; Many of the Bithynian Nobility were
Solicitors to succeed him in that high employment; and amongst those, Cleomax,
favorite to Nicomedes, upon that score was most earnest, and had most hopes;
but his King as a reward of the high attempt of the Father, conferred that
Office on Lixcestes his Son, who by many signal Actions of Conduct and Courage,
had a double Title to that Command, to which he added the most powerful one of
silence to Merit. Cleomax, though sensibly wounded by his failer, suppresses
all Resentments by Words, and resolves to manifest them by Actions; so that
soon after, having got an opportunity of a private Conference with Pharnaces,
offered him to set him at Liberty, and to depend on his Favor for his future
Fortunes. The Prince of Pontus joyfully laid hold of this Overture, and
Promises Cleomax rewards proportionate to his Service, so that when the
Funeral-Galley was to begin her Voyage, Cleomax disguises Pharnaces and
himself, and thrusting themselves into the Crowd of that solemnity without,
interruption got into the Galley and escaped. Whilst Ascauius, said Callimachus
to his Generous hearers was thus telling the Princess Statira these admirable
Accidents, Pharnaces was relating them to Mithridates, and then presented
Cleomax to him, whom the Pontick King received with all manner of
Acknowledgments, and on the Place ordered him rewards as great as his
Infidelity; this being done, the Pontick King came to Embrace Ascanius, to whom
the Princess had not answered one word to all he had said, so great was her
wonder, and her trouble at once.

The King of Cyprus, after his Acknowledgments were paid in the most passionate
Words and Actions, summoned Mithridates of his Promise, and implored, that as
in the public Temple he had been divorced from his blessing, so in the
Domestick-Temple he might be possessed of it. I perceive, Generous Prince,
replied Mithridates, by this request you are ignorant of the occasion which has
brought this Assembly hither; No Sir, Ascanius answered, I heard it since my
Landing: But Great King, I know 'twas only my supposed Death led you to what
you have done, the Cause ceasing, the Effects should do the like, the chief
Motive to the performance failing, it is a necessary Consequence, that all built
on it, should fail with it. You would not have given the fair Statira to
Callimachus, had you known Ascanius was alive. It Is too much your ignorance of
my Condition has so much wounded me; let not your Knowledge of it wound me more.
Had I known you were living, the Pontick King replied, interrupting him, I
would in some other way have endeavored to reward Callimachus's innumerable
Services; but I doubt Statira's Engagements and mine are too far past to be
recalled; so that if I should not keep my Engagements to the Generous Ascanius,
it is not my Crime, but the Crime of his own Fate. Would to the gods, the King
of Cyprus answered, I had really dyed, rather than live to hear these killing
words! What Sir, shall your promises be thus observed? and shall my Services
and Sufferings be thus rewarded? Did you only raise my hopes to the most
Glorious height, that ever any attained unto, only with more cruelty to
precipitate me and them? shall your mistake be more powerful for my Ruin, than
your knowledge for my preservation? Oh Sir, give me not so much cause to
believe, that what you say proceeded from your Ignorance, proceeded from your
Design; and let not that Princess Mithridatia be made a Sacrifice to Gratitude,
who is a Blessing above all that Services can pretend unto; do not give
Callimachus more than you should, and do not give me less than you promised.
The Services of Callimachus, said Mithridates, deserve my highest
Acknowledgments; And in giving him Statira, you therefore see how highly I
valued Ascanius, since to him I once had destined what I thought a full
recompense for preserving and restoring my whole Family and my self: If these
intentions have not had the success, I meant them possibly it is not more your
trouble, than it is mine. But my intentions and sufferings, said Ascanius, have
been greater than his; in what depended of our selves, I have been as much his
superior, as in what depended on Chance he has been mine: Do not therefore
reward Fortune, more than you will reward Virtue; and let me not so much doubt
your Justice, as experimentally to feel you give more to my solicitations,
than to my services; since only to Crown the First, you designed for me the
Princess Mithridatia, and to recompense the last you condemn me to a loss, as
much transcending Death, as his Condition who shall possess the Princess, will
transcend the condition of all others. While I did nothing, you gave me all I
could wish; and when I have done all I could, you deny me what you promised;
Callimachus's Services have the highest Favor, but mine are denied the lowest
Justice. Excuse me, Sir, if what you spoke as a doubt, I resent as a certainty;
I know you are too just, and too Generous to violate your solemn engagements;
and that I need no other Argument to incline you to observe them, but to
remember you of them: I will therefore no longer plead them, but only lay
before you, what is your Debt to the Princess, who ought (if bestowed on any)
to be given to him, who by the highest Flame, has the least unworthy Title to
her; she merits more than to sit in the Throne of the Universe: and therefore
though to fit in that of Cyprus be below her, yet 'ti^ much more below her to
be given to one, who is so far from having a Throne to invite her to, that he
has not so much as a certain residence to present her; whose Birth is not known
to you, and possibly to himself: or if he be not ignorant of it, yet his not
discovering of it, may justly invite you to believe the lowness of it, is the
cause why he conceals it; for it is better to doubt that evil, than to be
certain of it, whereby your admirable Daughter will be made a Sacrifice to your
Ignorance, instead of your Gratitude, and perhaps after her Condition is
irrevocable, you may find, that she who Merits the whole World, may be cast
away upon one who is of the lowest degree in it, and who has nothing
considerable but his Fortune and his Sword.

While I perceived, continued Callimachus, that Mithridates opposed the desires
of Ascanius, I did without interrupting his Solicitations, listen to them; but
when so rudely he reflected on me, and that at the end of what he had said, I
observed the Pontick King, and the whole Assembly turned their Eyes upon me,
and thereby seemed to tell me, They expected I should answer for my self: I did
immediately upon my knees kiss the Princess Statira's hand, which during the
Glorious words of Contract, and till then, I had by her permission held in
Mine: and then rising and turning my self to Ascanius, with a look which some
of my Friends afterward assured me, made him look paler than his wounds had
done, I told him; King of Cyprus, while you did plead the Great Mithridates
Promises, the only Title you could show for the Confidence of your Ambition;
and while you owned every man unworthy of that Blessing you solicited, I kept
that silence, which my respect to the highest Assembly in the World, rendered
my duty; But, now that you have broken those Bounds, and that you endeavor to
raise your own Trophies to my prejudice, I must tell you, That if the highest
and most perfect Flame that ever burnt, renders him that is blessed with it, the
least unworthy of the Princess Statira's esteem, it is Callimachus, and not
Ascanius has the best Title to that Happiness; which in any part of the World,
but before those which are the chiefest in it, I will justify. The Ignorance
of my Birth which you upbraid me with, is that I glory in; for it is more to
perform the Actions of a King, than only to be born One; and the Sword which
can conquer Kingdoms, is more to be valued than that King whose Sword does lose
them. In what quarrel is it, you can flatter your self with Hope of success,
when even in the Princess Statira's Service, nay, even in her sight, you have
twice failed of it? By your first drawing of your Sword, she lost her precious
Liberty; and by your second, she had lost even the hopes of recovering it, if
this Callimachus, whose Birth is unknown, or possibly is of the lowest in the
whole World, had not paid her those Duties, which your exalted Birth were
unable to present her. Ascanius, said Callimachus, had not the patience to
hear, me out, but interrupting me at these Words, replied, Were not this
glorious Assembly, and the sacred Place in which thou do speak thy insolent
Words, thy double Sanctuary; thou should before now have felt thy punishment
from that Sword, which thy Pride does so undervalue: if it should not serve me
in this reparation, I would eternally forswear wearing it; but I may live to
see thee before other company, and in another place. If that were really thy
desire, I answered, thou would not have taken so hopeful a way of preventing
it, as to have made this Declaration before so many Witnesses; neither could
thou have more evidently manifested my Adorations for the Princess Statira
excels thine, than in promising thy self more success from thy Sword, in
revenging thy own Quarrel, than revenging hers, when even thy own Faults made
her Revenge a double duty. Thou do allow me two Sanctuaries, but I allow thee
but one; for were it not in reverence to this Assembly, thou should find
that neither the Temple we are in, nor the Altar of it, should be thy
Protection. Would to the gods, Ascanius furiously replied, that only the Sword
thou so magnifi'st, and that Sword thou so undervaluest, were to decide who is
least unworthy of the Princess Statira; Thou should soon feel the highest
Birth is capable only of the highest Passion: And though I might with Justice
promise my self upon my own account a Victory against thy Sword; yet I would
ascertain it by making the fair Mithridatia, not only the Cause of our dispute,
but the Reward of it; thou would then learn, that all those Laurels Fortune
has heaped upon thy Head, were but prepared for me; that I was seemingly
unsuccessful, but to become more really the contrary; and what thou did
obtain more from the Valor of those thou had the Honor to lead, than from
thine own, would by my Swords purchase, become my Right; yes, presumptuous
Callimachus, I renounce the King of Pontus his engagements to me; I renounce
the superiority of my Title and Birth; I will forget the Ignorance, or meanness
of thine; do but singly dispute the Princess Statira with me, and I will
forgive thy past insolences to her and me, if thou will put me but in so
certain a way of hindering thee from repeating them in the Future. This
Generosity, I replied, with raptures of Joy I accept; give me so certain away
of punishing thee I will renounce my Glorious Contract, I will forget thy being
twice defeated, I will only consider thee as a Rival worthy of my Sword; and
leave it to the gods, whether a Third time they think fit to declare, what they
have twice declared already. Ascanius without listening further to what I was
about to say, or answering what I had said, turned himself to Mithridates, and
in the most moving Actions and Expressions he was capable of, solicited his
permission to that offer which he had made, and I had so joyfully accepted.
Possibly, Generous Princes, Callimachus continued, you may admire that
Mithridates did not interpose his Authority at the very beginning of these
Discourses between the King of Cyprus and me. But perhaps you will do so no
longer, when I have told you, That when our First heats began, Cleomax having
whispered to Pharnaces, that Prince forthwith told his Father in his Ear
something, at which he was so surprised, that he was so far from interrupting
what had past betwixt us, that he scarcely listened unto it; for he had taken
Cleomax aside, with Pharnaces, with whom he so intently did Discourse, that all
the while Ascanius was imploring a Concession to his request, the King of
Pontus neither answered him, nor so much as looked toward him; And by that
time the Cyprian had finished his Request, Mithridates having done speaking
with his Son, and with Cleomax, Ascanius fell a repeating that suit which he
had so lately made, and to which he had received no return; having the second
time ended what he would say, Mithridates desired his Excuse for having given
so little attention to his First Solicitation; for he had been taken up in an
employment, which possibly might render unnecessary the yielding to his
desires. Then turning himself to me, with his voice raised more than
ordinarily, he told me; Callimachus, what I have done this day for you, before
I knew of the King of Cyprus being alive; and what I have said for you, since I
knew it, gives you no shadow to doubt that I not only value your Eminent
services, but made it my care to reward them in a way at least answerable to
their greatness, and the just sense I had of them: But I have been now assured
of that, which if true, I shall more repent my Favors, than ever I was
desirous to load you with them; had it been what only my Informer would have
told me, and not justified to your Face, I had received his Intelligence with
as much contempt, as now I entertain it with trouble; but since he desires, I
will believe what he told me to be true or false, but as you shall confess, or
deny, I will not scruple to put that to a trial, where you are Party, Witness,
and Judge. My Informer is Cleomax; my Information is, That 'twas not only
Ostanes which helped you to escape, but that he did it by Nicomedes's Orders;
and that the banished Bithynian King laid the Design for your Flight, by a
joint contrivance of it with your self; whether this be true or false, you your
self can best tell me: and till you give me your answer, I will believe
neither; but I expect, nay, I enjoin you to deal clearly with me, and to
disguise nothing; the freedom I have used merits what I demand, and I know you
will not give me an answer which may render you unworthy of such an usage.
Never, Generous Princes, continued Callimachus, was any Man's surprise
comparable to Mine, at this fatal Question; to deny the Truth was to wound that
Sincerity which my Words and Actions had always observed; and to confess the
Truth, was to Wound me mortally in those hopes, whose Death I most apprehended:
This unexpected fatal discovery and question, and the ruinous Consequences of
not answering at all, or answering the Truth, so confounded me, that I remained
speechless so long, that Mithridates told me; if I would not answer, he would
take my silence for a Confession. This cruel Declaration forced me to say, Sir,
You should not have needed a second, and a threatening Command, if by solemn
Engagements, I had not bound my self to silence, in what I now seem to be
accused of. Sir, said Pharnaces to his Father, you need no greater evincement
of Cleomax's Fidelity to your Service, and of Callimachus's guilt, than his not
answering this Charge; and he that is so much a Friend to your Mortallest
Enemy, merits not to be trusted against him; Much less to have your
FavoriteDaughter, made the reward of his Services. To which the Generous
Atafernes interrupting what I was going to answer, replied, Allow Sir, that
what Cleomax informs were true: I hope Sir, you will not think it Just to
credit inferences above actual Services: he values still his Duty to you, above
his Gratitude to Nicomedes: and he that cannot be corrupted by such
Obligations, is incapable of that sin; so that even his accusation is so far
from rendering him the less capable of your Favor, that he thereby becomes
more deserving of it. The Prince Atafernes, I answered Mithridates, has said so
much, in so little, that he leaves me nothing to do, but only to mind you, Sir,
That I was guilty once before I had the Honor to know the great Mithridates,
to draw my Sword in Nicomedes's Quarrel against yours. His Generosity possibly
remembered more what I had at first done for him, than what since I had done
against him, and if I submitted to his Resentments (for by all the gods, I
never courted them, no not so much as moved him to them) it was with this firm
assurance, that nothing he could do for me, should diminish in the least,
thezeal I had to your Service, and what I then might have told him, I have
since fully Acted: But why, replied the Pontick King, with a furious look, did
you wholly ascribe your Deliverance to Ostanes's kindness? And why did you
conceal from me Nicomedes's? Perhaps, Sir, I answered, Nicomedes was resolved
to oblige me entirely; he might doubt, should you know his Favor only had
given me my liberty; you might suspect me so far, as to decline receiving those
Services which your Ignorance of it might enable me to present you: He knew my
Nature, and my Justice tied me to acknowledge Obligations, till I could with
Honor pay them; And to prevent my receiving a prejudice where he intended me a
Favor, he might confine me to that Silence which now you seem to ascribe unto
my guilt. Since, replied Mithridates with an inflamed Countenance, I find
Cleomax has told me the Truth, I since find you acknowledge an high Obligation
to Nicomedes, and a Duty therefore upon you to repay it; And since you have
declared your Resolution never to part from my Service, I must conclude you
intend whilst in that, to serve him; so that even out of your own Mouth I find
it but just, not to give my Daughter to the Friend of my Enemy; And not to
trust any of my Armies or Fleets to one whom I cannot believe, or else must
believe him unworthy that high Alliance and Trust. Now I see what made you
forward to exchange him without my consent, nay, without my knowledge. And now I
call to mind the Earnest you lately gave, of your resolutions to oblige
Nicomedes since, after his having designed my Captivity, nay, I believe my
Murder also, when I expressed my just detestations of that most Barbarous
proceeding, and bound my self to revenge it by my most inviolable Oaths, you
would have had me forgot both my Injuries and Vows. No, no, Callimachus, you
have but too much forfeited all my good Opinion of you, and all my intentions
for you, and thereby have made it but Reasonable that I should send you to that
Nicomedes to whom you are so much indebted, that by your services to him, you
may discharge some of those Obligations you acknowledge you owe him.

I was, continued Callimachus, wounded to the heart at these piercing words:
and therefore told the King, Because Nicomedes was so generous to me, Because I
was so just to him as to pay him that Gratitude and Obedience I might present
him without Infidelity to you; nay, which was more for your Service than his;
for had I told you my Obligations to him, your suspicion had disabled me from
paying you these Services of defeating his Fleet, and of saving your precious
Life, and the Lives and Liberties of the Royal House of Pontus. Must his
Gallantry, and my Innocent Retributions for it, be esteemed my Guilt? And must
weak Inferences be more Credited against me, than signal Actions be Credited
for me? Must the Exchanging of a dying Prisoner for the Princess Statira, be
now esteemed a Crime, which so lately was esteemed a considerable Service? Had
I stayed for receiving your Commands, I might have lost the power of obeying
them; And shall the exchanging a Prisoner laden with Wounds, for that divine
Princess which is above Ransom, be thought a greater Guilt, than reducing that
great Prisoner to that Condition, is thought a Service? Shall my pleading
against a Vow, which pregnant Evincements manifested to be mistakenly grounded,
and which was to hinder the great Mithridates from what I thought unjust, be
now considered as my Crime? Shall my words Pleading for you as much, if not
more than for him, be more operative against me, than my Actions and my Wounds
are persuasive for me? Alas! it is high time to despair, when what was my
Merit, is now considered as my Guilt. No, Sir, think not of sending me to
Nicomedes; though I acknowledge I owe him much, yet I prefer Affronts in your
Service above Glory in his; And if your differences should never be reconciled,
I had rather die ungrateful to him, than ever separate my self one Moment from
your Interests, Pardon me, Sir, if I say, I find my only Guilt is Ascanius's
Resurrection; You owe the Princess Mithridatia's Virtue and Birth, more than
you owe the Duties of my Services; and since you see nothing can pay them, but
what does over-pay them, and that you think it juster to give her to him who
can place her in a Throne, than to him who has only a Sword to conquer one for
her, you therefore choose to pay my performances by blasting of them; and rob me
of all Title to Happiness, by laying to my charge an imaginary Crime; but
though my respect to the great Mithridates, and which is more, to the Father of
the Princess Statira, will bind me not to repine at what he shall decree: yet
having no obligation to the Cyprian King, I must and do now solemnly Vow before
those gods to whom this Temple is dedicated, and who were invoked to be
Witnesses of my Felicity, as now they are of my Disgrace, That if he solicites
the breaking of that Glorious Contract, your Commands and the Princess
Mithridatia's condescension has blessed me with, though he still should sit in
his Throne, and should still be guarded by all his Subjects, yet through all
their Swords, Mine shall force a passage to his Breast, and make him feel, and
the World see the vastness of my Passion, in that of my Revenges, overcoming
all those difficulties which could oppose it. Mithridates at these words losing
all his Temper, in Raptures of Fury told me, Art thou not only contented with
having owned thy self a Friend to my Enemy, but wilt also declare thy self the
intended Murderer of that King to whom I will give Statira? Since thy
Insolence has made thee discover thy Criminal Intentions, my Justice shall
prevent thy Acting them; Then turning to the Captain of his Guards, he
commanded him and them to seize on me. Whilst the Captain of the Guards, and
the Guards themselves, in their amazement or trouble at that fatal and unjust
Command, continued Moveless; Pharnaces and Ascanius drawing their Swords, came
toward me to execute that Order, which those to whom only it was given, wanted
Power, or had too much honesty to perform. This made me immediately draw Mine,
and having told Pharnaces the employment he took was below a Prince, and a
Prince that was the Princess Statira's Brother, against whom I durst not lift
up my hands, but would offer to his Sword my unguarded Breast, rather than
employ it against one so nearly related to her; I put by that thrust Ascanius
in the mean time made at me, and closing with him, I flung him down, disarmed
him, and had then and there Acted my Revenge, if the fair Statira's Commands,
more than all those Guards which at last by their Kings repeated Orders had
environed me, and forced from my hands my own Sword, had not hindered me from
the Execution of my just Resentments. But those being suppressed by the highest
Commands, I turned my self toward her who had imposed them on me, and with the
deepest submission imaginable, I told her; The gods, Madam, even in their
Temple, and in their presence, and yours also, have so much eased that weight
of these miseries I am laden with, that even in that way my Rival Elected to
decide who is the least unworthy of you, have declared their Sentence in that
great Cause, in favor of him to whom the right did belong; Your Mercy, Fair
Princess, is not more evident to him, than my Success is; and instead of
punishing the Presumptuous aspiring of his Addresses, and his unsuccessfulness
in your Quarrel, by which you were made a Prisoner, you were pleased to save
his life, for 'twas only your Commands which did it; and I glory more in my
Obedience, than my Victory, since in that I powerfully evidence all your
Commands are Sacred to me; nor can you doubt I will disobey any of them, since
I even obey those for him, whose injuries to you are greater than those he has
cast upon me. Mithridates inflamed at what I had done, beyond the capability of
Accession, Commanded me forthwith to be carried close Prisoner to Heraclia:
Solemnly vowing, that if I escaped thence, the Governor's life should answer
it; and then observing the Dejectedness of Ascanius, to revive him, and the
more sensibly to be revenged on me, He turned himself to the Princess, and told
her, Statira, Callimachus having thus forfeited all my good intentions for him;
and that Prince to whom I first designed you, being restored to Life, I command
you to perfect in this Temple that happiness for him, which you were
interrupted from conferring on him, in the other. This Injunction, continued
Callimachus, wounded me more than all those unparalled Miseries Fortune had
that Day heaped upon me; and whilst I was sinking under their weight, I
observed the Princess Mithridatia at that fatal Command change Color, and
continued in a deep Silence, which made the Pontick King tell her; I shall
think your cruelty, not kindness, made you concerned to save Ascanius's life,
unless in the way I enjoin you, you forthwith do ask his Blessing. At this
second Assault she continued as Silent, and under the same, found higher
Disorders than at the First time: which so incensed her enraged Father, that he
told her; What, Statira, Have you also lost that Obedience, which till this
Moment you so exactly paid to all my Commands? Can you think That Callimachus
worthy of my Daughter, that I think unworthy of Liberty, perhaps of Life? and,
Can you for such a Man decline a Prince, as great in his Passion as in his
Birth, who has exposed the Forces of his Kingdom, and his Life also, for your
Service? and if his Success has not proportioned his Courage, or his Virtue,
yet he that so nearly had lost his Life to obtain the Victory, showed how much
he deserved it; and if you value not him above the false Callimachus, you
manifest, you esteem Merit less than Fortune; I require you, nay, I Command you
to place the King of Cyprus in that Felicity I had designed for one you must
acknowledge unworthy of it. And let me not meet with a disobedience in an
Injunction which I am concerned should be observed in Honor to my self,
Affection to you, and Revenge to Callimachus, Alas, Sir, replied the Princess
Statira, with the deepest submission and midness; What is it you Command me?
The gods are my Witnesses, I have in all things paid you an Obedience so
perfect, that it is in the last evincement of that Truth, that you have now
rendered me incapable to present you with this other which now you require from
me. For to obey your Commands I have Solemnly Vowed before all the gods, and
the Great Assembly, That I will be no Man's but Callimachus's, and that I will
be his; A higher Duty therefore than that I owe my Father and my King, renders
me unable to obey him; and since my Obedience justifies my now disobedience,
you will not I hope call that my Crime which is my Religion. By all those gods,
Mithridates furiously Answered, You shall never be Callimachus's; You may, Sir,
(replied the Princess, in her former submissiveness) hinder me from being his:
But Sir, I can never be any Man's but his. At these Glorious words, breaking
out of the hands of those Guards which held me, I cast my self at her Feet, and
told her, This Charming Assurance, divine Princess, gives me a Joy which does
overbalance all those Miseries I have had this day hurled upon me; you show
your self in this admirable Action, worthy of greater Empires than your Piety
makes you decline; your vouchsafing to own your despised Callimachus, when Men,
nay, when Fortune and Justice it self abandons him, puts him in a Capacity to
out-brave all Misfortunes; Yes, divine Statira, I consider now all my
sufferings with contentment, since it is those only have invited you to say more
in my Favor, than all my Services could extort from you; I now no more condemn
my Destiny, it is so Glorious, it rather Merits Envy than Pity; now I despise
Captivity, nay, Death it self, having in this one moment heard assurances from
the justest and fairest Lips, which are Felicities enough for an Age, and those
Happinesses the gods deny me in length, their perfectest Resembler confers on
me in weight. I had longer continued in Raptures of this Nature, but that I was
by Mithridates's Commands forced from that happy posture in which I had
entertained and delivered them, who exasperated to the highest at his Admirable
Daughters Refusal, and at my Triumphing at it, ordered me furiously to be
carried to the place of my appointed close Imprisonment. And the Excellent
Statira having not only once more declined that Obedience he exacted from her,
but besought him ever in Tears to suspend his Resentment against me for an
Action whose effects had preserved him and her self from Ruin, and by which he
was restored to the power of using me with such Violence, his Choler grew so
blind and boundless, that he forthwith confined to her Appartment the greatest
Beauty and Virtue of the World; and all that the Generous Atafernes could say
and beg for us both, was so far from hindering our Restraints, that it had like
to have made him share in them.

The End of the Fourth Book of the Sixth and last Part of PARTHENISSA.
FINIS.

