English Adventures.

By a Person of Honor.

Licensed May 12th, 1676. ROGER L' ESTRANGE

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. Newcomb, for H. Herringman at the Anchor, on the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1676*

ENGLISH ADVENTURES BY A Person of Honor.
The First Part.
WHen King Henry VIII. ascended the Throne, he was Young, Handsome, Active,
Amorous, Liberal, and Valiant: And having been Educated by a severe Father, to
be an Ecclesiastic; as soon as he wore the Crown, he determined to indulge
himself, for all the Austerities he had suffered, while he was destined to the
Priesthood.

The whole Kingdom, at so brave a Prince's being their Head and Example, began
to assume a new Face; and from that affected Gravity which the Nobility and
Gentry had put on, to please the deceased King; they dedicated themselves to
that way of Life, which was more suitable to their own Genius, as well as to
their Monarch's: And by their so warmly embracing the Change, manifested it was
the product of their Inclinations.

King Henry, for some Reasons of State, (with none of which I resolve to
meddle) was married to the Widow of his Brother Arthur, whose Virtue being
greater than her Beauty, had a much larger share in his Esteem, than in his
Love. For that ^assion will receive no Laws but what it freely gives unto it
self; and is a King over Kings, nay, some presume to say, has been even a Pope
over Popes.

While the Complements of Sorrow, were paying to Henry VII. our young King,
attended by Howard, who was afterward Duke of Norfolk, went privately in
disguise, to divert himself a Hunting in the Forest near Greenwich; but his own
Apartments at Baynards Castle, were locked up, as if he himself had been a
close Mourner in them; which the unknowing and good natured of the Court,
ascribed to an excess of Grief; for when it is real, it hates to have Lookers
on. And believing this themselves, easily and gladly infused it into others. So
that the first five years of Nero's Reign, gave not greater hopes to the
Romans, than this supposed Mourning did to the English; so apt are good
Subjects to believe well of their Princes, when they have but the least Rise to
do it.

But while the Ignorant were entertaining themselves, with the prospect of
Felicities to come, our Henry and Howard, were entertaining themselves with the
Recreations of the Country, and contriving how to employ their Youth, in those
enjoyments, which are most relished by it.

They went to a Keepers Lodge in the Forest, who knew not who they were; but
finding them Liberal to the height, they were proportionably served.

The morning being fair, it invited them to hunt a Stag; the Chase was long,
and the Hounds often changing; the Company was dispersed: whereby the King was
as much alone in the Forest, as he was thought to be in the Court. When he had
even tired himself with hard Riding, and by the heat of the day, came to a
large Tree which overshadowed a Brook; the shade and the murmur, invited him to
alight, and to cast himself on the Grass, where he soon fell asleep.

By accident a young Gentleman, whose name was Charles Brandon, was then
returning from his Travels, and from the Highway, hearing the Cry of the
Hounds, spurred his Horse into the Forest, to share in the Sport which Fortune
seemed to Present him. He therefore leaving himself absolutely to her conduct,
laid the Reins on the Horses neck at the meeting of three paths, that he might
take his choice; the Horse took the middlemost, which he had not walked in a
Furlong, but his Rider saw in the same path, a young Gentleman, handsome to
admiration, coming toward him, with his Arm interwoven, in that of a
Gentlewomans, whose Beauty, Stature, Shape, and Motion, struck him with new
astonishment.

And to speak the Truth, never any Man's admiration was paid with greater
justice, than his was to that adorable Stranger; her Natural Perfections,
needlessly owed something to the Dress she was then in, which resembled that of
Diana in the Chase; and the Habit of a Nymph which she then wore, discovered so
many Charms to Brandon, that his Eyes saw more captivating shapes than his
Fancy could have imagined.

While he was entertaining himself in Raptures, at the sight of so much Beauty;
and with Envy, at the person who seemed to be the Monarch of it; he saw the
hunted Stag, all imbos'd, brush into the path these Lovers were in; who were so
intent, in what they said and did, that they neither saw Brandon, who was
before them; nor heard the Stag, who was galloping after them.

But Brandon being sensible of their danger, cried out to them aloud twice or
thrice to look to themselves; for the enraged Beast was burnished, and it was
near Rutting-time: had he been certain the fury of the Stag would have been
only employed against the Gentleman, possibly he had not given the warning
which he then did; since to have been freed from such an Enemy, by such an
accident, was more desirable, than to dispossess him of such a Mistress was
hopeful, or so much as promising.

The two Lovers, at the repeated cries of the Stranger, turned their eyes
toward him, and observing he pointed earnestly at something behind them, they
instantly looked that way; but the notice his civility and care had given, was
so far from being beneficial to them, the danger being so near, as the
Gentleman, to avoid it, flung himself into the Wood; and the Lady having three
times shreek'd, fell all along, having no more the courage to stir out of the
place, than her Lover had to stay in it.

The Stag immediately began to run at her, with his Antlers; but before he did
her any hurt, though he twice pierced her clothes, Brandon had leaped off of
his Horse, drew his Sword, and had made the furious Beast quit the assault of a
defenceles^ Enemy, to mind the attack of an assaulting one.

But when Brandon had got between the Lady and the Stag, both his and her
greatest apprehensions were past; and though she got up, with all the agility
which Fear does usually inspire, yet she could not abandon her generous
Protector; and being unable, but by her Prayers for his safety, to contribute
toward it, she was making those for him on her knees, and with too much
ardency, to be singly the Product of Gratitude.

For the service he then did her, could not be greater than her sense of it, or
the merit and good mien of the person who paid it; since, in one word, he was
in our Sex, what the Lady was in hers.

The place in which this Accident happened, was so near to that where our Monarch
lay asleep, as the cries and shreeks had awaked him; and by their continuance,
being guided to the place from whence they came, he saw what put him in mind of
that Hero, the Noble Order of whose Knighthood, he himself was the Head;
whether this remembrance, or his admiration of the beauty of the Nymph, which
his heart, by some secret emotions, told him was, or sooner would be his
Conqueror, did awhile make him continue moveless, I cannot tell; but as soon as
he had seen the danger her Protector was in, (for his Clothes were all bloody)
or rather to participate in the Duty and Honor of her deliverance, his
Generosity, or growing Flame, made him immediately draw his Sword, and by a
menacing Cry, compelled the Stag to turn toward him, and then to run so
fiercely at him; that by his too intent gazing on his new Mistress, he had like
to have received from the irritated Beast more fatal wounds, than had been yet
given him by the Beauty he was serving.

How many glorious Successes had our Nation been robbed of, and how many
stupendous Vicissitudes had the World avoided, if the fury of the Stag had not
been diverted by the destiny of the King; but though the mournfullest effects
of it, were hindered by his Agility, yet he could not avoid the shock, but was
by the impetuosity of it, cast upon the ground, with such violence, that it
deprived him for a moment of the use of his senses.

The Stag had so overshot himself, by missing what he meant should only have
stopped his career, that before he could turn about to finish what he had in
part failed of, our Monarch had recovered spirits enough to see his danger, but
not to revenge or prevent it; and just as the Stag was running at him the
second time, at which the Nymph made a great shreek, Brandon generously bestrid
the Kings body, and with undaunted courage, and great dexterity, defended it
long eenough for our Prince to get up, and with his Sword in his hand to
contribute to the death of that Enemy, which had been so near acting his.

The Stag was no sooner fallen, but our Monarch and Brandon forgetting to
acknowledge to one another, the mutual obligations they had so recently given,
and received, went hastily as it had been by Concert, to offer their Services
to the Beauty to whom they had paid such signal ones, who received them both,
with the Retributions which their good Meens and their Actions so abundantly
merited.

Her fear being vanished, which had too much conquered the vermillion of her
Face, the lovely red reassumed the Throne again, with so much luster, as never
two hearts at once, were vanquished with so much celerity, and so little
resistance, as our Henry's and Brandon's were.

But when together with her exterior Charms, those of her Discourses had united
themselves, neither of our Gallants could tell by which of the Senses, Love
made the shortest approach to their Hearts.

She saluted them both, with a grace peculiar to herself, and with words as
enchanting as her eyes so that they both began to believe that what Poets
fancied, was to them a reality, and that this was the Goddess of the Forest.

But as soon as she perceived Brandon's clothes all wet with his blood, and
that some still trickled from a wound he had in the Neck; his could not run
faster from the Hurt, than hers did from her Face; so that taking hastily an
Incarnation Skarf, which was cast about her shoulder, she went with it
trembling and blushing to her new Adorer, and desired his permission with her
hand to stop that blood, which had been so obligingly shed in her service.

Brandon received the charming favor on his knees, and told her, trembling and
blushing more than she, I thought, Madam, the delight of being wounded in the
honor of your service, was incapable of any accession; but this unmeritable
condescension of yours, has convinced me of that error; and nothing could
diminish my joy, but that it is raised by your trouble.

But, Madam, (he continued) how could the person, whom you blessed with such
evidences of your favor, before your danger, abandon you in it? Ah! how
unworthy was he of those felicities I saw you confer on him.

These last words he accompanied with a sigh, and she heard them with a smile;
which our young Lover knew not how to interpret.

But our Monarch more sensibly wounded, by this kindness of his new Conqueress
to his Rival, than he had been by the Stag, leaning against a Tree, and folding
his arms one within another, by some sighs, which reached the Ladies ear, made
her turn hastily toward him, and then to ask him, Whether he had also received
any wound, which needed her assistance?

Our Henry replied, with a look which told her his passion, Yes, Madam, I have
received a wound, and a more dangerous one than his; (...) that, if he of us
two which most needs the happiness of your concernment, has the best title to
it, your charity has hitherto been misemployed.

The fair Nymph was covered with blushes at this unexpected Declaration, and
Brandon was so peek'd at it, that (...) she immediately interposed both her
Prayers and Commands, and added her Promises, that she would forgive their
disrespect to her, if they forgave each other, as in a moment the calm was as
great, as the storm else would have been.

And finding, by the temper of these two Gallants, that the fire she had
suppressed by her authority and presence, might revive in her absence, she
conjured them for her sake to promise solemnly they would eternally become
friends; and that they would evidence they had granted her earnest request, by
an immediate embracing of one another: it was impossible to tell which of them
was most expeditions in paying his obedience; for though by accident they were
engaged ^n a difference, yet by inclination they had contracted so good an
opinion of each other, that nothing less than being Rivals, could have hindered
them at first sight from being friends.

The fair Mediatress of this Peace, was doubly pleased with it; for she not
only hindered a quarrel between persons to whom she was much obliged, but the
manner of their obeying her, gave her a welcome evidence of the Ascendant she
had over them.

Every one of the three being ignorant who the other two were, and all being
desirous no^ longer to continue in that unhappiness, she entreated her two
Deliverers, to acquaint her who they were. Our Monarch immediately acquainted
her his name was Tudar, that he had the happiness to belong to the King, and
the great honor to be his Kinsman; and that he was that morning come from the
melancholy of the Court, to divert himself a Hunting.

Brandon immediately paid him those respects which his being of the Royal
Blood, were justly due unto him; and with all the civility imaginable, begged
his pardon, for what his ignorance of his quality had made him guilty of, and
could only apologize for; protesting he so highly reverenced every one of the
sacred blood of his Prince, that his own to the last drop of it, should be
joyfully shed in the duty of their service.

Our Prince repaid his Civility with fresh Embraces, and there began that
friendship which our most celebrated Historians have Recorded, and with Justice
too, since it never ended but with their Lives.

The fair Lady who had asked the question, was so pleased, that she owed her
safety to one of the Royal Blood, and with the celerity and cheerfulness he had
paid to her commands, that she could not but express her joy and gratitude at
both; but in words and actions so taking, that if any part of our Kings heart
did remain unconquered until then, it continued so no longer.

And therefore begging to know her name, she told him it was Izabella yet that
she was Daughter to my Lord -- that she was come from London, the usual place
of her Fathers residence, to visit some Companions of hers, at a Palace near
the Forest; that to divert the Ladies and Gentry of the Neighborhood, they were
engaged to Act a Play called Endimion, in which she was to represent Diana, and
therefore to try her Habit, was dressed in it, that morning when walking to enjoy
the freshness of it, they had been more than Witnesses of her disaster, for
they generously freed her from it.

Brandon then in obedience to her commands, told her his Name, and that he was
a younger Son of a Noble Family; that one of the pleasingst and fatalst
accident that the invention or malice of Destiny could possibly contrive, had
necessitated him to Travel into Foreign Countries, to subdue, or at least
mitigate his melancholy.

And then to divert the fair Izabella's more particular inquiry, and to
satisfy his own impatience, begged her, with a visible concernment, to let him
know who the happy Gentleman was who had possessed the honor of attending her
before her danger, and was guilty of forsaking her in it.

The King, who knew nothing of this before, and was not a little alarmed at
Brandon's sighing, when he asked the question, continued in a deep silence,
expecting her answer; which she made smilingly, and by desiring him to
consider, if he were not too curious to press for that a second time, which she
had denied the first.

Brandon begged her Pardon; which she assured him of, if he would, as they
returned to Charleton, for that was the name of the Palace to which she
intended to go, acquaint her with that Story by Retail, which what he had said
of it in Epitomy, made her desirous to hear.

Brandon conjured her more than once, to dispense with his obedience therein,
since it would renew his grief, and he feared infect her with it. But this
Reply adding to her Curiosity, he was at last vanquished by her, and the Kings
entreaties, having put herself in the midst, and walking softly toward
Charleton, Brandon having cast up his eyes to Heaven, and fetched a groan from
the very bottom of his heart, began the ensuing Relation.

THE HISTORY OF Brandon.
THat many Men run into high Crimes designedly, cannot be a greater Truth than
it is, that others fall into them, both against their inclination and intention.

This latter is what I can experimentally aver; but whether it proceeds from
the influence of the Stars at our Nativity, or from a Fatality to which all Men
are subjected, or from some other occult cause, I dare not determine; but this
I know that the crime I fell into, was not so much my sin, as it is my
punishment. But before I proceed to acquaint you with the particulars, which I
more than hope will incline you to be of my belief, I must beg you, that what I
am to tell you, purely to obey you, may be kept as great a secret, as otherwise
I resolved it should eternally have been, and as you will easily perceive the
nature of it requires.

Izabella, and our Monarch, having promised what he asked, he thus continued:

My Father having spent much of his time and blood in our late sad and
intestine Wars, abhorring the necessary cruelties in them, and loathing the
vicissitudes of a Court-life, retired for ever to a Castle of his own in
Glocestershire, where he determined to bury himself alive. But one day being
drawn to a Kinsmans Wedding, by the importunity of a bosom friend, he saw at
it, a Gentlewoman, so handsome, that what all the beauties of England (which
doubtless is their highest Sphere) could not perform on him in twenty years,
she did in a moment; for, Madam, it is the fate of some Families, to fall in
Love at first sight.

My Father passionately inquired of his Friend if he knew her, and being
assured he did, and that if she were not his nea^ Kinswoman, he would not
scruple to affirm, he knew no person in the World, whose virtue and softness of
humor, exceeded hers; but withal told him, the calamities of the Civil Wars
had so ruined her Parents fortune, as they were unable to give her a Portion,
in the least answerable to her birth and merit.

My Father, who knew that happiness has its solid Throne only in the mind, and
that wealth is an excess, which may often be more dangerous than useful,
courted this Lady, and having found the character his Friend had given him of
her, exactly true, at last married her, from that Union, my elder Brother and I
descended, whose Educations were such, that if we were no great Proficients in
our Studies and Exercises, it was our own faults: possibly never any Friendship
was greater, than that, between my Brother and I; we seemed to have but one
Soul, which actuated both our Bodies; and we were dearer to each other, by the
ties of Friendship, than by those of Blood.

We were never admitted to see a Court or an Army; and my Father who had taken
a Surfeit of both, gave our earlier years such ill impressions of them, that we
joyfully dedicated the hours of our vacancy to no other pleasures, but those of
Hunting and Hawking, and such harmless divertisements of a Country life.

In these innocent employments, my Brother attained to his twentieth, and I to
my nineteenth year; but as if Fortune had envied us this little tranquillity, a
near Friend of my Mothers dyed, and left to her care her only Daughter, which
Legacy she sent her at the last gasp, with the little she had saved out of the
general shipwreck, occasioned by the bloody contentions of the two Roses.

My Mother manifested the esteem she had of the dead, by her care of the
living* nor could that generosity be nobli^r employed, than on this young
Gentlewoman, whose name was Victoria; for she was so charming and lovely, that
the very first hour she came to live with my Mother, my Brother and I began to
feel a passion in our hearts, which till that moment, we had never been
acquainted with.

Could I draw you, Madam, her Picture to the Life, you would excuse our being
so soon vanquished: for I thought then, nothing could be so perfect; and should
have still continued in that belief, had not my sight this day convinced me of
my Error.

My Brother never told me of his passion, neither did I acquaint him with mine;
which was the first and only Secret we kept in reserve from one another.

I will not, Madam, so much misimploy your patience, as to tell you all the
Services I paid the charming Victoria; nor all the arts and assiduities I used
to make them acceptable to her; neither will I particularize my Brothers part,
in the like design. It Is enough you know, that after above one years
languishing, I had only this ill-natured consolation, that I judged my Brother
was as unsuccessful as I; so that the reservedness, and severity of Victoria's
carriage, made me often in despair and anger, resolve to abandon so hopeless a
Love; nay, I was in my heart almost despising my Brother, for his not assuming
the like resolution.

But alas^ I soon found it is Love which gives Laws to us, and not we to Love;
for I so strongly renewed my Chains, as a Penance, for having intended to
break them, that I had merited Victoria's contempt, had she but known I loved
her so much then, and had loved her no more formerly.

But as my passion increast, I thought her coldness did; and in all her
deportment both to my Brother and me, she manifested such an indifferency, that
I could not be more troubled at it, than I was pleased to observe my Friend
wore the same Livery.

While things were in this posture, one morning he went out very early a
Hunting, my Page, who was fond of that recreation, very officiously waked me,
to give me notice of it; hoping I would be a sharer in it* and consequently he,
who usually attended me.

This being the first time he had designed to separate me from any of his
recreations, as well as businesses (except that great one of his Love) I
resolved to follow him, and learn the cause, but after having for some hours
fruitlesly inquired after him, and neither hearing of him, nor the cry of the
Hounds, I returned home melancholy, and weary; and the Servant which waited on
me in my Chamber, being out of the way, I cast my self on a Bed with a Canopy
which was in a Closet within the drawing Room, endeavoring by a little sleep to
abate my being tired in body, and troubled in mind.

I had not slept half an hour, but I was awakened by the noise of one walking
in the same Room. The curtains of the Canopy being not close shut, I saw
through the opening, that it was the fair Victoria.

The curiosity of a young Lover made me continue concealed, to discover what
brought her thither; I saw she was discomposed, and while she was looking in
her Glass, to adjust herself, my Brother came in, who running to her with open
arms, embraced and kissed her, at which she made no resistance, but blushed
exceedingly.

My Amazement and Grief at so surprising an Accident, is not to be expressed: But
one of the Maidservants coming into the outward Room to (...) it, I heard
Victoria say, Alas! we shall be discovered, unless you make haste away. My
Brother at this, pressed her much to name the hour and the signal; to which, at
last, trembling and blushing, she answered, This night at midnight, and three
soft strokes at the upper part of her Chamber door, should be the sign for
admittance. But she added, Forget not, Sir, there is nothing but a painted
Wainscot between your Mothers Beds-head and mine, and therefore if you speak
one word, it may be overheard, and I shall be ruined.

My Brother promis't her hastily an exact obedience; then having again kissed and
embraced her, went into the outward Chamber, from whence he aloud ordered the
Servant to call his Page to him; and as soon as the Coast was clear, Victoria
also went hastily away.

Judge, Madam, I humbly beg you, (continued Brandon) what my condition was, at
what I had heard and seen; for I confess I am not able to relate it: Amazement,
Jealousy, and Anger, or rather Fury, did so torment me by turns, nay,
sometimes all at once, that I knew as little what was fit to do, as what was
fit not to be done.

Sometimes I resolved to make Friendship and Nature yield to my resentments,
and in a Duel killing my Brother, convince Victoria, she had made an unjust
choice; but soon that angry Resolve resigned it self to the Sacred names of
Brother and Friend.

Neither could I in calmer thoughts with any shadow of Justice condemn him for
having done to me, but what I doubt I should have done to him, had my success
been equal to his.

My Rage finding no fit object on my Brother to discharge it self, I determined
to be revenged on her, and by immediately detecting her sin to my Mother, get
her banished with ignominy out of a Family, where her too much kindness to one
of it, was an affront to all the rest.

But then my Love, or rather Pity, to ruin what I had so lately adored, shook
that resolution, and in a few moments afterward entirely conquered it. So that
finding no single object on which to (...) my Despair, I was so Criminal (for
which Madam, said Brandon to Izabella, I most humbly beg your pardon) as to
Curse the whole Sex: for since she who I then believed the greatest ornament of
it, and possessor of the strictest virtue in it, had so abandoned herself, I
rashly and criminally concluded all of them merited, what at that time I too
heartily wished might befall them.

In these Disorders, locking up the Chamber door, and walking many turns in it,
I began to grow more moderate, and then my evil Genius did let me see, that
what I had considered as my highest misfortune, was what I might more
reasonably esteem the contrary; since if I prevented my Brother in the
assignation agreed on between Victoria and him, which was no difficult work to
perform, I should both satisfy my Revenge, and my Love.

When this fatal Project was admitted, Alas! with what Raptures was it
entertained; and all the dictates of Remorse, for betraying my Mistress, my
Friend, and my Brother, how cheerfully were they sacrificed to the imagined
felicities which were to attend the Action.

In brief, Madam, I so cautiously ordered the Design, that it succeeded to my
wish. But while I was in my Brothers place, and in all the pleasures of
triumphant Love, I did hear him many times give the appointed signal at the
door; but you will casily believe, I took care Victoria should not, in whose
embraces I spent the happy and guilty Night; and just as the Day began to dawn,
having agreed with her the next Night, to repeat my joys, I retired a back way
to my own Chamber, where having for some time celebrated my double victory, I
dressed my self, and with impatience enough waited to observe how my deluded
Brother would resent so wounding a disappointment; never till then having in
the leas^ considered, what might be the consequen^ces of it, so much the
delight of invol^ving him in it had blinded me.

My Chamber was next to the great Square, in which the Staircase was carri^ed
up, and from whence Victoria was to come down to the Chapel, which every
morning and evening she failed not to do.

I had not been long on the attendance when through a little opening of my
door, which I had made on purpose, ^ saw my Brother come to the foot of the
Stairs, walking short turns, and every moment casting up his eyes, to observe
when she would descend:

At last she appeared, but as soon as she saw him, her face was covered with
blushes; but his, at the sight of her, became pale as Death; and such a shaking
seized on all his limbs, as it too evidently discovered the storm in his Soul.

Victoria, either ashamed to look on him, who she believed that night had
rifled her greatest treasure; or else minding her steps, looked not on him,
till she was within seven or eight of the bottom; but then casting a look
toward him as full of modesty as fire, and thinking none could hear her, she
told him, I hope, Sir, you are now satisfied -- He, without giving her leave to
finish what she had begun, replied, in a furious tone, Yes, I am satisfied; --
But it is, That you are the falsest of Women; and (...) long, you shall be
satisfied my Resentment shall be as great as my Affront. Then without so much
as staying for her Answer, he flung away in such rage, that I who saw it, am
not able to describe it.

The poor Victoria, at so amazing an usage, became white as Innocence, and gave
no sign that she was alive, but by an universal trembling.

The fright I was in, lest she should fall down those steps, on which her
astonishment had seized her, made me run out of my concealment, and so timely,
that I caught her in my Arms just as her Senses had forsaken her; whereby I
prevented that Death by her fall on the pavement, which her grief made her
desire.

All the Servants in the Family, who were not then employed in the necessary
functions of it, were gone to the Chapel, and so were my Father and Mother,
whereby missing of all help, I carried Victoria into my Chamber, and there by
bowing her body, rubbing her temples, and casting water on her face, I brought
her at last out of her fainting, and then conjured her to tell me the cause of
it.

She only answered me with a deep sigh; at which I smiled, and acquainted her
I had heard all that had past between her and my Brother.

She knew I had too much concernment for her, not to be sensible of her then
condition, and therefore having awhile reflected on my smiling, on a sudden the
cast her eyes toward me, and fixing them steadfastly on me, she told me; I
conjure you, Brandon, to tell me, and truly too, where you lay last night. I
instantly answered, With the greatest Beauty of the World; and then told her,
how I came to over-hear her Assignation with my Brother, and had by my Art,
repaired the misery of her unkindness.

All the while I was making that short Narrative, I saw her color come and go,
her heart ready to force a passage through her breast, and in so many other
Agonies, that had she actually made me as unfortunate as she once intended, the
sight of her then suffering would have been too severe a revenge: But alas!
when I came to the end of my information, she fetched a hideous skreem, and
fell dead on the Bed, to which at first I had carried her.

I cannot tell you, Madam, which of my Griefs were greater; to see her in that
condition, or to find her having made me happy against her will, had reduced
her to it: however, I endeavored all I could to restore her to her Senses,
which at length I effected; but she had no sooner opened her eyes, and saw her
self in my Arms, then she relapsed, and so long, and so dangerously, that when
I feared I could not recover her from Death, I resolved to accompany her in it.

But when I began to despair of her return, she came to herself again, and
while I was on my knees celebrating my joys for it, and renewing my passionate
request, to know what was the occasion of that sorrow, which was so dangerous
to her and me; she strove to go away, but not being strong enough to do it, she
fell again upon the Bed, and told me, in an Accent too moving to be imitated,
Ah Brandon, you have ruined your Brother, and me, and your self, if at least
the friendship you have hitherto paid him, be not a fiction; for I am your
Brothers wife, and this morning --.

A crowd of sighs, and a torrent of tears, stopped the passage of her words; but
alas! what she had said, reduced me to a condition as worthy of pity as hers
was; which as soon as she observed, it heightened her own afflictions, so that
she employed a quarter of an hour, and with interrupted words, in telling me,
That my Brothers Hunting the day before, was but a pretense to go the earlier
abroad, to meet her with a Priest, by appointment in a Grove, where they had
been married.

At the end of this Relation, her Woman, who had mist her at the Chapel, and
had in vain sought her over all the House, came to inquire of me, if I could
tell her where she was; there finding her in a fainting condition, by her help,
we brought Victoria to her own Chamber; and her Distemper every moment
increasing; she took her Bed, and I retired.

My Father and Mother having missed her at their Devotions, concluded some
indisposition was the cause of it; wherefore they came to visit her, and
finding she was in a high Fever, they went hastily to their Closets, to write
for two of the eminentest Physicians in the Country. I took that opportunity
to steal into her Chamber, kneeled by her Beds-side and in more tears and
sighs, than words, convinced her of the vastness of my grief, and then advised
her to send immediately for my Brother, and to tell him, She had locked him out
of her Chamber one night, merely to try his temper; but since she found he
resented that seeming unkindness so highly, she begged his pardon for it, was
really sorry she had committed that fault, and would endeavor to repair it by
all the actions of her Life.

This was the best counsel I could then present her; and asking her, Whether
she approved it, and if it were her pleasure I should send my Brother to wait
on her? She only told me with a sigh, Do what you will. Then turning from me,
she fell a weeping in such excess, that I thought she would be drowned in her
own tears.

As soon as I heard my Mother coming in at one door, I slipped out at the other,
and went to seek my Brother; for I was confident if he went not to visit her,
it would both increase her danger, and possibly discover the cause of it.

At last I found him in a Grove of the Park, lying his full length, near a
Brook, and in troubles almost as great as mine. I told him Victoria was fallen
into a burning Fever; and by the fierceness of the beginning, my Mother more
than feared the End would be fatal, and therefore had sent two Expresses for
the Doctors. That I came then from waiting on her, but I had found her so
alt^r'd, as the change had amazed me; since I thought I saw the image of Death
in that face, which till then, had been all life. I added, that in a whisper,
she had desired me to send him speedily to her, and that I would so order it,
as to entertain my Mother, while she herself was speaking alone to him; since
she had something on her heart to say, that till she had told him and received
his answer on it, she should be in torments.

At first my Brother seemed unmoved at her danger, and request; but I, at
length, prevailed with him to go, where we found my Mother all in tears, the
violence of Victoria's Fever, so greedily increasing on her.

The vastness of my Mothers affliction, was no ill preparative, to melt my
Brothers heart; when he came to Victoria's ^ed, she resigned to him her place,
and I, to allow them the freer liberty to discourse, drew her to a Window under
pretense of seeing from thence, if either of the Doctors were coming.

I never could learn what in particular past between them, but I saw him at
last kneel down by her, (for my eyes were still turned that way) and laying his
lips to her burning hand, seemed thereby to seal her Pardon.

But my Mother, who apprehended such Visits might be hurtful to the fair
Patient, ordered us both to retire.

I cannot better parallel his Grief, than by telling you, Madam, it was equal
to his late Fury; and as we walked together into the Park, he discovered to me,
how the day before he was secretly married to Victoria; for he knew he could
never have obtained my Fathers consent to do it, since her Beauty and Virtue
was all her Portion. He further told me with groans, that he trembled to think,
'twas his Brutishness, had reduced her to the deplorable state she was then in*
and informed me afterward of their Assignation, her failing, and his
resentments at it, (a Relation which alas I knew better than himself;) That
though he more than feared, 'twas his outrageous Passion, had flung her into
the Fever; yet she could not be brought to acknowledge to him, it had done so:
But she had begged his forgiveness for deluding him, in such moving Words,
Actions and Tears, as those confessed to him that Truth, which he could not
extort from her Mouth; That he had begged her Pardon on his knees, for his
Crime, which she had granted him with a tenderness so charming, that her
forgiving him in such a manner, had wounded him as deeply, as his Barbarity had
her.

This Account he gave me, in so much affliction and disorder that it brought on
accession to my griefs, which, till then, I believed were incapable of any.

The share which he thought I bore in his misery, heightened his friendship, and
made him beg of me a thousand Pardons, that he had till then concealed his
Marriage from me, which was the first, and should be the last offense he would
be guilty of, but that now my lively sense of his grief had extorted from him,
that Confession which else he would not have made: for he feared when ever his
father knew it, if he should also learn I was acquainted with it, 'twould
involve me in his disgrace, the apprehension of which only had hitherto sealed
his lips; s^ that he never had been seemingly unkin^ to me, but to be really
the contrary.

We then in many embraces renew'^ our friendships.

Soon after, we saw one of the Doctor Gallop by us; we hastily followed him to
learn his judgment of Victoria's con^dition, upon which both our own depen^ded.

In brief, Madam, the Physician awhile felt her Pu^se, and shook his Head* and
having applied all that his art and kindness could dictate, he told my mother
the seventh day in great grief; That his Patient had more need of a Priest,
than of him; And that his skill deluded him, if some distemper of the Mind had
not reduced her Body to so dangerous a state.

But, Madam, ( Brandon continued) I perceive your Generosity and Compassion,
has made you too large a sharer in poor Victoria's sufferings; I shall not
therefore augment it, by particularizing all the fatal passages of this Story.

It Is too much you know, all the Physicians Care and Art, all my Mothers
Kindness and Assiduities, all my Brothers Pardons and Tears, and all my Groans
and Submissions, could not in the least prevail with Victoria to live; her
scrupulous Virtue, made her judge my Clinic was her own; and having lay'n one
night in my Arms, she concluded herself unworthy ever after to lie in my
Brothers; and that she was only fit for those of death: To which she hastened
with such earnestness and resolution, that those who knew not the cause,
admired at the action; and I who knew it, deplored it with such excess, that
the effect of my sin, was believed singly the product of my good Nature.

The Ninth day of her Sickness, was the last of her Life; and had like to have
been of my Brothers and mine: For before she locked herself up with her
Confessor, and after she had taken an eternal Farewell of my unconsolable
Father and Mother, she gave one half hour of her hasty time to me, and one full
hour to my poor Brother; but what she said to him to mitigate his sorrows,
heightened them, since to lose for ever so much Beauty, Virtue, and Goodness,
was above the power of Consolation; and from the hour of her death, he courted
his own.

What she said to me, was consonant to her admirable Virtue; and made me more
in love with her Mind, than I had ^ver been with her Person.

The nearer her illuminated Soul approached to the happiness she now enjoyes,
the greater the luster of it did shine; and though she spoke to me innumerable
excellent things, yet I shall relate to you but this one.

She conjured me to fly from Sin; for when it is committed, none can foresee
how productive it is in Evil, nor the utmost con^sequences which attend it. You
though^ (she added) that I had been unchaste, an^ that gave you the opportunity
to be sad Bu^ you did not imagine, that by satisfying on voluptuous desire, it
should plunge you (...) Incest, the death of your Mistress; an^ alas I fear,
that of your Friend and Bro^ther. All these were not your design; but (...) one
Sin they became your guilt; and by you^ sorrow, I see they are your punishment:
However (she continued pu^^ing toward m^ her pale and trembling hand) I
forgiv^ you, and have in tears begged of God to do it. Ah! by this so pregnant a
Sin, be for ever frighted from committing another: This is the last Request I
shall make you; and if you grant it, 'twill be the greatest blessing you can
bestow upon your self.

The excellency of her Admonitions, the Generosity with which she pardoned me,
the unexpressible sorrow for her death, and my own fatal guilt which had caused
it, so powerfully operated on me, that retiring from her more dead than alive,
I went trembling to my own Chamber, where having spent an hour in all the
Agonies which those Reflections could cast a despairing Soul into, I resolved
to forsake for ever my Fathers house, and immediately with some Jewels which my
Father had given my Mother, and she had given me, (for I was her Favorite) I
stole the back way to the Stables, took one of my best Horses, and Rid toward
Dover; but so overwhelmed with grief and trouble, as I knew not what I did.

From Dover I past the Channel into France, and for two years last past, I
served sometimes in the Armies of King Francis the Fifth, and sometimes in
those of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, where being careless of my life, or
rather weary of it, and desirous to lose it, I performed some such bold
Actions, as I wanted not the offers of great Preferments from those famous
Princes. But my unconsolable griefs, which made me do what they thought merited
their Favors, made me also decline all those their Generosities offered me. And
I had still lived that wretched and vagabond life, had not a young Gentleman of
Glocestershire, who had been my Neighbor there, arrived three weeks since at
the French Army, to learn the Art of War, by whom I was assured, That the day
of my flight from my Fathers, the fair Victoria dyed* That my Brother having
rather languished, than outlived her ten days followed her; And that by his
repeated desires, he was buried in the same Grave with her, for at his death,
he had acknowledged she had been his Wife; That my Father and Mother, at the
loss of her, him, and in appearance, if not in effect, of me also, so
languished away, that they were likewise buried together in one Monument; so
that by this Gentleman's importunities, and his telling me, that one, afar off
related to our Family, was suing for my Estate, and was like to carry it, I was
persuaded to return though without the least hope of relishing Life. But,
Madam, continued Brandon, since I had the honor to see you, I begin to cast
off that despair, and now that it has been in some small measure useful to your
service, in hopes it may be more, I shall cherish it, and only on that Account.

The King and Izabella blush at these last words, and partly to divert Brandon
from considering it, and also to pay the just debt of Sorrow and Pity due to
his Story, by turns acknowledged he had but too much made good what at first he
had said of the greatness of his Misfortune.

While they were in Discourses of this nature, our Monarch saw Howards come
Galloping toward him; who from the time he had lost his Prince, had been
ranging the Forest to find him, which having thus happily done, the better to
Act the disguise the King had resolved to keep, they often embraced each other,
Howard still calling him by the name of Tudor, and expressing much trouble for
their separation, and joy at their meeting.

Howard had no sooner cast his eyes on the fair Izabella, and on Brandon, but
he admired them both; and they made him their returns in the same Coin for
doubtless never four persons were more worthy the Name of Perfect than those
were, whom Fortune had by Accident brought together that morning.

Soon after they perceived a Chariot coming hastily toward them, attended by
six Pages and Footmen, in magnificent Liveries; and in it, only one Lady, whose
eyes had attacked our three new Lovers hearts, had not Izabella prepossest the
places.

This Beauty, as soon as she came to them, alighted out of her Chariot, and
without so much as taking notice of our three Gallants, ran with open Arms to
embrace and kiss Izabella, which she did a hundred times; and Izabella did the
like to her: And then told her Charming Friend, the great obligation she had to
her two Deliverers; who immediately in words and ^ctions, so enchantingly
presented them ^er acknowledgments for it, as it renewed their former
imaginations, of the Forest being inhabited by Diana, and her Nymphs.

The Lady newly arrived, whose name was Vtresia, came to seek Izabella in a
Chariot, the heat of the day, having turned walking into a trouble; to whom she
whispered something, at which they both smiled, and then continued their walk
toward Charleton, which was not a Furlong off.

The Chariot being too little to carry all five, the three Captives often begged
of the Ladies that they would go into it, and allow them the honor to walk by
it* for the heat began to grow importunate, which yet the Ladies chose to
suffer, rather than be guilty of such incivility.

They therefore all five walked together till they came to the Gate, where such
a crowd of Beauties came to meet Izabella, and to congratulate her Deliverance,
(which one of the Pages had run to inform them of) that our Monarch was
ravished, to see he had so many charming Beauties his Subjects, and deplored
the severities of his Fathers Reign, which had hindered them from frequenting
his Court.

They all invited our Prince, Howard, and Brandon, to refresh themselves in the
Palace; but our Henry apprehending to be discovered, despairing also before so
many Witnesses, to entertain Izabella alone; and longing to entertain his own
thoughts, he took his leave of them, begging and obtaining their permissions to
wait on them again: when on a sudden, Brandon turned pale, and fell into a
fainting Fit, but so happily for him, that Izabella, who first perceived it, to
prevent his falling on the Pavement, supported him in her Arms, till others ran
to his assistance; so that even his seeming want of Life, flung him into one of
the happiest postures of it. Our King, instead of pitying, envied him, and
began to dread a Rival, whose Misfortunes contributed to his Felicity.

The obliging Izabella, being sensible that his loss of blood, and his
attending on her a-foot, in the great heat, had reduced him to that condition,
judged her self tied to repair the Ill which she had been the occasion of, and
therefore desired and obtained of the fair Vtresi^ (who was the Lady of the
place) a Room for him, to which he was immediately conveyed, and the nearest
Physician and Chyrurgion sent for.

Thus Brandon lodged in the house, where of all the world he longed most to be,
his disaster contributing to his design, more than any thing else could have
done; so as he only wanted the satisfaction of being in a condition to relish
it.

In the mean while the King having his Horse brought him by Howard's Groom, did
with his Master Gallop to the Lodge, entertaining himself with the various
Accidents that morning had produced, and at least beginning to find, though he
were the Monarch of England, yet he carried in his heart a greater Sovereign
than himself.

ENGLISH ADVENTURES BY A Person of Honor.
The Second Part.
WHen Brandon was a while recovered of his fainting, and had learned where he
was, by the Servants appointed to attend him, and to whose favor he owed, what
he received, he blessed those wounds, which had produced for him such
advantageous effects.

As soon as his Physician had told the company he might be seen, he received
the Visits of all those Beauties; and she in whose service he was hurt, was the
most assiduous about him* but though her being so, proceeded chiefly from her
gratitude, and good nature, yet he hoped 'twas from a more obliging cause; so
apt are Lovers to entertain what they most desire.

Yet the great Familiarities he had seen betwixt Izabella, and the handsome
Gentleman she was walking with, before her late Adventure, gave him no little
alarm; which was much heightened, by his never being able to learn from her,
what, or who he was though he often and exceedingly pressed it: yet still Brandon
flattered himself with a belief, that so mean an action of his Rivals, would
ruin him in his Mistrisses favor; and when he trembled at the remembrance how
partial Love is, and how it will overlook all faults in those to whom it is
once given, yet he would again console himself with the belief, that who was
kind to a Coward, might be soon induced to become so, to a Man of Valor.

While he recovered, by the help of such pleasing hopes, the Comedy was Acted,
and soon after most of the Assembly dispersed themselves; but Izabella
continued with Vtresia, who was newly married to a Lord so young, as he was
sent to Travel; and had committed the care of his House, his Lady, and his
Estate, to his Sister, some seven years elder than he, her Name was Maria: and
though she was handsome, yet not so to the degree she desired; whereby not being
overlikely to be cried up for a Beauty, she resolved to be esteemed for her
Judgment and Discretion.

Maria therefore to make her Sister-in-law pass the time of her young Brothers
absence the least unpleasantly that she could, had got all the good company of
the Neighborhood to that meeting, and by many other divertisements, endeavored
to do therein what she had designed.

Vtresia and Maria being almost never separated from Izabella, and she, at
(...) hours, seldom absent from Brandon, those four persons spent not ^ll their
time.

And though Brandon chiefly made his Addresses to Izabella, yet he could not
but observe in Vtresia's looks, something which seemed to tell him, she was
somewhat more than civil.

Nay, at last, Maria herself became so diligent about him, as it appeared
rather the effect of Kindness, than Care, whereby Brandon found he had most
favor from two, where he was not so covetous of it, than from one where he
most desired it.

His condition permitting him only to divert the Ladies by his discourses, he
attempted to do it that way, and was so successful therein, that they admired
the Charms of his wit, as much as those of his good looks.

One Evening, while Izabella and Maria were enjoying the cool of it, in the
Garden, Vtresia came to visit Brandon* but instantly made as if she would
retire, pretending she was told, her two friends were then with him: But
Brandon so civilly and pressingly conjured her not to deprive him of the
blessing of her company* because he was denied the happiness of theirs, that
she blushed, and obeyed.

He thought this was a fit opportunity* to learn from her, what Izabella had
still denied him, and therefore earnestly begged her, to know who the Gentleman
was, that ^n her friends distress, had so criminally abandoned her*

Vtresia, who found by the manner of hi^ asking the question, how much he wa^
concerned in it; assured him, She was not a little troubled, that her friends
Injunctions had tied her therein to Silence. But she added maliciously and
smilingly, I am mistaken, if I guess not at the cause of your inquiry, and
therefore all I can do toward satisfying you, is, that it is a person whom
Izabella loves so entirely, as I believe you would repeat worse wounds than
those you have, that she loved you as well.

Brandon sighed and blushed; and Vtresia being thereby more peek'd, told him, I
know not what temper the Beauties hearts are of in France and Germany, but if
they are of the same as ours, it is an unhopeful attempt, to remove a Lover who
has once gotten the possession; and whatever your success may have been in
those foreign Countries, let me advise you to take care, how you embark your
self in a Passion for Izabella, who I doubt you will find is as constant, as
fair.

At the close of this warning, Izabella and Maria having ended their Walk, came
to visit our Gallant; and Vtresia perceiving they were surpised, to find her
alone with him, told them in some confusion how it had hap^^n'd.

Their entertainment that evening was of Love; and Vtresia being of a gay
humor, began to inveigh against the Formality of making it in Spain and Italy,
and the dullness of it in Germany.

Maria, to keep up the discourse, made a satirical one, against the Levity of
the French Courtship, alleging* That Love, which is one of the most intent
Acts of the Soul, was, by their airy humor, turned into ridioulousness.

This Contest was hardly begun, when one of the Pages came to acquaint Maria
and Vtresia, that Mr. Wilmore was come to wait on them.

They were loath to leave Brandon, and it had been uncivil not to entertain
Wilmore; Vtresia therefore asked Brandon, If he would allow them to receive the
Visit in his Chamber: And added, To incline you to it, I believe his
conversation will divert you; for he has been bred in France, and makes it part
of his business to introduce their Modes (especially in Love) amongst us, and I
fear I shall need his help, to maintain my Argument against my sister.

Brandon having assured them, That though the Stranger should be the very worst
company in the World, yet he had much rather admit of his, than be deprived of
the honor of theirs.

Wilmore was called in, and when he had paid his Civilities to all the Company,
Vtresia engaged him to be her second against Maria, a Province which he
willingly accepted; and then began so ingeniously to Raille those who were
constant in Love, without the speedy hopes of a return, making thereby an Amor
a solemn business, when the nature of it is pleasant and gay, that he set all
the Company a laughing: But Maria, who to continue her assumed gravity and
discretion, said with much seriousness, That it was in Love, as in War, where a
General should be cautious how he undertook a Siege, but being engaged in one,
he ought to dye, or carry the place. Then turning to Wilmore, she told him, Do
you think, Sir, had you beleaguered a Fortress, you would sufficiently
Apologize for raising your Siege, by saying, the Conquest was not worth the
Pain* and you thought the Fort pregnable, but finding it was not you would
attack another that was.

Pardon me, Madam, Wilmore replied, if I think you mistake the Case; for I
never said I was for a Siege in Love: That is the dull method of those
Countries whose Discipline in Amors I abominate, I am for the French Mode,
where the first day I either conquer my Mistress, or my Passion. Alexander the
Great, lost more time in besieging Tire, than he employed to conquer India. I
instance this one example in War, because you made Love a parallel to it; by
which, Madam, you may find, That the greatest Generals, as the wisest Lovers,
should be storming, and not besieging, what they would take.

If this rational method were pursued, Women would be too wise to expect long
approaches, and Men not such Fools as to make them.

Nor indeed did I ever see any Woman ( I mean in France) cry up Constancy, but
she was decaying; for when any thing but Love is to (...) Love, it is a proof
Beauty cannot do it, and then also nothing els^ can.

A young Gentleman who was my Fellow Traveller, undertook to besiege a Ladie^
heart at Monpellier, in mere melancholy wilfulness, because he knew she had
given it to another; I left him in that English Rode, and while he was not
gaining that Mistress, I had won and lost twenty: But at last he grew wiser,
and then happier.

Vtresia being pleased at this Story, it netled Maria the more, who said, She
had heard of a General, who because he would always storm, and not besiege
places, had never taken any; Experience also teaches us, that Fortresses which
can soon be taken, will soon be lost. And, Madam, said Wilmore, Experience
likewise teaches us, that some Fortresses cost more to take, than they are
worth when taken. I who Court Beauties by dozens at once, play a hopefuller
Game, than he who only Courts one all his life: he may think he has good luck,
if he takes that one; but I am sure I have ill luck, if I take not many; nor
did I ever fear that she would be an unconstant Mistress, after she has been
kind: for if she should be, it ought to be more her trouble, than mine.

The noise which was made in the Court, at the coming into it, of a Chariot,
and some Horsemen, made Izabella, who seemed least concerned in the dispute,
look out at the Window, she knew it to be her Fathers, and one of the Gentlemen
coming up, presented her a Letter, which when she had read, she gave it to
Vtresia and Maria, and then acquainted Brandon with the Contents of it, which
were, That her Father being the next morning early to go into Somersetshire
(his Uncle being dangerously sick) she was to come away immediately to him, to
receive his orders, during his absence.

Izabella obeyed, but expressed more sorrow for losing so much good Company, than
for her great Uncles danger; and having with much kindness and concernment
recommended Brandon's Cure to Vtresia and Maria, (which their growing Passion
for him, made a work of Super^rogation) making also excuses to him, That her
Duty to her Father, drew her from her actual care of him, she took her leave;
but left Brandon more wounded by her Absence, than by the Stag.

Vtresia and Maria waited on Izabella to her Chariot, and by many embraces in
it, seemed desirous never to leave her; yet the tears at their separation, were
the effects of their contentment, for they knew how powerful a Rival was
removed; and their hopes were greater to win Brandon from each other, than to
gain him from her; which evidences Friendship yields to Love, and Sincerity to
Dissembling, when once we are thoroughly engaged in that Passion.

While Brandon is recovering of his wounds, and those two Ladies were
contriving the most promising waves to make him sensible of theirs, Izabella
came to her Fathers, and found with him a Gentleman newly returned from his
Travels* whose name was Goodman; he was young, rich, and had learned rather the
empty and vicious Modes of Foreign Countries, than the solid benefit which
Voyaging well improved, might have taught him, a fault too common in our young
Nobless.

As soon as he saw Izabella, he start^ed, and made a great cry, to celebrate
his admiration at her beauty; and in short (for Love which terminates in
Marriage, is not of the essentials of my History) he fell so desperately in
Love with her, that being of an ancient Family, wealthy, and at his own
dispose, and my Lord -- being not over-able to give his Daughters Portion
suitable to her Birth; together with Goodman's declaring, 'Twas Felicity
sufficient to have such a Wife; the journey to the dying Uncle was put off, and
in three days, our amorous young Traveller married Izabella: But with so much
melancholy in her Face and Heart, as those few which were present at the
Nuptials, too visibly saw she sacrificed her Happiness to her Duty; for her
Father would admit of no excuses, much less of a denial.

Goodman finding himself in possession of so much beauty, minded not so much
the title he had to it, as he did the enjoyment of it.

While our Henry was thus eternally deprived of what some squeemish Lovers are
fondest of, he was so happy as to be ignorant of his misfortune, and was with
Howard in the Lodge, hourly consulting how to obtain, what actually he had
lost; but he had made a Confident of his Rival: for our young Norfolk, was shot
as deeply as his Prince; and was as intently concerned to Cure his own wound,
as his Monarch to Cure his. Yet he had the Art to disguise his own condition,
and to appear so warmly concerned for his Masters, as it planted him in a
higher station in his favor.

He knew the best and shortest Expedient to be well with a young and amorous
Prince, was to be trusted and employed in his Amors; and he more than hoped,
being likely to become a Love Ambassador, with the greater facility to effect
his own design, while he seemingly appeared for his Kings.

The news of this hasty Wedding, was the day of it brought to Charleton, and
was variously entertained by the three chief persons there; Brandon at the
receiving it, fell back into a Fever; and Vtresia and Maria had like to have
been assaulted with the same distemper, but from a different motive; joy and
grief, though most opposite passions of the Soul, often producing the like
effects.

But Brandon, who from a deep sorrow for the death of one Mistri^s, was fallen
passionately in Love with another, recollecting his thoughts, and summoning all
his reason to his assistance, inquired diligently what kind of person
Izabella's new Husband was; and being assured, He owed his success entirely to
his Estate, and Izabella 's Obedience to her Fathers positive and stern
Commands; he soon recovered of his Relapses, concluding, That she who would
make herself miserable to please a Parent, would be brought to recompense her
self, the latter being the more natural Action.

Nor could he forget the Caresses he saw her bestow on her Gallant in the
Forest, whose Name it was impossible for him to learn, from whence he judged
her Constancy was not as great as her Beauty; and that merely her Duty to her
Father having made her marry another, she would satisfy herself, after she had
pleased him.

Brandon also was not so much a stranger to his own merit, as to despair that
she who could be another besides her Husbands, might be prevailed with to love
a third; for in such cases, the appetite increases with the eating.

While he fed his Hopes with this Diet, he mended so visibly, as his two Lovers
concluded, his resentments had presented him with his Cure; whereby believing
the Fortress was without a Garrison, they had the firmer thoughts (but each of
them a part) they might become the Possessor of it.

I will leave them awhile on their Designs, and return to the Lodge, where our
Henry, by the bruise of his Fall, and the emotions of his first Amors (which
are commonly the most ardent) was so much indisposed, as he stirred not out for
four or five days, during which, Howard's servant went to Charleton on the
Scout; his first intelligence of importance, was, that Izabella was hastily
recalled to London by her Father: which was unwelcome to our Monarch, who
expected better opportunities (all the circumstances considered) to make his
Court to her in the Country, than in the City: yet he hoped as she went away
on a sudden, her return would be the like; and he promised himself, that by the
time she came back, his indisposition would cease, and he might renew his
Addresses with more confidence of success.

But on the Intelligencers second return le^^^ing she was married, the certain
News thereof was brought to Charleton, amazement and trouble was such, as had
Howard been ignorant till then of his Passion, he could have been so no longer.

After half an hours silence and consternation, the King instantly took Horse,
Galloped to the Banks-side by the dusk of the evening, where taking Boat, he
cross over to Baynards Castle, stealing into his own Apartment, attended only
by our young Norfolk, whom with all the warmth and concernment of a young and
first Lover, he in that moment employed him to my Lord -- House, giving him so
many and such minute instructions, as are too long to be repeated, and could
only be dictated by a passionate Lover: But by them his Confident was convinced
he had a hard Province, for he must either be false to himself, or to his
Prince; he was very unwilling to be the latter, but more to be the former.

Howard being dispatched on that Embassy, and our Monarch having re-assur^'d
his Purple, admitted a few of his greatest Counselors to see him; who
believing he had for the last six days declare^d himself to his Grief, began
with all the Formalities of State and Devotion, To beg him at least to mitigate
his entertaining it in such excess, lest it might be destructive to his own
Health, and consequently to his Kingdoms.

Our Henry in his Heart smiled at the Gravity and Seasonableness of their
Harangues; and at length seemed to be so much conquered by their Entreaties and
Reasonings, as he declared, That from thenceforth, he would give every day two
hours to their Addresses on the Public Affairs; but the rest of the day he
would employ both in the duty of his sorrow, and to conquer the fiercest
effects of it.

These grave Ministers failed not to acquaint the rest of the Court, how
excellent a Prince they had; in whose Grief for the Dead, they might be
convinced what his Care would be of the Living.

Nor did they omit by Inference, to make their Auditor^ sensible how powerful
their own Oratory was, which could so soon begin to vanquish an affliction,
that without it, might have proved unconquerable.

The new Queen, when her Father-in-law dyed, was by accident at Windsor, where
she resolved to continue, till the Royal Solemnities of his Funeral were
performed, whereby our Henry had the greater liberty: However, frequent
Expresses were employed between them, to console each other; in which
charitable offices, it is thought they were not long unsuccessful, since no
mourning seems more capable of comfort, than his, which proceeds from wearing a
Crown.

In the mean time Howard was not idle, for having a Servant who waited on him
in his Chamber, called Jeremy, whom he had found by Experiment, had a Genius
for all Intrigues, especially amorous ones, he took him apart, and began to
consult with him, how to get a Correspondent in my Lord -- House. Jeremy told
him, You need, Sir, go no farther; for I lived a year in it, and had been
deprived of the honor of your service, had I not been dismissed thence, by the
morosity of the Steward, who suspected (as the old are usually jealous of the
young) I had been a little too familiar with Leticia, who was a kind of
Governess to Izabella, and who still (...) the greatest Ascendent over her.

Our young Norfolk ravished to have met with such an Agitator, went with him
hastily to an old Servants House of his own, which by fortune was next door to
Izabella's; and from thence employed Jeremy into my Lord -- House, with strict
orders, to inform him of all things whatever, both how the Marriage was made,
and how affairs went ever since, or were likely to proceed; and if he could, to
get Letici^ to come where he then was, which she might do without the least
offense to her modesty, the House being a private one, and of good repute. But
if he could not prevail with her to come, then that he should discover how the
young Couple relished one another, and if possibly to engender some disgusts
between them; for which service, both he and Leticia should be most prodigally
rewarded.

Jeremy, who was sollicitous to live well in the wide World, especially by the
duty of his calling, for such he judged the serving of his Master was in any
thing; bestir'd himself) so vigorously, as in less than half an hour, he
ushered Leticia to his Lord, whom he left alon^ with her in to Parlor, being
too well educated, to listen to his Masters secrets.

Leticia, who was no Novice, and had set up her Rest, to make a Fortune by
being the sole Confident of the greatest beauty of England* married by
constraint ^^^one she despised, and who she thought deserved a Monarchs Bed,
had Fate been ^^ obliging to her, as Nature was sh^e to the height* at the
beginning of the ^^^^ey* Howard, who ^^on found that Gold was an Oratory, which
she relished above that of Demosthenes, or Cicero, poured such a shower of it
into her ^ap, that from being stubborn as a Cantle^, she became pliant as a
Glove.

This golden Key, made Leticia unlock the secrets of the House, and upon
promises of greater Rewards, if by her assistance ^e soon obtained the
happiness of her (...) esteem, she took her leave to go about it, as well
intentioned for him as he could wish and he as full of hopes, as the first lay
of such a ^ommerce could reasonably bestow on him.

While all this was Transacting in the Strand, the King was entertaining his
Ministers at Court, they retired just as Howard came thither; who having
resolved to serve his Masters Love seemingly, but really his own, made so
unwelcome a Narrative of Izabella's fondness, if not doting on her new
Husband, which he had discovered by her only Confident, whom he had won with
large Gifts, and larger Promises, that our Monarchs Passion being heightened, by
the difficultie^ he found, resolved to overcome all Obstacles.

And because he esteemed it but a half Victory to conquer by the Title of King,
he strictly commanded Howard, never to discover who he was, till he became
successful; yet by him he sent Leticia such Presents to be his Sollicitress,
under the name of Tudor, that had she overcome her Lady, as much as the Gifts
did her, the King had been happy, and she rich.

But though Howard presented her with his Kings Gi^ts, yet it was for himself;
and she had with such celerity planted in her Ladies Heart, a Contempt for her
Husband, that she was the apter to listen to her Confidents Elogies, in favor
of our young Norfolk, who by a thousand little services and assiduities,
insensibly gained an interest in Izabella's esteem, and soon after in her
Affection; for no progress in nature is more expeditious, than from liking to
loving.

Howard who judged, notwithstanding these prosperous Advances, he should have a
hard Chapter of it, unless he got the friendship of the Husband, as well as the
affection of the Wife; set himself about it, and effected it with such success,
as he was sca^ce more impatient, when he was out of Izabella's company, than
Goodman was, while out of his; whereby had he been jealous of Howard, even that
Passion could not have rendered him more inseparable from Howard, than his
friendship did; that which gave a beginning to this kindness, was by this
accident.

Goodman one evening returning from the Theater with Izabella, was unexpectedly
assaulted by a Hectoring Crew in the streets, and being pulled out of his Coach
by them, had suffered at their hands what they had pleased. By chance Howard
returning also from the Play, his Chariot followed Goodmans; and hearing his
Mistress shreek, looked hastily to find what might be the cause of it; and
seeing those Ruffians begin to Bastonado Goodman, he leaped out of his Chariot,
drew his Sword, and followed by his Pages and Footmen, soon rescued his Friend,
by wounding and putting to flight his Assaulters.

Goodman, who never was guilty of any one act of courage, but that of marrying
Izabella, was so sensible of this deliverance, and so taken with the generosity
and valor of his Deliverer, as from thenceforth he dedicated that life to him,
which he confessed he had preserved.

Howard, pretending an apprehension that they might attack him again, became
his Convoy, and went home in the Chariot with Izabella and him; but she paid
him so many thanks for what he had done for her Husband, as he began to fear
she approved it.

As soon as they were got home, Goodman was advised immediately to be let
Blood, and withdrew to do it; and Norfolk, in that juncture, made his
approaches so successfully, both by the Preparatory, and present assistances of
Leticia, as some, from that hour, believe he possessed his Mistresses Heart; who
not having had her Education in a Court, or so much as ever frequented one,
though she contemned her Husband, and loved her Gallant, yet she much scrupled
to act any thing which might evidence the truth of either: so innocent, yet
sensible is Nature, till Art and Example has deproved it.

Goodman, who from a Country education in England, and an Academical one at
Saumar, had leaped into the Licentiousness of London, and by his Fathers death
into a plentiful Fortune, soon thought he should pass for a man that smelt of
the Village, unless he was in the first File of the debauched, and therefore so
assiduously addicted himself to such Company, as he soon Commenced Doctor of
those Liberal Sciences.

This false step was not forgiven him by Leticia, nor soon after* through her
instigation, by Izabella, who inclining to revenge it to the height, was
persuaded by her Confident, nothing could merit that Appellation, but being as
kind to Howard, as Goodman was to many others.

The Hate she had to her Husband, and the Esteem, if not Passion she had for
our young Norfolk, made him, as they say, sooner successful, than otherwise he
would have been. But when once he had obtained her last Favors she abandoned
herself so entirely to the dictates of her Passion, as she repented she had so
long denied herself the pleasures she then enjoyed.

But Howard, who found it less difficult to gain her Love, than to disguise his
success from his King, did every day by new inventions endeavor to wean him
from a Passion, in which he prophesied he would be unsuccessful.

Sometimes he would at once condemn and admire the Rigidity of her Virtue^, and
at other times, the vigilance of her Husband, who by himself, or incorruptible
Spies, was never absent from her; and then would tell his King, Though he
acknowledged she was charming handsome, yet if Beauty were only what he would
enjoy, in case he would make use of his zeal and industry in the duty of his
service, he durst undertake in a few days to bring into his Embraces as
captivating a person as Izabella.

But our Henry, who had Idea's of Izabella too pleasing to be removed, or
peeked with the glory of succeeding in his first Amor, or with the
difficulties he found in it, resolved unmoveably to persevere in his design;
and therefore ordered Howard to pursue it to the utmost.

Yet believing it difficult, if not impossible, to vanquish so obstinate a
Soul, as he judged Izabella's to be, by the report of Howard, unless he
discovered he was her King; and having positively declared to him, He scorned
to owe his Victory in Love, to his Title: ashamed to descend from his first
height, he called into his Cabinet a young Gentleman named Denny, who he
esteemed and trusted; and there disclosing to him his Passion for Izabella,
employed him in it, allowing him to discover, 'twas her King was her Servant.

Denny, who knew how much his future hopes depended on his present success,
gave himself up absolutely to the management of it; and being supplied
unlimitedly with Money and Jewels, he quickly learned the influence Leticia had
over her Lady, and won the Confident, to betray the Mistress; for whatever is
to be sold in such Markets, he who bids the highest, is certain to be the
Buyer* Leticia had so well improved her Fortune in the first Voyage, that she
had readily embarked in any second, but greedily became the Factress for a
King, who if he did reward her in proportion, to what his Subject had done, she
knew she might ever after* live at ease with her Jeremy, which was then the
utmost of her Ambition; but as our desires commonly grow with our hopes, she
became afterward the Catholic Ambassadress of our Henry's future Amors.

One may easily believe, though Denny had gained her to his interest, yet her
own made her keep from his knowledge the secret, o^ her Lady with Howard, both
that the gaining of Izabella might seem the harder, and the reward of it be the
larger.

She also was loath to lose our young Norfolk's frequent Presents, which were
considerable as being at a Kings expense, and distributed by a prosperous
Lover; and she would often also mind herself, that Nature had not given her two
Hands, to become rich but with one.

To give her her due, she was more troubled with the fear, that Howard should
find she did betray him, than she was to do it.

Nor did Leticia find this so difficult an undertaking, as her first had been,
since to seduce a chaste Wife, for a Subject, was a more hard task, than after
she had made her flexible to the Duke, to make her become the like to his King.

Toward the better effecting thereof, she artificially contrived opportunities
for our Monarch to see her a walking; but those Rencounters were so short, as
they added to his passion: for she never appeared where he might long gaze on
her, and always dressed to the highest advantage.

But our Prince, the more he beheld her Charms, the more impatient he was to
possess them; and therefore by Denny, incessantly pressed Leticia.

The name of being a Mistress (and the first) to a brave and young Monarch; the
safety, as well as benefit of such a Lover; the felicity of a change from a
lower Gallant to the highest, were so constantly the Matinades and Vespers, of
the Confident, to her Lady, as Howard seemed at last, to have no Title but
possession; which though it be much in War, yet is little in Love, where the
whole tenure is at will and pleasure; whereby the way was so well smoothed for
our Henry, as the greatest difficulty was to find a fit opportunity, that what
had been concluded upon by Mediators, might be ratified by the Principals.

Leticia, at length, lighted on this Expedient; Goodman's Birthday being near,
she persuaded her Lady to Celebrate it, by a Feast, a Ball, and at night a
Masquerade: The King and Denny, were to be of the latter; who being about one
stature, and dressed exactly alike, the one could not be known from the other;
they were never to appear at once: so that having Vizards, and other disguises,
if one were in the Dance, it was impossible to know which of them he was.

The King, impatient to gaze on that Beauty he was so soon to possess, danced
awhile among the Masqueraders, while Denny stood in a retired place, where the
Butlers furnished, those of them with Wine who were thirsty with the Exercise.
He was covered with a long stuff Cloak, which was the false Scabberd to his
dancing Clothes, which he was to cast upon the King, when he himself was to
thrust into the Masquerade.

Leticia had agreed, when the King (who passed for one of the ordinary
Masqueraders) should step aside, pretending to drink, Denny should cast on him
his Cloak, and leap into his place of the Dance to supply it; which was to be
the signal for her, to conduct our Henry so muffled to her own Chamber, a^^
thence to Izabella's, which joined unto it; and on her return from carrying the
King to the field of the Duel, Izabella should counterfeit a fainting Fit, and
by her, and Leticia's Maid, should be carried as in a Swoon, to her own Chamber.

Our Monarch having therefore awhile danced, the sooner to view his Conqueress,
and fancying he might more solidly please himself with the felicities to
follow, suddenly leaped to the retired place where Denny stood, who immediately
casting his long Cloak on the King, jumpt himself in among the Dancers, and our
Henry, by the ready guidance of Leticia, was brought by a Back-stairs into her
Chamber, and from thence into her Ladies, where all the preparatives for his
reception, were most tempting and magnificent.

She left our Monarch there in all the Heats of a longing Lover, and went to
Present him with what she more than imagined would cure him of that Fever.

When Leticia came again into the room of the Ball, which was her signal to her
L^^y, she was then by accident talking with our young Norfolk* but she had no
sooner cast her eyes on her Confident, then covering her Face, and fetching a
deep sigh, she sunk into Howard's arms.

Leticia, in an instant, flew to her, called aloud for her own Maid, to help to
carry her up to Bed, there to give her some air and rest, which she said (...)
had found in like cases, would in an hour or two restore her.

But the Maid not being able to come suddenly enough, by reason of the crowd
and disorder at this accident, Howard, who believed all this Farce to be
Tragedy, and having heard what Leticia had said, snatched up Izabella in his
arms, and carried her up so hastily to her own Chamber, that he had almost
entered it, before Leticia could overtake him; for the cro^d cleft itself to
make him way to carry off the pretended Fainter and as soon as he was past,
closed again* so as before she could make her way, he was gotten up the stairs,
and had certainly gotten into the Chamber* had not Leticia's repeated cries,
of, Hold, ^^^d, stopped him, to ask her what occasioned them: she being fled up,
bid him instantly set Izabella down, or he would kill her* for the celerity of
his motion, had taken away her breath, which had once before happened to her in
the like extremity* and then by rubbing her face, so covered it, as our young
Norfolk could not see it; for if he had, it would have discovered the fallacy:
since Izabella so blushed, at what she was going to do* and so ^ugh'd ^^ her
hea^^, that chance had like to have made use of one of her Lovers, to be the
Adjutant for the other, as if Howard had seen her face, he must have admired
that a fainting person should have so much vermilion in her cheeks, and mirth
in her looks.

While the Confident was thus op^ortunely serving her Lady, and pressing Howard
to retire, the Maid being then come to ease him of his office, (for sooner she
could not get to them, out of the throng) the King was not without his alarms;
he had heard one hastily coming up the stairs, whose tread he knew could not be
hi^ Mistresses, and the reiterated cries, of, Hold, Hold, which he knew were
made by Leticia, both which made him believe he was betrayed by design, or some
unhappy accident had discovered him to Goodman and his Companions; he therefore
within the Chamber door, drew his Sword, and having that in his Hand* he
thought he was abler to give fear, than to receive any impressions of it, but
those of being then disappointed of his promised felicity.

But, on a sudden, the Vacarme ceased, Howard retired, and Leticia having
adjusted the fair Izabella's Hair and Clothes, lead her covered with blushes,
where our impatient Monarch expected her.

The Maid was ordered out of the Antichamber, and Leticia having delivered the
pa^ti^g Prey into the Royal Hunters hands, with great modesty and discretion,
retired into her own Chamber, saying, That so lovely a Subject could not be
safelier left, than under the protection of her own King.

Let us imitate Leticia's discretion, and not intrude into a Monarchs secrets.

But while he and Izabella were doing whatever it was, Leticia, who had engaged
some jovial Companions, to entertain Goodman in the Cellar, while the Company
was dancing, out of a reasonable apprehension the Assembly might r^^ent their
being left without the Master or the Lady of the House, and so abruptly break
up, went down for a moment to see that nothing was wanting* and to assure them
Izabella began to recover out of h^^ distemper, and had commanded her ^^ pay
them all those respects and services, which it had hindered her from pre^^nting
them.

Howard afflicted to the last degree, a^ his Mistresses indisposition, was
ret^^d out of the Dance, and longing to be satisfied from her own mouth, of
what he^ Confident had assured the company s^ole out of it, and being perfectly
acquainted with all the passages of the House, we^^ up the Back-stairs to
Leticia's Chambers which joined to Izabella's, and gently opening the door,
went softly to^^^^^ her Bed, the Curtains whereof were shut on the side. Our
Monarch, who heard one treading warily in the Chamber, concluded it could be no
other but Leticia; and he being then out of Function, but ravished with those
delights which had necessitated him to that Cessation, and ha^ing a lively
sense of Gratitude for her who had been the chief Agent of his felicity, said,
Come, come, Leticia, and receive a promise from thy King, of making thee happy
in the effects of his fa^^^, as thou (...) ^^de him, by those of thy care; the
fair I^abella shall be the witness of this inviolable promise, and this Ring
(taking a great Diamond from his finger) shall be an earnest of the performance.

Howard, who too well knew the voice, and too clearly heard the words, remained
astonished and trembling, as if he had met his Mother's Ghost.

But the King, who admired Leticia, came not to receive the offered security of
his favor, opened hastily the Curtains, and with amazement saw his mistake.
This Action of our Monarchs, recovered Howard in part out of his conste^^ation,
at least as much as a Man could be, who saw his Mistress false, and in the
embraces of a Rival, on whom he durst not discharge his resentments and fury.

Izabella, at the sight of Howard, shreek'd; and the King attributing it to her
despair, at having such a witness to her kindness, leapt off the Bed in fury,
and had in that instant, given his Favorite some fatal proofs of it, had not
Izabella seasonably interposed, and had not Leticia also, who was newly
returned into her own Chamber, hearing from thence the shreek of her Lady,
which she was not so ignorant as to imagine, was the Product of a Rape on her
Chastity, come also into the Room hastily, where a while she stood amazed to
find Howard with the King and Izabella; he with his Sword drawn, and she
restraining the hand which held it: but her astonishment ceasing, she became
her Ladies Assistant in so charitable an office.

Howard having recovered his wite, resolved to put this misadventure into the
least ill fold which he could, therefore lifting up his Eyes and Hands, and
stepping two or three paces back, sighed, and said, Have I, Sir, in one moment
so lost your favor; that because fortune has brought me to see your happiness,
I must therefore be deprived of my own: Alas, Sir, if this be your resolution,
be pleased to mitigate so much cruelty, by one act of mercy; and if you will
take away your favor, take away a life, which can last but by it. Yet, Sir,
vouchsafe to know my Crime, is occasioned by my Duty; for not being ignorant of
your Passion for the fair Izabella, I was ambitious to bring you early and true
assurances that her danger was vanished* for I knew when you heard of the one,
unless the other accompanied it, it would be fatal to you* But now I find the
danger of her death is metamorphos'd into an Intrigue of Love, I will presume
to hope, since my intention to serve you, produced my sin, your generosity ^ill
excuse an effect, of which that only is the cause.

These words spoken with a melancholy which was visibly real and great, (not
for hi^ fault, but for his Mistresses) together with her intercessions and
Leticia's* so conquered our Henry, as at length to evidence he was appeased,
Howard was made the Coufident in that Love, wherein he had been at first the
principal; the justice of Destiny punishing his unfaithfulness to his King, by
making an evidence of his favor, his torment, and yet obliging him to be
seemingly thankful for it.

While these Disorders were thus pacifying, and while they were advising on new
Expedients, to give our Monarchs other charming appointments, (in which Cabal,
one may think our young Norfolk, (without offending him) was but a sorry
Counselor) Fortune, who usually delights to favor those whom she has begun to
oblige, presented them with an Accident, much better than all their united and
best inventions could have contrived.

Many Flambeaux being in the Room^ and Cellars, where the Dancers and Drinkers
entertained themselves, the House by the negligence, or drunkenness of some
which held them took (...), on ^ sudden, in two places; and the flame* (...)
greedily devoured all that fed it, as it was impossible for the King, Izabella,
Howard, and Leticia, to fly out of it, either by the Great, or Back-stairs.

Denny, who knew his Princes danger, leaped out of the lower Window of the Room
in which they were dancing, and running into the street, by the gift of a
handful of Gold, got a Ladder clapped up to the Window of our Lovers, and running
it up nimbly, freed them from a ruin, which till then they thought inevitable.

Our Monarch more concerned for his Mistress, than himself, tore down the
lights of it; in which Howard was also very active, and making a large passage,
that she might the less uneasily get out, she first, then our King, and then
Howard, Leticia and Denny, got all safely down; at the Backside of the House,
the Confident bringing with her in a small Casket, all her Ladies, and her own
Jewels.

Leticia, no longer terrified at the danger, took the King aside, and advised
him in the confusion which all the company and the street was in, to convey his
Mi^triss to his own Apartmen^; and while the World believed she perished in the
Flames, possessed her undisturbedly in those of Love.

Our Henry in Raptures listened into, and observed this counsel, and
immediately lead Izabella, to the Tha^es side, from whence they undiscovered
got to Baynards Castle, wherein the most unfrequented quarter of i^, she and
Leticia were joyfully lodged.

But what seemed the most extravagant in all these Adventures, was, that our
Henry, as a fresh and greater evidence of his being reconciled to our young
Norfolk, entrusted Izabella to his care, for his Lodgings were next to hers;
and our King believing he was fitter for that trust, who had seen her in his
Arms, than Denny who but thought i^, sacrificed so much to Izabella's modestly,
as to let him who alone knew her kindness, be the only Confident of it.

Howard admitted at the fantasticalness of his Destiny; and seeing Infidelity
to his King, though but in an amorous affair, thus exemplarily persecuted,
firmly resolved, by his future Services, to repair his past Crimes, and so
signally ever after served his King in his most celebrated Actions and
Conquests, that nothing has more Tarnish'd the luster of that great Monarchs
Reign, than his severity (to give it the softest name) to that illustrious
Subject, and his great Son the Earl of Surrey; which some attributed to his
having discovered in process of time, how Howard had deluded him in his first
Amors.

For the offenses of a Subject against his King, are not to be estimated by
what they are in their own nature, but by the Resentment he is pleased to print
upon them; who, if he be of an humor to value a gallantry in Love, more than
the Conquest of a Province; an injury in the first, is engraven in Brass, while
a service in the last, is written but in Air.

The End of the Second Part of English Adventures.
ENGLISH ADVENTURES BY A Person of Honor.
The Third Part.
WHile our Monarch was settling Izabella in Baynards Castle, that in her
Embraces he might find an effectual cure for the late loss of his Father*
Goodman, and his deboist companions, had been buried in the ruins of his burnt
House, had not some charitable Neighbors, by forcing a passage through the
wall of their own Cellar, dragged them out of his; when drowning and burning
seemed equally to contend, which soonest should act their destinies.

After the fumes of his Wine were alay'd by sleep, he learned with some
amazement and sorrow, that the fatal Fire, which had consumed his House, had
involved in the flames his Lady and Leticia, (for that was the general belief)
he therefore put on deep mourning, but whether it were also the Livery of his
Soul, I cannot determine; since though, when he was alone, he would weep for
his loss, yet as often as he could, he would with his Camerades, endeavor to
drown the remembrance of it.

Izabella and Leticia, who went abroad to divert themselves, but very well
disguised, met him in a Chariot so covered with black, as a more mortifying
fight had hardly ever been seen.

It gave them both not little cause of mirth; for it was a new thing indeed,
for a Wife to see her Husband in mourning for her death.

However they both commended the decency of the performance, but much more
their own good fortune, which made them live to be the Witnesses of it.

Howard, who so happily evaded the storm he had lately been in, and who justly
feared in some of those soft moments, where Lovers keep nothing in reserve,
Izabella might discover to our Henry, how false he had been to him in his
attempt^, though not how happy in his success, for that he easily believed, her
interest would make her preserve a secret, employed his most recollected
thoughts both how to oblige her from detecting him, and how to make the King
tear her from his heart; since while she posses^ it, terrible apprehensions
must possess him.

And though he had assumed too rational and firm Resolutions, never again to be
her Lover, yet her abandoning him, though it were for his King, (for Love is so
just, as not to respect persons) had filled his Soul with revenge, so near all
worldly extremes are to one another.

At last the result of his thoughts terminated in a double resolution, he
courted her, by protesting, He so much valued he^ felicity above his own, as he
more rejoy^'d she was now his Kings, tha^ ever be had, that she had been his.
And then by new Vows, solemnly engaged to use his highest industry, to maintain
her in that station, to which her Merit more than her Fortune had raised her.
And at the same time also he attempted his Prince, but obliquely, and in
moments well chosen, by putting him in mind, That she had been chiefly, if not
only, conquered by his Title, and not by the charms of his Person; for 'twas
by the Magic of the name of Monarch, that Denny had more operated in one day,
than he had done in twenty, by being forbidden to make use of it.

And then added, He could not be so unjust to himself, as to believe he was not
as fit an Agent in such an Intrigue as Denny was; but his Competitor had been
permitted to use a Spell, which had been absolutely prohibited to him.

These Assaults at first, and during the warmth of our Henry's passion, made
but light impressions; but when Satiety added its Forces to Howard's Attacks,
they began by degrees to give deeper Prints* which yet he confined from his
Favorites knowledge, and he hoped from so much as his suspicions; for our Henry
would often tell him, Though he might grant he owed his possessing her to his
Title, yet even That itself made his Tenure the firmer, since she might like
whom she would* but* if she would only be kind to a King, she could be so ^ut
to him.

Howard, though young, yet was a refined Courtier enough to discern, since his
Master would not only allow his Mistress to be assaulted, but would also defend
her by such arguings, the flame was diminished; for whatever Lover (especially
one who is a Sovereign) does permit his Mistress to be touched, and does not
punish the presumption of him who dares do it, does therein manifest a
lessening of Love, which is of the nature of Tides, when they do not flow, they
quickly ebb.

However, though our young Norfolk was pleased with this inference, yet he knew
well the advances he had made in this ticklish affair for his own security*
would but the more hazard it, if they were not pushed to the end with ^ele^ity
and success.

He therefore added to those ^ttempts in which he was his own immediate ^gent,
another contrivance, on the probability of which he more depended, than on his
deluding Izabella by his vows and promises, or on his hopes of making his
Prince to abandon her, on the Account that she loved not Tudar, but the King.

For he had both to his satisfaction and his grief, experimented Izabella was
amorous* and therefore as she had first forsaken her Husband for him, and
afterward him for the King, he did from thence conclude, That her Love would
not be confined, and having now gratified the height of her Ambition, by being
Mistress to her Sovereign, she would also gratify her i^clinations, by being
kind, to one whom she should more like.

Howard had a young Woman, whom he secretly entertained for his Divertisement,
who was admirably handsome, and her Ingenuity was equal to her Beauty* h^^, he
acquainted with his design, and having engaged her in it, he dressed her in one
of his Pages Liveries, and preferred her to the immediate service of Izabella,
more than hopeful, that so lovely a youth, might not be unregarded by an
amorous Lady.

He spent daily many hours with thi^ feigned Page, whom he called Horatio, to
instruct him in the shortest, and likeliest methods, to make Izabella in Love
with him* with express order when he had found her Passion so violent, as that
she was impatient for the Cure, to acquaint him with it, and then to leave the
rest to his conduct.

Horatio, who perfectly loved his Lord, and violently hated Izabella, for
having gained the greatest share in that Heart, which she had entirely possessed;
being dictated both by Affection and Revenge, proceeded on the Design, with the
^eal and industry, which one whom those two Passions Animates is usually
inspired with. Howard, doubtless, made a very fit choice; for whoever attempts
a revenge, in which the Agents interest is not as well concerned as the
Principals, will be served but by half.

Horatio acted his Part, with such ^agacity and Diligence, as in a few days,
(...) saw Izabella was pleased with no Services but his, that she often cast on
him languishing, yet burning looks: and one night, when she and L^ticia were
lo^ked up in her Cabinet, and he attending in the outward Room, overheard the
Confident tell the Lady, If she did not suddenly dismiss Horatio, she would
ruin herself, since what was so visible to her, could not long be unseen by
the King; for no eyes were so quick and penetrating as a Lovers, and a Monarchs.

And to say the truth, it was hardly possible for a Lady capable of Love, not
to pay hers to Horatio; who had all the Graces of a Man, with the Beauties of a
Woman.

Leticia, who found all her Reasons and Prayers could not prevail with her Lady
to discard Horatio, did from thence Prognosticate her ruin, and began to cast
about for her own safety.

She repented a thousand times, her having lodged Izabella in Baynards Castle;
where our Henry having uninterrupted access to his Mistress, the delight began
to lessen; and it was then, that this Confident experimentally found, she had
not cultivated those Amors to the best advantage: For Love is heightened by
little difficulties, and hardships, and so n^ languisheth when it meets with
none (...) it turns it to a kind of natural Marriage, which is a little durable
with Ardor, as most Artificial ones are.

Though, Horatio, by what he had seen and heard, was himself confident, that
his Lady was his Captive, yet he was unwilling to give Howard assurances of it,
till by Demonstration he might convince him. One morning while he was busying
his thoughts to compass it, Izabella, as soon as she was dressed, dismissed
Leticia, and her Servants, and going into her Cabinet, called Horatio thither;
she told him, One of her Women had newly so commended his voice, as she was
impatient till she heard it.

He, immediately obeyed her; for he knew few, if any in the world, excelled
his: But the words he sung, were so amorous, and so rarely animated by him, as
Izabella, in the transports of her Passion, kissed him; and then blushing, said,
There was Magic in that Song.

But Horatio, to heighten her Appetite* retiring from her, with a sigh, Humbly
begged to know what was his Crime, which made her thus design his death; for he
must expect that punishment from his Lord, should he ever hear of this favor
she had then honored him with.

Izabella, in all the languishments of her kindness, replied, Ah Horatio, were
thou not too young to know all the Charms which attend victorious Love, thou
would more apprehend the loss of them, than of thy life.

This Izabella spoke in so moving and tender an Assent, as Horatio seemed
touched to the Heart, and therefore folding his Arms within each other, and
fetching a deep groan, he fixed his eyes on hers so intently, as if he would
never have removed them.

Izabella's flames being raised to the last degree, by these Actions, told him,
with all the softnesses of yielding Love, Alas Horatio, do not I venture more
than you in the discovery; I shall lose not only my life, but what is of much
more value, the unrivaled kindness of my King, while you hazard you know not
what; but by not adventuring, you certainly lose the opportunity of making your
life happy and considerable: For I who ingross a Monarchs Love, can make him
heap on you, all those other contentments, which I cannot present you.

But, said Izabella, interrupting herself, Why do I in the Cause of Love,
mention any thing but Love? And he who needs being Courted to accept of mine,
is but too unworthy of it.

But yet Horatio, let not the apprehension of danger deter you; for if your
flame equals mine, I can contrive, at once, your happiness, and your security:
for the King of late, but rarely, stays with me all the night.

Madam, Horatio replied, yet should he visit you any of those nights you
destine to my felicity --

Never apprehend it, said Izabella hastily, I need but let him know I am
indisposed, and therefore would take some rest; and he is grown too respectful
to deny it me.

Then, Madam, said Horatio, making hi^ Approaches to her, with all the humility
of a conquered Lover, dispose absolutely of a Life, which is without reserve,
entirely devoted to you; a Life which was my torment, till this auspicious
moment; for I p^n'd for that felicity, which your mercy has now bestowed upon
me: Yes, Madam, from the first moment I had the blessing to see you, I deplored
my Fate, which had given to my King, what could only make me happy; I resolved
therefore to mourn away my Life, and the sooner and the more pleasingly to end
it, I elected daily to gaze on those Beauties, which could only present me
that cure: for I could not so much as hope that you, who so deservedly possess
a mighty Monarchs heart, could vouchsafe to think of conquering a Subjects.

Oh Horatio, said Izabella, how little art thou versed in the mighty authority
of Love; King and Subject, are but Names of Art, but Love is the character of
Nature, and therefore is indelible.

All our Sex are generally condemned to Ambition, but they are inspired with
Love; I therefore sacrifice to both those Deities: the King has the oblations,
extorted to the first; but it is Horatio has those, which I willingly pay to the
last.

The disguised Page, seemingly ravished with these charming expressions, fell
on his knees, as some evidence of it; and having embraced hers, and kissed her
feet, sealed the Contract, which Izabella hastened to conclude, seeing Leticia
from the Window Landing at the Water stairs.

They therefore agreed that the ensuing Night should complete their joys; and
having appointed the precise Hour, that Horatio should steal into her Chamber,
Izabella undertook to order the Affair so, as by pretending a great Pain in her
Head, she would early take leave of our Monarch, and be no more in the Evening
interrupted with his Company.

Izabella, by her fresh embraces and kisses, and by a Present of Jewels, gave
him new earnest of her performance, then dismissed him, and fell a reading a
Romance, in which employment the deluded Leticia found her.

Horatio the same moment ran to Howard, and informed him of his Victory; the
Assignation, and all the particulars of both; who being transported, with the
joy of it, went immediately to the King, whom he found alone in his Cabinet,
and in whose sight he assumed so much melancholy, as our Henry both took notice
of it, and pressed him to tell and cause.

Howard only sighed, and cast down his eyes.

This Procedure augmented the Kings curiosity, and the stricter silence his
Favorite kept, the more his Master urged him to break it.

At length, seeming vanquished by his reiterated commands, he told him, Sir, I
owe all I have, and all I hope, to your Favor; and to merit that blessing, is
what I ambition as much as to possess it: I have therefore had a fierce
Conflict within my self, for I fear I am reduced to the miserable choice, of
either continuing in your esteem by what will even in my own judgment render me
unworthy of it, or to lose it, by what would give me some title to continue it:
But since you so positively command me to speak, I have elected the latter; For
it is more consonant to my duty, as well as inclination, to be ruined rather,
than merit to be so.

The King, at this Introduction, was startled; but impatient, to know what was
the cause of it, he listened, without interrupting him.

Howard having paused awhile, to make the Discovery appear the more natural and
effectual too, thus continued:

I believe, Sir, you may not have forgot how on several occasions I presumed to
disclose some apprehensions I had, that the fair Izabella, was more conquered
by your Title, than by the Passion she ought to have paid you.

I was not so unwise or rude, as to speak on so unwelcome a Subject, without
some belief I had ground for it; since I knew nothing was more tender to a
magnanimous Prince, than not to have a perfect return of Love from her, whom he
had honored with his.

But withal I was not ignorant, nothing could be more sensible to a good
Subject, especially to one whom his King had blessed with the highest characters
of his Favor, than to see him, pardon the expression, Sir, prostitute his
affection to a Mistress, who received not the happiness with all the
impressions of joy, gratitude and sincerity, which her Soul was capable of.

I must therefore now by hazarding your Favor, Sir, which is much more
considerable to me than Life, acquaint you, my fears were not without reason.

I made them my Torment, by con^ining them to my Breast, till I could make the
cause of them as visible to you, as their effects were sensible to me.

Our Monarch here, interrupted his Favorite, by saying, Take heed, Howard,
what you do; if you proceed no farther, I will attempt to persuade my self to
pardon all you have spoke, by attributing it to your zeal for my service, which
may incline you to act, though mistakenly, as you have done. But if you
persevere after this Caution and Forgiveness, you necessitate me either to
ruin my Mistress, or you: And nothing less than a Demonstration she is false,
can make me believe it.

Howard unmoved, (which the King too sensibly observed) replied:

I know my danger is great, but, Sir, my duty is greater; yet I cannot say
positively, your Majesty shall by a Demonstration be convinced she is false;
but you shall be satisfied she would be so, and that it is her trouble she
cannot be so.

The King, at this assurance, only nodded his Head, and commanded him to
proceed.

Howard then told his Prince, I shall now relate to you, Sir, a story, which I
know will surprise you.

But before I begin, will you be pleased to pardon me, if I presume to inquire
whether Leticia, has not been so faithful as to disclose her apprehensions to
you, that her Lady has, of late, too kindly gazed upon a Page I preferred to
her, whose name is Horatio.

The King answered, May be she has; but ask no more questions.

I will then Sir, Howard said, solemnly protest, That whatever may have but the
least shadow of a tendency, to disturb your quiet, I have curiously endeavored
to prevent, or remove, and will do to the last moment of my life. Your Majesty
having trusted me with the care of Izabella, and done me the honor to make me
your Confident in that Amor, I dedicated my self so to discharge that Trust,
as you should never repent the favor. And therefore I was much more vigilant
over her, than had she been my own Mistress.

A while since, I entertained Horatio to be one of my Pages, and finding him
very diligent, serviceable, and I believed faithful, I preferred him to wait on
Izabella, both as the fittest I had, and to give me notice of all things, for
you knew, Sir, my suspicions.

I was in a few days, so far from doubting his services were not acceptable to
her, as I began to doubt, they were so, but too much I was unwilling to admit
of so mean a thought, and therefore thrust it from my heart with so much
rudeness, as I hoped 'twould never dare to approach it again.

But, Sir, I could not persuade my self against what I saw.

For Izabella by stealth, even before me, would often cast such eyes on
Horatio, as made me tremble to think they were the looks of Love; and when I
would remove those fears, they appeared too rational to be cast off.

While my jealousies were young, I declined, Sir, troubling you with them. But
the elder they grew, they became the stronger.

I therefore determined, by one action, to confirm, or ruin them.

To effect which, I pretended yesternight some business which might detain me
this day many hours, and begged Izabella 's pardon, if till the evening of it, I
paid her not my duties. I went therefore early abroad, but returned privately
at Noon, concealing my self in my Closet, till she had dined; for then I knew
her Women usually left her alone, and therefore that would be the fittest time
to make my discovery.

I got unseen, by any, to her Chamber, but found it empty; yet hearing some
discoursing in her Cabinet, and seeing the door unlocked, I entered; there I
found Izabella and Horatio; she blushed, and told me, She expect^d me not so
soon. I replied, my business had been disappointed in part.

She observed I was surprised to find a Page with her alone, and therefore told
me with new blushings, She had been unkind to Horatio, to please herself; for
one of her Women had so exceedingly commended his voice, while she was at her
dinner, as longing to hear it, she had made him lose his own, to give her that
satisfaction; and just as she was persuading him to sing, I had interrupted
them.

This smooth Relation, I seemed to take for good payment, and therefore I chid
him, for needing to be persuaded to obey his Lady.

Horatio therefore immediately sung; but so charmingly, and the words being of
the power of Love, he so animated them by his actions, as though your Mistress,
Sir, stood on her guard; yet I too clearly saw, what I so much dreaded; for
never Love spoke so significantly in looks, as in hers, to him.

The lively sense of your affront, transported me to that degree, as I durst
stay no longer in the place; but begging Izabella 's permission, to employ
Horatio, for one hour, on a pressing business, I took him with me out of her
Cabinet, into my own; where locking the door, I asked him with an accent which
made him tremble, How he durst be alone in a Closet with his Lady?

He replied, It was by her Commands, not by his seeking.

I bid him, on your life, never again repeat that presumption.

He answered, Then, Sir, I beseech you, take me out of her service; for while I
am in it, it is both my duty to obey her, and your Commands that I should do it:
and she is never without company, but she calls me alone into her Cabinet,
where she is so kind to me --

Villain, I replied furiously, How kind?

Alas, Sir, said Horatio, you ask in so much anger, as I dare not tell you.

Tell me, I answered, drawing out my Punniard, or I Will kill thee.

He immediately said (but shaking with fear) I will discover all, so you will
promise me my Pardon.

Discover, said I, to the least circumstance, or thou art dead; and when I have
heard all, I will consider if thou art capable of mercy.

Horatio then said, I think, Sir, she is in Love with me; for when we are
alone, she has more than once embraced and kissed me; and she has appointed me
this night, at midnight, to steal to her Bed.

Traitor, I replied, Do thou not know she is thy Kings Mistress? Were thou my
Brother, this shall be thy last hour? But because thou have confessed thy sin, I
give thee a few moments to reconcile thy Soul to Heaven, and therefore lose
them not in fruitless begging of forgiveness from me; for dye thou shall.

Horatio therefore immediately fell to his devotions, but every minute with
floods of tears he looked trembling after me, for I still kept my Punniard in
my hand; and when I thought he had prayed long enough, I advanced to kill him.

But, O God, Sir, how was I surprised, when opening his shirt, he discovered to
me the breasts of a Woman; but so white, and so firm, as could the fury I was
in, have admitted Love, his tears had so softened my temper, that his eyes
might have stamped it on my heart.

How, said our Monarch, interrupting Howard, (for till then he had listened to
him, but in all the agonies of offended Love) a Woman? What could be her
design? And why was she so long revealing her Sex?

That, Sir, said Howard, filled me with new wonder; and when I asked her the
cause, she told me, her Uncle, to whose care her deceased Father had left her,
fell in Love with her, and would have forced her kindness; which to avoid, she
had fled from him disguised in man's apparel.

And I well remember Sir, (continued Howard) how one day walking in a Field
near the Highway, I saw him in it, and admiring his beauty, which was fitter
for the Female Sex, than that she then personated; I stopped him, and believing
by his traveling on foot, he was necessitous, I asked him if he wanted a
Service, and if he would be one of my Pages? He told me he would most
willingly: I therefore entertained him, gave him my Livery, and preferred him to
Izabella, who, it seems, being taken with his face, diligence, and voice, and
mistaking his Sex, bestowed on him her Love; by which he confessed to me, he
hoped so much to benefit himself, as before she could finally discover the
fallacy, he might obtain gifts sufficient to maintain him for his life, and a
young Gentleman, with whom she had exchanged her heart.

This, Sir, is all I have to tell you, but that I keep Horatio locked up in my
Closet, from whence he cannot escape, till I know the honor of your Commands
concerning him, and what your pleasure is on all these discoveries.

The King awhile walked in his Cabinet with looks, which too evidently
discovered the agitations of his mind; and then turning to Howard, embraced
him, and with a sigh said, Thou have done me at once the highest service and
disservice imaginable; for thou have told me that, which unknown, and
unrevenged, had raised her contempt of me; and known, has raised my Hate of her.

Then pausing awhile, he continued, Oh Howard, how unjustly are Monarchs envied
for their Power and Greatness, when the inconstancy of a Mistress, out-braves
both; and when even my Love to her, cannot fix hers to me, she forsakes the
Embraces of her Capti^'d King, to Court those of an imagined and despicable
Page. Ah why do we allow any of that Sex, to compose our Joys, when they could
hardly be eclipsed, but by their Infidelity.

Howard, who found his Prince more sensible of the intended Affront, than he
could well have hoped; changed his Battery, and casting away all those Reasons
with which he had armed himself to provoke his Revenge, began seemingly to
dissuade him from it, being not ignorant that whoever opposes his Princes Love,
without proving the Mistresses crime, as certainly contributes to the
heightning of it; as whoever pleads for the pardon of a Mistresses Inconstancy,
renders her the more incapable of obtaining it* For the Love, and Revenge of a
Monarch, are so tender a part of his Prerogative, as he will only allow himself
to be the Dispenser of their Effects.

So that when Howard began to beg him to remember, She was not actually, but
intentionally Criminal. Our Henry taking him up short, replied, She who has
resolved to be False, is so.

And when our young Norfolk added, That Izabella never loved any man, but her
King. He answered, It Is more than she herself knows, and she believes the
contrary. And lastly, when Howard desired him to consider, How Natural it was,
for the Young to be Captivated by the Lovely. He briskly replied, It Is at least
as Natural, and certainly more Just, for an injured King, to punish the
Offender: To which he added, No, No, She that can Love any but her own Monarch
after she has obtained his Heart, evidences nothing can fix hers.

However, I will this Night, by a demonstration, convince my self, and her, of
her Crime; Tear her from my Heart, and then --

There he stopped, and commanded, his Favorite so to order this business, as to
put it past the reach of Fortune to miscarry.

Howard assured him of his utmost care, and then said, Will you permit me, Sir,
after you are convinced, of what you will make your own eyes, the Witnesses of,
to beseech you to command me, before Izabella, to kill Horatio; and I shall
therein act my part so artificially, as she shall in an hour after, believe
your Orders are obeyed. For since I find your Majesty has judged her offense
merits to divorce her eternally from your thoughts; it will be no small
addition, to her Grief, to believe, that in the same sin, which has lost her
You, she has been the death of her Lover and herself.

The King having approved of this Proposal, shut himself up in his Cabinet, so
full of Fury, to have been deluded and betrayed by his first Mistress, that he
almost as impatiently longed for the hour to revenge it, as she did to commit
the Crime, which was to render that Revenge, a Justice.

Howard also retired to Horatio, that with him, all the design, might be so
cautiously laid, as it could not fail. A Design* in the execution whereof*
depended both his Revenge, for losing his Mistresses Favor, and his security in
possessing his Masters.

While they two were adjusting this important Plot, Leticia, who was confident
of Izabella's ruin, by her continuing obstinate, in retaining Horatio, begged
and obtained our Monarchs permission, to speak with him alone in a retired
place, where usually she had Audience.

She told him, That her endless Fidelity to his Service, had obliged her some
days before to tell him her fears of Izabella 's guilty inclinations, for the
enchanting Horatio; and having by his express Commands used all her Arts,
Prayers and Tears, to procure her to expel him from her Service, but
unsuccessfully, she too easily saw, for what end, he was still retained; she
had therefore made a little Hole, through that part of her Chamber Wainscot,
which separated it from her Ladies Closet; and had planted herself there with
great secrecy, from whence she had seen, more than once, the guilty looks she
greedily cast on her new Lover; whereby she had concluded there wanted but a
fit opportunity to act what they could not but have agreed upon: And having
been told, by her own Woman, whom she had made her spy, and perfectly
instructed in all the secrets of that Vocation, that this day Izabella and
Horatio had been together in her Closet, she fully believed the Assignation was
fixed to the ensuing night; since, Sir, she has employed me, to acquaint you,
her Head is so indisposed, that should you design her then, the honor of your
company, she must beg to be deprived of it, that by an uninterrupted Rest, she
may be to morrow, the more fit to obey your pleasure.

Our Monarch comparing this, with what Howard had newly told him, began to be
but too certain of Izabella's Infidelity; and therefore having first expressed to
Leticia his sense of her vigilance, and faithfulness, he contrived with her,
how to surprise her Lady, in the crime.

This Leticia undertook the conduct of, and was commanded to return to
Izabella, with the Kings passionate Condolings, for her Indisposition, and full
assurances, his Visits that Night, should not contribute to augment it, though
by his not paying them, it would bring an accession to his own.

Our Monarch being ready to be gone, Leticia, with all the insinuating Arts of
a Woman of her Vocation, humbly besought him to vouchsafe her one moments
Audience; which the King having granted, she told him,

As my Fidelity has forced me to bring your Majesty unpleasing News of one
Mistress, so my Duty has made me sollicitous, to Present you with a Cure for
that unhappiness.

For, Sir, this morning I went to visit a Lady, whom I had the Honor to be
acquainted with in the first bloomings of her Youth, and who then promised such
Perfections, when she should come to her Seventeenth year, as I believed she
only would merit the Conquest of your Heart.

What my Belief then suggested, my eyes this day, have had the blessing to
behold.

But, Sir, she is a Widow.

But, Sir, she is also a Maid; for the very day she was married to Sir Gilbert
Talboise, he was assaulted with a Fever, of which soon after he dyed.

Fate reserving her Virginity, for him alone who is only worthy of it.

Her own Name was Blunt; and as much as the Criminal Izabella, surpasses
ordinary Beauties, so much my Lady Talboise, transcends hers.

Were every Woman in the World, robbed of that Grace, Feature, or Motion, which
is most Captivating in her, and were all those borrowed Charms, by the Magic
of Love, united, to make one Beauty accomplished and perfect, yet even that
Mosaick-work Beauty would fall short of the Lovely Talboise.

I have begun, Sir, to give her those impressions of your Majesty, which I
think she will be as little able ever to part with, as you will be to part with
her, when you have once had the felicity to see her.

Leticia, without staying for the Kings further Inquiry, retired.

But what she had spoke, was not unoperative on his mind; for it prepared him,
with the less reluctance, to lose his first Mistress, by the enchanting Idea's,
she had given him of a second.

While all these things were thus transacting against the amorous Izabella, she
was entertaining herself with those Raptures which her Fancy promised, in the
embraces of Horatio, and sometimes in exclaiming against the dull motion of the
Sun, which added not wings to his course, when her Passion made her wish it.

At last the longed for hour of rest to others, and somewhat more valued than
rest by Izabella, arrived; and because of her pretended indisposition, she went
to Bed the earlier, appointing all her Attendants to retire, and make no noise.

A thousand times by the light of a Flambeau which was not far from her Bed,
she looked on her Watch, to see when the lazy Hand would reach the figure of
Twelve.

While she was in that importune expectance, the King had conveyed himself into
Leticia's Chamber, having first ordered Howard, neither to come into it, nor
into Izabella's, but to keep within call, in case he needed his service.

This our young Norfolk joyfully obeyed; for being now arrived near the moment
of the Action, he began to tremble with the apprehension, that Izabella's fury
and resentment, when she should be detected, if he appeared an Agent in her
shame, would urge her to discover his first Guilt, that she might involve him
in her ruin.

The King also having some relics of respect for her he had so lately adored,
esteemed it undecent, that any but Leticia should be the witness of her Ladies
disgrace, and possibly in consequence of her own.

Howard therefore stood in an obscure place, yet within hearing of his Princes
voice, should he in the least raise it. And Leticia, who was entirely ignorant
of Horatio's true Sex, had a faithful Sentinel near his Chamber door, to
advertise her, as soon as ever he opened it; that the King and she might arrive
timely enough, to prevent the acting the evil, yet soon enough to discover the
intended.

In these several employments the time was consumed, till the great Clock of
the Castle struck Twelve: immediately after, Horatio, in the dark, stole
toward Izabella's Chamber, Leticia's Scout, ran with the News of it to her;
and our Monarch and she went hastily the backway to it, concluding the fore-way
would be barred by Izabella's care, as soon as the supposed Gallant was gotten
into it.

Just as the King and Leticia, were got about the back-way to the Chamber door,
Horatio was entered it, Izabella had bolted that passage, and in the last
transports of her Passion, being only in an Aurora color Sarcenet Nightgown,
had almost stifled Horatio with her kisses and embraces; but as she was leading
him to the Scene of all her fancied enjoyments, Leticia seized on Horatio, our
Henry standing at the backdoor, unseen by Izabella, but clearly seeing all she
did.

Horatio, who had been assured by his Lord, that only the King and he would
surprise them; for so it had been resolved, before Leticia was admitted into
the Plot; neither did Howard know any thing to the contrary, till it was
impossible for him to advertise his supposed Page of it: being therefore amazed
and surprised to see himself thus taken by one, who was not of the design, and
by seeing neither of those which he believed were only privy to it,
endeavored to spring from Leticia; who having gotten firm hold of his shirt,
by his struggling to get loose, tore off that part of it which covered his
breasts, whereby Izabella, who had always her eyes on him, clearly discovered,
he was not of that Sex, which till then she had believed.

That surprising sight struck her with more astonishment, than her being
detected by Leticia, had filled her with fury and grief.

But she had scarce time to make any reflections on that discovery, for Horatio
being escaped at last, out of Leticia's hands, and retiring hastily by the
backdoor, at which she had entered, was there seized by our Monarch; who
leading him by the hand toward Izabella, with a face inflamed with anger and
contempt, told her:

I come, Madam, to bring you this Captive; and at the same time I Present you
him, I declare I am no longer yours: What my eyes have seen, I must believe. No
less an evidence I would allow, and no greater I could have.

I know another Prince offended to the degree I am, would wash away your
Crimes, in your Blood; and if I do it not, it is only because I judge to let
you live, will be a severer punishment.

Yes, perfidious Izabella, you shall not only lose for ever the Love you are so
unworthy of, but him also, for whose embraces, you have abandoned mine. He
shall suffer death for his offense, and you shall live confined, till Age or
Melancholy presents you yours.

Izabella, who had by the unexpected Accident which I have related, fortunately
discovered Horatio's true Sex, (which while the King was thus speaking to her,
she was fully confirmed in, for he could not so cover his breasts with the hand
that was free, but she saw a part of them) having her judgment clear and
active, stepped suddenly back, and as one half amazed, replied:

How, Sir, are these fit expressions for her to whom you first made the
glorious Present of your Heart; and for whose sake she sacrificed all that
ought to be most sacred in this World amongst Women.

Ah, Sir, since you are now satiated with those enjoyments which a thousand
times you vowed, were the highest you could aspire unto, perform on me, what
you threaten against me; for after having lost the felicity which only made me
relish Life, my best Cure will be to be deprived of it.

You mean, said the King, interrupting her with indignation, the felicity of
your Horatio 's embraces, it is those alone, I find, makes you relish that Life,
which because you shall be eternally deprived of them, you desire to lose.

Then, Sir, said Izabella, I am miserable indeed, since you choose to think me
capable of such guilt. But behold your Error, and my Innocence.

At the end of these words, she forced with both her hands, Horatio from his
breast, and then with a languishing, yet in a reproachful accent, she added,
Judge, Sir, if for her embraces, I would abandon those of my King.

Our Monarch, at this, was strangely surprised; not at his seeing Horatio was a
Woman, but at Izabella's knowing it. And Leticia was so confounded at the
sight, that it is past my Art to describe it; so that she would not rest
satisfied at the evidence thereof, which Izabella had exposed, but
expeditiously tried further experiments; which having entirely convinced her,
she stood like a Statue.

Her Lady, to improve this consternation, turning angerly to her late
Confident, told her, Go, wretched Woman, and never dare again to Present your
self before me; it was your idle jealousy of me, which made me resolve to
divert my self, and perplex you, by seeming to be in Love with Horatio. I
observed you had your Spies on me, and watched my very looks: But alas I little
imagined this design for ^irth, should discover your falsehood to me, much less
that you should by it, prevail with my King to suspect a Fidelity, which I had
dedicated to his Love, and not to his Quality.

But alas I find how much I was mistook; and that what I intended for an
innocent delight, has eternally rendered me incapable of any.

And since, Sir, turning to the King, you have judged me Criminal, I shall
punish my self, as if really I were so, by taking now my last leave of you; yet
I shall pray, that who ever you next Honor with your Affection, may be but as
sensible of it, as I have been; for more she cannot be* and may avoid a misery,
like that, which you have laden me with, and from whose Burden I am resolved
Death shall suddenly relieve me.

Then with her accustomed grace she kneeled, kissed the Kings hand, which (...)
bathed with her tears, and retired hastily into her Cabinet, bolting the door
after her.

He would be a better Drawer of Passions than I pretend to be, that could paint
to the Life, those of our Monarch, of Izabella, of Leticia, and of Horatio; for
never any four persons at once were assaulted with such violent and various
ones, as they were.

The last of them finding himself at liberty, withdrew to his own Chamber, to
put on those Clothes which might continue to disguise his Sex, from the rest of
the Family; and by the way was met by his Lord, who was impatiently watching
the Result of this whole Adventure, on which his Revenge and Safety, so highly
depended. He therefore followed Horatio, to learn it; which when he had done,
his Amazement, Grief and Anger, equaled those of all the rest.

The King, in the mean while, having his heart pierced, with Izabella's last
words and actions, and trembling with apprehension, lest she might be then
performing, what she had menaced him with; started out of all his thoughts, and
ran to her Cabinet door, where he heard her sigh with such excess, as set on
(...) again his breast, and with fiercer flames, than ever yet had invaded it.

He both knocked at the door, and called, but she neither would open it, or
answer him. This made him unite all his strength to force it.

She knew well enough by the voice, and by the attempt, who it was; but having
begun so fortunately to extricate herself out of that ruin into which her
mistaken Love, had so far precipitated her, she resolved to perfect what was so
far advanced; and therefore just as our Monarch had torn open the door, she got
into the Window which was over the Thames, and made as if she would have cast
herself out of it.

But the King, as she designed* catched her in his Arms; and then by all the
humiliations of a penitent Lover, so movingly begged her Pardon, for his guilty
suspicions, which had been seemingly, but too well grounded; and so
passionately conjured her to cast off a despair* which at once had so frightened
and pleased him, since it was the sublimest evidence of her Love and Grief* as
by degrees she gave him some hopes, she might not be for ever inexorable.

Who will not admire at the extravagancy of Love, and at the vicissitude of
Humane things; when the greatest Monarch of the World, is reduced to beg
Pardon, of his Subject, for her own fault; while she is more troubled she could
not Act it, than she would have been had she committed it: And yet her sighs,
and tears, that an imagined Page, is found to be a Woman, which aggravated her
fault, she makes pass even in the judgment of her King, as the proofs of her
Innocence.

Thus the World delights to abuse us, and yet we delight to pursue those
pleasures, by which we are abused; and to Court them, neglect our solid
Happiness; every one flattering himself with a belief, that he is the happy
person who shall fix the wheels of Love and Fortune, both which, will yet be as
perpetual in their motions, as the Sun in his.

But while the King and Izabella are peecing up all misunderstandings, while
Leticia is contriving how to recover the favor of her Lady, or failing of it,
to raise her Fortunes, by making the lovely Talboise, the Monarch, of our
Monarchs heart; while our young Norfolk, is contriving by a second design, to
repair the unsuccessfulness of the first* and while even Horatio, is upbraiding
his destiny with frowardness and unconstancy; for having blasted a design,
which he thought was so admirably well contrived, let us return to Brandon, who
seems justly to complain, we have too long neglected him, since his Actions are
to furnish the greatest and most surprising Events in our following Adventures.

The End of the First Tome of English Adventures.
ERRATA*
PAge 4. line 3. read in for by. p. 12. l. 4. r. so for for, ib. l. 10^ and 11.
leave out had not. ib. l. 15. r. so a^* p. 1^. l. 15. r. no for not. p. 16. l.
14. r. which for when. p. 41* l. 1, r. Francis the first. p. ^7, l. 21. r.
started for ^^^iled p. 96. l. 27. r. soon for ^ooner.


