A True and Perfect ACCOUNT OF THE Examination, Confession, Trial, Condemnation
and Execution OF Joan Perry, and her two Sons, John and Richard Perry, FOR THE
Supposed Murder of Will. Harrison, Gent. BEING One of the most remarkable
Occurrences which has happened in the Memory of Man.

Sent in a Letter (by Sir Thomas Overbury, of Burton, in the County of
Gloucester, Knt. and one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace) to Thomas
Shirly, Doctor of Physic, in London.

ALSO Mr. Harrison's own Account how he was conveyed to Turkey, and there made
a Slave above two Years, when his Master (who bought him there) dying, he
returned to England; being, in the mean while, supposed to be murdered by his
Manservant, who falsely accused his own Mother and Brother as guilty of the
same, and were all three executed for it on Broadway-Hills, in Gloucestershire.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN ATKINSON, near the Chapter House, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

Licensed,

September 8, 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

A True and Perfect ACCOUNT OF The Examination, Confession, etc. of John Perry,
and his Mother and Brother, for the supposed Murder of W. Harrison, Gent.
UPON Thursday the 16th Day of August, 1660, William Harrison, Steward to the
Lady Viscountess Campden, at Campden in Gloucestershire, being about seventy
Years of Age, walked from Campden aforesaid to Charringworth, about two Miles
from thence, to receive his Lady's Rent; and, not returning so early as
formerly, his Wife, Mrs. Harrison, between eight and nine o'Clock that Evening,
sent her Servant, John Perry, to meet his Master on the Way from Charringworth:
But, neither Mr. Harrison, nor his Servant, John Perry, returning that Night,
the next Morning early Edward Harrison (William's Son) went toward
Charringworth, to enquire after his Father; when on the Way, meeting Perry
coming thence, and being informed by him he was not there, they went together
to Ebrington, a Village between Charringworth and Campden, where they were
told, by one Daniel, that Mr. Harrison called at his House the Evening before,
in his Return from Charringworth, but stayed not: Then they went to Paxford,
about Half a Mile thence, where hearing nothing of Mr. Harrison, they returned
toward Campden; and, on the Way, hearing of a Hat, a Band, and Comb, taken up
in the Highway (between Ebrington and Campden) by a poor Woman, then leasing in
the Field, they fought her out, with whom they found the Hat, Band, and Comb,
which they knew to be Mr. Harrison's; and, being brought by the Woman to the
Place where she found the same (in the Highway, between Ebrington and Campden,
near unto a great Furz-brake) they there searched for Mr. Harrison, supposing
he had been murdered, the Hat and Comb being hacked and cut, and the Band
bloody; but nothing more could be there found. The News hereof, coming to
Campden, so alarmed the Town, that Men, Women, and Children hasted thence in
Multitudes to search for Mr. Harrison's supposed dead Body, but all in vain.

Mrs. Harrison's Fears for her Husband, being great, were now much increased;
and having sent her Servant Perry (the Evening before) to meet his Master, and
he not returning that Night, it caused a Suspicion that he had robbed and
murdered him; and thereupon the said Perry was, the next Day, brought before a
Justice of Peace; by whom being examined concerning his Master's Absence, and
his own staying out the Night he went to meet him, he gave this Account of
himself: That, his Mistress sending him to meet his Master, between eight and
nine o'Clock in the Evening, he went down Campden- Field, toward
Charringworth, about a Land's Length, where meeting one William Reed of
Campden, he acquainted him with his Errand; and further told him, that, it
growing dark, he was afraid to go forwards, and would therefore return and
fetch his young Master's Horse, and return with him; he did, to Mr. Harrison's
Court-Gate, where they parted, and he staid still: One Pierce coming by, he
went again, with him, about a Bow's-Shot into the Fields, and returned with him
likewise to his Master's Gate, where they also parted: And then, he the said
John Perry says, he went into his Master's Hen-Roost, where he lay about an
Hour, but slept not; and, when the Clock struck twelve, rose, and went toward
Charringworth, 'till (a great Mist arising) he lost his Way, and so lay the
rest of the Night under a Hedge; and at Daybreak, on Friday Morning, went to
Charringworth, where he enquired for his Master of one Edward Plaisterer, who
told him he had been with him the Afternoon before, and received twenty-three
Pounds of him, but staid not long with him: He then went to William Curtis, of
the same Town, who likewise told him, he heard his Master was at his House the
Day before, but, being not at Home, did not see him: After which, he says, he
returned homewards, (it being about five o'Clock in the Morning) when, on the
Way, he met his Master's Son, with whom he went to Ebrington, Paxford, etc. as
has been related.

Reed, Pierce, Plaisterer, and Curtis, being examined, affirmed what Perry had
said concerning them to be true.

Perry being then asked, by the Justice of the Peace, How he, who was afraid to
go to Charringworth at nine o'Clock, became so bold as to go thither at twelve?
answered, That at nine o'Clock it was dark, but at twelve the Moon shone.

Being further asked, Why, returning twice home, after his Mistress had sent
him to meet his Master, and staying till twelve o'Clock, he went not into the
House, to know whether his Master were come home, before he went a third Time,
at that Time of Night, to look after him? answered, That he knew his Master was
not come home, because he saw Light in his Chamber-window, which never used to
be there so late when he was at home.

Yet, notwithstanding this that Perry had said for his staying forth that
Night, it was not thought fit to discharge him till further Enquiry were made
after Mr. Harrison; and accordingly he continued in Custody at Campden,
sometimes in an Inn there, and sometimes in the common Prison, from Saturday
August the 18th, to the Friday following; during which Time he was again
examined at Campden by the aforesaid Justice of the Peace, but confessed
nothing more than before; nor at that Time could any further Discovery be made
what was become of Mr. Harrison: But it has been said, that, during his
Restraint at Campden, he told some (who pressed him to confess what he knew
concerning his Master) that a Tinker had killed him; and to others he said, a
Gentleman's Servant of the Neighborhood had robbed and murdered him; and
others again he told, that he was murdered, and hid in a Bean-rick in Campden,
where Search was (in vain) made for him. At length he gave out, that, were he
again carried before the Justice, he would discover that to him, he would
discover to Nobody else: And thereupon he was ( Friday August the 24th) again
brought before the Justice of Peace, who first examined him, and asking him
whether he would yet confess what was become of his Master, he answered, he was
murdered, but not by him. The Justice of Peace then telling him, that, if he
knew him to be murdered, he knew likewise by whom he was; so he acknowledged he
did; and being urged to confess what he knew concerning it, affirmed that it
was his Mother and his Brother that had murdered his Master. The Justice of
Peace then advised him to consider what he said, telling him, that he feared he
might be guilty of his Master's Death, and that he should not draw more
innocent Blood upon his Head; for what he now charged his Mother and Brother
with, might cost them their Lives; but, he affirming he spoke nothing but the
Truth, and that, if he were immediately to die, he would justify it, the
Justice desired him to declare how and when they did it.

He then told him, that his Mother and his Brother had lain at him, ever since
he came into his Master's Service, to help them to Money, telling him how poor
they were, and it was in his Power to relieve them, by giving them Notice when
his Master went to receive his Lady's Rents, for they would then way-lay and
rob him: And further said, that upon the Thursday Morning his Master went to
Charringworth, going of an Errand into the Town, he met his Brother in the
Street, whom he then told whither his Master was going, and if he waylaid him,
he might have his Money: And further said, that in the Evening his Mistress
sent him to meet his Master, he met his Brother in the Street, before his
Master's Gate, going (as he said) to meet his Master, and so they went together
to the Churchyard, about a Stone's Throw from Mr. Harrison's Gate, where they
parted, he going the Foot-way, cross the Churchyard, and his Brother keeping
the great Road, round the Church; but in the Highway, beyond the Church, met
again, and so went together, the Way leading to Charringworth, till they came
to a Gate about a Bow's Shoot from Campden Church, that goes into a Ground of
the Lady Campden's, called the Conygree (which, to those who have a Key to go
through the Garden, is the next Way from that Place to Mr. Harrison's House);
when they came near unto that Gate, he, the said John Perry, says he told his
Brother, he did believe his Master was just gone into the Conygree, (for it was
then so dark they could not discern any Man so as to know him) but perceiving
one to go into that Ground, and knowing there was no Way (but for those who had
a Key) through the Gardens, concluded it was his Master; and so told his
Brother, if he followed him he might have his Money, and he, in the mean Time,
would walk a Turn in the Fields, which accordingly he did; and then following
his Brother, about the middle of the Conygree found his Master on the Ground,
his Brother upon him, and his Mother standing by; and being asked, whether his
Master were then dead? answered No; for that, after he came to them, his Master
cried, Ah Rogues, will you kill me? At which, he told his Brother, he hoped he
would not kill his Master; who replied, Peace, Peace, you are Fool, and so
strangled him; which having done, he took a Bag of Money out of his Pocket,
and threw it into his Mother's Lap; and then he and his Brother carried his
Master's dead Body into the Garden adjoining to the Conygree, where they
consulted what to do with it; and at length agreed to throw it into the great
Sink, by Wallington's Mill, behind the Garden; but said, his Mother and Brother
bad him go up to the Court (next the House) to hearken whether any one were
stirring, and they would throw the Body into the Sink: And being asked, whether
it were there? he said, he knew not, for that he left it in the Garden; but his
Mother and Brother said they would throw it there; and if it were not there, he
knew not were it was, for that he returned no more to them, but went into the
Court-gate, which goes into the Town, where he met with John Pierce, with whom
he went into the Field, and again returned with him to his Master's Gate; after
which, he went into the Hen-roost, where he lay till twelve o'Clock that Night,
but slept not; and having (when he came from his Mother and Brother) brought
with him his Master's Hat, Band, and Comb, which he laid in the Hen-roost; he
carried the said Hat, Band, and Comb, and threw them (after he had given them
three or four Cuts with his Knife) in the Highway, where they were after found:
And being asked, what he intended by so doing? said, he did it that it might be
believed his Master had been there robbed and murdered; and having thus
disposed of his Hat, Band, and Comb, he went toward Charringworth, etc. as
has been related.

Upon this Confession and Accusation, the Justice of Peace gave Order for the
apprehending of Joan and Richard Perry, the Mother and Brother of John Perry,
and for searching the Sink where Mr. Harrison's Body was said to be thrown;
which was accordingly done, but nothing of him could be there found: The
Fish-pools likewise (in Campden) were drawn and searched, but nothing could be
there found neither: So that some were of Opinion, the Body might be hid in the
Ruins of Campden-house, burnt in the late Wars, and not unfit for such a
Concealment; where was likewise Search made, but all in vain.

Saturday August the 25th, Joan and Richard Perry, together with John Perry,
were brought before the Justice of Peace, who acquainting the said Joan and
Richard with what John had laid to their Charge, they denied all, with many
Imprecations on themselves, if they were in the least guilty of any Thing of
which they were accused: But John on the other Side affirmed (to their Faces)
that he had spoken nothing but the Truth, and that they had murdered his
Master; further telling them, that he could never be quiet for them, since he
came into into his Master's Service, being continually followed by them, to
help them to Money, which they told him he might do, by giveing them Notice
when his Master went to receive his Lady's Rents; and that he meeting his
Brother Richard in Campden Town, the Thursday Morning his Master went to
Charringworth, told him whither he was going, and upon what Errand. Richard
confessed he met his Brother that Morning, and spoke with him, but nothing
passed between them to that Purpose; and both he and his Mother told John, he
was a Villain to accuse them wrongfully, as he had done: But John on the other
Side affirmed, that he had spoken nothing but the Truth, and would justify it
to his Death.

One remarkable Circumstance happened in these Prisoners Return from the
Justice of the Peace's House to Campden, viz. Richard Perry (following a good
Distance behind his Brother John) pulling a Clout out of his Pocket, dropped a
Ball of Inkle, which one of his Guard taking up, he desired him to restore it,
saying it was only his Wife's Hair-lace; but the Party opening of it, and
finding a Slip-knot at the End, went and showed it unto John, who was then a
good Distance before, and so knew nothing of the dropping and taking up of this
Inkle.; but being showed it, and asked whether he knew it, shook his Head and
said, Yea, to his Sorrow; for that was the String his Brother strangled his
Master with. This was sworn upon the Evidence at their Trial.

The Morrow being the Lord's Day, they remained at Campden, where the Minister
of the Place designing to speak to them (if possible to persuade them to
Repentance, and a farther Confession) they were brought to Church; and in their
Way thither, passing by Richard's House, two of his Children meeting him, he
took the lesser in his Arm, leading the other in his Hand, when on a sudden
both their Noses fell a bleeding, which was looked upon as ominous.

Here it will be no impertinent Digression to tell, how the Year before Mr.
Harrison had his House broke open between Eleven and Twelve o'Clock at Noon,
upon Campden Market Day, whilst himself and his whole Family were at the
Lecture; a Ladder being set up to a Window of the second Story, and an Iron Bar
wrenched thence with a Plough-share, which was left in the Room, and sevenscore
Pounds in Money carried away, the Authors of which Robbery could never be found.

After this, and not many Weeks before Mr. Harrison's Absence, his Servant
Perry, one Evening, in Campden Garden, made an hideous Outcry, whereat some
who heard it coming in, met him running, and seemingly frighted, with a
Sheep-pick in his Hand, to whom he told a formal Story, how he had been set
upon by two Men in White, with naked Swords, and how he defended himself with
his Sheep-pick, the Handle whereof was cut in two or three Places; and likewise
a Key in his Pocket, which he said was done with one of their Swords.

These Passages the Justice of Peace having before heard, and calling to Mind,
upon Perry's Confession, asked him first concerning the Robbery, when his
Master lost sevenscore Pounds out of his House, at Noonday, Whether he knew
who did it? Who answered, Yes, it was his Brother: And being further asked,
Whether he were then with him? he answered, No, he was then at Church; but that
he gave him Notice of the Money, and told him in which Room it was, and where
he might have a Ladder that would reach the Window; and that his Brother
afterward told him he had the Money, and had buried it in his Garden; and that
they were at Michaelmas next to have divided it. Whereupon Search was made in
the Garden, but no Money could be there found.

And being further asked concerning that other Passage, of his being assaulted
in the Garden, he confessed it was all a Fiction; and that, having a Design to
rob his Master, he did it, that Rogues (being believed to haunt the Place, when
his Master was robbed) might be thought to have done it.

At the next Assizes, which were held in September following, John, Joan, and
Richard Perry, had two Indictments found against them; one for breaking into
William Harrison's House, and robbing him of 140l. in the Year 1659; the other
for robbing and murdering the said William Harrison, the 16th of August, 1660.
Upon the last Indictment, the then Judge of Assizes, Sir Christopher Turner,
would not try them, because the Body was not found; but they were then tried
upon the other Indictment for Robbery, to which they pleaded Not Guilty; but,
some whispering behind them, they soon after pleaded Guilty, humbly begging the
Benefit of his Majesty's gracious Pardon and Act of Oblivion, which was granted
them.

But, though they pleaded Guilty to this Indictment, being thereunto prompted (as
is probable) by some who were unwilling to lose Time, and trouble the Court
with their Trial, in regard the Act of Oblivion pardoned them; yet they all,
afterward, and at their Deaths, denied that they were guilty of that Robbery,
or that they knew who did it.

Yet at this Assize, as several credible Persons have affirmed, John Perry
still persisted in his Story, That his Mother and Brother had murdered his
Master; and further added, That they had attempted to poison him in the Gaol,
so that he durst neither eat nor drink with them.

At the next Assizes, which were the Spring following, John, Joan, and Richard
Perry, were by the then Judge of Assize, Sir B. Hyde, tried upon the Indictment
of Murder, and pleaded thereunto (severally) Not Guilty; and when John's
Confession before the Justice was proved, Viva Voce, by several Witnesses who
heard the same, he told them, He was then mad, and knew not what he said.

The other two, Richard and Joan Perry, said, That they were wholly innocent of
what they were accused; and That they knew nothing of Mr. Harrison's Death, nor
what was become of him; and Richard said, That his Brother had accused others,
as well as him, to have murdered his Master; which the Judge bidding him prove,
he said, That most of those that had given Evidence against him knew it; but
naming none, not any one spoke to it, and so the Jury found them all three
Guilty.

Some few Days after, being brought to the Place of their Execution, which was
on Broadway-Hill, within Sight of Campden, the Mother (being reputed a Witch,
and to have so bewitched her Sons, they could confess nothing while she lived)
was first executed: After which, Richard being upon the Ladder, professed, as
he had done all along, That he was wholly innocent of the Fact for which he was
then to die; and that he knew nothing of Mr. Harrison's Death, nor what was
become of him; and did, with great Earnestness, beg and beseech his Brother
(for the Satisfaction of the whole World, and his own Conscience) to declare
what he knew concerning him; but he, with a dogged and surly Carriage, told the
People, he was not obliged to confess to them; yet, immediately before his
Death, said, He knew nothing of his Master's Death, nor what was become of him,
but they might hereafter (possibly) hear.

For Sir Thomas Overbury, Knight.
Honored Sir,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I give you this true Account of my being
carried away beyond the Seas, my Continuance there, and Return Home. On a
Thursday, in the Afternoon, in Harvest-time, I went to Charringworth, to demand
Rents due to my Lady Campden, at which Time the Tenants were busy in the
Fields, and late e're they came Home, which occasioned my Stay there 'till the
Close of the Evening. I expected a considerable Sum, but received only 231. and
no more. In my Return Home (in the narrow Passage among Ebrington Furzes) there
met me one Horseman, and said, Art thou there? and I, fearing he would ride
over me, struck his Horse over the Nose; whereupon he struck at me with his
Sword several Blows, and run it into my Side; while I (with my little Cane)
made my Defense as well as I could: At last another came behind me, and run me
into the Thigh, laid hold on the Collar of my Doublet, and drew me to a Hedge,
near that Place; then came in another: They did not take my Money, but mounted
me behind one of them, drew my Arms about his middle, and fastened my Wrists
together with something that had a Spring-lock to it, as I conceived, by
hearing it give a Snap as they put it on; then they threw a great Cloak over
me, and carried me away: In the Night they alighted at a Hay-rick, which stood
near unto a Stone-pit, by a Wall-side, where they took away my Money, about two
Hours before Day (as I heard one of them tell the other he thought it to be
then) they tumbled me into the Stone-pit; they staid (as I thought) about an
Hour at the Hay-rick, when they took Horse again; one of them bad me come out
of the Pit; I answered, they had my Money already; and asked what they would do
with me, whereupon he struck me again, drew me out, and put a great Quantity of
Money in my Pockets, and mounted me again after the same Manner; and on the
Friday, about Sunsetting, they brought me to a lone House upon a Heath, (by a
Thicket of Bushes) where they took me down almost dead, being sorely bruised
with the Carriage of the Money: When the Woman of the House saw that I could
neither stand nor speak, she asked them whether, or no, they had brought a dead
Man? They answered, No, but a Friend that was hurt, and they were carrying him
to a Surgeon. She answered, if they did not make Haste, their Friend would be
dead before they could bring him to one. There they laid me on Cushions, and
suffered none to come into the Room but a little Girl. There we staid all
Night, they giving me some Broth and Strong Waters: In the Morning, very early,
they mounted me as before, and on Saturday Night they brought me to a Place
where were two or three Houses, in one of which I lay all Night on Cushions by
their Bedside: On Sunday Morning they carried me from thence, and about three
or four o'Clock, they brought me to a Place by the Seaside, called Deal, where
they laid me down on the Ground; and one of them staying by me, the other two
walked a little off, to meet a Man, with whom they talked, and, in their
Discourse, I heard them mention seven Pounds; after which they went away
together, and about half an Hour after returned. The Man (whose Name, as I
after heard, was Wrenshaw) said, he feared I would die before he could get me
on Board. Then presently they put me into a Boat, and carried me on Shipboard,
where my Wounds were dressed. I remained in the Ship (as near as I could
reckon) about six Weeks, in which Time I was indifferently recovered of my
Wounds and Weakness. Then the Master of the Ship came and told me, (and the
rest who were in the same Condition) that he discovered three Turkish Ships: We
all offered to fight in the Defense of the Ship and ourselves, but he commanded
us to keep close, and said he would deal with them well enough: A little while
after he called us up, and when we came on the Deck, we saw two Turkish Ships
close by us; into one of which we were put, and placed in a dark Hole, where
how long we continued before we were landed, I know not: When we were landed,
they led us two Days Journey, and put us into a great House, or Prison, where
we remained four Days and a half; and then came to us eight Men to view us, who
seemed to be Officers; they called us and examined us of our Trades and
Callings, which every one answered: One said he was a Surgeon; another, that
he was a Broad-cloth-Weaver, and I (after two or three Demands) said I had some
Skill in Physic: We three were set by, and taken by three of those eight Men
that came to view us: It was my Chance to be chosen by a grave Physician of
eighty-seven Years of Age, who lived near to Smyrna, who had formerly been in
England, and knew Crowland in Lincolnshire, which he preferred before all other
Places in England: He employed me to keep his Still-house, and gave me a Silver
Bowl, double gilt, to drink in; my Business was most in that Place; but but
once he set me to gather Cotton-wool, which I not doing to his Mind, he struck
me down to the Ground, and after drew his Steletto to stab me; but I holding up
my Hands to him, he gave a Stamp, and turned from me; for which I render Thanks
to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who staid his Hand and preserved me. I was
there about a Year and three Quarters, and then my Master fell sick on a
Thursday, and sent for me; and calling me, as he used, by the Name of Boll,
told me he should die, and bad me shift for myself: He died on Saturday
following, and I presently hastened with my Bowl to a Port almost a Day's
Journey distant; the Way to which Place I knew, having been twice there
employed by my Master about the Carriage of his Cotton-wool: When I came
thither, I addressed myself to two Men who came out of a Ship of Hamburgh,
which (as they said) was bound for Portugal, within three or four Days. I
enquired of them for an English Ship; they answered, there was none. I
entreated them to take me into their Ship; they answered, they durst not, for
Fear of being discovered by the Searchers, which might occasion the Forfeiture,
not only of Goods, but also of their Lives: I was very importunate with them,
but could not prevail; they left me to wait on Providence, which at length
brought another out of the same Ship, to whom I made known my Condition,
craving his Assistance for my Transportation; he made me the like Answer as the
former, and was stiff in his Denial, till the Sight of my Bowl put him to a
Pause: He returned to the Ship, and after half an Hour's Space he came back
again, accompanied with another Seaman, and for my Bowl undertook to transport
me; but told me, I must be contented to lie down in the Keel, and endure much
Hardship, which I was content to do, to gain my Liberty; so they took me on
Board, and placed me below in the Vessel in a very uneasy Place, and obscured
me with Boards and other Things, where I lay undiscovered, notwithstanding the
strict Search that was made in the Vessel: My two Chapmen, who had my Bowl,
honestly furnished me with Victuals daily, until we arrived at Lisbon in
Portugal, where (as soon as the Master had left the Ship, and was gone into the
City) they set me on Shore moneyless to shift for myself. I knew not what
Course to take; but, as Providence led me, I went up into the City, and came
into a fair Street; and being weary, I turned my Back to a Wall, and leaned
upon my Staff: Over Against me were four Gentlemen discoursing together; after
a while one of them came to me, and spoke to me in a Language that I understood
not: I told him I was an Englishman, and understood not what he spoke; he
answered me in plain English, that he understood me, and was himself born near
Wisbich in Lincolnshire; then I related to him my sad Condition, and he taking
Compassion on me, took me with him, provided for me Lodging and Diet, and by
his Interest with a Master of a Ship, bound for England, procured my Passage;
and bringing me on Shipboard, he bestowed Wine and Strong Waters on me, and at
his Return gave me eight Stivers, and commended me to the Care of the Master of
the Ship, who landed me safe at Dover, from whence I made Shift to get to
London, where being furnished with Necessaries, I came into the Country.

Thus, honored Sir, I have given you a true Account of my great Sufferings,
and happy Deliverance by the Mercy and Goodness of God, my most gracious Father
in Jesus Christ, my Savior and Redeemer; to whose Name be ascribed all Honor,
Praise, and Glory. I conclude and rest,

Your Worship's, In all dutiful Respect, WILLIAM HARRISON.


SIR,
IT has not been any Forgetfulness in me, you have no sooner heard from me, but
my unhappy Distemper seizing on my right Hand soon after my coming down into
the Country, so that till now I have been wholly deprived of the Use of it. I
have herewith sent you a short Narrative of that no less strange than unhappy
Business, which some Years since happened in my Neighborhood; the Truth of
every Particular whereof I am able to attest, and I think it may very well be
reckoned among the most remarkable Occurrences of this Age: You may dispose of
it as you please, and in whatever else I can serve you, you may freely command
me, as,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Kinsman, and Humble Servant, Burton, Aug. 23,
1676. THO. OVERBURY.


MANY question the Truth of this Account Mr. Harrison gives of himself, and his
Transportation, believing he was never out of England: But there is no Question
of Perry's telling a formal false Story to hang himself, his Mother, and his
Brother: And since this, of which we are assured, is no less incredible than
that of which we doubt, it may induce us to suspend hard Thoughts of Mr.
Harrison, 'till Time, the great Discoverer of Truth, shall bring to Light this
dark and mysterious Business. That Mr. Harrison was absent from his Habitation,
Employment, and Relations, near two Years, is certain; and, if not carried
away, (as he affirms) no probable Reason can be given for his Absence; he
living plentifully and happily in the Service of that honorable Family, to
which he had been then related above fifty Years, with the Reputation of a just
and faithful Servant; and, having all his Days been a Man of sober Life and
Conversation, cannot now reasonably be thought, in his Old Age, so far to have
misbehaved himself, as in such a Manner voluntarily to have forsaken his Wife,
his Children, and his Stewardship, and to leave behind him (as he then did) a
considerable Sum of his Lady's Money in his House. We cannot therefore, in
Reason and Charity, but believe that Mr. Harrison was forcibly carried away;
but by whom, or by whose Procurement, is the Question. Those whom he affirms
did it, he withal affirms never before to have seen; and that he saw not his
Servant Perry, nor his Mother, nor his Brother, the Evening he was carried
away. That he was spirited (as some are said to have been) is no ways probable,
in respect he was an old and infirm Man, and taken from the most inland Part of
the Nation: And if sold, as himself apprehends he was, for seven Pounds, that
would not recompense the Trouble and Charge of his Conveyance to the Sea Side.

Some therefore have had hard Thoughts of his eldest Son, not knowing whom else
to suspect; and believe the Hopes of the Stewardship, which he afterward (by
the Lord Campden's Favor) enjoyed, might induce him to contrive his Father's
Removal; and this they are the more confirmed in from his Misbehaviour in it:
But, on the other Side, it is hard to think the Son should be knowing of his
Father's Transportation; and, consequently, of these unhappy Persons'
Innocence, as to the Murder of him, and yet prosecute them to Death, as he did;
and, when condemned, should be the Occasion of their being conveyed above
twenty Miles, to suffer near Campden, and to procure John Perry to be there
hanged in Chains, where he might daily see him; and himself to stand at the
Foot of the Ladder, when they were all executed, as likewise he did.

These Considerations, as they make it improbable the Son should be privy to
his Father's Transportation, so they render the whole Matter the more dark and
mysterious; which we must therefore leave unto Him who alone knows all
Things, in His due Time, to reveal and bring to Light.

FINIS.

