THE LIVING, Dead Pastor YET SPEAKING.

In two SERMONS, Preached on Bartholomews day, Aug. 24. 1662. in Bewdly
Chapel, by Henry Osland then Minister there.

And now Published by some Friends of TRUTH.

MICAH 7. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me oh mine enemy; when I fall I shall
arise; when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me.

I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause; He will bring my soul to light, and I shall behold
his righteousness.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1663.

Courteous Reader,
THE Reverend Author of these Sermons, is known far and near, for his Labor,
Diligence and Zeal in Preaching the Gospel since he entered on the Ministry;
but could never be persuaded to Print any one of those Sermons, that God made
so successful in the Preaching.

These ensuing we have made bold to Publish; not as the best, but the last
Sermons of our beloved Pastor. The aspersions that were cast upon him for his
frequency in Preaching, made him (as on his deathbed) in these Sermons speak
more of himself, then in all that ever we heard him Preach before.

These Sermons were preached with good approbation of those that heard them,
though of contrary persuasions: if any thing offend, let it be imputed to us
that Published them; not to him that only preached them; and the rather because
we cannot say that this is verbatim that which was Preached.

Reader, if the reading of these Sermons draw so many tears from thy eyes, (and
resolutions from thy heart, to be the Lords, and to serve him) as it did from
those that heard them, thou will not lose thy labor, nor we our Pains.

The loss that we and the Church has had of such burning and shining Lights,
is so great, that it calls loud for our prayers, moans, and tears to the Lord
of the harvest, that he would send back such Laborers into his harvest,
wherein you shall have the joint assistance of your sorrowful friends, for our
dead, yet living Pastor.

I. D. T. F. R. W.


HEBREWS 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought back again from the dead
our Lord Jesus the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever.


THIS Text is Paul's farewell prayer for the Hebrews in the close of a large
Epistle to them: And it may be the subject of my last Sermons, after many years
labors with you, And in it you may observe three things;

1. The person prayed unto, and that is God; who is described from the rich
fullness of his Majesty, to be,

1. Yhe God of peace; this expressed: and

2. The God of all power; which is mplyed, yet amplified by one of the most
mighty works that ever was done; to wit, the raising from the dead the Lord
Jesus; which Jesus is also described from his Relation to the Church, to be the
great Shepherd of the Sheep: And withal how he came to a Flock, and to be a
Shepherd; and that was by the shedding of his blood, which blood is called the
blood of the Everlasting Covenant, which the God of peace made with the sheep,
and was confirmed by the bloodshed of the Shepherd.

2. The things prayed for:

1. That the Hebrews might be perfect in every good work.

2. That they might do the will of God.

3. That God would work the thing that was pleasing in his sight; wherein you
have for whose sake, by whom, or through whom this must be wrought: that is,
Jesus Christ; And 2. In whom that is in you the Hebrews.

Lastly, You have the doxology, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Paul's prayer for them, is, and shall be mine for you. And that you may know
the things prayed for you, I shall open them unto you (if God permit) I do
observe that when Friends part, they usually part with prayer.

Jacob when he parted with Benjamin, he sent him away with a prayer, Genesis 43.
14.

Paul when he parted with the Ephesians, Acts 20. kneeled down and prayed with
them all; And observe, it was to God: not as the Papists do, to Saints and
Angels, but to God through Jesus Christ.

The Doctrines from the words are many:

1. That God is the God of peace, i. e. of all blessings temporal and
spiritual. 2. That Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of the Sheep. 3. That the
great Shepherd of the sheep was dead for a time. 4. That God did bring back
again from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep. 5. That there is an
Everlasting Covenant. 6. That this Covenant is established in the blood of
Christ. 7. Through his bloodshed Christ has purchased a sheepfold, or flock
of sheep. Verse 21. 8. That a Believers duty is to do the will of God. 9. That
the doing of the will of God only is a good work. 10. That the sons of men must
be fitted, adopted, made perfect to do good works. 11. That God must work in
us, and cowork with us, to do the thing that is pleasing in his sight. 12. That
glory is due to Christ for ever and ever.
The Doctrine that I shall first speak to, is this.

DOCTRINE. Yhat Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of the sheep.
He is frequently so styled: Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd. Psalm 80. 1.
Give ear O Shepherd of Israel, Ezekiel. 34. 23. I will set over them one Shepherd,
i. e. one great Shepherd, John 10. 14, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 25. the Shepherd and the
Bishop of our Souls. 1 Pet. 5. 4. Yhe chief Shepherd: and in the Text the great
Shepherd: Which holds forth to us, that Christ has a Fold, that he is to those
as the Shepherd to his sheep: that Christ has more interest in his flock and
people, then any, then all Gospel Ministers have. It is true they are
Shepherds, but he is the great Shepherd. The Prophets, Apostles, Ministers,
Pastors are Shepherds; but they are all under Christ. So that what ever is the
work, or may be the care of a Shepherd over his flock, or a Minister for his
people, the same more eminently is the work and care of Christ over, and for
his people; which principally consists,

1. In gathering together, and keeping his Sheep, Jer. 31. 10. I will gather
him and keep him, as a Shepherd does his flock. Amos 3. 12. As the Shepherd
takes out of the mouth of the Lion the two legs and a piece of the ear: so
will this Shepherd pull his sheep out of the Lions Jaws; they shall not be
devoured, Ezekiel. 34. 22.

2. In nourishing and feeding his sheep, Ezekiel. 34. 10, 11, 12. He will make
them lie down in fat pastures. And though men would famish his sheep, and cut
them short, and separate the Shepherds from them, which feed them with
knowledge, and open to them the pure Gospel of Christ: yet he will keep them
alive in famine, and save their souls from dearth. It is all one with this
great Shepherd to feed with means, or without means; with or without, Gods
people shall be fed and nourished.

3. In giving life to the sheep, John 10. 28. 10. I am come that they may have
life, and that they may have it more abundantly. Inferior Shepherds can give
you but meat and food, but the great Shepherd gives life also.

Use.
LEt then the first Use be of Comfort to the Lords people. I know it is matter
of trouble to many Congregations of faithful believing Christians, that their
Guides are gone, and that they shall hear the voice of their profitable and
beloved Pastors no more. Well, these are driven from you, and a woeful breach
is gone through the land, yet the great Shepherd abides with you. Precious
believers, be not cast down at your losses: Are you scattered in the gloomy day
as the sheep upon the mountains? this Shepherd will gather you again: Are you
pursued with Dogs and Wolves? do they bite you and devour you? this Shepherd
will defend and save you: Do not you know where to go to find pasture? this
Shepherd will find a pasture for you: Do at not any time say that you are as
sheep without a Shepherd: when you put forth the first act of saving faith, you
were assuredly put into Christ's fold, and you shall be kept there by his wisdom
and care, and no one shall ever pull you out of his pasture again.

2. Here is matter of Exhortation: If Christ be the great Shepherd, then follow
Christ, hear his voice, obey and follow him. Beloved brethren, you are like to
hear my voice but in few words more. All you that have given your names to me,
and have ever followed me, I command you to follow the great Shepherd, and
follow none any further then they follow him: his voice is the Gospel that he
inspired, that his Disciples penned, and that he himself sealed with his own
blood: all are strangers that speak not according to this.

DOCTRINE 2. That the great Shepherd was dead for a time.
This is the second Doctrine. To prove the death of Christ by many Scriptures
and Arguments is needless, it being an Article of our faith: yet consult with
these few texts, Zac 13. 7. Awake my sword against my Shepherd. Matthew. 26. 31.
Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead. That Christ was dead but for a
time, is an Article of our faith also: The third day he rose again from the
dead: it was no long time that the grave did hold him.

You may ask me, What became of the sheep when the Shepherd was dead? You may
see in John 17. 11. I am no more in the world, but these are in the world; holy
Father, keep them through thy own name, those whom thou have given me: He
delivers them up to his Father, and God undertakes the keeping of them, and the
sheep were safe continually, till the Lord brought back from the dead the great
Shepherd; Christ left them in safe hands: he had more regard to his sheep then
to himself; he suffered himself to fall into the hands of bloody and malicious
men, but he preserved his sheep: he promised them that he would not leave them
comfortless; but he would come to them.

Use.
BE informed hence, that if the great Shepherd were dead for a time, then it is
no Marvail my Brethren, if the lesser Shepherds are dead for a time time also.
For as Christ was, so must we be in this present world, 1 John 3. This is one
part of our conformity to Christ* to be conformable to him in his death: Phil.
3. 10. The Prophets, says Zechary, do they live always or for ever? Zech. 1.
5. As for your Fathers, where are they? and for the Prophets, do they live for
ever? They must dye as the great Shepherd did.

Now Ministers dye either a Natural or a Civil death: A Natural death, which is
the separation of their souls from their bodies: their Civil death is, when
they are dead in Law; when the Law of the Land where they live, silenceth them,
and makes them as if they were naturally dead. And on this account there are
many dead Shepherds this day in England; this day of the month, this day of
the year, this twenty fourth of August is the Shepherds killing-day; and
whilst England stood, there was never so many faithful Ministers dead whilst
they lived.

There are many thousand Sheep bewailing their dead Shepherds and Pastors this
day: and many a child bewailing his dead Father; Such Fathers which have
begotten them to God, as Elisha did Elijah, My Father, my Father, the Chariots
of England and the ^orsmen thereof! This is the killing d^y, O think it not
strange though it be so! It is said in the eleventh of the Revelations, that
the Witnesses must be slain, and their dead bodies must lie in the streets so
many days. The Witnesses some take for the two Testaments; but they have no
bodies; it is most probable that these are men, and such as shall not be
naturally slain, but Civilly slain: and it is very probable that they set out
the faithful Ministers and Magistrates that have been Christ's Witnesses, and
born a testimony to his truth and ways, and such as stand to their testimony,
and will not deny his name; these must be slain, yet not naturally dead; they
must lie in the streets as dead men, unserviceable, disabled to do their own or
the usual work of Christ, that they have done; they cannot act as Magistrates
and Ministers. These things are now doing: The witnesses are at this time
slain: how long they shall lie we know not. Whether three days and an half or
longer: but as Christ was dead, so must they. And beloved hearers, this is the
day that I shall be in this sense a dead man, a dead Shepherd, a dead Witness,
after twelve years labors and witnessing to the truth of Christ in this place.
It is your duty to remember the great Shepherd who is alive again, who will
seek you and provide for you, and let you want no good thing, but lead you
forth in the green pastures: and two supporting things I would have you to
observe:

1. That the death of the great Shepherd, was no loss but a gain both for
himself and you. First, It did procure him a name above all names; that is, a
power above all powers; Every knee shall bow to him, and to him every tongue
shall confess; so that he shall be admired in all that believe, 2 These. 1. All
the earth shall admire him; he is by his death become the Author of Eternal
salvation: he is an Advocate, King, Priest, Prophet, and shall be Judge at the
last; All power is committed to him in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. And
Secondly, His death was gain to us: we had like sheep gone astray, and had
never returned, had he not been Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. But now his
humiliation was our exaltation, his Cross our Crown, his death our life. In him
we have peace and pardon, mercy here, and glory hereafter: Oh fear not; the
death of your Ministers may be best for you, yea no loss but gain.

2. The death of the great Shepherd was but short; the Lord brought him back
again; which is the next Doctrine.

DOCTRINE 3. That the God of peace by his mighty power did bring back from the
dead, the Lord Jesus the great Shepherd of the sheep.
The Scripture is full of Testimonies of Christ's Resurrection; the women that
wailed at the grave early to see what became of him, had this Answer from the
Angel: He is not here, for he is risen; Come see the place where the Lord lay,
Matthew. 28. 6. Peter assures us of it, with the rest of the Apostles, Acts 5 29,
30. Acts 2. 23, 24. It was not possible that he should be held of the grave.

And also the Scripture is full of Testimonies that Christ was raised up by the
mighty power of God, Acts 3. 15. Acts 4. 10. Rev. 11. Gal. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
These texts hold forth that Christ was raised up by the mighty power of God.

2. Why did God raise again from the dead the Lord Jesus?

1. To make way for his further usefulness for his people. As he by his death,
had purchased, so by his Resurrection he was made capable of interceding for
his flock, and of sending the Holy Ghost, and comforting them with his presence
in heaven: for Christ's glorious presence is not the least of the glory of
heaven: The Lamb is said to be the light thereof.

2. To fulfill all the Types and Prophecies that went before of him. David
prophesied of him, that God would not leave his soul in hell, nor suffer his
holy one to corrupt in the grave. Jonah lay three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, to Typifie the death and resurrection of Christ.

3. To make way for Christ's further Glorification. Had he lain under the power
of death, he could not have possessed the fullness of his deserved glory: the
soul might have been perfectly happy, but whole Christ could not be happy, had
he lain in the grave. And it was meet that as the body was in hunger, thirst,
cold, and did suffer much disgrace in the work of man's redemption, so it should
be glorified with a most transcendent glory.

We shall not meddle with that question now, whether God intended more the
glory of the person of the Mediator, or the salvation of the elect, in his
raising him up. We are sure that Christ's person shall excel in glory, and be
as the brightest starr in the firmament of heaven, John 17. and John 12.

4. To confirm and strengthen our says. For if Christ had not risen, our faith
had been vain, 1 Cor. 15. The Heathens were wont to reproach the Christians for
believing in a dead Christ; but they have a living Christ to trust in: for he
that was dead is alive again, and lives for evermore, yea lives to make
intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

5. That he might be the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. whose
resurrection is an evidence unto his people, that they that now sleep, or shall
fall asleep in him, shall one day be brought back again from death to life, and
feel the power of his Resurrection raising them above death and the grave, to
rest with him in life and glory, 1 These. 4. 14, 15.

Let us infer, That if it please God, and it be agreeable to his will, he that
brought back the great Shepherd of sheep, can bring back the dead Shepherds of
England from their Civil death.

You know beloved, the Spiritual Fathers of many Congregations are dead this
day: and the houses are full of mourning: Some weeping in one corner, some in
another; one child in one chamber, another in another; and I see your eyes are
full also: Oh let this dry up the tears that fall; God can if he will, bring
back from death your Shepherds again! When Martha and Mary were weeping over
their dead brother Lazarus, the Lord raised him up again: He has the same
hands, power, and skill: He kills and he makes alive again.

Object You may say it is unlikely that ever they should live again.

Answ. So thought Martha and Mary when Lazarus had been dead four days and
laid in his grave, John 11. It was unlikely also that ever Jesus Christ should
rise again: the Soldiers seal his sepulcher, roll upon him a mighty stone,
watch him, make him as sure as they could, Mattth. 27. 66. read the place: yet
notwithstanding all, he rose again. The two Witnesses were barbarously used,
read Revelations ch* 11. yet when the spirit of life from God entered into
them, they stood upon their feet, ver. 11.

These things God has done, and this thing he can do: but what God will do, I
am not certain. Yet I conjecture that the Shepherds of England shall be dead
but for a time: God will bring them back again from death; for Christ has told
us, That no man lights a Candle to set it under a bushel, but to give light
to the whole house. And do you think that God who has lighted so many Candles,
that have and may be useful to enlighten his house, will he set them under
bushels? Shall so much precious light be lost for ever? so many precious gifts
bestowed in vain? such gold rust, and so many fruitful trees lie under that
curse, Never more fruit grow on these trees? it cannot be: Shall God bring to
the birth, and not bring forth? It is true indeed God did punish an Egypt that
would not let his people go, with some days of darkness, and so he may and
does punish his people with the loss of light, that will not let their
iniquities go; he sends a famine, not of bread, but of the word of God; and
makes his people travel from sea to sea; but these judgments are not ordinary,
nor long lasting, but revocable upon humiliation and repentance (unless God
intends to remove his Gospel utterly from them) shall he that has commanded to
send Laborers in his vineyard, take so many out at once, and suffer them to be
kept out? especially when they have a desire to work and hate to be idle, and
the vineyard desires them so much, and needs them much more: But Christ is the
great Shepherd of the sheep; he puts down one, and sets up another, whom
he will; and when he will.

However it please the Lord to deal with us for the future, it has pleased the
Rulers of this Land by an Act of Parliament to disable all Ministers of the
Gospel, that after this day shall not conform to certain things; most of which
we have had time sufficient to consider of. And I for my own part have not been
wanting in prayer to my God for his direction in reading the Books written on
both sides, in conversing with the intelligent to find out what my duty is. I
have concluded upon nothing rashly, but with much deliberation: I did not set
the examples of men before me, nor drew any resolution from their practice: And
if more had conformed then do, I should have stood in the same judgment. And I
seriously profess, that one of those that stand off in these parts, weighs more
with me, then ten of the Conformists. The gain or loss of the world has been
nothing in my eye: I have had no thoughts of what I shall eat, what I shall
drink, or what I shall put on; but I have impartially studied the truth, and
the rules by which our ways and actions must be guided. And upon all this I do
most clearly see, that it is not my duty, but it would be sin for me to close
with the things that are proposed and enjoined. To give you my reasons, is not
safe for me, nor profitable for you: The new Liturgy I have not seen, and
therefore will neither approve it, or disallow it; lest I be one of those that
speak evil of that which I understand not. And though perhaps it is so
composed, that I may or can assent to the greatest part of it: yet if I and my
brethren assent not, and consent not unfeignedly to it all, we must speak an
untruth, and against our consciences and knowledge in the face of a
Congregation, where God is present, and his Saints, and where we must speak as
Gods Oracles, and no more then we are confident our Lord and Master Christ
would speak; or else we must refuse it altogether. And indeed let it be how or
what it will, whether it be through my weakness and Ignorance, I could not pass
my unfeigned assent and consent to any book (as I remember) that ever I read of
that bulk, excepr the Bible: and how I should to this, I cannot imagine, since
the old one has so much said against it, and this (as its said) is not much
different from it.

And although I know it is determined by our Rulers that I shall preach the
Gospel no more, and that I must leave the most honorable, sweet and most
desirable work in the world, the solemn public service of God in being his
mouth unto his people; And although I must leave a people whom I dearly love,
and am persuaded of their abundant love to me, whose service in the Lord I love
above all people, and have refused much of the world to dwell with them; Yet I
say with Paul, That God needs not my lie for his glory: He has not put me
upon a necessity of sinning to do him service. But the Apostle has told us,
that that man's damnation slumbereth not that says he must do evil that good
may come thereby.

It is true, many people say that they are but small things that are imposed,
and indifferent things, and trifles, and wonder at us, that so many Ministers
will leave their places, and cease preaching of the Gospel for such things as
these, that any man may do and not scruple; and many good men do yield unto and
keep their places.

To all this I say, God has not taught me to call or account any sin small; it
is in its nature damnable, an offense unto an infinite Majesty, a provocation
of his wrath to break the least of Gods Laws, or slight the smallest of his
commands.

2. I say they are not small to me, and I am confident they will not be small
things to our conforming Brethren in the day of Christ, however they seem now.
They are not small neither to such as are in bitterness and trouble for what
they have done. Oh that you could persuade the afflicted, tormented souls of
wounded men, that they are very small things!

If we that refuse thought them small, would we lose our livelihood in the
world for them? Have we not love to our selves, our Wives and Children? Do we
not desire to live as comfortable as other men? Some say it is through an
humor that we refuse: A strange humor that will make men lose 50. l. or 100.
or 200. l. per annum. How many Ministers are there that have many children, and
little provision made for them (but what is in the promise) that cannot yield,
but lose all! let not the world for shame call these men covetous any more. Nay
do you think that we would cease preaching the Gospel, that delightful work of
God, if they were such small things as some would make them? Has not God given
us ability, assistance and success? Are not ye (many of you) our glory and
Crown (if you stand fast)? Why should we lose and leave the best employment
upon earth? There is nothing but the fear of sin that could ever cause us thus
voluntarily to depart out of the Lords Vineyard.

3. What others do, is no rule to me; I judge not their parts or piety: I have
seen some of their Reasons, and have weighed them in the balance, and find
them too light to bring me up to them. We know what Ministers did in King
Edward the sixths days, and what the same men did in Queen Mary's days, and
what the same men did again in Queen Elizabeth's days. Because Peter denied his
Master under a temptation, and afterward Judaized through dissimulation, the
ways of Apostasy and deceit are not the better, because so great an Apostle
was found in them. But I will not dispute the case; God will be judge himself
shortly. Judge nothing before the time.

As for you my de^rly beloved in the Lord, by the cost and care of my Parents I
was brought up for the Ministry; and by the providence of God I was designed
for you. In this Town I had part of my Education, and therefore here I was the
more willing to employ my Talent. It was not wages that I sought for, or that
drew me hither, but work and labor; not yours, but you. Many thought my time
would not have been so long with you, but I thought if God had spared life, it
should not have been so short. Had I hearkened to Calls for greater preferment,
and accepted them, I had not been here to take my leave now: but I had amongst
you that which pleased me most; and as the hopes of it invited me to sit down
with you, so it provoked me to stay with you, even the success of my Ministry
in the converting and consolating of your souls. But now my Sun is gone down at
noon, and I am divided from you in the best of my days, before the gray hairs
have come upon me. As you were contented to sit under my Ministry in my tender
years, had it pleased the Lord, you should have had the benefit of my riper
studies: But our Times are in Gods hand, and he metes us out the work and
places where we must be. By this sad parting, it too plainly appears, that I
have been an unprofitable Preacher to you, and you unprofitable Hearers: and Oh
that we might join in one solemn day, to humble our selves both for the sins of
my Preaching, and you for the sins of your hearing; but it is now too late. I
will crave leave to speak a word in my behalf: I know not what aspersions may
be cast upon me, as there have been; as to my design amongst you in my work,
God is my record, that I aimed at nothing but the Conversion, Sanctification
and Salvation of your souls: I was glad when I heard of any of you that were
willing to leave your sins, and to set upon duty; and I could no further
delight in you, then I saw you delight in God and his ways. My Ministry was
not with the affected words of man's wisdom: I never del^ghted to speak a word
which I thought the meanest in the Assembly could not understand. I studied not
for a name or a praise, one hour in my Ministry, but how the truth might be
made more fit for you. And blessed be the God of our mercies, our labor has
not been altogether in vain in the Lord. When I came hither, I found many in
Christ, some of which have continued with me on earth a support, encouragement
and comfort to me to this very day: some of them are in glory with Christ.
Others there were that were strangers to Christ at my coming, but since have
subscribed with their hand, and set to their seal to be the Lords. Yet of these
some have continued upright, others have turned aside to sin and folly, broke
their resolutions made again and again, and have not performed their vows; but
they that sat at the table with me have lift up their hand against me, and sit
in the seat of drunkards and scorners; and it is to be feared will be found
persecutors of those that are good, and grow worse and worse, and not only
leave, but lose their first love: and if they persevere, they will be ranked
amongst Christ's enemies at the last. Oh that this might be an awakening word to
them this day, and that God would turn their hearts once again, once again to
his holy ways, and keep them therein to the end, that they may be a comfort to
me, and not a terror to themselves at the dreadful day!

There are another sort that I found wicked, and I fear so must leave them, on
whom the powerful word has had no power, but to this day are sinful,
disobedient, following diverse lusts, and hardening their hearts in the ways of
death, refuse the terms, the means, and the Lord of life.

And now my beloved, having given you an account of my life with you, and my
death approaching, my glass having a few more sands in it, I must proceed to
my dying words, and they shall be in twenty Directions for your practice of
godliness, and twenty requests I shall make to you in the behalf of God and
your everlasting souls. And I beseech you if you will do any thing for my sake,
or will regard the voice, the words, the last words (for all I know) of your
tender and hearty friend, hear and obey my words as follow.

1. Some of you are Magistrates, and act in a larger sphere then others: Behave
your selves beseeming the place you are put in; you sit in the Seat of God, and
you must judge for him. O sit not in the seat of Drunkards and Scorners of God,
his ways, and people; as your trust is greater then others, so will your
account be. If you sin now, you doubly sin, and be sure your sin will find you
out. Some of you are lately put in the places of men of prudence, piety, and
zeal for God, that were not the offspring of Sequestrations, or the issues of
divided parties, but chosen into the company for their real worth, and personal
abilities to serve the Town. And such they are which have given you
demonstrations of Justice running down like water, and righteousness like a
mighty stream. They left you a Town well ordered, where profaneness seeks
corners, and impiety dare not show its head; it has been a shame and reproach
for a drunkard to reel, or a Sabbath-breaker to appear in the light. The mouths
of swearers have been stopped, and the horn of the ungodly durst not lift up it
self. It is not for their impiety that they are laid aside, or unmeetness to
rule, but through their own dissatisfaction; and you that inherit their trust
(through favor) inherit their graces, diligence, and upright lives, that we
may hereafter say of you, as we can of them, You left the place better then you
found it. Love not sin in your selves, for then you will not punish it in
others: put not such in your bosoms, against whom you must draw the Sword: Let
not the enemies of holiness be your friends and favorites, least you spare
Agag when God says kill.

2. Endeavor to settle with you a Preacher after Gods own heart, that will
endeavor to please God and not man. Prayers without Preaching will not save
the ignorant and carnal that are yet amongst you; those that God has joined
let them not be separated: we read more of the Apostles preaching, exhorting,
warning the people then we do of their praying with them. Paul did desire that
utterance might be given him, not to read a few prayers again and again, but
that he might open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel,
Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3, 4. he tells us, that he was not sent to baptize, but
to preach; that is especially, principally to preach the Gospel as his main and
only work; and by the foolishness of preaching God saves such as believe; and
he charge Timothy in a most solemn and dreadful manner before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at his coming, to preach
the word, to be instant in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all long-suffering and doctrine. When I read all the texts that enjoin
preaching, and frequent preaching of the Gospel, and see the practice of Paul,
how at all times he was ready to preach, Romans 1. 15. wherever he came, and how
he strove to preach the Gospel where he could get in and had liberty to do it.
Romans 15. 20 and how he traveled up and down to preach, 2 Cor. 2. 12. and 2
Cor. 10. 14. yea though he had weakness upon him, and infirmities in his flesh,
Gal 4. 13. All these things make me conclude that it is an excellent work, and
the work of a Minister, and not to be neglected where we can have freedom on
honest terms. And I wonder that men can content themselves with a Reader only;
or that any that are called to this work can satisfy conscience with reading a
form only to the people, and slight or preach against preaching. God has
vouchsafed a preaching Ministry to your Fathers and you at least sixty years.
Oh continue it still and take care of your choice! A dead ministry is as good
as none, and an unpreaching Preacher is little better: I mean such as preach
well but live ill, that look toward heaven and row toward hell. Most people
desire a Preacher like themselves; but do you seek for one better then your
selves; you must (some of you) mend a great deal before you make the most holy
and best men, and a great deal more before you can be the best Magistrates, and
therefore for your selves you need a good, yea the best Minister. How much
better was Joas for Jehoiadah? it is but a little time and God will ask you how
you came by your places, and how you used your power; I wish you may give a
good account of both.

3. As you are professors of Christianity, both Magistrates and people, have I
pray you a special care of the honor of God in the Town: God has been
honored many years in this place: godliness was eminently befriended, so that
the Town was eminently hated and greatly beloved for its sake; the godly far
and near loved it; the wicked hated it and often threatened its ruin. Oh let
the honor of God be dear to you all. Let not sensuality, fleshly walking,
revellings, chamberings and wantonness, and all those luxuriances of the carnal
part be found amongst you which are so contrary to the glory of God. Remember
God says, I will honor them that honor me, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and those that set
light by God shall be despised, Mat. 22. Whether ye eat or drink, whatever you
do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. make this your end and aim in all
undertakings. Answer the temptation of Satan to pride, lust, envy, gluttony,
drunkenness, and flesh pleasing, with this question, Is this to the glory of
God? what will be the issue, the end of this action? will it redound to the
glory of Christ? how near would earth come to heaven, and what a glorious
resembrance would there be of the heavenly host of Saints and Angels by the
sons of mortals on the earth, if all they did were done to Gods honor! its
these base ends of pleasure, profit, credit, ease, earthly applause, and honor
that men prosecute on earth, which makes this world so like the suburbs of
hell, and turns so many thousands into hell, Psalm 9. For the wicked shall be
turned into hell and all the people that forget God; that is, to glorify,
honor, exalt God. Oh that you would observe this, and all agree in aiming at,
and intending his honor, and all of you would resolve never wickedly to sin
more in Sabbath breaking, swearing, lest we dishonor God and cast contempt
upon the dreadful Name of the Lord our God.

4. My next direction is, Endeavor to do the will of God and not your own;
live over your prayer, thy will be done; selfishness is a great sin, and self
is nowhere stronger then in the will; when a man will have his own will, God
and his Laws are set in defiance; wilfulness is the broadest, plainest way to
self-destruction. If we should ask, Why is the world so wicked? it is because
they are wilful, and they will have their own wills. And why are so many
thousands damned? Because they followed their own wills, and would have their
own ways, and they could never be reduced to the will of God, nor conquer the
powers of their souls, nor their earthly members to submit unto, and close with
the will of God, but they made Idols of their own wills, and then their own
wills made them a worship and service of the jealous God which he abominated;
and their wills chose them out ways which were cross to Gods ways: And hence
their perdition arose, as you read of the Jews, their wills choosed their own
ways, then was war in the gates; and God tells them, Oh Israel, thy perdition
is of thy self, thou have destroyed thy self; take heed of this wilful
refusing of the will of God, and following of your own.

5. Take heed of embracing damnable errors, the things that God has witnessed
against, especially take heed of Popery; Antichrist must down, and Babylon must
fall, though all the Kings of the earth labor to uphold them; and that the
Pope is the Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, there is more said for it then can be
said against it. Save thy self oh Zion from those that dwell in Babylon;
partake not of their sins, lest you partake of their plagues: the Beast and the
false Prophet must be tormented with endless fire; they have shed so much of
the blood of the Saints that they must have blood to drink, of which they are
worthy. You may safely lay down your lives for refusing Popery; one of the late
Prelates of this land has left it on record, that there is no peace with Rome;
Bishop Hall.

6. Beware of a league with sinners; let your companions be such as fear the
Lord; will you live in the bosom of those that must be in hell for ever, such
as will be enticing and drawing you from that which is good and into sin?
wicked companions have been the bane of many thousand souls; you have choice
enough; there are many precious believers amongst you of all sorts, old and
young, rich and poor; get into their acquaintance and fellowship; as a man is,
so will his society be; if sinners entice, consent not. Joseph himself was
corrupted in dwelling in the house of Pharaoh: it is good breathing in a
wholesome air.

7. Let not any sin reign or quietly dwell in you; you may with less danger to
your everlasting estate lie in a fire, or dwell in an ocean of water, then lie
and abide in sin; and yet no man will stay in a flame one hour, or lie in a
river or pond. Oh but how long will men lie in the bed of sin, and suffer sin
to lie in them! even till death dissolves the frame, and separates the soul
from the flesh, and both body and soul from God. Believe it Sirs, sin is as bad
and as full of evil as ever you heard it to be from the mouth of God or man; do
not lie in it till you feel it; let not feeling make you believers, but fetch
faith from the undoubted Word of God: You wonder why Ministers make such an out
cry against sin, why it is daily their work to cry it down; you wonder why men
are so precise to stand at such a distance from the appearance of evil, the
shadow of sin. Oh what nice men are those with you that cannot swear with you,
and subscribe to the Ceremonies, and drink your healths. Oh Sirs, did you know
the evil of sin, the poison that is in the smallest cup, the venom that is in
the least drop, you would keep at the same or a greater distance from it then
others do. You that would not let a blemish be in your faces, a small disease
in your hearts: Oh why will you let a sin lie in your souls, a sin that will
damn you, and shame you before God and the world, and be a torment to think of
it to all eternity! Oh that I might be so happy with Sampson to kill more of
these Philistines at the day of my death, then in all my life.

8. Let not the world and the things of the world be too precious in your eyes.
Believe that there is not that worth in it, that its pleasures and profits
tempt you to think there is. It is a portion that the Reprobate has, and
sometime that the Elect do want. You have many more precious things to look
after, love and delight in; a precious God, a precious Christ, and a holy
Spirit, precious Truth, and a precious Soul, and Heaven. The world weighs
nothing when it is laid in the balance with any, with either of these Oh lose
not either of these for the gaining of this base world: having food and
raiment, be content wit^ things convenient; if God give you more, use them for
his glory, and your neighbors wealth.

9. Obey your King, not for wrath, but for Conscience sake: If he impose Taxes,
murmur not at them. Tribute says Paul, must be paid to whom Tribute is due,
Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Protection is a greater mercy then we
can value: How much would many people give for such a defense as we have ^et
upon all our glory, and such quiet habitations! our lives and goods are not
prostituted to the envious, but confirmed by Acts of Parliament. Fear God and
the King, and foll^w not them that are given to change.

And so obey all in their places that are under him; in their places I say, and
in the things wherein they have power: The meanest Officer must not be
contemned, nor resisted doing his Office: He that resists, resists an Ordinance
of God, Romans 13. But still know that none have power against God; to set up an
Altar against Gods Altar. The Church has power to declare Christ's Laws already
made, and see them executed, and that the things of Christ be managed decently
and in order, i. e orderly without confusion: in Modes and things
Circumstantial they may determine as to time, place, etc. and we must obey. But
say the Leyden Divines. Syn. Pur. Theol. Disp. 35. Ab omni traditionum
humanarum jugo liberas habemus Conscientias, cum solius Dei sit res ad
Religionem pertinentes praescribere. If any thing be enjoined that you cannot
yield to, submit your selves to suffer patiently what shall be laid upon you.
When you see it is your duty (non obedire) not to act and practice, there you
must not nolle obedire, or superbe repugnare; there is a great deal of
difference between a man's not being able to obey actively, and his being
unwilling to obey, or proudly to resist, or disobey. Let the world know that
you are willing to yield as far as you can. All this I add as to obedience in
matters Ecclesiastical and Spiritual.

10. Conform to things established in the Church as far as you can: this
follows on the last. There are many things good that you may safely own, and
practice, and join in without sin. Do not think, that because I and others do
refuse to subscribe and Conform, that therefore we could not yield to some, or
that we judge all bad: no, we should have gone far, rather then leave our
Ministry, as far as any shoe of the preparation of the Gospel would bear us.
Your Case and ours are not the same; you are not put to declare your unfeigned
Assent and Consent to all and every point in the Liturgy as we are; nor to
subscribe to other things. I can (says Mr. Z. C.) keep communion under that
form of Worship wherein I cannot administer, and heartily say Amen to the
Petitions which are put up in an order so confused, preposterous and
indigested, that it seems to me so much below the gravity of the Church,
whose mouth I must be, the seriousness of the Office whereby I must minister,
the sanctity of the duty I am to perform, and the Jealous and Sacred nature of
the object to whom they are presented, that I dare not stand between God and
his people in the same. In things that are unlawful absolutely the actor and
the looker on; he that prays, and he that holds up his hands, sins: But in
things that are inconvenient, or in an imperfect mode of Worship; where thete
is a liberty of closing or refusing: the Joyners are not guilty of the sin,
especially if there is a secret protest entered against every desiling thing.
In our extempore prayers there were failings, imperfections; we were men; words
might fall that were not so apposite as was desired by us for such a duty: Our
soul abhorred them as they were sinful, so did yours. Will God impute these to
you? surely no. There is a local presence, and a moral absence in one and the
same duty: the body is before the Minister, or Officiating Priests, ready to
hear what God says, or to offer up to God what he says, but if he utter
falsehood, the soul is absent. A Minister preaches a manifest error, the hearer
abhors it, keeps it far enough from the belief of his heart; shall this man be
guilty of it? Surely it is his sin that is the Actor, it lies at his own door:
thou have delivered thy Soul. The Application is easy.

11. Do not be drawn by the examples of men only; nor feared by their threats:
be not Conformists I mean because such and such are: and be not Non-conformists
because others are so. I desire that my bare practice may not lead you:
possibly I may be deceived and mistaken. We all know but in part: as I ever
said, Follow me no further then I follow Christ. And though Christ refused to
wash his hands, though it was a tradition of their forefathers, and a command
of Superiors, yet into their Synagogues Christ went. Search the Scriptures, see
with your own eyes, and let the command and will of God weigh more with you
then the example of men: And be not feared from following God through the fear
of man; He has assured you that no man shall harm you whilst you follow the
thing that is good. The fear of man has been a great snare to the godly. How
uprightly had Peter stood, had it not been for this? Daniel was fearless, and
so would not omit a small thing of opening his window, but prays in the sight
of all, though the King had forbidden it. Christian Courage does excellently
become a Soldier of Christ: get much of the fear of God in your hearts. Timor
timore, ut clavus clavo pellitur; fear drives out and expells fear.

12. Have a great care of Schim: I speak of sinful schism: There is a schism
that is lawful and commanded; and there is a schism unlawful and condemned.
Separate from sin and things in themselves unlawful, and the Scripture will
bear you out, 2 Cor. 6. ult. but to separate from the Worship and Ordinances of
God, because they are not so lively administered, nor perhaps so purely as might
be desired, this is not warrantable. God must be served with one mouth, with
the best we can have and bring before him: A pair of Turtle doves or a little
Goats hair is acceptable where no better can be had. Let nothing make you leave
Gods house, but what himself departs for; the branch will not fall off, if it
has but a little nourishment from the root.

13. Take heed of disaffection to the people you differ from: Many of Christ's
members may be of another mind in, and about these trifles and ineptias
tolerabiles as Calvin calls them. Judge of men according to their diligence and
seriousness in Worship, Knowledge and holy walking. Love them most that love
the Lord and Laws of Christ. Let them Conform or not, hate or disaffect none on
this account, but such as hate the Lord.

14. Learn so to walk as you may avoid scandal and contempt. You must be
careful; else you will offend the weak Brethren, which Paul would not, and
believers must not give offense to the Jew or to the Gentile, or the Church of
God. Offenses will come, but woe to them by whom they come. You may offend the
weak, by extending of your liberty, and walking to the outside of it; and you
may contemn Authority by contracting it, and standing too close to your
Christian Liberty to the sleighting of their Lawful Commands. Christian
Liberty is an excellent thing, but few know how to use it: but some upon its
account wrong their Neighbors, some the Magistrate, but chiefly their own
souls.

15. Fret not at the ungodly when they prosper in the world: It was David's
fault or failing; let it not be yours. Though they oppress you, imprison you,
trample on you, and say all manner of evil against you for the Lords sake;
though they make your lives uncomfortable, vex your souls, walk in profaness,
have their wills, despise the oath of God, Ezekiel. 17. 18. bear indignation
against the holy Covenant, Dan. 11. 30. forsake it and do wickedly against it.
ver. 32. come not in trouble for it, but glory in their shame; be not troubled
at them: Is not eternity long enough for them to suffer in? and is not time
short for them to sin in? Read Job 20. 4, 5, 6. Is not the triumphing of the
wicked short, and the joy of the Hypocrite for a moment? But they shall perish
for ever, though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach to
the clouds. How soon will their glory depart, and sorrow and shame cover them
as a Cloak! Oh Christians, prize the favor of your Lord, and account no man
happy but he whose God is the Lord.

16. Take heed of the wiles of Satan; he lies in wait at all times to deceive.
It is his work to lay snares in times of liberty to draw you into
licentiousness, and to swim down the streams of pleasure; in times of error to
seduce you from the faith: in times of strictness to outdo your duties, and
overdo what God has commanded. You cannot be too watchful against such an
enemy who strikes at the life of your souls. Do not think he does not seek your
ruin, because he does not visibly appear to you, because you do not see him;
he works in the dark, and does most against you, when he is least suspected. Oh
be not ignorant of his devices.

17. Do not easily part with your Comforts. You to whom the Lord has spoken
peace, and assured you of his love in and by the Gospel, let not many cross
providence though he lifts you up, and casts you down, though he takes; and
withholds good things from you, let not these make you lay by your comforts.
You that live in the Church Militant, must expect opposition, combats and
falls; miseries as well as mercies will attend you; frowns as well as smiles,
comings and goings of comforts, enjoyments, assistance. You must see nights as
well as days; Summers and Winters, heats and colds, dews and dryness. When any
of your flowers wither, and your Suns go down sadly, do not let your radical
comforts depart from you: still say with David, Why are thou cast down my soul?
why art thou disquieted within me? Still trust in God, for I shall yet praise
him. Give not way to a dejected spirit, you cannot serve God acceptably; do all
you do in joy fullness and praise, Psa. 100. 1, 2. Never think you do well to be
grieved and so far cast down as to be unserviceable to your God, or unmeet to
praise him in holy joy, delight and love.

18. Nourish faith, hope and love: It is by faith that we must be justified and
saved; by faith we must serve and please the living God; by faith we must
conquer sin, death and the world; you need faith to go through with you in all
conditions; hope is necessary to anchor the soul, and keep it close to God in
storms, delays and dangers: love will raise you and carry you after God and
his ways, and make you bear affliction with delight. If you live in love, the
God of love will be with you: it will sweeten much of the troubles of the
earth, and give you a taste what heaven is. You Will need these graces more then
all the world, when the Bridegroom comes; when others are toyling for the
world, do you labor for faith, hope, and charity: It was a foolish thing in
the worlds eye to behold Noah build an Ark and make such ado about so needless
a thing as they thought; but who was the fool when the flood came? the world or
Noah? You know how our meetings for the increase of faith, hope, and charity
have been derided and decryed by too many amongst you as needless things: but
who will be the fool when the Bridegroom comes! he that has these graces, or
he that has them not! consider but a little and judge.

19. Take heed of the leaven of hypocrisy; those that have read the Book
called The Vain Religion, may know who the hypocrite is; is it not the man that
professes to know, worship and own God for his Father, and yet in heart and
works denies him? and is there any sin more common then hypocrisy? nay are not
you that so often have the hypocrite in your mouths to reproach your neighbors
with, the hypocrites your selves?

Oh the mischief that hypocrisy has done in the Church! how many golden
professors but the other day, are become eminently profane, and have not
forsaken, but hated and openly renounced the things and ways of God and glory
and rejoice in it! Oh these men's Religion was but gilded hypocrisy, and now
the guilt is off, and men are in their own colors, and have on their own
coats; now the hypocritical garment that they put on to deceive, is off. Oh be
sincere Christians or none! let not the portion of the hypocrites be yours at
the last day.

Lastly, Above all make God your chiefest good; let Christ be your way to enjoy
him through the help of the Spirit, Word, and Ordinances; let God be thy Father
and thy all, and he will be ever thine, and with thee for thy good, who cannot
dye. When one told a Christian that his Father was dead, Desine blasphemias
loqui, cease to speak blasphemy, my Father is still alive. When thou have done
all thou can in working out thy salvation, yet let the stress of all lie upon
Jesus Christ: Christ is all and in all: value the world and all things but as
dust, dross, and dung in comparison of this invisible glory, Lord, God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost! live to him, and dye in him, and you shall reign with him
world without end.

I have now twenty more requests, or petitions to you, which will be my dying
words, my last requests, if God bring me not from death again.

1. I beseech you all my Brethren and Fathers, examine your selves thoroughly to
know the state of your souls, and how you stand in the sight of God; think how
near the day of Assise is to us all; you are in an estate good or bad, of life
or death* know so far as is attainable, the case you are in; you are apt to
say, when I have put this question to you, We trust it is well with us. Oh my
Brethren it is not good to trust (in this case) before you try; have you not
heard and read that many a man's faith and hope is vain! Jam. 1. and 2. chap.
Job in many places? try your own case, know your own selves.

2. See in your trial especially that the work of conversion is soundly
wrought; see to that; Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails nothing, but a
new creature. All your shows are but as a tympany; all your duties husks,
shells, are unavailable without the new creature. Beloved my spirit stirs in
me through fear lest you have not past yet through the new birth: the Scripture
has concluded you under wrath and woe, if you are not born again: Oh see to it.

3. My next request is, that you would not sit down short of Jesus Christ; you
may go far and do much, and yet fall short of Jesus Christ; there is a running
in vain, because men sit down before they come to Christ; they sit down with
the Name of Christ, and with a few notions of Christ in their heads, and with
some underling affections to him, and on a few formal performances to him, when
they have not the life of Christ in them, nor the Laws of Christ, nor his
Spirit ruling in their souls, nor his Word dwelling in them richly to teach
them his fear. Oh beloved, this is not your rest; if you sit down without the
nature, life, laws, Spirit, and power of Christ in you, to qu^cken you,
enliven, enlighten, empower, and enable you to live, love, obey, and glorify
Christ, you will sit down short of Jesus Christ, and then it had been better
you had never set a foot toward Christ in his holy ways: never rest till you
are in his arms, and your abode is in his bosom, you in him, and he in you the
hope of glory.

4. My next request is, That you would mind above all things your eternal
condition; you are this day sitting on these seats now, by fires in your
families with your relations anon: but to morrow you may be in eternity, and
know no more what wives and children, sun and moon, earth and sky, clocks and
time, how they pass by you and bring you reports from friends and various
experiences as now they do; do all for eternity. Remember when you are praying
you pray for eternity and eternal mercies and things: think when you feel your
breath departing that eternity is coming upon you.

5. Set up, and if you have begun, keep up serious and servent prayer in your
families, and other family duties of admonition, instruction, and reproof. Let
your houses be little Churches, and that which is denied you in other families,
let it be had at home. I know the society of believers of one heart is
quickening in close and private chambers, and our hearts are much enlarged then
before God. Yet so long as you pray to the same God, for the same Church and
people, especially when your own flesh and blood, your dear wives and children
are at your elbows, Oh how should this quicken you to be earnest for the life
of their souls! Let not the Lord when he looks down from heaven to see if there
be any that seek after him, let not then your families be found prayerless
families, as if you owed no obedience to God, or stood in no need of him, and
lest he clap a curse on your doors, Cursed be this family that calls not upon
the name of the Lord.

6. Have a special care of bringing up your children in the fear of God;
instruct, correct, and give them a good example: you have little of the world
to leave them perhaps; if you leave them in the possession of God and in the
hopes of heaven, you have been good Parents to them; but to leave them nothing
of the world and without God and hope, it is so sad a thing that you will not
give a good account of it before God.

And you that are children, do not break your Parents heart by your sinful
disobedient ways: you have tender Parents who love you, and would not bring
you up for the devil, nor see you everlastingly confounded and burned in the
lake of hell. Oh return to God and his holy ways, remember your Creator; God
longs for you and desires the first ripe fruit; the sooner you come in to him,
the more you shall have of his love, and the more will your godly Parents
delight in you.

7. Never be ashamed of a serious, holy, godly life, though you are reproached,
vilified, and suffer much in the world for it; be not dismayed, but rejoice and
be exceeding glad that you are sufferers for holiness, and not persecutors of
it: but be ashamed of a filthy conversation, of the Image of Satan, of the sins
that make you odious and loathsome in the sight of God. I admire to pass by the
Ale-house-dores to hear so many singing, drinking, roaring, and they are not
ashamed at it; but there are many that are ashamed to worship God in their own
houses, or reprove sin: if this be not to be ashamed of Christ, what is?

8. My next request is, That you would never think that you are holy enough, or
have grace enough, but be still pressing after more. No worldly man thinks he
has riches enough but will be thirsting after more; and shall not the
Christian be as covetous after God? is not one dram of grace more then all the
world, one smile of Gods countenance more then a hundred rivers of oil? why do
you think you have enough of this labor, to grow in grace and to abound in it?

9. If you do not grow so fast in grace as you should, be sure you do not
decline and decay in grace. Whither has Apostasy carried a backsliding soul!
Apostates stop not frequently till they are in hell; there they rest because
they can fall no lower; be sensible of thy declinings, Christian, lest they end
in this, and thy latter end be worse then thy beginning.

10. My next request is, That you would look to your worship; a little thing in
worship is more offensive to God then you think of. Consider Nadab and Abihu;
small faults in worship provoke highly: there we deal immediately with God, and
his glory is immediately concerned; he is therefore nowhere so jealous as in
the things of his worship: take heed of a lasie, frothy, formal, superstitious
worship, lest God cast it as dung in your faces, and say, Who requires these
things at your hands?

11. Have a special regard to the Lords day: let it not be profaned by
unlawful recreations, and games, nor by those that may be lawful at other
times: lose not an hour of it in vain delights or pleasures of the flesh: let
the soul be attending on God even when your hands are about the works of
necessity and mercy: do not think all your work is done when the public
worship is done: say not then, Flesh, take thy pleasure, I have served God
enough; this day it is a day for meditation, rejoicing, thankfulness and
prayer, and to visit the sick, instruct your families, and not to be spent in
the service of the world or flesh.

12. Though this be a day of scattering, yet let brotherly love continue: those
that have walked in fellowship in public and private Ordinances, let not your
love be cold, but continue love and affection, and exhort one another, and pray
one for another, and serve one another in love, and be kind, courteous,
faithful, and zealous for the good of every poor sheep that belongs to this
fold.

13. That you would be more then ordinary diligent in working out your
salvation. What means God will afford you, we cannot tell: if any, make use of
it to work by: if small or none, labor so much the more your selves. How
comfortably might you live and die, if you knew that your calling and your
election were made sure! however diligence will bring comfort, sloathfulness
shame: it is no small comfort now at my suspension, that I worked while I had
time,

14. I request you, that whatever you do, you do all in the strength of Christ,
and not in your own; do nothing for your own glory but for his: keep down self,
and let it not be exalted against the Lord in any thing: take heed of
self-sufficiency, self-aims, self ends; learn not only to trust in Christ, but
to use Christ: here is the wisdom of the Saints to do all in Christ and for
Christ.

15. I beseech you pity and look to your poor; they grow great and numerous,
and many are poor inwardly and outwardly both: let some course be (...)


