To the Right Honorable The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, And to the
Honorable The KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES In this present PARLIAMENT
Assembled; The Humble PETITION of TITUS OATS, D. D.
Most Humbly shows,
THAT your Petitioner in the Year 1678, discovered a horrid Popish Conspiracy
for the Destruction of the late King Charles the Second, his present Majesty,
and the Protestant Religion within these Kingdoms; and proved it so fully, that
several Parliaments, and Courts of Justice, before whom he gave his Testimony,
declared their Belief of it by public Votes, and the Condemnation of several
of the Conspirators. For which Reason and because your Petitioner would not be
terrified by their Threats, nor seduced by their Promises of great Rewards
(with both which Temptations they often assaulted him) to desist in his
Discovery; the Jesuits and Papists pursued him with an implacable Malice, and
endeavored to take away his Fame and Life, by suborning Witnesses to accuse
him of Capital Crimes; but being defeated in that Villainous Attempt, they first
procured King Charles the Second to withdraw that Protection and Subsistence
his Majesty had, at the Request of several Parliaments, allowed to your
Petitioner; and then instigated his Royal Highness the Duke of York to
prosecute your Petitioner in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, for speaking this
notorious Truth, viz. That he the said Duke of York was reconciled to the
Church of Rome; and that It is High Treason to be so reconciled wherein a
Verdict and Judgment for one Hundred Thousand Pounds Damages were obtained
against your Petitioners and your Petitioner was committed to the
King's-Bench-Prison.

After this, the same Popish Party obtained leave from King Charles the second,
to prefer two several Indictments against your Petitioner, for two pretended
Perjuries in his Evidence concerning the said Conspiracy, which they brought on
to Trial in the Reign of King James the second; and your Petitioner was upon
the Evidence of those very Witnesses, who had confronted him in three former
Trials, and were disbelieved; and through the Partial Behavior of the Chief
Justice Jeffreys, in brow-beating his Witnesses; and misleading the Juries,
convicted of the said Pretended Perjuries, and received this inhumane and
unparalled Sentence following, viz. To pay two thousand Marks to the king; To
be divested of his Canonical habit: To be brought into Westminster Hall with a
Paper upon his Head, with this Inscription, Titus Oats convicted upon full
Evidence of two horrid Perjuries: To stand in and upon the Pillow two several
days, for the space of an Hour: To be whipped by the common Hangman, from
Aldgate to Newgate on Wednesday, and to be whipped again on the Friday following
from Newgate to Tiburn: To stand in and upon the Pillow five times in every
Year of his Life; and to remain a Prisoner during his Life. Which Sentence
being intended, as your Petitioner has just reason to believe, to murder him,
was accordingly executed with all the Circumstances of Barbarity; he having
suffered some thousands of Stripes whereby he was put to unspeakable Tortures,
and lay ten Weeks under the Surgeons Hands. Neither did their Cruelty cease
here, but because your Petitioner, by God's Mercy miraculously supporting him,
(and the extraordinary Skill of a Judicious Surgeon) outlived that Bloody
Usage, some of them afterward got into your Petitioner's Chamber whilst he was
weak in his Bed, and attempted to pull off the Plasters applied to cure his
Back, and threatened to destroy him: And that nothing within their Power or
Malice might be wanting to complete your Petitioner's Misery, they procured him
to be loaded with Irons of excessive Weight for a whole Year, without any
Intermission, even when his Legs were swollen with the Gout; and to be shut up in
the Dungeon, or Hole of the Prison, whereby he became impaired in his Limbs,
and contracted Convulsion Fits, and other Distempers, to the great Hazard of
his Life. All which illegal Proceedings, and barbarous Inhumanities, your
Petitioner humbly conceives were not only intended as a Revenge upon him, but
likewise to cast a Reproach upon the Wisdom and Honor of four successive
Parliaments who had given him Credit, and upon the Public Justice of the
Nation. And your Petitioner humbly hopes that since the Papists themselves have
verified and confirmed his Evidence by their late open and avowed Violations of
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, this Honorable House will vindicate the
Proceedings of former Parliaments, and discharge your Petitioner from those
Arbitrary and Scandalous Judgments, and the unjust Imprisonment he lies under.

Your Petitioner does therefore most humbly beseech your Lordships and your
Honors, to take his deplorable Case into your generous and tender
Consideration, and to give him such Redress therein as to your Lordships and
your Honors great Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, shall seem meet:

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
London, Printed by J. D. and are to be sold by Richard Janeway, 1689.


