Ottoman Gallantries: OR THE LIFE. OF THE BASSA OF BUDA.

Done out of French.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. 1687.

To the Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord CAVENDISH.
My Lord,
I Should not know how to Apologize for the Presumption of this Address, if the
Introduction of a Forreigner did not in some wise plead in my Excuse. His
Privileges, as such, in a great manner entituling him to your Lordship' s
Protection, I resolved, at the same time I implored his Admittance, to improve
the Occasion, as well for the discharging some awful sense of Gratitude, for
the Obligations I have to your Illustrious Father, as for the paying your
Lordship that Homage that is owing you from all those that make Profession of
publicly honoring Merit and Virtue. Yes, my Lord, as the World does both
Esteem and Admire the ravishing Excellencies of your Person, the surprising
Progress you have made in all sorts of Noble Exercises, that Blooming Beauty of
your Genius, that Vivacity of Imagination, Solidity of Judgment, those Charms
in Conversation, and that early Harvest of Polite Learning that so soon in your
Spring your Lordship stands possessed of; as if the Muses had a Mind to make
some Amends by shedding all their Gifts upon your Lordship, for the constant
support and azylum they have ever found in your illustrious Family: So it has a
Respect and Veneration for your Goodness, your Condescension, Generosity,
Candor, and Gallantry, that conspicuously declares the Nobility of your
Extraction. Thus I hope this Offering will not only be interpreted, as an
Effect of my Zeal and Admiration, but as a Testimony of the ardent and
respectful Passion, with which I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient, And most Humble Servant, B. Berenclow.

IBRAHIM: BASSA OF BUDA.
I Am not at all surpised to see that Love occasions many Disorders in Private
Families. It ever did so, and ever will: But to find that it is It that has
kindled the War we at present see between the Turks and the Empire, is a matter
very extraordinary, and nevertheless very true. Easy will it be to know this
Truth, from the following History, which I shall faithfully relate from the
Memoirs I have received from one of my Friends at Constantinople, where he has
an Employ under a Foreign Minister, by whom, as he writes me word, he was
informed of what I am going to recount.

Count Teckeley, that famous Head of the Malcontents, that has so long born
Arms against his Master, after having (according to the Destiny of those that
are engaged in such like Enterprises) found that there is nothing more
difficult than to succeed in their Projects, was ready to sink, when he
resolved to send his Secretary, once for all, to the Grand Signior, of whom he
had already received diverse Succors, but too slender to bring his Designs
about. He expressly encharg'd him to tell this Prince, and the Grand Vizier,
that he was obliged to come to an Accommodation with the Emperor, unless they
assisted him better than they had hitherto done. That all his Partisans were
weary of the War they had made for so long a time, and for the most part at
their own cost. That he could no longer hinder them from returning to their own
homes, where they had their Wives and their Children, principally since the
Emperor, gave them hopes of Liberty of Conscience, and the Preservation of
their Privileges; for whose Infraction they had taken up Arms against him.
That they daily persecuted him to accept these Conditions, which he had
endeavored to elude; remonstrating to them, that these were Promises that
would never have effect. That this had stopped them hitherto: but that at
length the want of Power he labored under, would oblige him to close with
those Offers.

This Secretary having laid these Reasons before the Grand Vizier, this
Minister laid 'em before his Master; a Prince that having been brought up amid
the effeminacy of the Serraglio, did by consequence, love Peace much better
than Wan. The Grand Vizier, for his part, desired nothing but Quiet; not but
that he was well experienced in Martial Affairs, but because he loved a
Sultana, whose sight he preferred before all things. By these means the
Secretary had but a scurvy Reception; and the Answer made to him, was, that the
Grand Signior would by no means engage openly in the War; but that he would
give Order for the assisting of his Master, under hand, as had been done since
his Revolt, against the Emperor. For this purpose several Bassa's had Order to
repair to Constantinople, and there, in the Secretaries presence, were they
commanded to keep a secret Correspondence with Teckeley, and to favor him in
all they could, yet without committing any Hostility that could embroil the two
Empires.

The Emperor, who was but ill served in Spies, hearing of Teckeley's
Secretary's arrival at Constantinople, and this meeting of the Bassa's,
imagined all to be for the making of War against him; and an Envoy he had in
that Court; having signified to him, that the thing was so, he sent him Order
to break the Designs that might be espouz'd to his prejudice in that Assembly,
by several advantageous Offers he caused to be made to the Turks, if they would
for Twenty Years prolong a Truce, that was made between the Two Empires, after
the Battle of St. Godard. The Grand Vizier, who expected nothing less than
this, was over joy'd at this juncture, and resolved to procure the advantage of
his Master, that was offered without running any Risque; he began to give out a
Rumor of an approaching Rupture, that so the Emperor augmenting his allarums,
might cause still more advantageous Conditions to be proposed to him.
Nevertheless, for the better insinuating of the War, he sent for the Bassa of
Buda, who had not been summoned to the first Assembly: and as he was the Person
the Port was wont to consult in what concerned Hungary, the Emperor did not
doubt, but that the Turks would proceed to a Rupture with him.

This Bassa was a Man between Eight and Twenty and Thirty Years old, as well
made as a Man could be, brave to the highest Degree; but whose Wit did
nevertheless surpass his Bravery, and Good Mien. He had obtained his
Government, not so much however by his Good Qualities, as by the Love the
Sultana Zelinda had conceived for him: And this Adventure is extraordinary, and
sparkish enough, so as to believe that I shall not weary out my Reader, by
giving him an account of it.

This Bassa was one of those Tribute-Children that are raised upon the
Christians; and his Mother having not been able to dispense her self from this
unhappy Law, which thus obliges to give what one best loves, no sooner saw that
her Child was culled out by those that are appointed to exact it, but that she
made a Mark in his Face, that she might be able to know him again another day.
This Mark was just for all the World, as if he had put on a Patch; and far from
being disguised by 't, it on the contrary, served as a Beauty-spot. For this
must needs be granted, that it does not unbecome a Man. Nevertheless, as it is
a Token of an effeminate Spirit, that has recourse to these sorts of Artifices,
it must be allowed at the same time, that those who pretend thereby to please,
far from succeeding in their Designs, render themselves contemptible to the
Fair Sex, which loves a man that does not thus trifle away his time in playing
the Woman. The Bassa's Mother having taken this Precaution, saw him carried
away with the less regret, as hoping she had not wholly lost him. He was
educated in the place where the Children of Tribute are brought up; and when he
was at an Age of learning something, he distinguished himself from all the
rest: Insomuch, that he was from that time observed to be a Subject worthy of
officiating one time or other, the highest Places of Trust. Nor were they
deceived in the hopes they had conceived of him. The Grand Signior, who had
been informed of his fine Qualities, having one day sent for him into his
Presence, he liked him so very well, that he would needs have him to be his
Page. But this Youth, who was but between Twelve and Thirteen Years old, fell
on his Knees before him, and besought him rather to let him bear Arms;
promising him, that he would one day render him such good Services, that he
should not be sorry he had granted him his Request. It is often a Capital Crime
to oppose the Grand Signior's Will. And as their Yoke is tyrannick, such like
Complements have been often known to cost the Lives of those that made them.
But either that the Grand Signior was in a good Humor that day, or that he was
pleased with the prettiness of this Child, he granted him what he desired.

He was put among the Janissaries; and being one day upon the Guard, at the
Grand Vizier's Tent, this Minister commanded him with his own Mouth, not to
suffer any body to enter, be it who it would. A moment after the Aga, who is
the Captain of the Janissaries, coming thither, our Youth denied him the Door,
which he being scandalized at, he lift up his Hand to strike him; asking him,
if he knew not his Aga. The Answer the young man made him, was, levelling his
Piece at him; and he had been a dead man, if some Officers, that were with the
Aga, had not interposed to save him. The Janizary would not fire, for fear of
killing an Innocent instead of the Offender; but still keeping his Arms in a
Posture, he prevented his being seized, which the Aga would have gladly done,
that he might have punished him upon the Place, for the Affront he imagined he
had received.

The Grand Vizier hearing a noise, sent to see what was the matter; and being
told the occasion of the Disorder, he himself came out of his Tent-door, where
Both demanded Justice of him. The young man was in such a Rage, that the Aga
had dared to lay his Hand upon him; that he could hardly open his Mouth. He
remonstrated to the Vizier, that he had done naught but executed his Orders:
That thus he was as much concerned as himself, to be revenged, since that the
Aga, who had been informed of the Prohibition, did sufficiently show the little
value he had for his General, in thus exceeding his Commands. But all that he
could say, did not hinder the Grand Vizier from making him in the wrong;
telling him, that he ought to have the Judgment to consider, that the
Prohibition did not regard the Aga, who being the Head of his Guard, ought to
have free Ingress and Egress to his Quarters, for the receiving and executing
what should be commanded him. Nevertheless, as the Greenness of his Years
rendered him excusable, besides his having ^o expressly forbidden any one should
enter, as that he might believe, that the Prohibition was for all, he ordered
the Aga to contain his Resentment, and imposed Silence on him. He fancied he
had not so many measures to take on the young man's account, whom he looked
upon as a simple Janizary; and to whom besides he imagined he had been very
kind, in causing him to be pardoned. But it lying upon our Youth's Heart, that
a Hand had been lift up against him, far from being satisfied with his
Sentence, he resolved to right himself, since the Person he expected it from,
had not done it.

Nor was the Aga on his side satisfied; and as he imagined it to be a Blot upon
him, in having been insulted by a Man who was bound to obey him, he would have
proceeded to strange Extremities, if he had not been afraid of displeasing the
Grand Vizier, who would be absolute. Things being in this manner, they both
would quickly have found the means of satisfying themselves, if they had been
of equal Condition: But inequality being the Cause that the Aga slighted the
young man, and that the young man durst not on his side offer to challenge him;
they both watched for the Occasion to give themselves satisfaction; and the Aga
went this way to work: He commanded the Youngster in all perilous occasions,
hoping it would be impossible for him to escape perishing in one or other. But
Fortune taking care of him, not only preserved him from Dangers, but also
extended his Reputation so far, by the fine Actions he performed, that he was
talked of in the most remote Provinces of the Ottoman Empire. Nay, and as
People are wont to magnify all Objects, according as what is related, is more
or less distant, he was said to have achieved such great things, as would have
been capable of defacing those we read in History, if they had been true. In
short, he began to make himself known in Places whither he was never like to
go; and People had every where so good an Opinion of him, that as soon as the
least advantage befell the Ottoman Empire, the better part of it was attributed
to him, tho very often he had not been present in the Encounter.

This did not at all please the Aga, who far from diminishing any thing of his
Resentment, in favor of his Merit, found, on the contrary, the aversion he had
for him to augment. He looked upon him as a Rising Enemy, and as a man that
would stand candidate with him for the first Offices of the State, and the
favor of his Master. Being prejudiced with such like Sentiments, he did all he
could in some wise to lessen his great Actions; and not being able to ravish
him of the Honor that was due to him, he endeavored, at least, to make him
share it with some others; hoping, that the more People partook therein, the
less would be said to his advantage. The young Janizary would not perchance
have taken notice of this, if he had not moreover had a Grudg in his Heart. But
being attentive to all he did, he quickly perceived with what Spirit he was
animated; which still increased the Desire he had of measuring his Sword with
his. The Undertaking was great for a young Soldier. Nevertheless, the Affront
he had done him, being ever present to his Memory, he had no Quiet till he had
satisfied himself in this. This he effected by an occasion that was offered;
and in this manner were matters brought about.

The Troops being in Winter Quarters, the Aga, who had a great Passion for
hunting, sent for English Hounds; and though it is not the Custom of the Turks,
to hunt like us, a certain Renegadoe he had with him, discoursed him so often
of the Pleasure we had in Stag-hunting, that he suffered himself to be led
along with the temptation of seeing whether our way was better than theirs.
Thus being out a hunting, the young man, who being still animated with the same
Design, put himself into a false path, and caused one of his Friends, whom he
had engaged in his Interests, to suggest to him, that if he meant to be at the
fall of the Stag, that was just coming to a Bay, he must scour along that way.
The Aga was overjoyed at this advice, which he took in good part; and being
extraordinarily heated, he thundered along, without considering, whether he was
attended, or not. And indeed, he that had gived him this Council, seeing that
he was fallen into the Trap that was laid for him, instead of following him,
galloped after the Dogs. By these means the young Janizary had the pleasure of
seeing himself alone with his Enemy, whom he cried to as soon as he saw him,
that he had long sought for such an opportunity as that, and that since it
offered it self so happily, he desired him to give him satisfaction for the
Outrage he had received.

This Complement surprised the Aga. However, as he did not want Courage, he
laid hand to his Pistol, rather than to answer him: For you must know he had a
pair at his Saddle Bow, contrary to the custom of those that go a Buck-hunting.
The Young Janizary did the like on his side; and as they were in a place where
they could not make any escape, to avoid a Shot, a Cut, or Thrust, it was
impossible for the Combat to be otherwise than cruel on both sides. However,
the young Janizary meaning to let him see that he had a Courage above all Fear,
bid him fire first; and the Aga not standing to be twice bid, levelled his
Pistol at him, and missed him. The young Janizary called out to him, to take
his other Pistol, and bid him fire again, which the Aga did, but with as little
success as the time before. He was very much at a loss, after having thus
missed in his twice discharing: But he was very much surpised when the
Janizary, instead of availing himself of his advantage to kill him, or at
least, to make him beg his Life, cried out to him, not to be under any fear,
and that out of acknowledgment for the Obligation he had to him for fighting
him, he was willing to renounce the hopes he had of Victory. However, to let
him see, that he said nothing to him, but what he was ready to do, he fired his
two Pistols in the Air, which put the Aga into great admiration. But he had not
the leisure to make any great Reflection upon his generosity: For at the same
time the Janizary attacked him with his Sable in his Hand, and pressed him in
such manner, that he plainly saw, that though he was rid of his Pistols, yet
was he not the less to be feared. He stood upon his Defense, and did all he
could to stop him; but either that the Aga was not so expert as the Janizary,
or that Fortune concerned it self in the matter, the Janizary gave him two
Wounds, one in the Arm, of no great moment, and the other in the Body, which
was much more dangerous.

While this Combat was in Hand, the Aga's People not seeing him, and having
heard firing several times, most of 'em quitted the Chase, and made that
waywards, where they heard the noise. As they ran full gallop, they were not
long a getting to the Place of Battle, and were much startled to find him
wounded. Yet as part of these People belonged to him, and that the rest were
his Friends, they did not enquire into the occasion of the Quarrel. All their
care was only to secure the young Janizary, who being in a narrow way, could
not avoid falling into their Hands. In vain was it that he stood upon his
Defense; the Number overwhelmed his Virtue, insomuch, that he was loaded with
Fetters, as if he had done the most criminal action in the World.

It was a great misfortune to him, in that the Aga did not see how they misused
him; for after having tried, as he had done, his Generosity, in all likelihood,
far from suffering such a thing, he would have hindered it with all his Power.
But the Wound he had received, and whose danger. I have intimated, had reduced
him to such a Weakness, as that he had lost both Speech and Knowledge. However,
it could not be said, that he had been assassinated; for he had been also found
with his Weapons in his Hands: And those that took the young Janizary, did
themselves declare, that he singly had brought him into that Condition. All
this, together with the Youth of Ibrahim (so was the Janizary's Name), and the
great Actions he had done, did occasion his being generally pitied by all
People; especially when reflection was made, that the Aga had put a signal
Affront upon him; and for which any man of Courage, as well as he, would have
taken his Revenge.

The Grand Vizier was the first of this Opinion; but with all this not one
durst interpose in his behalf. If it was on one side considered, that the
Resentment so common to Men of Valor, was the Cause of his Fault: on the
other, they made reflection, that this Action was of mighty Consequence; at
least, without being severely punished. Those that had the best Intentions for
him, did allow, that if he was pardoned, it was the means to heighten the
audaciousness of the Soldiers against their Leaders; a Crime that already
reigned so very much among the Militia, that it was absolutely necessary to
remedy it. Thus Policy prevailing over any other Consideration, the whole
Discourse was of making him serve for an Example to others. The Grand Vizier
himself appeared the most earnest to have him brought to a Trial; but it was
only outwardly: for under hand he caused the Officers of the Council of War to
be sounded, by whom he was to be tried, to know, whether there was no way to
bring him off. If he would have employed his Authority in the Case, it would
have been easy for him; and he needed only to say one word; but he was afraid
of getting the Odium of all the Officers in the Army, that seemed concerned in
the Aga's revenge.

Those whom he had thus given order to sound the Council of War, having brought
him back word, that not one of them would promise him any thing, he be-thought
himself of a very singular Stratagem, which was to send for each of them apart.
Some he told, that the Janizary's Crime being the most enormous that a Soldier
can commit, there was no Torment great enough to expiate it. That thus they
would oblige him, by detaining those that be prone to commit a like Action, in
condemning him to have his Hand cut off, and then to be empal'd alive. His
Directions to others were quite in an other Style. He told them, That indeed
the Janizary deserved a most extraordinary Punishment; that Martial Law
required his Hand to be cut off, and then undergo an infamous Death: However,
as he had performed a thousand fine Actions, and this the only ill one, he
should be obliged to them, if they would in his favor relax of the Rigor of
the Ordinances. That he did not demand of them absolutely to absolve him, but
barely to condemn him to run the Gauntlet; a Sentence that nevertheless would
be sufficiently rigorous, seeing, that hardly any thing worse can be done to a
man, save putting him to death.

The Grand Vizier was too absolute for them to dare to contradict him: every
one of 'em promised what he required, and effectually kept their Words. Thus
when the young Janizary came to a Trial, they were divided in their Opinions,
some requiring he should be empal'd alive, after having had his Hand cut off,
and others, that he should barely run the Gantlet Not a man of them would
desist from his Sentiments; so as that they could not agree upon the Sentence,
for which cause they had it referred to the Grand Vizier. But he, far from
deciding, bid both Parties be steadfast; and in the mean while outwardly to
terminate this Contest, he nominated Six Officers more to assist at the Trial
of the Process.. He for his Reasons gave, that these would not perchance be
divided, as the others; and that thus he should make them agree in their
Sentence. But before he nominated them, he made them all to promise all that he
desired; insomuch, that Three opin'd on one side, and Three on the other; which
rather augmented, than laid asleep the Dissension. And indeed I may call by
this name, what had like to have been the occasion of a great Disorder: for
every one thinking, that the Opinion he declared himself of, was that of the
Grand Vizier, they spared one another so little, that after having been at hard
Words, they appointed a Rendezvouze, to see one another with Sword in Hand. Of
this the Grand Vizier was informed by one of those who thought to make his
Court to him, by letting him see to what a Pitch he was affected to him. He was
not mistaken; for the thing pleased the Vizier extremely: Nevertheless, not
judging it convenient to let it proceed farther, he forbid these Officers from
proceeding to any such Extremity; and under Color of not augmenting the
occasion of their Enmity, he said, That since they could not agree upon the
Point, he would send away the Prisoner to Constantinople, to be tried by the
Grand Signior himself.

All the Officers that would perchance have found fault, had he undertaken to
save him, of his single Authority, far from diving into his Secret, were the
first to approve of his Prudence. Whereupon he sent him under a good and sure
Guard; at least it seemed so: but having waylaid it with Men, that were still
more numerous than the Convoy, they freed him out of its Hands, after having
put those to flight that should have opposed their Attempt. The young Janizary,
who expected to die at Constantinople, as well as in the Camp, was over joy'd
at this Adventure, which he knew not what to attribute to. However, his joy was
but of short continuance: for he had scarcely had time to thank his Deliverers,
when that the Convoy returned, with a Troop of Horse, which it had met on the
way, and whose assistance it had implored. As soon as the others saw this, and
that the Match was not equal, they in their turn fled, and abandoned the poor
Janizary, who being ill-mounted, according to the Custom of all Criminals,
could not follow them, tho his Heart did. The Convoy having thus taken him
again, without much truoble, it did not otherwise mind running after the rest,
who, to cut off all knowledge of their March, threw themselves into a Forest on
their Right Hand, and which contained ten Leagues at least in length.

By this means the young Janizary was conducted to Constantinople; which the
Grand Vizier being informed of, all that he could do, was to write to the
Sultana Zelinda, who was very much his Friend, that she would employ her
Credit, to save him. In the mean while the Aga had had time to recover; and as
he was generous of himself, and that besides, he valued the young Janizary's
Courage, whereof he had had good proof in the Combat he had had with him, he
was no sooner upon his Legs, but that he entreated the Grand Vizier to suffer
him to go to Constantinople, where he promised him to do all that in him lay,
to obtain the young Janizary's Pardon. The Grand Vizier having this very much
at Heart, did not only give him leave, but that he might make the more
expedition, he advised him to embark in a Ship, which he offered him. The Aga
accepted it, and going accordingly on Board, there arose so great a Storm the
very first day, that he was forced to come to an Anchor on the Coasts of the
Venetians. This Re-publick was then in Peace with the Port, so as that the Aga
there met with all sort of good Reception. He staid two or three days, waiting
for good weather; and in that space a Woman came to beg of him, he would give
her leave to embark in his Ship, when that he made Sail. This Woman, who was
already pretty well advanced in years, had a Daughter with her of an excellent
Beauty; and the Aga thinking that she would go the Voyage too, not only granted
her Request, in consideration of the Damsel, but likewise made her a thousand
offers of Service. For he said in himself, that this was a Bit fit for the
Grand Signior's Tooth; and that if he could make himself Master of her, he
should not only obtain the Janizary's Pardon, but that he should also oblige
his Master to do many things for him.

While that he fed himself with these hopes, the Woman told him, that this
Beauteous Person, who was her Daughter, would not go the Voyage; which obliged
him to take other measures. That which he contrived, was to conceal what passed
in his Mind; telling this Lady, on the contrary, That she did well, in not
exposing her Daughter to the danger of the Sea, or to the inconveniency of a
long Voyage. By this means he removed all the suspicions she might have
conceived, joined to this, that he never looked upon this Beautiful Person, but
as if she had been altogether indifferent to him. In the mean while, the day of
his departure being come, and the Nymph returning to conduct her Mother to the
Ship, he made Sail all on the sudden. The Mother having perceived, that they
were moving, begged of him, to cause the Longboat to be put out, to carry her
Daughter back on Shore: But the Aga seeing that there was no longer any danger
for him, in declaring his Mind, he told her plainly, that her Daughter was too
lovely to be the Wife of any private person; that he pretended to present her
to the Grand Signior, as soon as he was arrived at Constantinople; That he
believed she would infinitely please him: But if it proved not so, her Fortune
would be greater than if she staid in her own Country: That he had not been
able to see her, without finding her the most Charming Person breathing; and
that if he did not love her, it was only for that it was not allowable in a
Slave, as he was, to lift up his Eyes upon a Person designed for his Lord: That
he said no more, because he was not suffered to explain his mind further; that
Time would show the rest; and that this depended on the manner of her Reception
by the Grand Signior.

This Complement was extremely vexatious to this Lady, as well as to her
Daughter: And it is impossible to relate all the melting things they said to
persuade him, nor how many Tears they shed, seeing their Entreaties were in
vain. However, that I may not dwell longer upon a Subject so worthy of
Compassion, you must know, that all conspiring to the Aga's Desires, he had so
fair a Wind, that his Ship made more way in Two Hours than he expected to do in
Four. By this means he arrived at Constantinople, before that Ibrahim was
conducted thither; which was of extreme consequence to him, since it was to be
feared, that the Grand Signior might take a Fancy to put him to Death as soon
as he arrived. It was no extraordinary thing, that the Aga should have this
thought, since he was ignorant of what the Grand Vizier had done for him, or
that he had written to the Sultana in his behalf. However, having begged
Audience of the Grand Signior, he presented him the Beautiful Person he had
brought along with him, who was in some manner changed, both by the
inconveniency of the Sea, and out of Grief to be thus led into Captivity. But
though for these Reasons she did not shine so much as usually, she nevertheless
appeared so beauteous and charming to the Grand Signior, that he whispered to
himself a thousand times, that there was nothing in his Serraglio comparable to
her. He made her at the same time several magnificent Presents, and worthy of
so great a Prince. This Beautiful Person appeared insensible to all this, as
well as to the other Tokens of Love given her by the Grand Signior: But as the
Will of those Princes serves for Law in all their Dominions, whatever
repugnance she had to grant him any favor, she could not dispense her self
from doing all that he required.

Enjoyment, which is wont to extinguish all Desires in other Lovers, produced a
quite contrary effect in him. It is impossible to say to what Degree he loved
her; and his fondness appeared so strong, that it gave a jealousy to all the
other Sultana's of the Serraglio. In the mean while, she had not been eight
days thus declared the Favorite, when the Guard that conducted the Janizary
arrived. He that commanded it, having had Audience of the Grand Signior, he
presented him the Grand Vizier's Letter, by which this Principal Officer
informed him of all that passed between the Aga and the Janizary: And to
inspire him with Sentiments of Mercy, he gave him an exact Account of all the
Occasions Ibrahim had been in; and forgot not to give him the Praises that were
due to him. While that the Grand Signior read this Letter, the Aga being then
present, had his Eyes fixed upon him, to mind after what manner he took the
thing; and he only waited till he had done, to throw himself at his Feet, and
demand his Pardon. For after having changed Color several times while that he
read this Letter, an indubitable mark that it sensibly affected him; he toar it
in a thousand pieces; then walking thereupon, as a furious man; This insolent
Wretch shall pay for it, said he; and I am over joy'd that he is brought
hither, that he may gratify my own sight with his Execution. How! continued
he, to attack his Aga! And what Torment can be invented, but what he deserves
to have a thousand times more cruel?

Every one seeing the Grand Signior in so great a Passion, cast down their
Eyes, and trembled. Thus not a Person but looked on Ibrahim as a lost Man, and
all People pitty'd him, without knowing him otherwise than by Fame. In the mean
time Sultana Zelinda, being ignorant of what passed, sent to entreat the Grand
Signior to come and see her upon a matter of moment she had to say to him. The
Grand Signior went thither, and as soon as she saw him, she went about to
prepossess him, in favor of the Janizary, by a Relation of his fine Actions.
But the Grand Signior not being pleased with this Discourse, Yes, Madam, he
answered, he has done all you say: but d' ye also know what he has done more?
D' ye know that he would have killed his Aga? And that to morrow I Will have him
empal'd before my Eyes? Ah! God forbid, Sir, the Sultana answered, and have you
no more care of your own Interests. Consider, Sir, that after those Trials of
Skill this poor Wretch has made, he is born for the Glory of your Empire. If he
had had less Courage, he would more patiently have born the Affront put on him
by the Aga. See with what greatness of Mind he declined revenging himself, when
it was in his Power to do it. He fires his Pistols in the Air, against a Man
that had newly fired two at him. Where is the Man that has done the same thing?
and what Example have you of it in your Empire? Besides, if your Celsitude did
but consider what you might expect from such a Man, who is said not to be
Eighteen Years old as yet; and if you be not resolved to yield to so many
illustrious Marks of Valor, that you would, at least, yield to my Entreaties.
Yes, Sir, continued she, it is I that implore your Mercy for that unfortunate
Man. You know, Sir, I know him not; but I am so affected with his great
Actions, that though he were my Brother, I should not intercede more for him.
At these words she threw her self at his Feet, and embraced his Knees, telling
him, she would never rise, unless he granted her Request.

This Sultana had formerly been his whole Inclination; and it was only since
the Arrival of the New Commer, that her Credit was no longer so great.
Nevertheless, this Prince still expressed a great regard for her; and the World
saw, that notwithstanding his new fondness, he still honored her with his
Visits. Wherefore she did certainly believe that her Request was going to be
granted her. But this Prince imagining, that it was for his Interest to punish
a Crime, that being pardoned, might give an Ill Example to his Soldiery; Ask
me, Madam, said he to her at the same time, all you please, and I will
instantly grant it you; but do not importune me any longer, I beseech you for a
thing which I must, of all necessity, deny you. It sensibly troubles me, loving
you so tenderly as I do; but you would not have my Complaisance proceed so far,
as to injure my Empire. You see the Consequences of it as well as I; but as I
fancy, you did not reflect upon them. Thereupon he represented to her, how
necessary it was to keep up Obedience among the Soldiery; and that if Ibrahim
was not punished, all the others would think it allowable in them to do what he
had done. However, to let her see, that it was not out of Passion that he spoke
in this manner, tho he had manifested some in the beginning of his Discourse,
upon her Consideration, he changed the manner of his Death, and promised her,
that he should only be be-headed.

As this Sultana did not act of her own motion, and that it was only to do the
Grand Vizier a kindness, she would not importune him any longer, contenting her
self with telling him, that her Design was not to torment him; but that if he
could have granted her this Request, without injuring of himself, she should
have been much obliged to him. The Aga, who had said nothing as yet, having
learnt, that this Sultana had been refused, durst not speak, well knowing, that
his Credit did not come near to hers. Thus nothing now was expected, but to see
the Janizary dye, the Day of whose Execution was assigned on the morrow. The
Grand Signior had the Cruelty to have it performed in his Presence, and
appointed the Place under the Windows of the Serraglio, contrary to the usual
Custom. The Hour drawing near, he went to the new-come Sultana's Room, and
there, without being seen, he viewed through a Lettice-Window, the whole
Preparation for the Execution, having the Young Sultana by his side, and her
Mother, whom he had left with her. A Moment after came the Young Janizary; and
the Mother had no sooner cast her Eyes upon him, but that she cried out; Ah,
Sir, what see I here! this is my Son; and if you do not pardon him, I shall die
at your Feet. These Words did extremely surprise the Grand Signior, as well as
the Young Sultana: And the Grand Signior imagining, that some body made her say
this, to save him: Ah! Madam, said he to her, how can this be your Son? and
though it were so, how can you know him again, he that is not above Eighteen
Years old, and has been here above these Fourteen? It is my very Son, Sir, she
answered him in a frightful Condition, and if you have any kindness for the
Sister, save her unhappy Brother. Thereupon she told him succinctly the Mark
she had caused to be made upon him, that she might know him again; and that she
came to seek him out, when that the Aga stole away her Daughter. She added,
That if it was her Son, he must likewise have a Mark on the left Arm, but which
was natural; That it was of the form of a Pigeon: and that if it were not so,
she did not pretend he should pardon a Person that had had the unhappiness to
displease him.

The Young Sultana hearing the Mother talk in this manner, or rather partaking
in her Grief, she threw her self at the Grand Signior's Feet, and told him,
That after having raised her to the Rank she possessed, she did not think he
would give her the Affliction of seeing her Brother pass through the Hands of
an Executioner: That she found her self in a strange Concern, a Token that her
Mother was not mistaken: That she must however tell him the same thing that she
had told him; namely, that they should view his Arm, and then pass on to the
Execution, in case they did not find the designed Mark. The Grand Signior
taking care to lift her up again; Yes, Madam, said he to her, what you demand
is just; and though I am going to make a scurvy Business on it with the Sultana
Zelinda, to whom I have refused Ibrahim' s Life, I am very glad that this has
thus happened, to let you see, that I consider you above all others. At these
words, he gave a Slave order, to go immediately to the Place, where the
Execution was going to be performed, to make the Janizary show his Left Arm;
and if the Mark beforementioned was there, to cry out Pardon at the same time.

The Slave knowing what part the Sultana. Favorite took in this Commission,
did not leave off running till she came to the Place, where it had been too
late, had she staid never so little longer. For indeed in a moment later it had
been done; and, as I may say, the Executioner had already his Arm lift up to
complete his Work. But the coming in of this Slave having stopped him: Look
upon me, said she to the Janizary, who did not mind her: I come from the Grand
Signior, and he commands thee to show me thy Left Arm bare. Does he already
repent, he answered her with a firmness becoming his great Courage, of his
Favor to me? If he will have my Hand to be cut off, it is not the Left I am to
give thee, but the Right, with which I attacked the Aga. At the same time he
presented the Hand to him he then mentioned: But the Slave said to him, The
Grand Signior does not send me hither to do thee more harm than thou have
received. I can say no more to thee, but show thy Obedience to his Commands, by
letting me see the other Arm instead of this. The Janizary seemed very
indifferent at these Words, and showing her what she demanded, she had no
sooner turned up his Shirt Sleeve, but that she perceived the Form of a Pigeon:
She immediately cried out, Pardon, pardon; which amazed all those that were
present, who knew that Sultana Zelinda had been refused the same thing, as was
declared by the Slave. The Officers would not believe her upon her bare word;
but also not daring to proceed, because that she spoke in the name of the Grand
Signior, they sent to know his Pleasure. The Grand Signior confirmed what she
had said: And thus in an Instant the Janizary was seen to pass from a shameful
Punishment, to a Fortune that would have been much greater, but for an unhappy
Accident that befell his Sister: She was become big with Child, miscarried, and
after that had a flux of blood, that hindered the Grand Signior from seeing her
of a long time in private: And as she no longer contributed to his pleasures,
she was quickly in the Rank of forgotten Persons.

After this Sultana Zelinda became more than ever in favor. She had mortally
hated the other, during the little time she had been in Credit; Not content to
see her self triumph over her Rival, through the Disaster that was befallen
her, she did what she could to ruin her entirely in the Grand Signior's
Opinion. She forged several Letters, by which she seemed to be a Damsel that
had had several Intrigues in her own Country: And if the Grand Signior had
been Credulous, she would have been shamefully turned out of the Serraglio. But
this Prince knowing what to attribute this Detraction to, and who besides
looked upon himself as the only Cause: of this Sultana's Calamity, entreated
Zelinda to entertain him no longer with such like Discourses; adding, that on
the contrary, she must live in good Terms with her, if she meant to be
agreeable to him.

This Advice was a kind of Command. Thus Zelinda was to use Violence to her own
Inclination. But what is not a Person capable of, when the Business is to
captivate the Heart of a Great Monarch? Not only she abstained from speaking
ill of her any more, but she likewise saw her with as great Expression of
Kindness as any other: So true is it, That when the Master commands, nothing is
impossible. This pleased the Grand Signior extremely, who was daily more and
more concerned at the unhappy Condition the other Sultana was reduced to. For
you must know, that her flux of Blood did not cease, which was doubtless worthy
of Compassion. Now that he might declare to her his Regret for her Illness, he
granted her all the Favors she demanded of him: nay, and often prevented her
Requests: Insomuch, that Pity, with him, supplied the Place of Love. But
nothing could so much persuade her of the Consideration he had for her, as his
giving her Brother leave to come see her Twice a Week in the Serraglio. A thing
that was never seen in the Ottoman Empire, and which perhaps will never be seen
again. He had already given him the Office of Vice Admiral of the Seas, and had
heaped sundry other Favors upon him; insomuch, that he might be said to be a
fine Example of the Inconstancy of Fortune, who after having used him so
severely, smiled so much upon him at that time, so far, as that he was one of
the Men of that Empire, to whom He promised most, and who, on his side, had the
finest Qualities therewith to correspond. For tho we daily see, that she makes
her Choice fall upon such Persons as are unworthy of it; yet must you agree
with me, that when she sheds her Favors upon Men of Worth and Ability, they
are much more capable of keeping them than others.

This is a Truth that cannot be denied. But without dwelling longer upon this
Subject, you must know, that one day when he went to see his Sister, the
Sultana Zelinda came thither, but in such an extraordinary Magnificency, that
had she had a Design of Dazzling the Grand Signior, she could not have done
more. The Grand Signior had given the sick Sultana order, not to admit any body
into her Lodgings while her Brother was there. Thus when the other came to the
Door, she let her know, that she was extremely grieved that she could not
receive her, and told her the Occasion. But Sultana Zelinda made answer, that
the Prohibition was not for her; and at the worst, it was but letting the Grand
Signior know nothing of the matter. This answer seemed very sparkish to the
sick Sultana; and as she was afraid of incurring the Grand Signior's
Displeasure, she rose up hastily to go mind her her self, that far from the
Prohibition's not being made for her, it would be found to be principally on
her account, if the Grand Signior was brought to explain his Intentions. But
the other making a Jest of all she said to her, replied, That they were Both
too wise ever to say a Word of the matter; and that thus there was no great
danger in not remembering the Prohibition. And going still on, as she said these
Words, she came into the Room, where was the sick Sultana's Brother. Since he
had been in Turkey he had seen a World of fine Women; so as that he had no
reason to be surpised at Beauty: yet could he not sustain the Luster of the
Sultana's, which he gazed upon with Admiration. But this Admiration produced no
Softnesses and Wishings, either that he was withheld by Respect, or, as is more
probable, that Sympathy, which is wont to produce such surprising effects in an
Instant, was not in him. He would have gone away that very moment, which put
Sultana Zelinda in a Maze; and she asked him, whether she frighted him? He made
her such an Answer as Gallantry required of him to such a Question as that:
Then he added, That he knew the Respect he owed her, and that this was the
Cause that he was content to deprive himself of the Pleasure there was in
seeing her. That Is being too wise, and too prudent, she said to him, for a
Person of your Age: And if Respect, as you say, obliges you to be gone, I
dispense you from that, nay, and require you to stay here.

This Discourse seemed very free for such a Person as Zelinda, who had so many
measures to keep: and the sick Sultana, and her Brother, did presently imagine
that she must have powerful Reason to induce her to talk in that manner. If it
had been becoming a Man to have had a little good Opinion of himself, Ibrahim
might have fancied that he had some share therein; and though this had
happened, he would not have been much in the wrong, since in Truth Sultana
Zelinda was fallen in Love with him, upon the Rumor of his Reputation;
Insomuch, that being very willing to inform her self, whether greater
Commendations were not bestowed upon him than were due to him, she had passed
over a great many Considerations to have a sight of him. Thus was she far from
suffering him to be gone; and as People are wont to interpret all things to
their advantage, she took for Tokens of a budding Passion, all the fine things
he could not forbear saying to her, both upon her Beauty and her Wit.

It is a wonder how Ibrahim came away from this Interview, without being in
Love. For it is certain she did all she could to please him, which joined to
her Beauty, which was not Common, ought to produce great effect upon a Man of
Eighteen Years old. She was obliged to go away first, because that word was
brought her, that the Grand Signior was going into her Apartment. Fough, said
she in Ibrahim's Ear, he knows not how troublesome his Visit is to me; and if I
might speak my Mind, I should desire him to put it off till another time.

This was a sufficient hint to a man that was not stupid: But what gave him
still a better Opinion of his good Fortune, is, that she pressed his Hand at
her going away. He thought not fitting to say the least of this to his Sister,
though he was not wont to conceal the least thing from her; but he believed
there to be such as he could not divulge, without being wanting to the
Character of a well-bred Man, and he placed in the Number of these what had
newly happened. Sultana Zelinda being gone, the beauteous sick Sultana asked
him, what he thought of her: All that a man can think, Madam, said he to her,
of a Beautiful Person; and I know only You that ever was capable of disputing
the Prize of Beauty with her. What I now say, he continued, ought not to be
suspected by you: You know, that Flattery is very ill becoming in the Mouth of
a Person that has the Honor of being so nearly related to you: But if what I
now say to you, be not sufficient to persuade you of my sincerity, I mean to
tell you with the same ingenuity, that I have hardly in my Life seen a more
Beautiful Person; and yet I know none that affects me less.

This Converse held them till the time required for him to go to his own House.
The fair, though sick Sultana, was overjoyed to see him have these Sentiments:
For though the Grand Signior had commanded her to live in good Terms with
Sultana Zelinda, she against her had a certain Jealousy, which is natural to
Persons that aspire to one and the same Heart. And indeed, though in the
beginning she had only complied with the Sultana's Desires, out of a kind of
necessity, she came in process of time, to relish the Occasion; not, perchance,
his Person, but at least the Grandeur of his Empire, which he had shared with
her, so long as she had enjoyed a perfect Health. So sweet a time being ever
present to her Memory, she wished nothing so much as that she might recover. It
was rather on this account, than to deliver her from the Indisposition she
labored under, that she sent for Physicians from all parts, to whom she
promised Immense Sums, if they could stop the Malady with which she was
afflicted. Several promised her what they did not perform; but at last, after
having passed through the Hands of all these Quacks, there was one that offered
his Service, telling her, that he would stake his Life against her Recovery.
That nevertheless, as she was weakened both by the Nature of her Distemper, and
the violent Remedies that had been given her, it required time to see the
effects of his Promises, for as much as that she was to be restored by little
and little, before the last Hand could be put to her Recovery.

The Promises this Physician made were quickly divulged throughout the Grand
Signior's Court; and tho they could hardly obtain Credit, after so many others
that had failed the beauteous Sultana; yet Zelinda was allarum'd at them,
principally when she knew, that by the Means of the Remedies he had given her,
she already began to mend daily. She would willingly have doubted of it, so
ungrateful was the thing to her; but it was impossible for her to do it, seeing
her self, by the Change that appeared in her Face, that to think the contrary,
would be to flatter her self. However, you must know, that she still continued
to love her Rival's Brother: and of this she had given him several Tokens, in
some other Visits which she had still paid him when he was there. Nevertheless,
things had not proceeded further as yet, either for want of Convenience, or
that perhaps she was afraid of trusting her Secret with a Person engaged in
Interests so contrary to hers. But in short, she passed over this Consideration
in some days after, and that because she fancied she saw in him a Love that
fell in nothing short of hers. It was in her Sisters Apartment; where she
imagined she perceived it. She was gone to pay her a Visit, after her usual
manner; and discoursing familiarly with him of the return of her Sisters
Health; She will be more beautiful than ever, said she to him; and as the
Sultan will not fail of reviving his Flames, you will quickly share his Favor
with her. I do not envy, added she, her happiness; but I am vexed that the
Benefits you are going to receive, should come to you through any other hands
than mine.

Before I tell his Answer, you must know, that what ever indifference he had
entertained for her in the beginning, he had in the process of time, found so
many Charms in her Conversation, that if he was not Hand over Head in Love with
her, yet it might be said, that she was not indifferent to him; for which
Reason, taking that time to declare the Sentiments to her he had for her, I
love my Sister, said he to her, as a Brother is bound to love her; but in
short, if I was suffered to tell my whole thoughts upon the matter, as there
are others in the World whom I love infinitely more, it would be much more
grateful to me, that they took care of my Fortune. Wherefore, added he, if it
must b^ to their Prejudice, that she recovers her Health, though it would be
more handsome in me to think it than to say it, I am willing you should know,
that I wish she might never be cured. This was a sufficient Explanation of his
Mind, as not to leave any room for doubt, but that she was the Party meant in
his Discourse: So as that she was extremely well satisfied: And as there is
nothing that makes greater progress with a Person, as her knowing that you
correspond with her Passion, Sultana Zelinda was quickly sensible of such
raging Flames, that she was obliged to unbosome them to their Author.

It was not without Confusion however, that she resolved to take this Course.
Such a step is ever a wrecking sort of Business to a Woman: and if ordinary
sort of Damsels make such a do in coming to that pass, what must it not be when
it befalls such a Person as Zelinda? Nevertheless, Love being stronger in her
than all the Reflections she could make, she took Pen and Ink, and wrote these
Words to him:

Sultana Zelinda's Letter to Ibrahim.
IT is time that I lay aside the Scruples that stop me. I love you, since I
must needs tell it you: And indeed, to what purpose would it be for me to
conceal it, since you are sufficiently clear sighted, to see it in every thing
I daily do. Your Sister has no share in the Visits I make her: You ought to
make the Application of them wholly to your self: And she is so very far from
flattering her self with them, as that we both of us make such Figures, as
would hinder us from ever being good Friends, had she not a Brother that is
capable of making me forget all things. Thus let her in peace enjoy the
Sultan's Heart; I shall never be jealous of her, provided, that you assure me,
you will render me the Mistress of Yours.


Ibrahim being daily more and more taken with the Sultana Zelinda, relished
this Letter extremely; and for fear she should repent of having written these
king things, he expressed his own Gallantries in these Terms:

Ibrahim's Answer to Sultana Zelinda.
IF hitherto nothing but my Looks has told you, that I love you, do not think,
Madam, that I was detained by any other Consideration, than the Respect I have
for you. I do not fear enting upon the Sultan's Tenures, and though it were to
cost me my Life, I am prepared for all, rather than remain any longer in
silence. Thus it is not your Letter that quickens me, I had already my Pen in
Hand, to assure you, that you are the most lovely Person in the World, and that
I am the most in love of all men. Give me, I beseech you, Madam, an Assignation
elsewhere than at your Sisters; You will see, that the Expression I have newly
used, is much too weak to express all those soft Wishings you have inspired me
withal.


Though Ibrahim took mighty pleasure in reading the Letter that was sent him,
yet Sultana Zelinda was no less satisfied than he. Thus Both having Sentiments
so conformable to one another, they were careful when they saw one another at
the Sisters Lodgings, to procure a more particular Interview to themselves.
Zelinda bribed an Eunuch, who introduced Ibrahim privately into her Apartment;
and there they interchang'd so many Testimonies of a Reciprocal Love, that
after having spent the Night together, Ibrahim did not talk of going, nor
Sultana Zelinda of sending him away home. In the mean while, it being already
broad-day, and Zelinda obliged to show her self to her Waiting Woman, she shut
Ibrahim up in a Closet; and he, in hopes of having the same Pleasures the
following Night, as he had had the Night past, was not at all sorry to be thus
put into Prison. He there spent Two or Three Hours in be-witching Imaginations,
as is usual with happy Lovers. But, as there is nothing so common as to see
them pass all on the sudden, from the top of Happiness to an Abyss of Miseries,
at the time he was deepest plunged in these agreeable Thoughts, he heard a
great noise, which obliged him to listen. It was the Grand Signior, who was
come to see Sultana Zelinda; and Both being seated pretty near the Closet-Door,
he heard the Sultan speaking these Words to her:

It is a strange thing, Zelinda, to see how you use me at present: I love you
daily more and more, and yet far from corresponding therewith, you can hardly
suffer my Caresses. I see that all you do is only out of Constraint; and as
that is not natural, some body must certainly have robbed me of your heart.
There was a time when I flattered my self, that I had it all entire; and when I
compare so happy a time with the present, I find my self under so profound a
Grief, that I know not how it comes that I do not die of despair. For you I
renounce all the other Sultana's: With whatever Charms Nature has provided
them, my Eyes are not favorable to them. Nevertheless, they all do what they
can to please me. Whereas you now look on me so indifferently, that it seems as
if. I was burdensome to you. What does all this mean, Madam, added he, can I be
so unhappy, as that you should have a disgust for me, or that my Conduct should
make me incur so ill a Treatment? If I am the cause of it, you need only to
speak, and you will see me so complaisant, that though I were your Slave, I
could not obey you better. But what do I say! Am not I effectually so? And do
you see, that I ever in your regard, made use of the Power given me by the Rank
I here hold. All the People you see of both Sexes, make it their main Pride to
sooth my Will; and for my part, I make it mine wholly to sooth yours.

Such a Discourse at any time is troublesome, principally when one knows, that
there is some ground for it: But it is quite another thing, when a natural
Coldness is joined to some Consideration. Thus the Fear Zelinda was in for her
Lover, who was not so well concealed, but that he might be discovered, rendering
her altogether unhinged, or rather, quite nonpluss'd and in utter Confusion,
she made such a sorry Defense, that the Grand Signior, who was not, perhaps, as
yet jealous, begun to harbor some gauling apprehensions. You have reason,
Madam, he said to her, for not vouchsafing me so much as the trouble of
disabusing me: When one hates People, it is very indifferent, whether they
think they are beloved or not. But, what do I say? You would be glad that I
left you, that so you might be at ease. He then held his Peace, to see whether
she would use her utmost endeavour^ to give him better Impressions: but
perceiving that she continued in a kind of Insensibility, which was worse to
him, a thousand times, than the greatest Slights: Ah! this is too much, Madam,
renewed he, and since now I can no longer doubt, but that you despise me, at
least, without being insensible, I must watch so narrowly, to discover who can
be the Cause of it, that nothing may escape my Penetration.

At these words he rose up, all in Anger, and his Design was to be gone that
very Instant; but his Love detaining him in spite of his Intentions: But pray,
Madam, said he to her, have you nothing to say to me? And will ye let me go
away desperate? What can I say to you, Sir? she answered him: And if you be in
an ill Humor, am I the Cause of it? Yes, that is it that makes me now incur all
these Complaints: wherefore, as I hope it will quickly be over, far from
detaining you, I should be glad you would go your ways. She paid him her
Respects after the rate of our Women's Courtesies, as soon as she had finished
this Discourse: And the Grand Signior not being wont to be treated in this
manner: Yes, I will go, Perfidious Woman, he said to her, since you will have
it so. Nay, I Will do more: I am going to use my utmost endeavors to forget
thee; and happy shall I be, if I can accomplish this Design. Nevertheless, I
must tell thee, that I plainly perceive from whence thy insensibility proceeds;
thou love some other; and as thou must have seduced the People that are about
thee, to serve thee in thy new Passion, my Wrath is going to pour upon them,
till such time as that my Love does permit me to revenge my self on thee. At
these Words he sent for all those he had placed about the Sultana, and after
having questioned them each by him, or her self, and threatened cruelly, for
that they had not with sufficient Fidelity looked after the Sultaness; he
caused Two to be strangled in his Presence.

This was matter to startle her mightily, as well as Ibrahim, who heard all
that passed, from the place where he was shut up. However, after having thus
given Instances of his Cruelty, he went his ways in a terrible storm. But
hardly was he got out of her Chamber, but that he returned his Eyes, all
sparkling with Fury: Open me, Madam, said he to her, your Closet, to see if you
have not had the imprudence to keep some Love Letters: And since that I am so
unhappy, that the People I have placed about you, are more trusty to you than
me, let me, at least, omit nothing of what may inform me of the Occasion of my
Misfortune. It is easy to apprehend, that these did strangely surprise the
Sultana as well as Ibrahim, who had heard them distinctly. However, Zelinda,
after having committed the fault of not managing this Prince, as became her, by
some kind Words, hoping that she might repair it: Ah, Sir, said she to him,
Must your Celsitude needs continue to outrage me by the most sensible
suspicions imaginable? Should I write to any Body but my Dear Lord? And should
I receive Letters from any other than himself? In saying these Words, she threw
her Arms about his Neck: but he stepping back, How, Madam, he answered her,
from whence comesit, that you are so sensible to this Reproach, and that you
were not so but a moment ago to so many others that I made you. I said a
thousand things to ye more outraging than this; and not content with Words, I
proceeded to Effects. All this, nevertheless, was not capable, as I may say, of
unlocking your Teeth. You saw, that I exercised my Justice upon Wretches,
without so much as vouchsafing to implore my Mercy. What' s the meaning of your
talking now, when what I do does not come near the hundredth part of what I
did. I must certainly, added he, have caught you by your Feeble; and I beseech
you to open this Closet to me instantly, to see whether I be mistaken or not.
The Sultana seeing that her Artifices had availed her nothing, found her self
still at a greater loss than before. She would still have trifled him off with
some sorry Reasons; but he, instead of being therewith satisfied, thinking, as
it was true, that all her Excuses only departed from the fear she was in of his
discovering her Concerns: Ah! this is delaying too much, Madam, said he to her,
and if you give me not the Key which I demand of you, I shall quickly break
open the Door. The Sultana no longer knowing what to say, made semblance of
feeling for it in her Pocket, and not finding it, making the Grand Signior very
impatient; Pish, once again I tell you, this is trifling too long, said he to
her in a furious Passion; and I see plainly that you fool me. At these Words he
called some Persons of his Train, with a resolution to command them to break
open the Door.

Ibrahim did not attend that Extremity to shift for himself; and having
devin'd, that Matters would come to that pass, he had seasonably opened the
Closet-Window, that looked into the Garden, and leaped out of it. It was full
Thirty Foot high; but he had been so happy, as not to hurt himself. However, in
avoiding one danger, he fell into an other. Nobody comes into this Garden, but
the Grand Signior and the Sultana's; and were he discovered, it was almost the
same thing for him, as if he had been caught in Zelinda's Closet. As he knew
all this very well, he immediately sought out some place where he might hide
himself. This was no difficult matter; for Places there were enough, where a
Man might hope not to be perceived: but wisely making reflection, that it was
not sufficient to avoid all Peoples sight, but that he must likewise contrive
the means to get out of that Garden; which he could not do, but by the Ministry
of the Gardener: He resolved to trust himself to him: For this purpose he cast
his Eyes about, to see if he could spy him; and getting no Body in ken, he
perceived an House, which could belong to none but him: Thither stole he, and
after having listened attentively at the Door, he knocked, and a Woman came and
opened it, and was mightily surpised to see so handsome a Man, and of so good
a Mien. Save my Life, said Ibrahim to her, without Hesitation; and to merit her
giving some attention to his Words, he gave her his Purse, which was top-full
of Gold, with a Diamond of great value. This does Wonders in the Age we live;
and in Turkey, as well as here, there are very serviceable People, when a man
knows how to engage them by such winning, Such attractive Means as these
Ibrahim made use of. And indeed, this Woman, without making any Reflection on
the Danger she exposed her self to, if it should chance to be known, that she
had given him harbor (for in fine, she might well imagine, that he came from
the Serraglio), let him in very amicably; and having discoursed some time
together upon this Adventure, he was obliged to tell her, that Love was the
Cause of his Disorder, yet without specifying to her any further particulars.

The Woman, who was the Gardiner's Wife, hearing him talk in this manner, bid
him fear nothing; and as she had been formerly in Love, she would take a most
peculiar Care of him. That she knew what a Person was capable of in that
Condition; not that she had ever done any thing but in Honor and Honesty, but
because that her Relations being against her marrying the Husband she had, they
were both obliged to have recourse to Artifices, to deceive them. Thereupon she
began to run into Particulars of her Husband's Courtship; and already began to
make known by the Prologue, that the History would be long, when Ibrahim, who
had other things in his Head, desired her to defer that Account till an other
time; giving her to understand, that some body or other might pop in upon them
immediately; and that it was expedient to find out a Place where to hide him.

In all this House there was but one Chamber, and a Garret over it; and Ibrahim
was of Opinion to go into the Garret; but was dissuaded from that by this
Woman, who told him, that a Fellow her Husband employed in his Profession, lay
in it; and that as they knew not how long he should be obliged to stay there,
it was not fit he should be seen by a young giddy-pated Cox-comb, who might
perchance discover the whole Mystery. She was rather of advice, to disguise him
as a Woman; and he jumping with her in Opinion, she gave him a whole Suit of
hers, and hid his in the Bed. While that this Metamorphosis was doing, in came
the Husband, who was mightily surprised to see a strange Face, and whose Sex
his dear Spouse was busy a changing. As she was so so pretty, and that it is
very natural to be jealous, he began to make a terrible Bussle; nay, and
perhaps things would have proceeded further than Noise, had he had the strength
in his Hand. Ibrahim threw himself at his Feet, begging him not to ruin him,
and owning ingenuously to him, that it was for an other Woman than his Wife,
that he was fallen into that Perplexity, it moderated his Jealousy a little.
But nothing put him in so good an Humor as the Purse and the Diamond, which
his Wife showed him. Whereupon Ibrahim added, that what he saw was nothing, and
that he would make him other-guess Presents, in case he was trusty to him.

This Husband seeing some likelihood in what he said to him, did a little calm
his Anger. Nevertheless, having heard, that Gallants paulm'd strange things
upon Husbands, he began to fall again into his jealous fit, telling Ibrahim
very resolutely (for fear all this was Trick), that he would know from what
part of the Serraglio he had thrown himself into the Garden. This was a
question he would never have been prevailed upon to satisfy, nay, though it
had cost him his Life, if in that instant he had not remembered that his steps
were printed in the place where he fell, and that thus it was a Proof against
the Sultana, should the Grand Signior come to take notice of it. For this
reason did he no longer persevere so much in concealing his Secret from him; he
owned all ingenuously to him; and desiring him at the same time to take a
Spade, and under pretense of working in that place, set what he should think
necessary to rights, as well for the Sultana's safety as his own. Though that
at the Name of the Sultana Zelindu, the Gardener knew her to be the Grand
Signior's Favorite, he was a little troubled at the danger he was going to
throw himself into, if the Intrigue ever came to be discovered. Yet as one is
ever more sensible to one's own Concerns, than to those of an other, he was
very glad that he had cured him of those Suspicions that might have remained in
his Head. He went immediately to do what Ibrahim said to him; and he had hardly
struck twice with his Spade, but that the Grand Signior appeared to him out of
the Closet-Window, asking him if he had not seen any body leap down.

As you will doubtless wonder, that after the Orders the Grand Signior had
given to his Men, to break open the Door, so much time had passed before he
came into that Closet, it is fitting that you know, that those he had brought
with him to the Sultana's Apartment, thinking he would stay there some time, as
he was wont to do, had stragled up and down, so as that when he wanted them,
they were not to be found. Nay, some hearing what passed, and thinking to
oblige the Sultana, who they knew had a great ascendant over him, went out of
the way on purpose, so that he had himself been forced to take an Iron Crow;
and as the Door was strong, he had been a long while before he could break it
open. Besides, he had prosecuted his first Thought; That is to say, of
ferretting her Scrutoir, and all the other Places where she might conceal her
Letters: But in short, having found nothing, he made reflection, that the Window
was open, and that perhaps some body, having been hid in this Closet, had made
his Escape that way. He had not dreamt in the least of this before: So true it
is, that when a Person is in Anger, they are but little guilty of reasoning.
This had made him ask the Gardener, whether he had seen any thing; But this Man
having answered him in the Negative, he was vexed that he had made such an
Hurricane for nothing. It is not necessary that I say, how that the Sultana was
in a terrible allarum while all this passed; it is easy to be imagined. She
represented to her self at each instant, how she had seen Two Persons strangled
in her Presence, and only expected the moment that the same thing should befall
her, as well as Ibrahim. But at length, seeing that the thing had turned so
happily for her, she began to be haughty again, and told the Grand Signior,
with an Accent that rather spoke the Mistress than the Slave: That the
Condition of those that are destined to enter the Serraglio, was a strange
thing; That they were exposed to his Caprices, and to his Jealousy: That Two
poor Wretches had newly perished in her sight, whose Blood was every moment in
her Mind: That this was not the first time she had endured his peevish Humor:
That it would be a greater kindness to kill her outright, than thus put her to
a lingering Death: That in a Word, if he was resolved ever to treat her in this
manner, she would rather make away with her self than suffer it.

The Sultan had diminished much of his Anger, when he had found nothing in the
Closet. Thus being wholly disposed to make her satisfaction: I am too blame,
Madam, he said to her, I own it: but in short; blame your self, if I have
pushed my Jealousy so far: A Word said timely would have freed me out of this
Extremity: but you took delight in augmenting my Suspicions; and you,
doubtless, did it to see, whether I really loved you. You know that Jealousy
is inseparable from true Love: You were not content with mine, it ever having
been sedate and calm: But why put ye me to this Test, you that know it is you I
only love, and that for your sake I should be ever capable of quitting my
Empire?

A ready way to a Reconciliation, was certainly such words as these, coming out
of the Mouth of so great a Monarch; and Zelinda being not altogether so fierce
as she might have been, if she had found her self innocent, quickly closed with
it. Things having passed in this manner, the Grand Signior, after having spent
an Hour, or thereabouts, in an Entertainment all full of Affection on his part,
and all full of Artifice on Zelinda's, proposed to her to go walk in the
Garden. As she could not imagine any thing else, but that Ibrahim was there,
she did what she could to divert him from this Resolution. Nevertheless, seeing
that he persisted therein, she durst no longer oppose it, for fear that a
longer Refusal might make him suspect something. They took several Turns in a
covered Alley, and which was very pleasant; but the Sultan being weary of
walking there, he proposed to her the going into a Grove, that was the whole
Ornament of that place. The same Reason that had obliged her to decline coming
down into the Garden, set her a studying to contrive some Excuse to avoid that
Walk. But the Sultan taking her by the Hand, hall'd her along, as a Man may
say, in spite of her teeth. She would not stand upon any further Entreaty; and
having made way into the thickest of the Wood, the Sultana relied upon the
Fancy she had, that if Ibrahim should by Chance be there, he would take care to
hide himself; when she perceived a Man stealing across the Grove, she did not
doubt but that it was he, and imagined her self absolutely ruined. And indeed
this Object, which the Grand Signior had perceived as well as she, having
revived his Jealousy, he quitted her surlily, to run after the Spark. In that
Instant the Sultana fell into a Swoon; and if by chance the Sultan had come
presently back, there needed nothing else to convince him of her Infidelity.
But he was so taken up with his Pursuit, that though his whole Empire were at
stake, it is to be thought it would not have diverted him. The Man being a good
Runner, made him take several Turns before he could overtake him; but, as ill
luck would have it, his Clothes catching upon a Palisado, the Sultan, who
followed him close, got up to him before he could get loose. Thou shall die,
thou Wretch, said he, laying hold of him, but of so cruel a Punishment, as
shall detain all those that might, like thee, be capable of corrupting the
Fidelity of the Sultana's. The Ungrateful Woman shall also perish, added he;
And though I should love her still more tenderly than I do, which nevertheless
is impossible, I should choose much rather to die my self than pardon her.

The Man was so seized with Fear, to see that it was the Sultan himself that
had stopped him, that he was as a Man that had lost all manner of Knowledge.
Wherefore he suffered himself to be led on, without making any resistance, or
so much as saying a Word. Now this was exactly the way to confirm the Sultan in
his Suspicions. It is impossible to express to what a Degree his Anger
proceeded; and after having put this Man again into the Hands of the Eunuchs of
the Serraglio, he commanded them to carry him into Sultana Zelinda's Apartment,
and to attend his Orders there. After this, returning back, and after having
sought out the Person he thought he now hated much more than he had ever loved
her, he found her in the same place where he left her.

She was recovered from the Swoon she fell into; but she was in such a piteous
Condition, that she might be said to be rather dead than alive. The manner of
the Sultan' s accosting her, was the way to put her into a greater Disorder.
Thou had Reason a while ago, said he to her, to tell me, that thou were very
unhappy, in being bound to suffer my peevish Humors. Perfidious, faithless
Woman, I have at length in my hands, he that robs me of thy Heart, and within a
moment I am going to give him his due deserts. I ought already to have
sacrificed him to my Resentment; but I will have thee to know, that if I have
deferred his punishment, it is only that thou may see him expire thy self
under the most cruel Torments. I shall spare thee no more than he: And since
thou have had so much Pleasure in preferring that miserable Wretch to me, thou
must also go and keep him company in the other World.

At these Reproaches the Sultana fell again into a Swoon; and as the Grand
Signior had called his Attendants of Eunuchs about him, he ordered them to
carry her into her Apartment. There they threw her upon her Bed, and while they
did what they could to bring her to her self, he sent for Executioners, that so
as soon as she had opened her Eyes, he might before her Face put to Death the
Man he had taken Prisoner. This Man, who had appeared so dejected at the time
he was laid hold of, had mightily changed his form. He was prepared for all the
Grand Signior should cause to be done to him, with a wonderful Courage:
Wherefore, making a generous Contempt of Death; Why do thou tarry, said he to
him, to bereave me of Life? Know, that it is ungrateful to me, since thou have
robbed me of what could make me love it. I love the Sultana, it is true; And
since it is a Capital Crime in such a Barbarous Nation as thine, I would have
thee know, that this, instead of troubling me, is the most acceptable thing I
could have met withal.

These Words put the Sultan into such an Excess of Rage, that he drew his Sword
to sacrifice him to his Resentment; But at the time he was going to run it
through his Body, coming to make Reflection, that he would come off at too cheap
a rate; No, said he to him, I will not follow the Dictates of my Anger; And I
plainly perceive, that thou only seek to animate me, to escape the Torments
I design for thee. Arm thy self with a true Constancy, instead of the bare
Appearances thou now show us. It is seasonable for thee, I assure thee; and
never had thou more need of it. And indeed, the Executioners were just ready;
and if they began not their Work, the Reason was, that the pitiless Sultan
would needs feed Zelinda's Eyes with this fatal Spectacle. He gave Order for
that purpose, that she should be immediately brought to her self again by the
means of Remedies: And through the impatience he was in of wrecking his
Revenge, he was seen to run where she was, hoping that his Presence would give
more Virtue to the Remedies. But seeing that this had no effect as yet, he
returned again to that Wretch, whom he endeavored to overwhelm with New
Reproaches. For all this staying, he said to him, thou shall suffer
nevertheless; And if I hold these Executioners hands, it is only because I
mean, that the Sultana shall be her self an Eye witness of thy Punishments. Her
Fear for the Torments I am preparing for her her self, had made her fall into a
Swoon, out of which they have much a-do to fetch her; but in short, this will
last but little longer, and you shall quickly see an end on it.

Thou think this is an horrible wrecking of me, cried this Unhappy Prisoner,
in saying all thou say to me: but I would have thee to know, that thou can
not oblige me more. How! is it possible that the Sultana should think of me,
and she, whom I have ever found cruel in the time that I might believe that she
opened her Eyes to the Proposition I made her of marrying her, should be
propitious to me now, that she sees me in thy Hands, and just ready to perish
for having loved her too much. No, I have no longer any regret to die, if thou
tellest me true; And though I had already comforted my self after all the
misfortunes that persecute me since I saw her, it is now quite an other thing,
that I know she yields to so many illustrious Marks that I have given her of my
Affection. Let her only come and speak one word to me with her lovely Mouth,
and after that do the worst thou can. I defy thee to get one bare Word from
me that may express any impatience; nay, and provided, that I have but the
pleasure of seeing her once again, I shall be but over-well contented.

This Excess of Love put the Sultan into a Rage, as thinking this unfortunate
Creature did only say, he was unhappy in his Mistress, to hinder his Resentment
from falling upon him. Wherefore, to let him see, that he did not so easily
credit him; We shall see in a moment, said he to him, whether we are able to
humble this Pride, and whether by the means of Torments we can force the Truth
from thee. Just as he had uttered these words, he had notice brought him, that
the Sultana was come again to her Senses. And as each Moment was a Year to him,
as I may say, so hot was he upon his Revenge: Bring that ungrateful Woman
hither, he answered, and let us see whether we can find out any thing severe
enough to punish her. Provided that thy Vengeance falls only upon me, replied
the unfortunate Prisoner, thou need only to satisfy thy self; and I tell
thee once again, I shall have sufficient Constancy, not to utter one sole
Complaint.

The Grand Signior did not vouchsafe to answer him any longer; and casting his
Eyes that way the Sultana was to come, he had no sooner perceived her, but that
using his Tongue again; Come near, Perfidious Woman, said he to her, and after
having rendered thy self so unworthy of the Honor I did thee, come and view
the Torments that are prepared for those that dare to sully the Bed of the
Ottoman Emperors. This is a Capital Crime among all Nations; but know, that it
is much greater here than elsewhere. Other Princes do not choose Women, but
through reason of State; and very often they do not love them; but for my part,
I love thee tenderly; and it was on that account that I had preferred thee to
an infinite number of others, that would have thought themselves honored by my
Choice, and who would have been favorable to me, though it were only in
gratitude for the Favors I had raised them to.

Ought not this Obligation to produce the like Sentiments in thee? But what do
I say! Were thou not obliged to it by a more engaging Sentiment than this?
Oughtst thou not to answer to my Love, whereof I give thee so many instances;
and for a reward of which, thou would now give me my Death?

As the Sultan had put himself between the Prisoner and Zelinda; to make these
Reproaches, they could not see each other: but stirring from his place, the
Prisoner, who was at watch to see a Person he infinitely loved, and for whose
sake he had exposed himself to so great a danger, had no sooner viewed Zelinda,
but that turning toward the Sultan; With what false hopes have thou fed me, he
said to him, and after having made me expect to see the Person for whose sake I
came so far, must thou insult me to that degree, as to show me an unknown Face,
instead of that which is so well engraven in my Heart, that I can never forget
it?

Hitherto Zelinda had had her Eyes down upon the Ground, as a Person that found
her self Culpable, and who expected every moment to be convicted. For she had
so fixed it in her Head, that it was Ibrahim whom the Grand Signior had taken,
as that she did no longer doubt of it. But finding by the Tone of his Voice,
how far he was mistaken, she interposed with her Tongue, and thereby hindered
the Grand Signior from speaking, tho he had already his Mouth open to answer
the Prisoner. She addressed her Discourse to the Sultan, and did it in these
Terms: It is so dolorous a thing to me, Sir, to see my self so unjustly
accused; and my Grief must have very much deceived me, that I now find my self
alive. And it is in this, that I am obliged to jump in an Accord with what
People say of our Sex; namely, that only Men die of Grief, and that for our
parts, we live by it. God keep me, however, from it, and after the injustice
that you do me, if I am so unhappy, as not to sink under my Griefs, I know the
Means to free me all of the sudden. Yes, I will my self stab my own Bosom,
added she; And all that I require of God, and my Great Prophet, is, that you
may have eternally a Regret for the sad Extremity you have reduced me to.

The Grand Signior, who looked upon both their Discourses as Trifles, as
suspecting them of Intelligence, the better to deceive him: Pish, to others,
Madam, said he to her; for I am not so easily imposed upon. We shall presently
make that Wretch sing an other Tune; and turning at the same time toward the
Executioners; Come, said he to them, Employ your whole industry to force the
Truth out of his Mouth. That is not necessary, this unfortunate Man answered,
with a firm and vigorous Voice; and I shall tell it thee plainly, without thy
needing their Ministry. I do not say this to thee, added he, that I might
escape the Torments that thou art preparing for me: I know, that thou ought
to satisfy thy Cruelty. A Man that despises Death, has nothing to fear; And
all that I can tell thee, is, that if I could be revenged on the Aga of the
Janissaries, and see her once again I love, I should die the most contented of
all Men. But thou deniest me the One, and as for the Other, it was impossible
for me to succeed in the Projects I had laid, it being the Will of Destiny,
that this Aga, whom I had so much Reason to hate, was no longer here when I
arrived. And what has the Aga done to thee, the Sultan reparty'd, that thou
should have that inveteracy against him? He has robbed me of my Mistress,
this Unfortunate Prisoner answered; And what makes me hate him still the more,
is, that he carried her away contrary to Good Faith, and as a Thief as he is. I
will inform thee of that Circumstance, added he, if thou art ignorant of it;
And thou must know, that her Mother going to entreat him to afford her Passage
in his Ship, to come hither, to seek out a Son that had been a long while in
these Parts; and this lovely Virgin having accompanied her on the day of her
departure, to give her her farewell, he weighed Anchor, without being affected
either by her Cries or her Tears. I have been since told, added he, that he has
delivered her into thy Hands; And it was to see her once again, that I passed
over the Garden Walls, where thou found'st me. This is the whole Naked Truth,
since thou will needs know it. But let not this hinder thee from doing all that
thou have resolved on: I did not tell it thee, to avert the Punishments with
which thou have menaced me: And once again, those that do not fear Death, do
little fear all that can usher it in.

Never was Man so out of Countenance as the Sultan, when he heard him talk in
this manner: For in fine, as a body cannot feign so well, but that it may
plainly be seen when a Person lies, it is in like manner easy to know when he
speaks the Truth. However, that he might not pass for too credulous a Man, he
sent for the other Sultana; and when she was come into the Antichamber, he
went out to meet her, and question her. And indeed, he was resolved to be Cully
to neither of them; and though he no longer loved this latter, yet was he not
without Jealousy. The Sultana, little dreaming of what passed, seeing him
coming, advanced with a smiling Countenance, asking him from whence she derived
her great Felicity, to see her self sent for to a place where he was seldom
used to think of her. But the Sultan, far from answering, as she expected, to
so handsome a Complement; Forbear, Madam, said he to her, going about to abuse
me any longer: I am informed of your Demeanor; and if I send for you hither, it
is only to punish you, as you deserve. The Sultana was much surprised at these
Words. Nevertheless, as she knew her self innocent, and that People when so,
are never at such a loss as when they have something upon their Conscience: My
Life, Sir, is in your Hands, she answered him; but I think you too just to go
about to deprive me of it, without first telling me wherein I may have offended
you: For the more I examine my self, the less can I guess it; and unless you
acquaint me with it your self, I shall remain all my Life long without knowing
it.

These Words were said with a certain Air, that made the Sultan know that she
was innocent. Nevertheless, being willing that she should fully justify her
self, How, Madam! he renewed, d' ye call this nothing, to have an other Lover
than me; the appointing him Assignations; And after having been raised to the
glorious Rank of Sultana, to allow a Slave to share the Favors you have
granted me? These Reproaches made a shift to put the Sultana into the utmost
Surprise: Nevertheless, her Innocence continuing to give her assurance: These
Words, Sir, she answered him, would not deserve my puzzling my Head in the
least with them, if they came to me from any other than you: but since they
depart from a Mouth I must ever revere, whatever it may utter against me, I
have nothing to answer, but that you would let me see those that dare to accuse
me, and I will make their Calumny so clearly known to you, that I do not
believe you will any longer suspect me. This is just, Madam, the Sultan replied
to her, he being still more and more persuaded of her Innocence; and making her
pass at the same time into the Chamber where the Man was I have mentioned, she
was in a strange surprise when she had cast her Eyes upon him, and had already
opened her Mouth, to express her Wonder to the Sultan, when this Man prevented
her. There Is she, cried he, she I came so far to seek: And how could I miss of
knowing her again, after having imprinted her so deeply in my Heart? But alas!
I plainly perceive she is no more propitious to me than she was in our own
Country; she already colors for Anger: And since it is impossible for me to
live without loving her, you will do me a kindness, Sultan, in taking away my
Life, which in my Circumstances, cannot be otherwise than ungrateful to me.

Sultana Zelinda, after having been in so terrible a Fright, triumphed in her
mind to see her self delivered from it with so much advantage: And as she was
not without Jealousy of her Rival; From whence comes it, Sir, said she to the
Sultan, that you have used me so very ill, upon a bare suspicion, and that now
that things are made out, your Anger is cooled, to a degree, that you seem to
be insensible? Why are not you curious to know whether you have been told All?
Perchance that this Wretch has still a Design upon me. What has been newly told
you, might be invented on purpose to make your Resentment fall upon an other,
and to skreen me from your Anger. Lovers have Fences that are not always found
out. And when one has the Sovereign Power in Hand, as you have, methinks that
good sense requires, that you should not thus stop at the half way of your
Revenge. Command these Executioners to do their Duty, and you will perhaps
discover things which you did not expect.

Now if we make Reflection on this Discourse, nothing is more malicious. It was
an insinuating into the Grand Signior, that the other Sultana was capable of
deceiving him; and that in a word, this Unfortunate Wretch corresponded with
her. But as he was naturally far from the Cruelty of his Predecessors, I mean,
when he had no Cause: for upon the least suspicion he was like them; and what I
have above related is a good Testimony of it, as I say, he fancied he was
sufficiently informed, as not to need to go any further: Cease, Madam, said he,
a Discourse that is so very much out of season. If I have given but a moment
ago Marks of my Cruelty, you ought only to impute it to my Jealousy; and far
from being in Anger at it, you ought to have been vexed if I had not done it,
since Tranquillity, upon these sort of Matters, is a sign of but little Love.

These Words were as many Stabs with a Poniard, into the other Sultana's
Bosom, who saw, that notwithstanding she recovered her Health, the Grand
Signior made so little account of her, that even in her own Presence, he did
not stick to say soft and kind things to her Rival. However, as Peoples
Demeanor toward these Emperors, is not the same with that to other Persons,
she was obliged to swallow her Affliction, which Sultana Zelinda having
perceived, she did further all she could to insult her. At the last, being no
longer able to bear with so many Instances of Contempt from her, and from the
Grand Signior too; I join my Entreaties, Sir, said she to the Sultan, to those
of Zelinda, that you would revenge the injury that this Wretch has done to you,
and of which I am as culpable as he, since I must needs tell you the Truth.
Yes, if h^ had not known he was beloved, he would not have exposed himself to
so great a danger. I can no longer live without him, just as he was no longer
able to live without me; and the greatest kindness that you can do to us Both,
is to bereave us of our Lives, that are equally burdensome to us Both, since
that the Aga has so cruelly parted us.

If the Grand Signior was surprised to hear this Discourse, he she pointed at
in it was still more than he. Ah! Madam, said he to her, would to God, that
what you have now said was true, and that I, on that condition, were destined
to endure all that these infamous Executioners can invent most cruel against
me. But to my Misfortune, you are but too cruel to me; and what still plunges
me into a farther despondency, is that I plainly perceive with what Spirit you
are animated at present. You lay to Heart, that the Grand Signior says kind
things to an other in your presence; And the injustice of my Fate, is such, as
that not content with all the Cruelti's that you have exercised against me, to
complete my misery, you add what I could never have expected.

I thought that Virtue was the Rule of All your Actions; but by what I
perceive, you are very much a stranger to it. And this is what ought to comfort
me in my present Condition, since that the loss I have is not so great as I
imagined it. Yes, Sultan, it is out of Jealousy that she goes about to provoke
you; And if I had still sufficient Power to acquaint thee what her Cruelty was
to me, thou would see, that I am so far from ever having been happy, that my
Misfortune has even surpassed that of the most Unfortunate.

As much as Sultana Zelinda had been transported with joy at her Rival's
Discourse, whom she thought ruined in the Grand Signior's Good Opinion, after
her Confession; so much was that of this Man unpleasant to her. Wherefore, that
she might not give the Grand Signior time to make Reflection upon it; D' ye not
see, Sir, that the Excess of his Love sets him upon saving his Mistress at the
Expense of his own Life. Now are Torments and Tortures seasonable; and I am
very much deceived, if you do not find out many things. The Sultan had almost
forgot the Love he had had for the Sultana while that she had been indisposed:
but the Words of this Man having made him return into himself: It is not your
Business, Madam* said he to Zelinda, to teach me what I have to do. I love the
Sultana, well enough to be willing this Mystery should be unravelled; And I
shall take care to revenge her Love, or reward it, according as it shall prove
guilty or innocent. But there are ways of informing ones self, which though
they be less cruel the one than other, are nevertheless equally certain. It is
to those of Mildness that I am very willing to have recourse: And who knows
not, that very often, instead of extorting a Truth by the means of Tortures,
the miserable are often obliged to say all they have not done, so to free
themselves from the Excess of the Torments they are made to suffer. At these
Words he sent Ibrahim's Sister back into her Apartment; commanding, that no
body should speak to her till farther Order: Then questioning her Lover, he
would needs have of him a particular Account of his Passion. And this Man, who
had made the Sultana a Thousand Reproaches when she went out, but nevertheless
loved her beyond expression; thinking, that the only means to save her, was to
tell the Sultan the Truth, related his History to him. And as it is full of a
World of Incidents, I am persuaded the Reader will not be sorry that I impart
it to him. And here you shall have it Word for Word as he told it to the Grand
Signior, without my changing the least thing in it.

THE HISTORY OF Rivelli and Lidiana.
I Shall not trifle away time, Sir, in giving you a long account of my Birth,
nor of the Sultana's: And to what purpose would it be for me to tell you any
thing to the advantage of our Extraction, since no regard is had to that in
your Empire? I will tell you nevertheless by the by, that we are both Natives
of a Town, which is but Two Italian Miles distant from that where the Aga played
his Prank: That our Relations are the most eminent for Estate and Quality in
that Place: That for my part I had all imaginable Reason to be satisfied with
Fortune, if Love had not come across, and robbed me of my Repose. At Fifteen
Years old my Father sent me to Venice, to serve the Re-publick in its Armies,
where, in his time, he had had considerable Employs; and Three Years after I
was listed under its Colors, the Senate sent me Order to return into the City,
and gave me a Regiment. During the abode I made there, I lead the same Life
which People of Eighteen Years of Age do commonly lead, and who want no Money*
That is to say, that being naturally prone to Love, I saw an infinite number of
Courtezans, which that Town is better stocked with than any other in the
Universe At length, growing weary of that Life, which, in Truth, is unworthy of
an Honest Man, I abstained from returning into that Place of Debauchery, which
did in no wise please those that had tasted of my Liberality; and especially a
certain Woman, whose Ministry I had made use of in my amorous Expeditions. I
was daily persecuted by her; she every day showed me the Picture of some new
Courtezan; and I own, that among them there were some of a wonderful Beauty,
and for whom a Man would have been capable of doing all things, if their Beauty
had been accompanied with Wisdom. But as I was utterly pawl'd by the easiness
of these sorts of Conquests, or rather, I knew they were common to me with the
first Comer, I persisted in the Resolution I had taken of remaining Discreet.
This almost madded this Woman; and I was for some time without hearing of her:
But at the Months end I saw her come into my Room with a satisfied Countenance;
and having desired me to send my Servants out; And this, said she to me,
showing me the finest Picture I had seen in all my Life, will you resist it?
No, said I to her, I own it, after having attentively viewed the Pourtraict;
And I agree, if the Original be conformable to the Copy, there is nothing but
what you may expect from my Liberality. I do believe it, she answered me; And
if you say this to me now, what will you say, when I shall have told you, that
this is the Picture of Mademoiselle Lidiana, a Person whose Name cannot be
unknown to you, no less than her Birth and Fortune. I was surprised at these
Words; and must tell you, Sir, that this Name is that of the Sultana you have
in your Hands; who being of the most considerable Birth in our Country, was as
familiar to me as my own. For my part, I am called Rivelli: And I am very
willing to acquaint you with Both our Names, that Circumstance being necessary
to the Sequel of my Discourse.

My Surprise was not so great, but that I presently re-collected my self out of
it; and still holding my Eyes fixed upon that Picture; Is it possible, said I
to this Woman, that you can put the Original into my Hands* Doubtless, answered
she me; And provided you do what is requisite for that purpose, you will
quickly see the Accomplishment of my Promises. I thought that this Woman, who
was self-interested, as are commonly all those of her Profession, meant, that I
must be liberal: Wherefore taking out my Purse at the same time, I gave it her,
with a Promise, that it should be only a Sample of my Gratuities. In fine,
being enflamed more than I can represent to you, I told her, that I pretended
not to wait any longer than Night, to see whether she was a Woman of her Word:
Whereupon she told me, that I was too hot upon the Spur; and that the Conquest
she proposed to me, was none of those that are achieved in so short a time.
Nay, she added, that the Person being in nothing inferior to me, as I know very
well my self, she did not pretend to grant me any Favor that could redound to
her Prejudice: That this was what she had to tell me on her behalf; and that if
I was an Honest Man, and would think of marrying her, that then it should be my
own fault, if I was not happy.

This Complement, far from displeasing me, was extremely acceptable to me.
There wanted nothing to my budding Passion, but a little Esteem, to render it
such as it ought to be, that it might be wanting in nothing. Thus there being
nothing more now to stop the Progress of it, Yes, I said to her, a Thousand
times more enflamed than before, I accept of these Conditions; and I charge you
to tell her, that I shall never enfringe them. In uttering these Words, I
snatched the Picture from her, and kissed it with so much transport, that a
body must have been very blind, as not to perceive that I was passionately in
Love. After a thousand Follies of this nature, and which would be too long to
relate: But tell me, I said to her once again, is it really true, that she is
as beauteous as her Picture? And may I flatter my self, that my Vows may with
her meet with a kind Reception? I warrant ye both, she replied to me: And if
you would have me tell you things as they are, I come hither only by her Order.
You may know this from her when you please. And to show you, that I tell you
nothing but the Truth, be you a while hence, at her going out of her House to
the Church: She is lodged near the Church of St. Mark: Follow her, and when she
comes near the Holy Water, speak something to her, and you will see in what
manner she will answer you.

These Words were so positive, that I had not the least room left for doubt,
but that she spoke the Truth to me. Thus abandoning my self to joy, I confirmed
the Promises I had made her, that she should not lose her Pains: After which I
accepted of the Expedient she proposed to me, that I might fully secure my
happiness to my self. Now you must know, that this Woman did really speak the
Truth; and that at that time I was not indifferent to the beautiful Lidiana.
But I must inform your Celsitude how this came to pass: This Woman seeing that
she lost all her Gains of me, by the Resolution I had taken, to be no longer
debauched: And having thereby lost her best Customer, had been cudgelling her
Brains, to contrive the means of getting my Favor again. As she had seen me
very sensible for the Fair Sex, she fancied there was no other Expedient for
her, than to bait me with this Temptation. Nevertheless, having seen me pawl'd
by all the Courtizans, she sought out one that was no Miss, but who might
become one by her way of Management. As she was attentive to this Jest, she
saw Lidiana, whose ravishing Beauty offered her the Fetter wherewithal she
sought to ensnare my Liberty. She informed her self carefully, who she was, how
she had been brought up, whether she was giddy-headed, and well disposed to the
World; and in sine, whether her Mother, in whose Company she was come, had a
strict Eye over her: But all that she was told, having informed her, that she
had fed her self with hopes, which she was far from seeing effected; she took
other Measures, and such as I am going to re-count to your Celsitude.

Having acquainted her with the Name of the Town where I was born, and she
knowing Lidiana to be of the same Place, our Birth, our Age; and in short, all
that People seek to make a Match seeming suitable to her, between us Two, she
found the Means to get to the Speech of this lovely Person; and after having
told her, who I was, and that I was extremely taken with her Beauty and Merit,
though I had never seen her, she used her Persuasions so effectually, that she
inspired her with the Curiosity to see me. Lidiana giving Credit to all she
said to her, made her swear, that she would not give me intimation of it, which
the other was very glad of, as having not yet discoursed me upon the Matter,
and by Consequence, fearing that I might have made some false step, that might
have discovered her Cheat. The Place she appointed her to see me in, was the
Church of Saint Mark, whither I commonly went to Mass; and there, without
dreaming of it in the least, I was contemplated by Lidiana's fair Eyes, to whom
I could not make Returns, she being mobb'd up, after the Mode of Italy, in a
great Veil, that robbed me of the sight of her. I appeared to her the same as
the Woman had described me to her; and though it was very advantageously to me,
I may, without Vanity, say, that I did not belie the Esteem she had conceived
upon the Go between's Relation.

This interview being made in this manner, Lidiana said a thousand things to
her in my favor: And after several Discourses, of which I was ever the
Subject; and wherein the Woman did not forget to assure her, that I daily
became more and more in Love, and that I continued in the Design of marrying
her; she brought her at length to consent to give her her Picture; and it was
the same she brought me. Things being in so fair a way, without it is having
cost me either Cares or Pains, which however is seldom seen in such an Occasion
as this. I had no longer any other disquiet, than the longing to see so fair an
Original. It was easy for our Go-between to procure me this satisfaction; and
after what she had done, she needed only to speak, to effect that. It was still
in a Church where this interview was made; and Lidiana seeing that I did not
take my Eyes from off her, this confirmed her still in all that had been told
her; and she lift up slily her Veil, and gave me sufficient leisure to
contemplate her; so as to tell my self a thousand times, that I had seen
nothing in all my Life that came near her Beauty.

To tell you, that after this, I had no longer any Repose, till such time as
that I had spoken to her, is to tell you nothing new. Whoever has ever been in
love, knows, that Lovers require something more real than sight. Nevertheless,
it was a Difficulty, and as the Mode of Italy is, that Maidens do not render
any Visit, so incommode a Custom did not allow me to have a plenary
satisfaction in that point. This Faileur advised the using of Stratagems. But
though I was passionately in Love, and that the Property of Love is to inspire
Wit, I must needs own to my own Confusion, that I was endebted to our
Go-between for our Contentment. This Woman having prudently judged, that we
could never do any thing, unless we had some Servant to be a Confident in the
Concern, had wriggled a Waiting Gentlewoman into the Family, of whom the Mother
had occasion: She daily gave Lidiana one Letter or other that I had written to
her, and very often two or three, instead of one, She likewise conveyed her
Answers to me: And this Petty Commerce was a mighty Easement to both of us. Now
our Go-between having so good a string to her Bow, she bid this Maid to tell
Lidiana, that she should make semblance of falling all of the sudden into a
Swoon, when that the Mother was gone abroad, which Lidiana having accordingly
done, this Maid went our, as if it were to fetch a Chyrurgeon, to bleed her;
and as I had notice of the Mystery, I staid hard by in a Decent Habit. Thus was
I conducted into Lidiana's Chamber, where because there were some other
Domestics, she told me aloud, that she would not suffer me to blood her; and
that I was too young for that. The Waiting Woman, with whom all things were
concerted, and who had her Lesson at her singers ends; You say right, Madam,
she said to her* but as it is not certain, that we shall find any other than
this; and as your Malady is pressing, I am of Opinion, that he stay here till
you see whether an other will come. At these words she gave the Servants Order
to go seek out one; nay, and a Physician. And that they might not return too
soon, she sent them to such as were lodged at the farthest end of the Town, as
if they had been the most expert.

To prevent giving of suspicion, I made semblance of being vexed at this
Preference, and would needs be gone; but they promised me, I should be rewarded
as much as if I had let her Blood: And as the part I acted required my seeming
self-interested, I promised to stay upon these Conditions. All of them by this
means being dispatched out of the way, except the Waiting-Gentlewoman, I threw
my self at the Feet of Lidiana's Bed, who had caused her self to be undressed
on purpose, the better to make her illness thought to be real; and I not only
confirmed to her, what our Go-between had told her on my part, but I also vowed
to her an eternal Love. She seemed to be affected with all these Assurances;
and as there is nothing that more re-doubles the Affection, than the being
possessed, that she for whom one sighs, has a grateful sense of it, it is
impossible to express to what a Degree I found my self* enflamed.

I cannot tell exactly how long I staid with her; but I dare affirm, that
though, as I have said, the Lodgings of those Persons we sent for, were a
mighty way off, they nevertheless came when I thought they must needs be still
a long time before they could return. That is to say, in one word, that I was
not weary in her Company. Nevertheless, hearing the others upon the Stair Case,
and having nothing more to do there, at least, without exposing my self to the
being discovered, I was obliged to sound a Retreat. The Waiting Gentlewoman
conducted me back; and to make it the more believed I was what I really
represented, she put the piece of Money into my Hands in the Presence of the
other Servants.

That interview having passed in this manner, both our Passions augmented in
such sort, that in an other Visit that was procured me by the like Artifice;
That is to say, in still seeking to deceive those that might be concerned
therein: Tho by other means, she proposed to me, to demand her in Marriage of
her Mother. I made her answer; That it would be but ill timing of our Business;
and that it was rather a thing that depended on the Father than on her: That
hers being far off; and as there was no paying him this Deference, by reason of
his Absence, we must even stay till I could have the honor to see him. That I
would take a journey on purpose to our Countrey-House, at my return from the
Campaign, then at hand: That in this Expectation I should think it a Thousand
Years long; and that if she doubted of it, she would do me a great deal of
injustice.

I know not what to attribute the refusal to that Lidiana made of being
satisfied with my Reasons, unless that Fortune, being weary of favoring me,
was resolved to play me the most cruel Prank that ever could befall a Man. But
so it is, that she, after having urged several things in opposition to the
Reasons that I gave her, I had not any quiet till I had promised her to break
the Matter to her Mother. I did so out of hand, to satisfy her rather, than
out of any hopes I had, that she could give us satisfaction. And indeed, the
Mother, after having received me with great Civility* so far as to tell me,
that no greater advantage could befall her Daughter, gave me to understand, that
I asked her a thing that was out of her Power; but that she would write
concerning it to her Husband, who was particularly informed of my Birth, of my
Estate, and of the Repute I had acquired in the World, to receive my Alliance
with the same Joy she did. Thereupon I entreated her that I might accompany her
Letter with one of my own; and having declared to me, that my Request was too
just to be denied, I gave it into her Hands, that she might enclose it in her
Packet.

Lidiana seeing things in this disposition, far from being sorry at the step
she had made me take in this Matter, was overjoyed at it, and advised me to
ask to see her till such time as that her Father's Answer came. This was my
intention, had she not mentioned it to me. Thus I went to pay a Visit on
purpose to her Mother; but she told me, that could not be, without furnishing
Matter of Talk to the World; and that if I loved her Daughter, as she was
persuaded I did, I would not insist upon that, as being bound to take more Care
than any body of her Reputation. She urged to me a World of things to the same
purpose, and such as were conformable to the Custom of the Country, and even
to Decency. But as a Lover is seldom well content to have such narrow bounds
prescribed him, I opposed Reasons against her, but which seemed so weak to this
Lady, that she continued to refuse me what I required.

Things remaining in this Posture* to my great Regret, I impatiently waited for
the Father's Answer. In the mean while, not being able to be without seeing
Lidiana, I had recourse to the Go-between, whom I was upon the point of
dismissing, as secretly reproaching my self for suffering such an Affair as
that to be managed by such an Hand as hers. But having been withheld by some
Consideration, I was very happy in meeting her still to do me Service. I went
to Lidiana's House when her Mother was not at home, and having shut our selves
up in that Ladies Chamber, having with us only the Waiting* woman I mentioned a
while ago, whom we had for a Witness of our Actions; I perceived a Paper behind
a Glass; and Curiosity having set me to see what it was, I found it to be the
Letter I had given her. It was just the same as I had put it into her Hands; at
which, being both of us surprised* Lidiana told me, that she must of necessity
have forgotten it there, which I thought to be very probable. Nevertheless,
being not at all satisfied with this Neglect, I told her, that it would be
convenient that we put it again where we found it, and that she making
semblance of perceiving it when her Mother was come home, she should ask her
what was the Reason she had not sent it.

I was so out of Humor at this Adventure, and so eager to find out the Riddle
of it, that I left Lidiana in that very instant, as if my Departure must have
forwarded her Mothers Return. Lidiana, who had no less impatience than I,
seeing her come back, immediately performed what we had agreed on together.
This Lady appeared extremely surpised to her: And indeed, she fancied she had
sent that Letter, which she had left by mistake. The thing seemed so
extraordinary to Lidiana, in a Concern of that Consequence, that she thought it
to be an Excuse she used, and which she paulm'd upon her: But in Truth, it was
really so as she said: and what had been the occasion of this Mistake, is, that
she had so much Business on the day she had written, that one thing had made
her forget an other. However what is extraordinary in such an Occasion as this,
is, that though she had thus forgot my Letter, she had not however been wanting
to make mention in hers of the Proposal I had made to her; wherefore she told
Lidiana, that I needed not to be concerned; and that this would nevertheless
produce its Effect.

Lidiana repeated this to me the first time that I found the occasion to see
her again; and thinking to comfort me mightily, by vending the same Money to me
with which she had been paid, this Circumstance plunged me into the utmost
Despondency: So much the worse, said I to her, if she has committed that Fault
also: And what will your Father say, when he shall see that I demand you of
your Mother, and that I do him not the least Civility; he who is the Head of
the Family, and whose Affection I only ought to captivate, if I mean he should
be propitious to me. Lidiana made a Mock of my Fears, assuring me, that her
Father was not a Man of such scrupulous Regards. She told me farther, that
though he were of that Humor, he might be appeased by letting him know that it
was none of my Fault. I made a show of believing her, because I perceived I
obliged her in so doing; yet I could not forbear trembling secretly, till such
time as that they heard from him: and when the Letters were come accordingly,
it was with a greater trembling still, that I went to her Mothers House, to
enquire what they contained: But alas! I was but too good a Prophet. She
ingeniously told me, that her Husband was piqu'd that I had not accompanied her
Letter with one of mine. But as she certainly did cordially espouse my
interests, she told me, that since it was she that had committed the Fault, she
would repair it* and that I should not trouble my Head about the matter.

These Promises had been something to a Man that had been less persuaded than I
of the Capricious Humor of the Person, which I had heard instanced several
times. I knew, without being particularly acquainted with him, that he was of
the same Temper with those Country sort of Noblemen that will have every thing
precisely in its form, and a superstitious Observer of Method. All his Life
long he had been wedded to Appearances, without ever standing to shrift into
the Truth: And what could I expect from a Person that passed for such in the
Opinion of all People. My Suspicions proved to be but too real; his Wife having
sent my Letter to him, and given him a fair account how all matters went: Pish,
to others, said he, it is now too late: This was a convenient Match indeed, I
own it: But I Will have no Son in Law that knows not how to live, that understands
not good Manners. At the same time he divulged my Courtship throughout the
whole Town; and as I had many Relations and Friends there, I received
intimation from several Hands, that I had nothing to hope. The Answer he made
his Wife, was conformable to what was signified to me; insomuch, that having
lost all Hopes on that side, I went to see that Lady, to whom, after having
made known how sensible I was to this Refusal, I proposed, that she would give
us her Consent for a Private Marriage. To make her condescend thereunto, I told
her, as it was Truth, that her Husband having found nothing to reprehend in me,
save the Fault whereof I was accused, he would be obliged to be appeased, when
the thing was once done. That she had promised me to repair the Mischiefs,
which she knew very well her self to be the only Cause of. That thus I hoped
she would not disapprove of the Expedient I started; and that it was the only
Remedy to my Misfortune. This Lady loved me, and I cannot deny it, though
indeed, she was the only occasion of all my Misfortunes: Nevertheless, she was
frighted at my Proposal; telling me, that she should be ruined if such a thing
should happen. That her Husband was a Man not only never to relent, but
likewise to cause my Process to be made as a Seducer. He Will not meddle, Madam,
I answered her: And d' ye not know, that we have seen People as much wedded as
he to their Sentiments, that have been obliged to conform to such an Occasion?

I told her still many things more to persuade her; but all that I could say
having been to no purpose, I was obliged to take other Measures. Those that
came into my Head, as likely to be the most effectual, were to speak to
Lidiana, having asked whom, whether she laid her Father's refusal to Heart? As
much as you, said she to me, at least; And I think it strange, that after so
many instances that I have given you of my Esteem, you ask me such a Question.
It is not that I doubt of it, Beauteous Lidiana, I answered her: And if I was
willing to hear you once more say, that you love me, it is a Token of the
sensibility of my Passion: And to demand such Proofs of yours as may solace me
in my Misfortune. I have proposed them to your Lady Mother; But as she more
cordially espouses Conjugal Love than that she had given to me as her future
Son in Law, she would not listen to them. I hope it will not be the same with
you; and that having looked upon me by her Order, as a Person that was one day
to have the happiness of being your Husband, that same Conjugal Love will make
you concur with me, to procure the things that are necessary for our mutual
satisfaction. You ought not to doubt on it, said she to me, provided you only
propose such things as I may honestly do: for otherwise I do not think you
expect I should obey you. No, my dear Lidiana, I replied to her; and you would
be too blame, did you so much as but suspect it; And all the Proposal that I
have to make to you, is only that we may marry privately.

I pretended to go on, and tell her how things would be accommodated after that
she was once my Wife. I would farther convince by good and specious Reasons,
how that she could be in no wise prejudiced, and that there were thousands
daily, who by these means brought their Parents to reason: but instead of
giving me time for so doing, she interrupted me with these Words: I wonder,
Rivelli, said she to me, how you dare make Proposals of this nature to me. I
must certainly have given you Occasion, by some Action unbecoming a Virgin,
which puts me so out of countenance, that I promise you to prevent it for the
future. No, my dear Lidiana, I answered her, all in a maze at this Discourse,
you never did any thing that could shock Decency; And though I should have seen
you of a humor to do it, which God be thanked, is far from your inclination,
my Love is of such a Nature, that I should have quickly have advertised you of
it. I love you not only because you are lovely, but also because that you are
virtuous. With these Sentiments can I propose any thing to you that may make
you uneasy; And then why exclaim you so highly for telling you, that I wish to
be your Husband? There are often secret Reasons that oblige a Lover to make the
like Propositions. The Fortune of she they love, that is more considerable than
their own; the Advantage they derive from an illustrious Alliance; and
sometimes also the desire of deluding them, after having gratified their
foolish Passion. But thanks be to God, I am exempt from all these Weaknesses;
and I do not believe that you can suspect me of them. I have a Fortune
considerable enough, so as not to mind that of a Wife: Your Birth, all
illustrious as it is, does not surpass mine: And as for my Design, I do not
think there is any need of telling you, that it has only Virtue in
Recommendation. If it was otherwise I should not have made the Paces you have
seen me make: And you know, that it was not till after the Refusal of our
Parents, that I have been obliged to make you this Request.

I told her nothing but the Truth; and she knew all this as well as I;
nevertheless, giving me a greater repulse than before. If I did well, said she
to me* after several sharp things that ushered in this, I should never see you
more after such a Proposition: And though I will not deny that it is not
Interest that has set you to court me, yet you must agree with me, that you
offend me in the most sensible part imaginable. Is it not the dishonouring of
me, the proposing a secret Marriage to me? How can the matter be concealed when
People stand in such fair Terms? What can those say that take notice on it? And
must one carry in one's Pocket one's Contract of Marriage, or the Certificate
of the Greek Priests.
Papas, to oblige them to pass a better Judgment? Ah Madam! I answered her, can
one ever pass an ill one of you* you that pass for an Example of Virtue in
every Bodies Opinion? Such an Apprehension is valuable for those whose Virtue
appears doubtful* the least thing may make the Balance incline on the Bad side:
Whereas those that resemble you, would do all things without my concerving the
least Suspicion. That is to say, Rivelli, she retorted upon me, that you would
insinuate to me, that Reputation all alone is sufficient for a Woman: But know
from me, that we are so far from being bound to believe you, that they are
those that have the most measures to keep. The Reason is, that when People come
to discover their Concerns, the noise of 'em is much beyond that of those they
call Persons of mean Virtue. Now as that you propose to me, must of all
necessity be one day detected, you will take it in good part, that to avoid
such a trouble, I desire you to desist from all such Pretentions.

In spite of all the interest I had in these Words, I must own to you, that
they gave me Admiration. I tacitly applauded my self for loving so virtuous a
Person. Nevertheless, as I was more sensible to my Love than all the rest, I
was very cautious of unbosoming these Sentiments to her. On the contrary, I
still did all I could to make her lay aside hers: But not having been able to
bring that about, my only care was now to sweeten her up, seeing her beyond
measure insens'd. This I had much a-do to effect: but in fine, all things being
reconciled by my Submission, we thus parted as good Friends as ever, after I
had promised her nevertheless, that I would never make her the like Proposition
again. However, it was very necessary that I should set my Mind at rest on that
side; For Two Days after her Father arrived, he having run Post to stop the
Progresses of my Passion; so pre possessed was he against me, on the account of
the Circumstance I have before-hinted. The first thing he did upon his Arrival,
was to forbid his Daughter ever to think of me; and told his Wife, that as he
judged by her Letters, that she espoused my interests, he commanded her
absolutely to lay them aside. These were the very Terms he made use of; of
which I had notice by Lidiana; who assured me at the same time, that if I
remained faithful to her, all this should not make any impression upon her
Mind: That she would so order Matters, as to make him come to himself, by a
feigned condescension: And she entreated me to set my Friends to work, and to
go to work my self, to gain his good Opinion.

It was needless in her to give me this Counsel; my interest obliged me to take
it of my self. Whereupon I went to pay him a Visit as soon as he had made known
his Arrival; but I was very much amazed to see, that though the Door was open
to all People, it was shut to me. He sent me word, that he was busy in writing
of Letters, and desired me to excuse him. This might have passed current with
me, if the same Complement had been made to all Comers: but a Man coming at the
same time to ask for him, the Porter let him in under my Nose, either that he
had not the Wit to know that this might vex me; or, as is more probable, he did
nothing without his Master's Order. If it had been in an other Occasion, I
leave it to be guessed how I should have taken this Affront: But the Concern of
my Love not permitting me to manifest my Resentment, I went my ways without
saying a word; but not without carrying along a peevishness, as rendered me
quite another man. I returned thither on the morrow; and the same Complement
having been made me; or at least, the Porter having contrived an other Excuse
not to let me see his Master, this was more than needed to cause me to make a
noise, if the same Reasons that had detained me the Evening before, had not
still detained me that Day.

What shall I say? In short, I had the Patience to do the same thing for Eight
Days together; at the end of which, seeing that it would be the way to make me
ridiculous, if I went again, I chose to write to him; and accordingly did so in
most submissive Terms: And the Tenor of this Letter was to undeceive him of
there being any Fault of mine in what had passed; and to let him know that I
had been several times at his House to discourse him my self on this Affair. I
gave it to One of my Men, with Order to deliver it to him himself, and to
demand his Answer. Nevertheless, as I was afraid, after what had befallen me my
self, they would not introduce him, if he said he belonged to me, I forbid him
saying of that; but only that he had a Letter to give him from one of his
Friends. With this Pre-caution he was introduced to him: And as my Man could
then no longer excuse himself from telling him from whom he came; he had no
sooner mentioned my Name to him, but that he refused to take the Letter;
telling him angrily, That when he had been once offended he never pardoned. As
I did not expect such an extraordinary Complement, I had not instructed him
what Answer to make him. Nevertheless, happening to have some Wit: My Master is
not a Man, said he to him, to be treated in this manner: And though it were
true, that he had offended you, which however I shall not grant, the Submission
he makes to you would be capable to sweeten any other Spirit than yours.

These Words, far from producing the Effect he hoped, did only serve to insense
him the more: So as that my Man seeing there was nothing to be done with such a
rugged Temper, thought fitting to come his ways. But in coming out of the
Chamber, he left the Letter upon a Stool; telling him he was afraid I should
beat him if he brought it back. As I was impatient to know the Success of this
Embassy, I thought the time tedious till he returned: But I had so little
Reason to be satisfied with the Reception that had been made him, that the
hopes that had fed me hitherto quickly vanished. I approved what he had done,
and what he had said: And as he was making an end of giving me an Account of
all, word was brought me, that a Footman asked for me. I was surprised to see
Lidiana's Livery. What would thou, Friend? I said to him hastily; already
hoping for some better News. It is a Letter, Signior, answered he, that my
Master sends you back; and he desires you never to take the pains of writing to
him. At these Words he presented me my Letter, which was still sealed up; And
as there was no way for me to decline taking of it, I was struck with grief, in
having to do with a Person of so little Reason.

This was as yet but the Moiety of my Misfortune. This whymsical Man, guessing
that I did not make all the Paces without finding some returns in his Daughter,
he forbid her not only to have any Commerce with me, but he watched her so
narrowly, that though she had been of an Humor to do things to the prejudice
of his Commands, it would have been impossible for her. Nevertheless, he knew
not that we had a String to our Bow, which it was difficult for him to break:
This was the Waiting Woman whom the Go-between had placed with the Mother, by
whose means I received five or six Letters after one another.

But all on the sudden I saw my self deprived of this Consolation; and when I
asked the Reason, the Go between told me, that the Father had taken away all
the Ink and Paper that was in the House; that there was no longer any Writing
but by his Order; and not content with this, he had placed Maids with his own
Hand about the Mother and Daughter, to hinder any one from being so charitable
as to furnish them wherewithal to keep on foot our Commerce.

All these Pre-cautions seemed to me very strange in a Man I had never
offended: and all the Comfort I had left in so great a Misfortune was, that I
could still write, and receive Answers by word of Mouth. I knew not whether
they were ever conformable to what the Go-between told me: But in fine, as they
could not be more obliging for me, I took thence an occasion to revive the
Design I had interrupted for the Reasons already specified: I mean the
proposing anew a private Wedding. To oblige this Woman to do her Duty well, I
not only showed my self beneficial to her, but still made her hope for great
rewards if she sped. This is a Secret very serviceable to many People; and
there are thousands that thereby succeed in their Designs. But for my part, who
am the most unfortunate of all men, I found my self Ship wracked where others
find an Harbor.

That you may apprehend this Truth, I must tell you, Sir, That this Woman
understanding her Trade to Perfection, lured me for some time without giving me
any positive Answer. One while Lidiana did but weakly oppose my Proposal;
another while she absolutely rejected it, as the thing in the World the most
injurious for her. At length, after having thus imposed upon me for Two Months;
That is to say, during the whole time that my Employment permitted me to stay
at Venice, she no sooner saw me upon the Point of my Departure, but she told
me, That Lidiana being persuaded of the Honesty of my intentions, had at length
resolved no content me. So great a piece of News, and which besides was so
little expected by me, overwhelmed me with an indicible Joy. Is it possible, I
said to this Woman, that Lidiana yields to my Desires? And how shall I ever
acknowledge this Obligation, for which I know I am only endebted to you? I told
her thereupon, all that an Inamorato is capable of saying, when he thinks
himself just ready to enjoy a Felicity after which he has long sighed: And not
content with expressing my Acknowledgement to her by Words, I made her Presents
so-so considerable.

The Joy I was in had hindered me from asking her, after what manner she had
agreed with Lidiana to execute our Project: but suspecting that I should not be
long without asking it, she prevented me by questioning me how I pretended to
go to work: For in short, said she to me, I do not see that you would have been
the better by having her Consent, at least, if I had not smoothened a
Difficulty that was offered. You know she is kept in her Father's Eye, and by
the Person he has put about her; and how to deceive these Two Argus's, and find
the time necessary for you Both, before you can put your Concerns in a good
way. Yet this is what I have done, added she, without giving me time to answer
her: For having objected this same Difficulty to Lidiana, now in discourse, I
let her see, that having but a Quarter of an Hours time, this Marriage could
not be done in the Forms; but that if she would trust to a Promise you should
give her of marrying her, it was all one and the same thing, since that you
loved her too much to deceive her.

This, Sir, is what this dangerous Woman told me; to which she added, that
after having had a great deal to do before she could bring Lidiana to resolve
upon this, she gave her her Word at the long run; That in consideration of this
Promise she would do all I pleased. That if I had the assurance of mounting by
Night into her Chamber with a Rope-Ladder, I should find the Window open: But
that I was to make no Noise when I was once got in, because that the least Word
was capable of discovering me: That I knew there was only a single Wall between
her Mothers Chamber and hers; Nay, and that the Two Beds were very near one
another: That therefore I ought to take my measures accordingly: That I needed
only to present my Promise; that was my Pasport: That Lidiana would take it;
after which she would grant me all things as her Husband.

It is impossible to express the joy these good News gave me. That I had before
was nothing in comparison of this: Not that I meant to abuse Lidiana's
facility, but because I saw my self thereby delivered from the trouble of
lulling to sleep a Father more difficult to deceive than a jealous man: Besides
I had no time to lose, being upon the Point, as I have already said, of my
Departure. Be it as it will; being urged on by my Love, and this Circumstance,
I desired the Go-between to procure the Assignation for that very Night; and to
signify to me, whether it would be accepted. Her Answer was favorable to my
impatience: She told me, that Lidiana would leave the Window open* and
recommended to me on her behalf, that I should not in the Sequel abuse the
Favor she did me* as also to observe a profound silence. I told her I would
perform all she desired, in such manner as that Lidiana should never have the
least matter to upbraid me withal.

Things being thus concluded on both sides, I kept my self ready for the Hour
of the Rendezvouze: And having written the Promise in agitation, which I was so
foolish as that I must needs sign it with my Blood, I went from home, and
repaired under Lidiana's Windows: at the time I thought all People to be in
Bed, I slung up my Ladder of Ropes, which she was to fasten, for fear I should
break my Neck; and finding it fixed, I mounted-up in such haste, as that I
seemed to fly. When I was at the Window, I pushed against it, to see if it was
open; and having found all things conformable to what had been told me, I
entered the Chamber, where I should have see my self up against the Wall, though
I knew the Room well enough, if one had not come to take me by the Hand. Ah!
Lidiana, I said to her softly, getting as nigh as I could to her Ear; how
infinitely am I obliged to you? And though I should give you to the last Drop
of my Blood, can I ever acquit my self to you of what I owe you? I was so very
much in Love, that notwithstanding the Prohibition that was made me, I was
going to launch out into a Discourse of a World of such like things, when this
Person put her Hand upon my Mouth. I thereby understood that she barred my
saying any thing more; and studying only to please her, I held my Tongue
immediately. But in exchange I took that Hand, and kissing it with Transports
that are more easy to be imagined than described; I held my Fortune so great,
that I would not have exchanged it for that of a King. From thence I would have
proceeded to the Face, but this Person repulsed me gently with her Hand;
insomuch that she did but the more augment the flames I was sensible of for
her.

What shall I tell you in short, after several little things of this Nature,
she yielded to my Desires, after having received the Promise I have mentioned,
and which I gave her upon my accosting her. How! the Sultan interrupted, has
Lidiana granted you the last Favors? And dare you boast of this in my
Presence, you that know, that of a sorry Slave, as she was, I made her a
Sultana; nay, and a Sultana- Favorite. Pardon me, Sir, this Man answered;
Matters went not so; and if you would be pleased to have one Moments Patience,
I will quickly acquaint you how all this Concern was unravelled. You must know,
that in the Moment that I thought my self the most Unhappy of all Men, I found
so little of what I sought, that I could have wished my self a good way off. Is
it possible, said I in my self, that there can be such deluding Maidens, and
that it is my ill Fortune to have made so ill a Choice? I did not make these
Lamentations without cause: She I had in my Arms had been already in those of
several others, by what appeared to me. Thus my Love being changed all of the
sudden into a terrible Disgust, I need not tell you that the Night seemed a
thousand Years long to me. This is a thing you may easily suppose of your self;
and it is not necessary that I utter my mind further. In fine, I made the Day
come at least Two Hours sooner than ordinary: I mean, that there were Two Hours
of Night still to come, when I told this Person that I was going my ways
because the Day drew near. She grasped me in her Arms, seemingly to make me
believe that she let me not go without Regret: But this little availed her,
since I was so far from making Returns to her Fondnesses, that I could have
been content, as they vulgarly say, to have been kicked out thence. In short;
having broke out of her Arms without observing many Measures, I went my ways
with a Mortal Vexation; but which would have still been much greater but for a
dexterous Trick I used This Person had put my Promise under the Bolster; I took
it slily away, with a full Resolution not to marry her, since that instead of
the Ravishments I had promised my self to have met withal in her, I had found
something so different, that the Day was not more from Night.

Now these are the Particulars of that Rendezvouze; to which it is convenient
to add to undeceive you at present of the thought you had of its being Lidiana:
for the Go-between having proposed to her the Secret Marriage I have
beforementioned, and in no wise prevailing with her to consent to it, she
bethought her self of making an other supply her Room, to merit the Recompenses
I had proposed. Thus one may see how dangerous it is to trust in those Venial
Souls; and provided they have your Money, they mind not by what means. Besides
it was an easy matter for her to paulm this Trick upon me. She had in the
House a Creature she had several times put to all sorts of Trials: Besides she
lay in Lidiana's Chamber; nay and in her Bed; the Father of that fair Virgin
thinking fit to have her by him, for fear of those Nocturnal Rendezvouzes by
which the sharpest circumspection is over-reached. Now I was ignorant of this
Circumstance. Thus all things conspiring to my Misfortune, it is not to be
wondered that I was cruelly deceived.

In the mean while I went away the next Morning without bidding Adieu to the
real Lidiana, of whom however I had no cause to complain. But the Adventures of
a Wicked Night had so pawl'd me, that I was no longer capable of Gratitude or
of Love. Being possessed with such Sentiments, if I could have made my Horse
fly, I should have done it; so eager I was to distance my self from Lidiana; to
whose disadvantage* I told my self then at least as many things as I had told
my self a little before in her favor. So precipitated a Departure did
extremely surprise her: She was not for some time to be persuaded that I was
gone: but at length having no room left for doubt, if her Love made her be
troubled for my Proceedure, her Spite suggested into her so many things
against me, that it may be said to have got the Victory. Nevertheless she was
not so well Mistress of her self as that she could entirely forget me;
wherefore after having waver'd a long time, whether she ought to write to me or
not, her weakness was more prevalent than her Haughtiness. Perhaps she thought
hereby rather to revenge her self on me, than make appear the Remnants of her
Love. Nevertheless, as in regard of that Passion it is more grateful to a Lover
to meet with Reproaches than to be treated with indifference, this had been
still matter of Triumph to me; supposing I had been still as sensible to her
Merit as I had formerly been. But leaving this Question apart, which
nevertheless was never contested by able People, I will repeat to you the
Tenor of the Letter she sent me.

LIDIANA's Letter to RIVELLI.
I Thought you of a Character so different from that of other Lovers, that I
made no Scruple of giving you Testimonies of my Weakness. But in fine, it was a
folly in me to believe otherwise than that all Men resemble one another: There
is not one but that is a Deceiver: And as it would be Blindness to doubt of
this after your Carriage, I am become so wise at present that I should rather
choose to lose my Life than ever more commit the Folly I have done. In short, I
hate you now as much as I ever loved you: This says All to express the
Sentiments I am in, since it is certain that I have been so possessed in your
Favor, that nothing could be added to my good Opinion.


She has Reason, said I smiling in my self, never more to commit the Folly she
has done. It is effectually the means to disquiet those that have to do with
her; and I advise her to stick to her Face; which far from discovering her
Defects, has so many Attractions, that no body would ever imagine that the rest
was so little answerable thereunto. After this Reflection, and some others that
were as little to her advantage, I felt my Pulse, as I may say, to know whether
I ought to make her an Answer; but fearing if I did so, it might make me incur
an other Letter, I resolved by my silence to break off all Commerce between us
Two.

Now this was my Proceedure; whence it is easy to conjecture, that Lidiana
seeing her self slighted in this manner effectually hated me in succession of
time, as much as she had ever loved me. But what do I say? Her Aversion did
much surpass the Love she had ever had for me: I will make who will be Judge:
And I will take you your self, Sir, to Witness, after I shall have related to
you the Sequel of my unhappy History.

You must know, that the Campaign being ended, I was in Garrison in a City
where all the Women, even such as were of the very Dregs of the People, were so
many Beauties. And certainly though I have traveled as much as any Man of my
Age, I know no place where Beauty is more generally found. This infinitely
pleased all the Officers; Several allured by so great a Charm, married in this
Place; others that had not as yet Devotion enough for so holy a Business, got
Mistresses; and of the whole number of us I may safely say, that only I
remained insensible. They all wondered at this; and particularly those that
knew me to be of a Temper very prone to Love: But in short, one single Night
had given me a Disgust to all Women; and they were all Lidiana's to me,

About the middle of our Winter Quarters I had a Boon to ask of the Senate; and
thinking to obtain it better in Person than to demand it by a Letter, I
departed Post; though to tell the Truth, I considered on it more than once by
reason of Lidiana, whom I was afraid of meeting some where or other; nay and
for whom I had so much Aversion, that I dreaded to hear her so much as speak.
Being arrived at Venice I did not so much as enquire after her, for fear some
troublesome Person or other should come and extol her Gracefulness and Beauty
to me. Only the Go-between knowing of my Return, came to see me; or to speak
more exactly, to renew some Commerce with me; so to get some Money from me. But
I sent her Word, that I would not speak with her* Yet this not making her
desist, she came again several times; which obliged me to send her Word, That
if she was ever more seen at my Gate, I would have her whipped. She knew not what
to think of so great an Alteration: But in fine, these Words being positive,
she was afraid of the Bastonnade, and importuned me no more.

I came not alone to Town; one of the most Considerable Officers of the Army
kept me Company. As he was Young, well-made and very Rich, he quickly made an
Hurry-durry among the Ladies; who were not all Cruel to him. Nevertheless he
met with One to whom he sighed in vain: And as he very ingenuously told me his
Concerns after having entertained me with his good Success with the others, he
imparted to me the Rigor of this Person; at which he seemed to me to be very
much afflicted. As I was no longer an Inamorato, I did not take his Passion by
the same Bias I should formerly have done. On the contrary, I told him, That I
wondered that he who was so richly stocked with Wit, laid a thing so very much
to heart that was only the Well-bred Man's Trivial Play-thing; or at most ought
to serve him only as an Amusement. He was surpised to hear me talk in this
manner; I whom he had ever known to be of a Character quite different from this
Discourse. You are no longer the same Man I knew, he said to me: And pray ye
since when have you been so very much changed? Since, I answered him, that I
have found all Women to be deceitful. I thereupon told him my History; at which
he did but laugh, after the rate of most Young People, that make a Jest of
all. You laugh at my Cost, I said to him: but have a care I do not quickly
laugh at yours. This cannot be long first, since you tell me you are so very
much in Love; For* craving all Lovers Pardon, there is not One but is a Culty:
And notwithstanding all your Wit and Understanding, I have no better Opinion of
you than of an other. All Women cheat us, continued I: Some smile upon us, as
having need to recover their Honor that has long been under a Cloud; Others
seek to lose it: And if there be any one that has sincerity at first, she keeps
it not long, either that We being first wicked, we quickly teach them to become
so as they cannot repair the Corruption of their Nature; which makes them run
full speed to Perdition. The truth is, he said to me, you surprise me still
more and more by such extraordinary Sentiments: I do not much wonder to see you
have such a bad Opinion of her that has deceived you; but to extend it
indifferently over all Women, is what I cannot relish; nor will ever any Body
relish it no more than I. Pardon me, I said to him; For let a Man but have
never so little Practice of the World, and he will quickly know that they are
all marked in the same Corner; and all the difference I find in them is, that
some are cunninger than others; insomuch that they can longer disguise their
ill Nature.

We could never agree upon this Matter; which did not much trouble my Head no
more than the Rumor he spread abroad of me, that I slighted all Women. And
indeed they were all so indifferent to me, that he asserted nothing but the
Truth. Nevertheless as he was daily more and more possessed in Favor of his
Mist ress, he was so particularly assiduous in his Addresses to her, as obliged
her to look upon him with a better Eye than she had hitherto done. He came to
proclaim this Triumph to me with an unequalled Joy; and in all probability
expected I should have complemented him upon the Occasion; when I told him with
a very dull Face; Well! You see now which of us two was in the right: Now the
Cheat's discovered: You was only put off at first that you might be the more
enflamed; and now you are only looked upon with a better Eye for fear you
should be gone. Do but continue, and you will see strange things. In fine; I do
not despair but that the same thing will quickly befall you as did me; and you
need only to press on, as I did, to be convinced of this Truth from your own
Experience.

I shall not tell you, Sir, all that he replied to me upon this Point: that
would be too tedious: and it is sufficient that you know, that he having
continued to sing to me still in the same favorable Tune of his Mistress, I
was obliged to draw him Lidiana's Picture, to show him, that those that had the
finest appearance, were not the She Is in whom he ought most to trust. He was
very attentive to the first Strokes I touched of her; but I perceived that he
afterward grew concerned; which I was preparing to ask him the reason of, when
he interrupted me with this Discourse: Forbear your Raileries, I beseech you,
Rivelli, and do not draw the Pourtraict of my Mistress instead of yours. I! the
Pourtraict of your Mistress, said I to him, strangely amazed: Faith I had no
such Thoughts: I know not who she is, and hitherto have not been much concerned
to know her; but you will see, that if they be so alike in Face, they are much
more alike in inclination: I told you plainly enough, that all of them are
Cheats; and you will never believe it till you are caught.

He took in ill part all I said to him; and seeing it impossible for me to get
him out of his pensive Humor: But for God's sake, I said to him, acquaint me
with your Mistresses Name; for I know that of mine; and this will be surer than
all the Conjectures you can derive from my Discourse. She is called Lidiana, he
answered me; and she is a Person of Quality, who is come hither with her Mother
for a Process of Consequence which they have before the Senate. I leave it to
be judged whether I was not surpised at this Declaration. Nevertheless I
judged it not convenient to tell him what I thought of the matter: On the
contrary, being very willing that he might be caught as well as I: You have
been falsely allarum'd, said I to him; I only knew Lidiana by Fame; and though
she is of my Country, as I departed thence when very young, I do not remember
I ever saw her. A body has never so much assurance when he tells a Lie as when
he tells the Truth; either that the serious look I put on, made him suspect
something, or that there appeared Signs in my Face that I did not speak
sincerely; he had no sooner left me, but that he left Lidiana, whom he asked if
she knew me. She blushed at this Question, and appearing strangely non plus'd;
What is the meaning of all this, Madam, he renewed? And the Question I put to
you, is it so extraordinary that it must needs cast you into the Confusion I
see you labor under. This perplexed her still more than before; insomuch that
it was not necessary he should question her farther to discover that it was she
I had pointed at in my Discourse: Ah! Madam, he said to her, who would have
thought it of so lovely a Person? And what will become of me after all I know?
He said no more: but as this was more than needed to make Lidiana apprehend
that some Story had been told him that touched her Honor: Yes, Sir, she said
to him, I know Rivelli: But whence comes this Perplexity, and the Discourse you
hold me? He was in so lamentable a Condition, that he could not answer her in
his Turn: Whereupon Lidiana confirming her self still more and more in her
Suspicions: From that proceeds what I see, she renewed: And is it a Crime in me
to have known Rivelli? I Will tell you farther, he has loved me; or at least he
would have made me believe so: and perhaps he would have married me, but for
Conjectures which it is not necessary I inform you of. I believe it
sufficiently, Madam, he answered: But let me advise you not to mention it to
any Body. Nay and I advise you to tell Rivelli, that he be more discreet an
other time: And if like him, I had had the Fortune to have Favors from so
beautiful a Lady as you, I would sooner have been killed than ever have spoke
of them to any Body.

He judged not convenient to say more to her, though she earnestly entreated
him to conceal nothing from her: But what he had said to her being more than
sufficient to make her understand that I had spoke ill of her, I was strangely
surpised to see her enter my Chamber one Morning; and having asked her the
Occasion, I come, Sir, said she to me, after having taken off her Veil, to know
why you ruin my Reputation: and I wonder very much that you, whom I ever
thought a worthy Person, should do Actions so unworthy of a Man of Honor. You
was suffered, added she, to go your ways, as you did, without your taking leave
of me: I never made you any great Reproaches for breach of Faith: and you
should never have heard talk of me, if you had not obliged me to it by your
Carriage.

Lidiana appeared so beauteous to me in holding this Discourse to me; and she
was really so lovely, that it is not to be wondered if I perceived those Flames
to revive that had been formerly so ardent. I was strangely surpised; I that
slighted her so much before, that I should have preferred the most despicable
of Creatures before her. For this Cause did I seek to excuse my self; or
rather, I absolutely denied the ever having spoke ill of her. It is very true,
Madam, I added, that I have great Reason to be surpised that you have so much
forgotten me after what passed the Night before my Departure; and I can only
attribute it to the Levity so natural to those of your Sex.

I had no sooner bolted the Word but that I checked my self tacitly for so
doing. I asked my self what this meant: and if after the imperfections she had
under her Linen, a Man must not be void of Judgment to be still sensible of
any Spark of a Flame that must needs make me blush for shame. But if I made
this Reflection, Lidiana immediately freed me from it by a Transport of Anger
which she could not moderate, after having heard me talk in this manner What
then has passed between us, she said to me? And impart it to me, since that I
do not remember it. Let Us leave that matter apart, I said to her, and let it
never be mentioned, since you have forgotten it so soon. I have tenderly loved
you, you know it: but in short, one is not born to love eternally: And though
this should not commonly happen, yet this is what has befallen you, who had
promised never to love any Man but me. It will be a surprising thing to you,
Sir, that I talked to her in this manner; after the tacit Reproaches I had
newly made to my self: But the more I looked upon her, the more I found the
Wounds to open again that she had made in me. Wherefore all I could say to my
self of the Condition I had found her in, being not capable to make me turn my
Eyes from off her, I grew more enflamed than ever; which will not seem
surprising to you when I shall have told you, that she quickly justified her
self to me of the Suspicions I had conceived of her Virtue.

As all I said to her did still denote that something very particular had
passed between us, she would by all means know it; and thinking there was no
great Mystery in discovering a thing to her which she must needs know as well
as I, I surpised her extremely, when I told her what I told you before. I
perceived she blushed at this Relation, and I attributed it to the Modesty that
is so natural to Maidens; or to the Regret she had perchance for having granted
me this Favor now that she no longer loved me. But I remained not long in this
Opinion: What you now tell me, she said to me, is an Imposture so enormous,
that I will die in Torments, or I will be revenged. You shall maintain before
the World what you have now said to me: It concerns your Honor and mine so to
do; and I perceive you have been deceived.

These Words opened my Eyes when it was too late; and no difficult matter was
it for me to apprehend that it was the Go-between and her implement that had
played me this Prank. In the mean while, if without having been informed of
Lidiana' s innocence, I had anew conceived for her Sentiments all full of
tenderness, it was quite another thing, when I was persuaded of it. Ah! Madam,
I said to her, what can I ever do to repair my Fault? It was the loss of the
Esteem I had for you that has been the Occasion of all this Disorder. But now
that I know your Virtue, I shall so well repair what has passed, that you shall
see that it is not without an extreme Regret that I see my self obliged to
leave you. But I do not pretend, I added, that my Repentance should exempt me
to you wards from the Satisfaction I owe you: You need only impose a Punishment
upon me, and I shall not appeal from it, however rigorous it may be: and on the
contrary I will say, that you are too good, since I own my Fault does not merit
any Pardon.

If she would have listened to me, I should have said much more to her, so
penetrated I was with Love: But her Head being only possessed with her own
Justification, she went directly to her Mother, to whom she gave a faithful
account of all I have newly related. As that Lady could not act all alone in
this Concern, she gave her Husband intimation of the Matter, who presented a
Request to the Magistracy, that he might be permitted to take up all those he
suspected of this intrigue. The Magistracy having upon his Request given way to
Justice, the Go-between and her imp were put into Prison; and I was confronted
against them after they had denied the Points upon which they were examined. As
the Truth was easy to be made out, notwithstanding all their little Tricks and
Circumventions, the Judges condemned them to be put to the Rack. This struck a
Terror into them; and preferring a speedy Death to Sufferings that are very
often worse than the loss of Life; they owned their Crime, without standing to
be put to Torment. After this they were condemned to the Whip and to
Banishment; a Punishment too mild for a Crime of that Nature.

This Affair did not thus occur in Venice, without furnishing Matter of Talk to
a World of People: And as Detraction finds occasion to bite upon all things,
People there were that would needs have it, that these Wretches had been
sacrifie'd to recover Lidiana's Honor. This Rumor was quickly buzzed about
the Town; which the Father having notice of, he expressed a Concern at it to
his Friends, who advised him to marry her out of hand. They told him, as it was
true, That it was the means to put an end to all these Discourses: Whereas-as
long as she should remain a Maiden, People would be ever talking of this
Adventure. He found their Reasons very pertinent: and as they advised him at
the same time to prefer me before all the Matches that could be offered, it so
fell out, that his interest made him forget the aversion he had conceived
against me. One of our mutual Friends proposed the thing to me, which filled me
so with joy as was impossible for me to express it. I went immediately to find
out Lidiana's Father; and after having thanked him for his kind thoughts to me,
I told him that he might make the Contract of Marriage as he pleased: That I
pretended to give all I had to his Daughter: wherefore that it could not be so
advantageous to her but that I should still wish to do more for her. He
received my Complement with abundance of Civility; and after having made some
Excuse to me for what wa passed, he bid me go see his Daughter, and tell her
this News* found her alone in her Chamber and having thrown my self at her
Feet: Your Father bestows you upon me, said I to her, Beauteous Lidiana. But as
this Present, however incomparable it may be, cannot please me unless it comes
from your own hand: Tell me, I beseech you, whether the Regret I have for
having offended you, has made you forget the hatred you had for me.

Lidiana gave me not time to finish these last Words; or at least did not give
her self the Patience to hear them. And indeed, interrupting me with a
Disturbance of mind not easily to be observed: My Father bestow me upon you!
she said to me: And is he so poor spirited after the Reasons we have to hate
you? Does he not remember the ill Opinion you had of me? And in short, after
the most sensible Affront that a Man can offer to a Virgin, is it possible that
he can pitch his Choice upon you? How, Madam! I said to her, is it possible
that you your self do remember my Offense, rather than the Regret I have for
having offended you? I shall say nothing to ye of my Love: yet if you have the
least Memory, you must know that I have loved you with all the Passion and all
the Honesty imaginable. This is sufficiently justified by the Esteem I have
forborne having for you from the very moment that I thought you less honest than
I imagined; but now that nothing more hinders me from entertaining that Esteem
anew, I may tell you, that I shall render so much Justice to your Merit and
Virtue, that never Husband set so great a Value upon a Wife as I pretend to
have for you. If you never esteem me but in that Quality, she answered me, you
will never have other than an ill Opinion of me. Though I know the Obedience
that I owe to my Father, yet I would have you know that I shall dispense my
self from it in this Occasion: Wherefore if you have the least Consideration
for me, I beseech you to lay aside all thoughts of courting me; otherwise you
will oblige me to things which will not be to the advantage of either of us
both.

You may think, Sir, I could not be otherwise than afflicted at these Words.
Ah! Madam, I perceive how the Case stands, I answered her: I now experience a
Calumny that is common to me with many Unfortunate Wretches. I have a Rival;
and you do not hate me so much on the account of what I have done to you, as
because that you love an other. I was struck with Jealousy at the same moment:
and after having cudgelled my Head with a thousand desires of revenge, I went
away all in a Fury, and fully resolved not to let things rest so. In this
Design I went to find out my Rival, whom I let know, that one of us must die.
He was a brave Man, and not of an Humor to be startled at such a Complement:
Wherefore without being in any manner heated; Very willingly, he said to me;
but perhaps there will be no need of that, if you will but acquaint me what
animates you so much against me. Can you be ignorant of that, I answered him?
And when you rob me of my Mistresses Heart, can I be without Resentment? I have
not so much Presumption, he replied to me: but though it were so, I swear to
you, that things shall never go farther on my side. I have loved Lidiana, I own
it; nay and my design was to marry her; but since the News you imparted to me,
I am so thoroughly pawl'd, that I no longer remember that I have loved her. If
ever I happen to marry, added he, it shall not be a Chronicle-Wife, at least in
my knowledge.

This Discourse made me apprehend that he was one of those that had an ill
Opinion of Lidiana: And though I had a sufficient Esteem for her, as to be very
glad that every one should do her Justice, the least of my Cares was to
undeceive him. Having no longer any Occasion to quarrel with him, after such a
Declaration, I set my Mind a little more at rest; hoping that since I had not a
tender and passionate Lover to combat withal in her Bosom, in time I might
with ease recover the Honor of her good Opinion. Being possessed with these
Sentiments, what did I not do for Two whole Years together? I quitted my
Employment that I might be the more assiduous with her; and declining to make
use of her Father's Authority, who still favored my Addresses, I placed my
hopes only in the Excess of my Repentance, and in the Violence of my Love. What
did I not do, Sir, during so considerable a time, and which seemed so much the
longer to me as that I was in Torment? But what need is there of spinning out
this Discourse any further? You must know, that I only lost my Pains; which
putting me into the utmost Despondency, I departed from Venice with a
Resolution to go seek in Foreign Countries the Cure I could not hope for as
long as I staid in a Place where I should be continually exposed to the seeing
of Lidiana. I had much a-do to form this Resolution, and much more to execute
it; so great is the Feeble when one is in Love. But what much helped to make me
gain this over my Mind is, that Lidiana had no longer any Quiet with her Father
since she had so formally thwarted his Will. Thus believing my Absence would
skreen her from all these Persecutions, I went to Rome, and thence into France,
where I served in the Forces that were appointed against Flanders. But though
War be capable of possessing one's Mind entirely; principally when a Man has a
little Ambition; it is nevertheless certain, that wherever I went I carried
Lidiana's image along with me: She every where came to torment me; insomuch
that having no more Repose in that Country than I had at Venice, I returned
thither incognito, to have at least the Consolation of seeing her. I found she
was gone thence on her return into our own Country; and taking a Journey
thither my self, I was told the saddest News that ever could have befallen me.
It is not necessary that I tell it you; you know it, Sir, as well as I; I mean
the stealing away of Lidiana by the Aga. Any other that had been less in Love,
would have contented himself with venting of Sighs, and with accusing Fate of
injustice: But as my Love was of a different Nature from that of all Men, I
also took a Resolution, which no other Man but I would have taken; it was to
come snatch Lidiana out of the Aga's Hands; wherein though I saw an
insurmountable Difficulty, my Consolation was, that either I should die in
pain, or that I should speed in my Design. Whereupon I came hither only as
courting Death, as I may say: but Destiny seeking still more and more to
oppress me, I was informed that your Celsitude had had the same Eyes as I: That
is to say, that you had found Lidiana so Beauteous that you had put her into
your Serraglio. It would be impertinent for me to tell you my Despondency at
this News: it is easy for you to judge of it by the Resolution I took to pass
over the Walls of the Serraglio: And I undertook to do so, so much the more
willingly, in that I hoped that Lidiana being there against her Will, she would
concur with me to free her self out of Slavery; supposing that I was so happy
as to get to the Speech of her. There is no need of my telling you any thing
farther: You know how you found me; and I shall only add, that your Celsitude
is concerned to punish me out of hand, since that as long as I shall be alive,
I shall not only dispute against you, but also against the whole Earth
together; for a heart without which I cannot hope to live.

This Man having thus related his Concerns, the Grand Signior, who had
hearkened to him without one's being able to say whether he was animated with
Revenge or Hatred, went out of the Chamber, and so to that of the Sultana, who
was interested in this Discourse. There, without telling her what this Man had
related to him, he would needs be acquainted with her History from her own
Mouth, to see whether he had not imposed upon him. But her Account having been
altogether conformable to his, he wanted much of being in that Anger he would
have been in had he perceived they had prevaricated with him. Nevertheless he
was still uncertain what he was to do: For on the one side he judged this Man
worthy of Death for the Love he dared to harbor for the Sultana: He considered
on the other, That he was sufficiently punished in the manner he was treated.
In fine, Mildness having prevailed over all other Considerations, he granted
him his Pardon at the Request of Sultana Zelinda; not that she did honestly
espouse his interest, but because she thought that by preserving his Life, it
would be for her an instrument ready at hand that would serve to render the
Grand Signior jealous of her Rival. Now indeed her Policy had been good,
supposing that his Celsitude had suffered him to stay in his Dominions; but
having had the Pre-caution to send him away thence; nay end to cause him to be
accompanied to the very Frontier; that so he might not be imposed upon by this
means, her Malice proved all to no purpose.

While that all this passed Ibrahim was still in the same place, whence he
imagined he might easily escape, having engaged the Husband and Wife in his
interests. But as People often reckon without their Host, it happened that in
the very time that he thought himself in the greatest security, it wanted
little but that he had been discovered in the manner I am going to relate:
After all the Bussle that I have newly re-counted, the Grand Signior went down
into the Garden with the Two Sultana's; and as he was walking there fell a
terrible Rain that obliged him to seek out some Place where he might be under
shelter. There being none nearer than the Gardiner's House, he ran thither with
his Company; and Ibrahim had but just time to hide himself. In the mean while
the Gardiner's Wife was so surprised, that the Grand Signior easily perceived
that something ailed her. The Sultana's passed also the same Judgment. But they
all having attributed it to the surprise she was in to see Persons of their
Rank, the lowness of her Extraction saved her. The Rain being over, the Grand
Signior returned into the Garden; and there it was that Sultana Zelinda was
surprised with a strong Jealousy. For while she was amusing her time, in
contemplating some Figures that were upon their Pedestal, the Grand Signior
struck aside with her Rival; and kindling his Flames anew that had only been
interrupted by her Malady, he entered into an Arbor that was at the end of an
Alley, the Door of which he shut after him, for fear Zelinda should come and
disturb his Conversation. Zelinda no sooner perceived that he went off, but
that being vexed for having given Occasion to the Affront that was done her,
she walked apace to overtake him. She was almost as soon as he at the Arbor,
which she saw him direct his steps to; and when she was just got up to it, she
saw her self shut out.

This was so terrible a Vexation to her, that she had never had the like.
Perhaps she did not love the Sultan; and the Love she had for Ibrahim is a good
instance of the contrary, since Two great Passions are incompatible with one
another. But in her Ambition supplying the Room of Love, she was for all the
World as jealous as if she had really loved him. I shall not however lose time
in relating all that her Anger made her say: and indeed it would be needless,
since there is no body but may imagine, that in such Circumstances one is
capable of saying many things. It is more expedient that I proceed to her
Actions, by which it will be made more manifest than by her Words, with what
Spirit she was animated.

All the World agrees, That Women have infinitely more Wit than we Men, when
the Matter in agitation is Love. The Reason for this is easy to be given: As
it is of an extreme Consequence for them to conceal their Concerns, they make
it their study, as I may say, from their Infancy, to foresee all that may
befall them. From hence it comes, that some of 'em are so expert at deceiving
their Gallants and Husbands. But this is not my Business; and I shall only say,
that as they excel us in the Art of making Love, it is the like in Jealousy,
to which they are so naturally prone, that it makes them often commit a
thousand Follies. If I sought for the Reason of it, I should quickly find it.
As Jealousy is a Companion of Love, it follows, that he that is the most
wedded to this last Passion, is the more smartly sensible of the other. Now
Zelinda making this fatal Experience, it is not to be thought strange if she
studied the means to ruin her Rival, to which she was so much the more
powerfully excited, in that she daily saw her Favor augment, and that her own,
on the contrary, did visibly diminish.

After having framed this Resolution, she was not long before she contented her
self; and in this manner went she to work: She made reflection, that Ibrahim
only passed for her Rival's Brother, on the score of what her Mother had said
of him: That the Sultan was to be made believe, that it was a thing invented on
purpose to conceal the secret Flames he had for her. That if he was
sufficiently jealous after this, to be hurried to the utmost Extremities
against him, she would see to preserve him from danger, either by the Ascendant
she had over him, or by the Credit of others that had the Grand Signior's Ear,
and who would be overjoyed to employ their interest in her behalf. That at the
worst, if Ibrahim perished in this Occasion, she should have, at least, the
Consolation of having involved her Rival in his Misfortune.

Such a Resolution was no great Proof that she loved Ibrahim with overmuch
Affection: But without troubling my Head, in going about to justify her, I
shall only say, that she is not the only Person that has thus sacrificed her
Love to her Ambition. Be it as it will, being daily more and more persuaded,
that she could not take more just measures than these, to re-establish her self
in the Sultan's Favor, and banish her Rival from it, she caused Notes to be
dropped in the Grand Signior's Chamber, by which he had intimation given him,
that People frequented the Serraglio for the Love of the other Sultana. One of
these Notes falling into his Hands, he was struck with so terrible a Passion,
that nothing was capable of cooling it, but a thought that came into his Head,
that it might perchance be an Artifice of Zelinda. That he might shrift into
the Truth, he went to this last Sultana's Apartment, and pretending to consult
her upon this Affair: Is it possible, Madam, he said to her, that I am
deceived? And you that have so much interest to make the Truth known to me, how
can you be at rest in a thing that concerns you as well as I.

He considered her attentively, to see if he could discover upon her Face, with
what Motions she was seized. But Zelinda being Mistress of her Movements, and
besides excelling in the Art of Dissembling above all those of her Sex: It is
true, Sir, she said to him, that this Discovery concerns me as well as you,
since it would be the means to recover the Honor of your Favor, which you
have bereaved me of, without my having rendered my self unworthy of it. But to
what purpose would it be for me to intermeddle with a matter, since that your
Celsitude is so pre-possess'd, that though I should let you see things with
your own Eyes, yet would you not believe them. She said these Words with such
an Air of Simplicity, that the Sultan fell into the Trepan. How will you let me
see things with my own Eyes, he answered her? And having it in your power to
procure my Repose, you have hitherto had the Cruelty to be silent. Ah! Sir, the
Sultana said to him, is this still the means to get out my Secret? And these
Transports of Love that start from you in spite of your Anger, do they not
acquaint me, that the greatest harm that can be done you, is to disabuse you.
Continue, Sir, she added, to love those that deceive you, and on the contrary,
hate those that love you. This is the Fate I have of late undergone.

This augmented the Sultan' s Jealousy to such a point, that he would needs at
the same instant give order for the strangling of Ibrahim, which Zelinda being
mightily surpised at: Moderate your Passion, she said to him, unless you would
have me believe that I am now the most unfortunate of all Women. How can you
have the least kindness left for me at a time when you are so sensible for an
other. But if my interest does not affect you, do, at least, for your own sake
what you will not do for mine. Suspend your Revenge, till you know whether you
are really jealous. Perhaps you are imposed upon, and would you not be very
glad to be so informed, that you may not have any Scruple left.

Tho these words were not capable of appeasing his Anger; yet at least he gave
bounds thereunto, till such time as that he had shrifted into the matter. In
the mean while the Sultana was very much perplexed how to reconcile the
Jealousy she had against her Rival, and the Love she was sensible of for
Ibrahim. She had in her Mind invented an infallible means to confirm the Grand
Signior in his Suspicions: But at the same time she represented to her self,
that it would be the loss of her Lover, which rendered her a little more
reserved in her Revenge. At length, Ambition prevailed over Love, and to the
hazard of all that could happen, she resolved to ruin her Sister. What farther
obliged her to take this Resolution, is, that after having promised, as she had
done the Grand Signior, to make him see clear into her Rival's infidelity, he
earnestly pressed her daily, to which it was impossible for her to resist, at
least, without letting him see, that all that she had done, was only an
imposture: Wherefore being pressed by such powerful Considerations, she
confirmed to the Sultan the Promises she had made to him; and to acquit her
self of them, she told him that it was necessary he should dissemble both to
the Sultana and to Ibrahim. That she would make him hear with his own Ears, his
amorous Cajolleries to her: That she did not think he required more of her,
since that to speak on one side, and to listen on the other, was a Proof
sufficiently great, that she had told him nothing but the Truth. That she asked
him but Two or Three Days for that purpose; that is to say, till Ibrahim went
to pay a Visit to his pretended Sister, according to the Permission he himself
had given him.

The Grand Signior agreed to all, as also to put himself in a Woman's Clothes
that day, that so in Quality of Zelinda's Maid, he might slip into the other
Sultana's Apartment, without being known. Things having been concerted in this
manner, they were accordingly executed. Zelinda knowing that Ibrahim was at her
Rival's Lodgings, carried the Sultan thither, and letting him into a Closet
that was* beyond the Sultana's Chamber, she bid him stay there. Before she left
him, she promised him, that she was going to bring them both near him* and that
there being only a Partition of Deal Boards, he might hear all that they said
to one another: For she insinuated to him at the same time, that she would
withdraw immediately, to afford them the means of saying kind things to one
another.

The Sultan fell into this Trap, and Zelinda being gone out, she pulled to the
Door, shutting it to with a Hook, without the Sultan's perceiving it. After
this she went to find out Ibrahim and his Sister, who were in a place pretty
remote from that where the Sultan was, and there making semblance of having
something to desire the Wife of one of the Grand Signior's Principal Officers,
she told her Rival, she knew not how to go about it, for that there had been
some Bickering between them: that if she pleased, she could free her from that
Trouble, she that was a Friend of this Officers Wife: That she entreated her to
write to her, as if the thing came from her, and she offered to do her the same
Service in the like Occasion. By this means she engaged her in writing: And as
she had made it a long tedious Business, a Tale of a Tub, and that it was
necessary she should be a long while a writing, she took that time to go to the
Place whither she had promised to bring the other Sultana. She used their not
disturbing her as a Pretense, and Ibrahim, who was very glad of it, being
resolved to improve that Occasion to the discoursing her: Wherefore he followed
her at the same time; and had no sooner overtaken her, but that taking her by
the Hand, How much am I obliged to you, Madam, said he to her, for having found
the means to send away the other Sultana? And how happy should I be if it was
for my sake? Pardon me for my boldness, in saying such things to you. It is
perhaps showing a little too much Presumption: but after all the indulgence you
have had for me, it is pardonable in me, though I believe that you prefer me
even before the Sultan.

The Grand Signior, who heard all these Words as distinctly as if he had been
in the very place where they were, not being able to contain his Resentment;
Ah! Wretch, cried he, with an inconceivable Fury, stay one moment, and I will
make thee throw off that Criminal Love that dares attack me, who am thy Master
and Benefactor. At these Words he would have rushed out of the Closet; but
finding resistance at the Door, his Resentment augmented in such a manner, that
all that I might say of it, would fall much short of it. Ibrahim was much
surpised when he heard the Sultan talk in this manner; and Zelinda making
semblance of being the like, Ah! you are ruined, my Dear, she said to him,
after having got at some distance from that Place, for fear the Sultan should
know her Voice: Make your Escape presently, and for my part, I will see to come
off as well as I can. The Necessity was too urgent to stay long in consulting
what Course to take. Thus Ibrahim not knowing of any more safe Retreat than the
Gardiner's House, where he had already been, leapt out of the Window, without
being perceived by any body. Zelinda having shut it after him, went to the
Sultan, who used his utmost endeavors to break the Door open.

He was in a terrible Fury, and without saying one word to Zelinda, he ran with
his Sword in his Hand, where he expected to have found Ibrahim, and the other
Sultana. He was not surpised that he found no body there, and he had made
noise sufficient, as to imagine that they had made their Escape: but thinking
that they could not be far off, he fell to searching, having still his Sword in
his Hand, an indubitable Mark that he had no mind to stand shilly shallying. It
will doubtless be wondered that the Sultana did not go to meet him, to justify
her self: but you will forbear doing so, when you shall know, that her Closet
was remote from the place where this Scene was acted, and that she was there
sedately finishing her Letter, and without suspecting in the least the
Misfortune that was grapling her. In the mean while, the Sultan, after having
sought her every where in vain, directed his steps toward this Closet; and as
he hurried along, she turned her Head that ways, to see what was the matter.
She was much surpised to see him thus with Sword in Hand, and all transported
with Anger, which was easy to be guessed by his Eyes, as well as by his
Carriage. Thus without thinking of what she did, she threw her self at his
Feet, saying to him, Ah! Sir, do not let your Resentment fall upon your poor
Sultana. These Words confirmed him still more, that she was culpable; so that
he lift up his Arm to plunge his Sword into her Bosom; but having by chance
cast his Eyes upon the Letter, See here-still doubtless, said he to her, Marks
of thy infidelity, perfidious as thou art; and Curiosity suspending his
Resentment, he went to take that Letter, wherein he was very much amazed to see
quite an other thing than he expected. This disarmed him in some manner, not
being able to apprehend how the Sultana, having such reason as she had to
tremble, could amuze her self, in writing such indifferent things. Thus not
being able to conceal his Astonishment, Ah! this is too much, ungrateful Woman,
he said to her, to join insensibility to the most mortal Offense that can befall
me; and tell me how thou can be so in Cold Blood, when that I surprise thee
with Ibrahim, and dallying away the time with him in Amorous Discourses.

The Sultana was so far from dreaming of the malicious Prank that had been
played her, that without casting the Fault upon her Rival: If I have seen
Ibrahim, Sir, she said to him, it is only with your Consent; and you must have
taken for amorous Discourses the brotherly Kindnesses that have passed between
us, but which never went beyond the bounds of Honesty. At these Words she fell
into a Swoon; and her Fright having made her Malady return at that very
instant, she vented in a moment so great a Quantity of Blood, that the Sultan
imagined, that without being obliged to revenge himself, he should presently be
revenged by this Accident. This made him direct his steps another way, to seek
out Ibrahim: but he was far from finding him, since that he had made his
Escape, as is before related. All these Disappointments did a little cool his
Fury, infomuch, that Zelinda seeing her self revenged on her Rival, without
there being any Necessity to shed all her Blood, took that time to endeavor to
save Ibrahim. Sir, she said to the Sultan, I may perchance be mistaken, and the
Tranquillity you found the Sultana in, is a certain sign that she never
understood any fineness in all the Caresses she has made to Ibrahim. You know
there are Brothers and Sisters that love one another tenderly, and discourse
one another accordingly. Wherefore I am vexed that I have animated your
Celsitude by false Accounts, which will be the Occasion of the Sultana's Death.
If you would take my Advice, added she, you should seek to inform your self,
before that you proceeded further: And you ought to take my Advice; mine, that
notwithstanding the interest I have to rid my self of a Person that shares your
Heart, do sufficiently love Justice, as not to be willing you should sully your
Hand with a Blood that you would perhaps unjustly shed.

The Grand Signior, who had already judged favorably of the Sultana, being
still pre-possess'd in favor of her by Zelinda' s Words: Yes, Madam, he said
to her, I will follow your Advice, since you judge it convenient. But be she
innocent or not, I cannot but, after the Generosity you have had to save her,
when that one bare Word of yours would have ruined her, I give you for a
Recompense the whole Empire, which your Virtue merits over my Heart. Yes, my
lovely Zelinda, You need not fear that your Rival shall share it with you; nay
I am sorry that I have given you any matter for Vexation in that point: but I
will so behave my self henceforward, as that you shall never have any Occasion
to be discontented.

Such Words as these were a mighty matter of Triumph to Zelinda; and her Wile
could not have a more advantageous Success. Thus, all haughty at this Event,
she signified to Ibrahim, after what manner she had turned things, and how that
he had nothing more to fear. As there is nothing that touches us more nearly
than our selves, Ibrahim, who at another time would have been sensibly
afflicted at his Sister's Misfortune, was easily comforted. Nevertheless the
Grand Signior was not so well cured of his Suspicions, but that he forbid him
expressly ever more to enter into the Serraglio, which extremely displeased
Zelinda, who had been so well satisfied with the Visits he paid his Sister,
that if the Sultan had taken her Advice, matters should have gone otherwise.
However, she was too cunning to desire him to revoke that Order. When People
know themselves culpable, they are ever afraid, that the least thing should be
capable of discovering them, as indeed this daily happens, when that it is the
least expected. Besides Zelinda having judgment enough, as not to commit a
Fault of that Nature, she studied how to find in secret interviews, the
Occasions of seeing Ibrahim, and of not making her Fidelity to be suspected by
the Grand Signior.

This was absolutely impossible, at least without engaging an Eunuch, who might
facilitate the entrance of the Serraglio to her Lover: Wherefore to surmount
this Difficulty, she caressed one of them, called Almonack, a Person of Wit,
and whom she had already done some Service, though at that time she did not
expect any Returns. Now you must know, that Jealousy prevails as much among
Eunuchs as among others; they would all be Favorites of the Sultana's: and at
the moment that any one of them is so, he has as many Enemies as he has
Comrades. This befell Almonac, and one called Moro, who had at least as much Wit
as he, having got a Fancy to dive into the Reasons that made him so gracious
with Zelinda, was not long without discovering the whole Mystery. He one day
perceived that he let Ibrahim into the Serraglio, and that he conducted him
into Zelinda's Apartment. There needed nothing more for him to judge how
matters went: But he was in a great Perplexity, when it came to the push, what
Course he was to take upon this Discovery. For in short, he was no stranger to
Zelinda's Ascendant, and her Artifices, insomuch that he was afraid, that the
Grand Signior being informed of it, he might have so much Weakness as to
believe her, to his Prejudice. Being possessed with this Apprehension, he
resolved to go warily to work in this Concern: That is to say, not to intimate
Zelinda's infidelity all at a Clap to the Sultan; but that Ibrahim had a secret
Commerce in the Serraglio by Almonac's means. Moro having given this Account to
the Sultan, his Celsitude fancied it to be for the love of the other Sultana,
insomuch that being vexed at his having pardoned her, he went to find out
Zelinda, to whom he imparted the News he had been just then acquainted withal.
Zelinda gave Heaven thanks, for that he came to unbosome himself to her, seeing
otherwise she had been absolutely ruined, as well as Ibrahim. Nevertheless, not
judging it convenient to oppose the impression this News had made upon his
Mind, she told him on the contrary, that Ibrahim merited a most extraordinary
Punishment, and that if he would take her Advice, he should endeavor to nab
him in the Fact, so to make him afterward suffer the Punishment such a Fault
did deserve.

The Sultan relished this Advice, and commanded Moro to be so narrowly upon the
watch, as that he might surprise him: And Moro imagined this to be no difficult
Province, because that in one Week only he had seen him enter four times into
the Serraglio. But Zelinda being none of those that sleep upon an Affair of
such great Consequence, gave Ibrahim intimation of all that passed, insomuch
that Moro lay all in vain perdue. The Grand Signior, whom he had promised, that
Three Days should not be over before that he put him into his Hands, seeing
Fifteen spent, asked him, if he jeasted with him. To which, Moro not knowing
what Answer to make, he gave him but one Week more, threatening him, that if in
that time he did not see the Effects of what he had promised him, he would
treat him as a Calumniator. There passed a Week more without his being able to
keep his Word: Whereupon the Sultan being animated against him by Zelinda,
commanded the Mutes to strangle him. Moro knowing that he died unjustly, he
demanded permission to sign his Last Will and Testament, to which he had Answer
made him, that he might not only do it, but also that the Grand Signior had so
ordered it.

Whereupon he began to maintain, that what he said of Ibrahim was true; after
which, he that served as Clerk, bid him sign it; but he made Answer, that it
was not yet time, and that he had many other things to say. Thereupon he would
have talked of Zelinda; but this Clerk being obliged to her for his Fortune,
would not listen to his Deposition, but made Signs to the Mutes to do their
duty, insomuch that he was strangled at the time he was going to conceive some
Consolation, in knowing that the Sultan would revenge his innocence.

Moro perishing in this manner, it was easy for the Clerk to serve Zelinda
thoroughly; and he needed only to suppress the Deposition that concerned
Ibrahim: but as he wanted much of having the same Sentiments for him, as he had
for her; and that on the contrary, he was overjoyed at this occasion to revenge
himself, for an injury he had received from him, he carried the Last Will to
the Grand Signior; and it made upon his Mind all imaginable impression. Zelinda
was not long without taking notice of it; for after he had dismissed this Man,
and cast his Eyes twice or thrice over what he had left him, Ibrahim is
culpable, he cried, and I must not suffer him to live any longer. At these
Words he gave order, that the Mutes should be bid to go strangle him: Whereat,
Zelinda being strangely surpised, and meaning to endeavor the fencing off so
great a Misfortune. What is your Celsitude going to do, she said to him? And
must you, upon the Tale of such a Wretch, put to Death one of the greatest
Generals of your Empire, and who is the most capable of doing you service. The
Eunuch, who had Order to go warn the Mutes, surceas'd his Departure at these
Words, being very glad to oblige the Sultana, in giving the Grand Signior time
to make Reflection on what he did. The Sultan appeared uncertain in this, and
tenderly viewing Zelinda, You are too generous, Madam, said he to her, for a
Rival; and if you did well, far from interceding for them, as you do, you would
animate me to put them both to death. Far be I from that, she answered, Sir; if
I aim at your Heart, it is not by sullying my self with a Crime which I should
be eternally upbraiding my self withal. But alas! I perceive, that I shall
never possess it, that Heart that makes all my Joy. It is much more my Rival's
than mine; and if it were not so, you would not command that Ibrahim should be
put to Death upon a bare Suspicion. But what do I say! rather upon the
Deposition of an Enemy, since he that had promised you so many things, is dead,
without being able to acquit himself of his Word; so great a Jealousy, added
she, I very much suspect; and it is perhaps the Cause I concern my self so much
in Ibrahim's safety, since that if you grant me this, it is an infallible Mark
that you love me more than her.

Zelinda having turned matters thus dexterously, the Grand Signior was far from
diving into the Motive of her Intercessions; and that he might not give her
Occasion to believe, that he entertained any Sentiments for her Rival, to her
Prejudice. You confound Delicacy and Love, Madam, he said to her: if I am
jealous, it is not of your Rival, but rather of my Glory, which suffers by
Ibrahim's Audaciousness. If I put him to Death, it is only to learn those that
might resemble him, that it is Temerity for them to address their Vows to the
Sultana's. Thus if I am jealous, it is only of you; and I do not pretend, that
Ibrahim's Action had the Confidence to entertain you with his Love. How should
I be capable, Zelinda answered, ever to listen to any Body, to the prejudice of
what I owe to my Lord! I say this, the Sultan replied, only to render others
wise. It is expedient that one or other die. At these Words he reiterated the
Order he had given for the strangling of Ibrahim; insomuch, that Zelinda being
no longer able to parry so Unhappy a Blow, she could not retain her Tears;
which she nevertheless covered with an other Pretext: If you see me weep, Sir,
she said to him, it is not without Reason: The whole Ottoman Empire is going to
impute Ibrahim's Death to your Jealousy: And, as I told you, this Passion
never proceeding but from a violent Love, who will not believe, but that I am
the least beloved; I, for whom your Celsitude has ever appeared so indifferent,
as never to have any suspicion of my Fidelity. How! the Sultan retorted, would
you have me jealous of you? No, Sir, Zelinda answered; And whatever I say, I
will never give you occasion for it: But I could wish, that you were not so
much of others, or at least, that you would not let it be so manifest. If
Ibrahim is so unhappy as to rob you of your Repose, you may remedy it, without
suffering the thing to retort upon me: You need only to distance him, under the
Pretense of the Good of your State; after that, you need not fear his returning
into the Serraglio, to see my Rival; But to put him thus to Death on her score,
I tell it you once again, is clearly to show to all the World, that I am the
wretched she, and that it is she only for whom you have an inclination.

The Sultan was strangely amazed to see her take things by this Bias; and as
he did not penetrate into the source of her Tears, that still trickled down
more and more, he became very much mollify'd. Thus, to show him, that he had
more consideration for her, than she said, he dispatched away an Eunuch, to
hinder the Mutes from doing their Office. The Eunuch made haste, for fear of
coming too late; and indeed it was necessary he did so, since that all Ibrahim
had been able to obtain, was, that he might bathe, and say his Prayers, before
they executed the Sentence that was past upon him. Nevertheless, as the
Sultan's Design was not to pardon him to all Intents, he asked the Sultana,
whither he should send him, and Zelinda, choosing rather to deprive her self of
him, than see him die, advised the Grand Signior to confer the Government of
Buda on him, an Employ that required a Man of a consummated Experience in War,
and which, by Consequence, he was as capable of as any body.

Thus you see how Ibrahim came to be made Governor of so considerable a Place,
and why in the first Convention that was held of the Bassa's, he was not sent
for with the rest. But at length, the Good of the State prevailing over all
other Considerations, he came to Court, and Sultana Zelinda having ever a great
influence over the Grand Signior, made use of that Occasion to see him; Absence
having not been capable to make her forget him, though it had been of some
Years duration. It was not so with Ibrahim, not that he had entered into any
other Engagement, but he had made use of his Reason, to cure himself of an
Amor that had like to have been fatal to him, and wherein he could not
persevere, at least, without being exposed to the same Dangers he had run. Thus
the Returns he made to the Testimonies she gave him of her Passion, spoke but
little fondness; nay, and he excused himself from accepting of an appointment
she made Almonac propose to him, who on his part did not allow Zelinda his
Ministry but with trembling, after what had happened. The Sultana was startled,
and also picqu'd at this Refusal; and though he had used, as a Pretext, that if
he did not accept the Offers she made him, it was rather out of fear of
engaging her in some ill Business, than for his own sake; yet was she of a
quite different Opinion. She entertained a Fancy, that his denying of her thus,
was because he had got an other Mistress; and this thought inspiring her with a
Design to ruin him, she only suspended this Resolution till such time as that
she could be truly informed, how this Matter stood. To effect this, she bribed
one of his Principal Servants, imagining, that if he had any Intrigue, there
must be some one or other to whom he must have imparted it: But not one having
been able to give her any such Account, because that effectually her Suspicions
were ill grounded, she laid aside above half her Anger, beginning to believe,
that it was only Fear that had hindered him from accepting of her Rendezvouze.

After she had thus justified him in her Mind, she was but a very little while
before she restored him her Affection: So true it is, that in the Hearts of
Lovers, the Passions that seem the most contrary, succeed one another. Far am I
from saying, that they be effectually so: For after all, whatever Hatred a
Lover, or a Mistress may think they have for each other, we are too blame, to
call by that Name the Sentiments with which they are animated. So far it is
from being Hatred, that it is an Excess of Love, insomuch, that the greatest
Mischiefs that can befall them, would be, if that should happen which they
desire against the Beloved Person. Sultana Zelinda did quickly give proofs of
what I now say; for instead of continuing in the revenge she meditated a moment
before, she signified to Ibrahim, that she loved him more than ever, insomuch,
that she could live no longer, if he refused her the satisfaction of
entertaining him in private.

It would not have been well in Ibrahim to have persisted any longer in his
Denials: Cruelty does ill become a Man; and after all, since it was only fear
that detained him, it was in some manner shameful for him, that a Woman should
have more Courage than he. I know not, whether it was for these Reasons, or
others, that he changed his Mind; for in short, he saw Sultana Zelinda, and she
took so much pleasure in his Converse, that she would have been very glad if
the Grand Signior would have conceived a Fancy to have detained him at Court.
Nevertheless, as this was a thing rather to be desired than hoped for, she fell
to contriving some other expedient, for the giving her self content, and found
none better than this.

As she knew not the Secrets of State, she innocently thought that Ibrahim, and
the other Bassa's, had been sent for, only with a Design of making War, and
imagining, that there would be a thousand Occasions for her to see her Lover,
if she could oblige the Grand Signior to go himself at the Head of his Armies:
She used all manner of means to persuade him, that it concerned his Honor not
to leave any other than himself to make the Conquest of Hungary. The Sultan,
who to speak frankly, loves a Camp less than the Serraglio and Hunting, having
not answered her upon this Point, as she desired him, she addressed her self to
the Grand Vizier, who, in Quality of Prime Minister, might do much for her
satisfaction. She was very loath to do it however; For this Minister had been
in Love with her for some Years; but he, far from seeming to her, amiable
enough to create the like Sentiments in her, he was disagreeable to her, to a
Degree beyond sufferance. But being capable of doing all things for the Love of
Ibrahim, she sent to tell the Grand Vizier, that she had a longing desire to
speak with him, and entreated him, that it might be the same Day. Almonac was
the Bearer of this good News, which afforded the Vizier so much Joy, that he
made him a Present of a Diamond of great Value. You may be sure, he did not
fail the Rendezvouze: He threw himself at the Sultana's Feet; he asked her,
what he could do for her Service, entreating her, that she would employ him.
Zelinda received him with a Countenance, which she knew how to compose as
Occasion served. Thus having appeared all Sweetness, contrary to her Custom,
the Vizier was so enflamed, that he vowed to her, that what she demanded of
him, must not be in his power, or that he would instantly grant it her. We
shall see that, the Sultana made Answer; and what I desire of you, is, that in
the War we are going to make in Hungary, you would induce the Grand Signior to
go thither in Person.

The Grand Vizier was surpised at this Request, and seeing that the Sultana
had suffered her self to be abused by the Rumors that ran about of an
approaching Rupture between the Two Empires, he thought it convenient to
undeceive her, that so she might convert her Demand into an other, wherein
there might be means of doing her Service. Whereupon he informed her, how the
Reports that run about of the War, were only to oblige the Emperor still to
augment the Offers he had made to the Grand Signior: That there were not the
least thoughts of proceeding to a Rupture with him, and how far from that the
State stood in need of Peace. Though such an Answer ought to have stopped the
Sultana's Mouth, she did not rest satisfied therewithal: She told the Vizier,
That it was very true, that she had thought, as well as others, that the War
was just breaking out; but that by being mistaken, she did not see why he
refused her her Request: That Peace and War being equally in his Hands, he
might choose either: That if he did it not, it was for that he had no Design to
oblige her: That she was very glad she knew it, that so she might accordingly
regulate her Sense upon his Conduct.

These Reproaches were sensible to the Grand Vizier, proportionably to the Love
he had for her; and as it proceeded even to Excess, I shall not undertake to
express his Grief: Nevertheless, being very willing to mollify her Spirit: Ah!
Madam, he said to her, would you, that for my own sake, I should plunge the
Empire into the Disorder that is an inevitable Consequence of War. Should not I
remain responsable toward the Sultan, and toward his People? And for having
confided his Authority in me, must I be the Author of so many Mischiefs? Tell
me, he added, what can oblige you to make such a Request, and perhaps I may
find some other Expedient for your satisfaction.

The Sultana was not so mad as to do it. And indeed, if there are Women that
impart to their Lovers what passes secretly in their Hearts, it is only to
their Favorites; but to believe they do so to others, is what never happened,
and never will. Thus the Sultana guiding her self by these Rules, far from
owning things to him as they were, used, as a Pretext, That the Grand Signior
shared his Favor between her and her Rival, she fancied she could not better
remove her from his Heart, than by removing her from his Presence. That as she
did not enjoy her perfect Health, the Grand Signior would never expose her to
Fatigues, such as were those of War: That this was the Service she expected
from him: if not, that he might expect she would never look upon him with a
good Eye.

The Grand Vizier believed sincerely what she said: Wherefore, imagining, that
provided he proposed some Expedient that could produce the same Effect, she
should like one as well as an other: It is not necessary, Madam, he said to
her, that we proceed to that Extremity, for the giving of you satisfaction; and
though in the sentiments I have for you, it is very grievous to me to
understand, that all your Vows aim only at possessing the Grand Signior; Yet
will I serve you in it, to show you, that your Content will ever be dearer to
me than my own: Suffer us only to finish, he added, the Treaty that is now
negotiating with the Emperor; and after, I promise you to engage the Sultan to
undertake such a Progress as shall be the same thing for you, as if he had been
engaged in War.

This Expedient was such as would have non-plus'd a Person that had less
Address than the Sultana: But besides her being naturally crafty, and that
besides, Love whetted her Wit: What you say, said she to him, would be
something, if I did not see an inconvenience in it. If you thus cause the
Emperor to take a Progress, this will be so far from quieting my Mind, that it
is on the contrary a Courting in me of new Disgraces. For one Rival that I
shall rid my self of, there will thence arise an hundred others. How many
People are there that have not the least thoughts, by reason of the length of
the way, of presenting a Beauty to the Sultan, who seeing him upon the spot,
will be proud of the Occasion of bringing him all that they shall find
handsome. I shall be every where afraid of meeting with one or other, to
supplant me, and only in War can I find my safety.

These were the Reasons the Sultana urged, to destroy the Expedient the Grand
Vizier had started: And as they had some Face, he bent his Thoughts to effect
her purpose by some other means. In the mean while, as it was not his Opinion
to make War with the Emperor, he proposed that of the Persian, wherein he made
appear much more facility; but which the Sultana thwarted with Reasons I shall
suppress. In fine, the Grand Vizier in no wise prevailing to get her approve of
it: Well, Madam, he said to her, ' it is done, since you will have it so, and we
will have War with the Emperor. But at least remember, that it is only to
oblige you; and that if this makes me lose the Sultan' s Favor, you are bound
to treat me a little more favorably than hitherto you have done. The Sultana
being overjoyed at her having obtained what she desired, gave him some good
Words, which rendered him so fervent to oblige her, that he sent for Ibrahim
that very day, by whom he expected to be better informed than by any other, by
reason he was acquainted with the Country, and knew the means how to carry on
the War successfully in Hungary.

Ibrahim repairing to the House of this Prime Minister, came at a time when he
was busy: Wherefore there being no means of seeing him in half an Hours time,
the Grand Vizier sent Directions to his Wife, to introduce him into her
Lodgings, and to entertain him till such time as he had dispatched an Affair he
had then in hand. This was a signal Favor for Ibrahim, and which the Grand
Vizier seldom did to any Body: But the necessity he had of him, was the
Occasion of so great a Distinction. Be it as it will, Ibrahim no sooner saw
this Lady, but that he remained, as it were, charmed with her Beauty. The Lady,
on her side, found him perfectly handsome; and if they had dared to interchange
their thoughts upon this Case, they would have mightily gratified their
Inclinations, since there is nothing that more abridges the pains of Lovers,
than the knowledge they give one another of a Reciprocal Love. But in short,
both of them were cautious of so freely declaring their Sentiments, Ibrahim was
detained by the Respect that People commonly have for the Person beloved, and
the Grand Vizier's Wife, by the Decorum of her Sex. I do not say, by the
Obligations of her Duty, since it is certain they seldom stick to fail in that,
from the time they amuse themselves thus in ogling so tenderly any other than
their Husbands.

Thus this Interview only terminated in a great deal of Civility on both sides:
But though the Grand Vizier remained full an Hour without coming, the
Conversation did not languish, as commonly happens when there is nothing that
animates it. They said a Thousand pretty things to one another: and they had
still abundance more to interchange, if he had not come so soon. In the mean
while, the Grand Vizier being to discourse him in private, took him along into
his Garden, where he immediately fell to the matter, asking him, what he
thought of the Emperor's Forces. Ibrahim told him what he knew of them; and as
he required nothing more than Occasions to signalize himself, he made the
Conquest of Hungary so easy to him, that the Grand Vizier was the more excited
to keep his Word with Zelinda. Wherefore this Minister having been very much
satisfied with him in this first Interview, demanded a second of him, and after
that, several others, which Ibrahim took care to lengthen as much as he could,
because that in those Occasions, he took his measures so well, that he saw his
Wife several times, with whom he fell so in Love, that he absolutely forgot
Sultana Zelinda.

What made him proceed so far in so short a time, is, that he found in her all
the Acknowledgment he could desire. Nevertheless, Sultana Zelinda was
sufficiently jealous, as to take notice of it; but by good luck for him, as she
knew that he had Business in that House, she was far from believing that he
went thither on any other account. After all these Conferences, the Grand
Vizier spoke to the Sultan of making War upon the Emperor* at which his
Gelsitude seemed amazed, having heard him say several times, that it was not
for the Good of his Empire to break with him. He asked him the Reason of so
sudden a Change: And as the Vizier was prepared for this Question, and that
besides, the Sultan was none of those penetrating Wits, that can defend
themselves against the Artifices of a Crafty Minister, he made him believe all
he was minded. The War being thus resolved on in the Council, was proclaimed
forthwith throughout the whole Ottoman Empire, with this Circumstance, That the
Grand Signior would go himself in Person.

Sultana Zelinda, after having expressed her Acknowledgment to the Vizier,
thought that there was nothing more wanting to her Happiness, than to intimate
to Ibrahim, that she was the Cause of it, and why she had done it. Ibrahim
thought himself bound to thank her for it; but he did it with so little
Fondness, that the Sultana was not satisfied. Still less satisfied was she with
several Reasons he urged to divert her from this Voyage: He told her, among
other things, that if she suffered the Grand Signior to make War, he would
cease perhaps making of Love. That tho these Two Passions be not incompatible,
it nevertheless often happens, that the one is neglected for the other: That
her Interest was to keep him with her, and not to suffer his Flames to
evaporate by Occupations that were of sufficient Consequence to make him lay
all other Thoughts aside.

The Sultana vouchsafed to hear him out; but he having done speaking, she was
so scandalized at his Discourse, that she was seized with a furious anger: It
ill becomes thee, ungrateful wretch, she said to him, to give me Lessons how to
keep the Sultan's Heart: And when I only aspire to thine, should it not be thy
Province to make me forget him, instead of speaking to me in his behalf.
Ibrahim saw plainly he was in the wrong; and meaning to repair it, he
endeavored to excuse himself upon the Care he had of her Fortune. But the
Sultana made him Answer, That as he only faggotted sorry Reasons upon each
other, he must needs do a great many things to make her forget such an Offense.
This was frankly telling him to be more tender for the future: But as this did
not depend on him, and that besides, the Love he had for the Grand Vizier's
Wife, was an Obstacle to the return of his Affection, he so little satisfied
her, that she was still more angry than before. However, it had been a Thousand
times worse, had she known the Cause of her Misfortune; but by good luck for
her, she was a stranger to it; and as wretched as she thought she might reckon
her self, she had, at least, the comfort of flattering her self, that she had
not any Rival.

In the mean while, the Grand Signior made all the necessary Preparations for
his Journey; and Ibrahim judging that he should be persecuted, if Sultana
Zelinda went along, used his utmost endeavors to have it put off, or at least,
that she might not be of the Number. But the Sultan having formally declared
his Mind, That he meant she should accompany him every where, he had no other
means left than to set the Grand Vizier to work. Wherefore he told him, that if
he was minded to Husband his own Glory, it was not expedient he should let the
Grand Signior march to this Expedition: That though he was without experience,
and by Consequence obliged to rely in all things upon him, Fame would
nevertheless adjudge the Praise of all his Conquests to the Sultan: That since
He it was, that must undergo the whole trouble, it was but Justice that he
should have all the Glory: Wherefore he thought himself obliged, as a real
Friend, to give him this Advice.

The Grand Vizier having weighed this Discourse, found it to be of very good
sense, and seeking the Occasion of speaking to the Grand Signior, he urged to
him Four Difficulties as to his Journey, insomuch, that this Prince, who was
more a Lover of Repose than of Trouble, promised him to make reflection upon
the matter. Thus People began from that very day to forbear talking of the
Journey, as of a thing very certain: And this being told again to Zelinda, she
asked the Grand Vizier the meaning of it. He had only sorry Excuses to give
her, which made her still the more angry. Nevertheless, not satisfied with
telling him, that she took it very ill that he changed things in this manner,
after having concluded them with her, she declared to him so positively, that
she expected they should be executed according to their Project, that the Grand
Vizier durst not thwart her. In this manner the Grand Signior's Journey being
upon the point of being broken off, was set on foot again, so as left no room
for doubt.

When Ibrahim first heard this News, he thought every body mistaken, and that
he alone was informed. That he might be the better assured, he inquired of the
Grand Vizier about the matter; and he being willing to let him see that it was
none of his fault, owned ingenuously to him, how the Case stood, and at the
same time, that he was forced to it by the Sultana. Ibrahim did all he could to
represent to him, that in his Post he needed only to slight all such Menaces:
but he knowing the Influence she had over the Grand Signior, not judging it
convenient to incur her Displeasure, he made Ibrahim Answer, That he loved
rather a little less Glory, and to be what more assured of living the longer.

After this Answer, Ibrahim judged that it would be a difficult matter for him
to prevail with him to take an other Resolution, so much the more as that his
Passion solicited him himself, not to absent himself from the Sultana; and as
that he had taken, was very contrary to the Love he began to be sensible of for
his Wife, he invented all manner of means to absent himself from the Eyes of a
jealous Woman, whose detection he judged it would be impossible for him to
escape, if the Grand Signior went the Journey. Being possessed with these
Sentiments, he whirled his Head with a Thousand such things as I may well call
Chimaeras, since that he himself gave them this Name, when that after having
troll'd them in his Mind, he had found their Extravagancy. Nevertheless, after
long musing, he paws'd upon one that he thought certain, but which being
extraordinarily dangerous for him, did well merit he should take it into his
serious Consideration. This was to intimate to the Grand Vizier, that the
Sultana was only desirous of this Journey, that she might have the
Opportunities of seeing him, and that what she had said to him, was only a
thing invented to conceal her Concerns.

The step was very slippery, as I have said, and he was not so unprovided of
understanding, but that he plainly saw, that he staked his Life. But as
Inamorato's are half mad, whatever Reflections they may make, he caused this
Intimation to be given under Hand to the Grand Vizier; but to lessen the
Vexation he might entertain upon this account, he signified to him at the same
time, that far from making returns to her Passion, there was nothing that was
more insupportable to him. That he might not doubt of this Truth, several
Circumstances were related to him, which he himself might remember. However
nothing persuaded him more than that invincible desire the Sultana had to cause
the Grand Signior to undertake this Voyage, and Ibrahim's Request to hinder him
from so doing.

Without this Circumstance he would a thousand times have died of grief, to
see, that before him she preferred a Rival, whom he esteemed so much below him.
But being in some manner comforted, by making reflection, that the Sultana was
made to endure the same Treatment he endured, he went to the Grand Signior,
whom he told, That he had maturely weighed the Reasons that were Pro and Con
his Journey, and that all well considered, he ought to think of it no more, at
least, without exposing himself to Perils, to which, whatever Precaution he
might use, there was no Remedy. There needed no more to make him break it a
second time: But the Grand Vizier not content with what he had newly done, he
sent Ibrahim away Post, without giving him one moments delay, under color,
that in the then Conjuncture, the Frontier stood in need of such a Man as he.

This was to his great Regret, that he saw himself obliged to go thus away
Post, and he could have wished he might have bid Adieu to the Grand Vizier's
Wife, with whom he had been so happy as to come to a right understanding.
Nevertheless, his Vexation was much less than that of the Sultana, when that
she knew he was gone. She knew not whether she ought to impute the Fault to
him, or to the Grand Vizier, whom she had heard, had only given him a Quarter
of an Hours time to take his leave; of which, being very willing to be
informed, she sent to require a private Conversation, with him, which he was
far from refusing her, out of the desire he had to reproach her. Coming both
with such Sentiments, it was impossible their Interview should pass without
some noise; and indeed the Sultana having farther learnt, that the Vizier had
dissuaded the Grand Signior from going into Hungary, which she knew not before,
She was no sooner in his Presence, but that without making him any Complement,
she asked him why, after having promised her, that the Journey should be
undertaken, he had broken it, to the prejudice of his Word. The Reason is,
Madam, the Grand Vizier said, without being startled, that I knew not you was
in Love with Ibrahim, and as I have a Care of my Master's Honor, I am very
glad that a pitiful Slave should not share what is destined for him. The
Sultana was very much surprised at these Words.; but not thinking fit to agree
to what he said; I excuse this want of Respect, she answered, because I know
very well, that it proceeds from your Jealousy; but know you, that you must
not relapse; otherwise I shall not ever be of an humor to take things so
mildly. Thus it is to your Love, she added, that you are now indebted, that I
do not punish you, as you deserve; and it is further in its Favor, that I
consent that there be not any Journey, to let you see whether I love Ibrahim or
no.

It was an extraordinary thing to hear the Sultana talk in this manner, who
naturally was violent, and who besides, according to all appearances, ought not
to have taken the Vizier's Complement so mildly. But you must know, that she
had the knack of dissembling when she pleased, and that when her Heart was
seized with a strong Anger, that was the time when she affected the greatest
Mildness. And indeed, far from doing what she said for the Love of him, her
whole Contrivance was, how to know who had revealed her Secret to him, that she
might afterward accordingly make her Resentment fall upon them both. The Grand
Vizier not knowing her to be so great a Mistress of Dissimulation, having taken
in good part so sudden a Resignation, instead of persisting in jealous Motions,
fell into an Excess of Tenderness. He asked her Pardon for having unjustly
suspected her; and the Sultana seeing him at the Point she desired, pressed him
to tell her the Author of such an Allarum. The Grand Vizier imparted all things
to her, and having not omitted to tell her, that Ibrahim had himself entreated
him to break off the Sultan's Journey, she changed Color, and called him a
Thousand times Ungrateful and Perfidious in the bottom of her Soul. But this
plunged her into a greater Despondency; the Vizier assuring her, that either he
was mistaken, or that the Intimation came from the same Hand.

They parted pretty good Friends in appearance, which must needs cast a
diffidence in the Mind of a suspicious Man. But as much as Lovers are
suspicious in Points of their Misfortunes, they are on the other hand as full
of Confidence in Point of their good Fortune.

Thus the Grand Vizier having fallen into the Trap, went to the Army the most
satisfied Man living, and was no sooner come thither, but that the Sultana, who
was very glad that he appeared in these Sentiments, for fear that out of
Jealousy he should reveal her Concerns to the Grand Signior, had it buzzed in
his Ears, that what had been said: to him of Ibrahim, was not only true, but
also, that he loved her beyond expression. He had much a do to believe this
News; but they promised him to give him such convincing Proofs of it, that he
should no longer doubt of it. He had nothing to say after this, till such time
as that it was made clear out to him, as was promised, he fastened upon the
Siege of Vienna, after having laid waste the open Country by Robbery,
Slaughter, and Conflagration.

If this Famous Siege related to my Subject, I should have fine things to
insert in this place; but as it is not seasonable, I shall only say, that the
Vizier was so jealous of Ibrahim, that he did all he could to have him cut off.
It was a Miracle how he escaped, at which the Vizier being strangely amazed
himself, he contrived to ruin him after an other manner, charging him with the
length of the Siege. The Sultan setting a Value upon Ibrahim, wondered to see
that the Vizier complained of him; and having communicated his Letters to one
of his Principal Officers; This Person being a Friend of Ibrahim's, told him,
that he needed not to wonder, and that the Vizier had Cause to hate him. The
Sultan asked him, why? Because, Sir, he said to him, that Ibrahim loves his
Wife. At these words he took out of his Pocket a Letter that was written from
the Camp, in which several Circumstances of this Amor were signified to him.
The Sultan, who delighted in diverting himself at an other's expense, retained
this Letter, and half an Hour after imparted it to the Sultana, who had taken a
strange course to revenge her self on Ibrahim. She had caused a Letter to be
put into the Vizier's Hands, which Ibrahim had written to her formerly, and
which, being without a Date, might pass for New. But seeing this, which might
produce the same effect, she was very sorry she had sent the other, yet kept
it, however, that she might make farther use of it against Ibrahim. The Sultan
left it with her, without so much as thinking whether she kept it, or not; but
as soon as he was gone, she sent it to the Vizier, by an express Courrier, with
order to tell him by Word of Mouth, That now it was his part to revenge himself
on a man that made Love to his Wife, and to his Mistress: and this done, she
imagined he would not suffer him to live long.

This was all the Complement she made to him: for she was so incensed, to see
that Ibrahim loved an other, that she only breathed Revenge. And certainly,
this is not to be wondered at, since that some few days before, she was also
prompted by the same Sentiments, though she as then thought him but
iudifferent. The Grand Vizier, at the Reception of this Letter, had much a-do
to believe what he saw. He had newly learnt by the other, that Ibrahim loved
the Sultana: And by this: he saw plainly, that it was his Wife of whom some
Circumstances were related, touching some Beauties she had under her Linen;
which made known to him, that those that talked in that manner, must needs have
seen them. I leave you to think, what Two Injuries of this Nature were capable
of producing in his Mind: To which, we shall add a Third Affront, which was as
sensible to him as the other: This was to see, that after his Wife had had the
Weakness to grant him some Favors, he had been capable of divulging them,
which he perceived by the Character of the Letter he had newly received. So it
is, that being seized at the same time with Shame, Rage and Jealousy, he sent
to seek out Ibrahim, and inquired of him about a Mine, with which he had
encharg'd him. Ibrahim made him an Answer suitable to his knowledge of the
matter: Where upon the Vizier taking occasion to fall into a Rage: There Is no
need of asking, he said to him, why the Siege is thus span into a length; no
body does his duty; and Ibrahim, whom I thought the bravest of our Officers, is
the most a Coward. Ibrahim is no Coward, this Bassa made Answer; And he dares
say, that if every one had performed his duty, as he has done, the Town would
long since have been taken. These are only Words, the Vizier replied, and Words
very remote from Effects. But if you are so brave, go now instantly and attack
such a Bastion, and either be killed upon the spot, or return victorious, when
the Mine has been once sprung. I consent to it, was Ibrahim's Answer: And if
you would your self see how I go to work, I would advise you to follow me.

The Vizier seeking a Quarrel, was upon the Ferment at these Words: You are a
rash, arrogant fellow; said he to him, to go to tell me what I have to do:
March where I command you, without further Reply: if not, I shall make you
sensible what it is to disobey me. I do not disobey you, Ibrahim replied: but
once again, it is not yet time to attack the Bastion: And if you do it, it is
the way to ruin your Army. I Will march thither, however, since that you will
have it so; but I will have every one to know, that I do it not without Regret.
I do not doubt that, the Vizier reparty'd: And it is long since, that I know,
that the greatest vexation that can be done to such a Man as thee, is to send
him to such an occasion. I trouble my self little for this Reproach, Ibrahim
made Answer: My Comfort is, there is none but thou of that Opinion: but thou
must needs bear me a Grudge upon other Accounts; And the whole Army is my
Witness, that I spare my self no more than an other, when it concerns the
Sultan's Service. At these words, out he went, and so to his Expedition, which
was as unhappy as it was ill digested. He caused Three Thousand Men to be
killed in this Action: and the Vizier seeing that the whole Army was ready to
revolt against him, accusing him of causing all these Men to perish without any
necessity, sent him an Order to retreat.

In the mean while, though the Siege thus spun into a length, as the Christians
dreaded, that at the long run the Place would fall into the Hands of the
Infidels, several hastened to its Relief, and, among others, the King of
Poland. All these Troops being come within Two Leagues of the Ottoman Camp, the
Grand Vizier was at a very great perplexity, having an Ill Will born him
equally by the Officers and Soldiers. This did not hinder him however, from
contriving to rid himself of Ibrahim; and having sent for a Man in whom he
confided, he commanded him, that when the Bassa was engaged in the Battle, he
should give him a Bullet in his Back. This Order being given, he detached
Ibrahim to go view the Christians, who were advancing upon the Mountain of
Calemberg. The Assassinate followed him; but before he had time to do his
Business, there came a shot that killed him himself, and which preserved
Ibrahim from danger.

It is not my Province to give the Particulars of that great Day, a Day so
glorious to the King of Poland. It is sufficient, I say that after Ibrahim saw
that all was in disorder on his side, he marched toward the Grand Vizier's
Wife's Tent, which was already surrounded with Christians; insomuch, that she
ran a risque of falling into their Hands.

He opened his Passage to it with his Sable: and having thus freed her from
danger, he conducted her into the Body of his Army, which fled before the King
of Poland. The Grand Vizier, who thought her a Prisoner, and who, as is
thought, would have been glad something worse had befallen her, which is
justified by the little Care he had taken of saving her timely, was in a Rage
to see that she was endebted to Ibrahim for her Safety. Nevertheless, as he had
too much Business upon his Hands, to think then on that, his whole Thoughts
were how to get off with his Forces and himself. But when this was done, he
openly complained, that Ibrahim had abandoned the Posts he had confided to him,
under Color of giving Succors to Ladies, but in effect, to cloak his
Cowardice. He further complained of some other Officers, that so he might not
be thought to point at Ibrahim, out of any particular Resentment. Having
prepared Peoples Minds by these Complaints, he sent for them to his Tent; and
after having upbraided them with their Cowardice, he caused them to be
strangled in the Presence of the Principal Commanders of the Army; Ibrahim only
did he reserve for the last, and having made him go into a By-Apartment, he
showed him the Two Letters before mentioned; after which he had the same Fate
as the others had had.

His Execution surprised all the Officers that knew that the Pretext that had
been used to put him to Death, was altogether unjust, since that he was not
only brave of his Person, but that he had moreover, more Experience in point of
War than the Grand Vizier himself. And indeed, this Minister imagining, that
after so hardy a stroke, and done by his single Authority, he had many measures
to take, he sent a Courier to the Grand Signior, to acquaint him with the
Motives that had obliged him thereunto. This News being spread in the
Serraglio, the Two Sultana's were forthwith animated with different Sentiments.
Ibrahim's Sister being extremely afflicted, went to cast her self at the Grand
Signior's Feet, and demand Justice of him against the Vizier: And as for
Zelinda, she did not think it became her to concern her self in this Affair,
that freed her from a Lover blackened with Infidelity. These were her first
Motions: but having quickly made room to others, more tender, she looked upon
her self as the Cause of Ibrahim's Death, which cast her into an Affliction
much greater than that of the other Sultana.

Being thus possessed anew with Sentiments of Tenderness, it is easy to
apprehend, that far from taking the Vizier's part, who besought her however, by
a Letter, that she would grant him her Protection with the Grand Signior, she
did him all sort of ill Offices, but underhand. Yet did she not think it
expedient to use Ibrahim's Death as a Pretext, for fear he might accuse her of
revenging him, as a Party concerned, which he might have justified by the
Letter he had in his Hands: but having had the Cunning to get it again, she no
longer kept any measures, and accused him of being the Cause of all the ill
successes of the Army. Now as these ill successes had cast the Ottoman Empire
into a great Consternation, the Grand Signior did no longer look upon the Grand
Vizier with so good an Eye: and then Zelinda coming also to the Charge, it was
no difficult matter for her to obtain of him, that he should be put to Death.
The Order for that purpose was dispatched out of hand; and for fear the Grand
Signior should revoke it, Zelinda sent it to the Mutes by one of her Servants,
with an Injunction to be himself present at the Execution.

Such an Order did extremely surprise the Grand Vizier, who expected quite an
other Treatment from the Grand Signior, whom he had done great Services in
several Occasions: but seeing that it was brought by a Confident of Zelinda's,
he plainly perceived, that he was going to dye, rather as a Victim of Love,
than as a Victim of State, which was performed at that very instant; and
Zelinda had the Cruelty to go see him struck dead, as he was, as if she had
been afraid they had not executed the Grand Signior's Orders.

THE END.

