To the Honorable The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in PARLIAMENT
Assembled; The Deplorable Case and Humble Petition of Dr. TITUS OATS.
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioner in the Year 1678, discovered a horrid Popish Conspiracy,
for the Destruction of King Charles the Second, and his present Majesty, and
the Protestant Religion within these Kingdoms; and proved it so fully, that
several Parliaments and Courts of Justice, before whom he gave his Testimony,
declared their belief of it by public Votes and the Condemnation of several of
the Conspirators. THAT upon this Account the Popish Party pursued your
Petitioner with an implacable Malice, attempting several times to take away his
Life; and being defeated in that Attempt, they first procured the said King
Charles the Second to withdraw that Protection and Subsistence that the said
King had allowed him at the Request of several Parliaments, which was 40 l. per
Month; and then instigated his Royal Highness the Duke of York to prosecute
your Petitioner in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, for speaking this Notorious
Truth, ( viz.) That he the said D. of York was Reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and that it is High Treason to be so Reconciled; wherein a Verdict and
Judgment for 100000 l. Damages were obtained against your Petitioner, and your
Petitioner committed to the King's Bench Prison.

AFTER this the Popish Party obtained leave from King Charles the 2d, to prefer
two several Indictments against your Petitioner for two pretended Perjuries, in
his Evidence concerning the said Conspiracy; which they brought on to a Trial
in the Reign of King James the Second: and your Petitioner upon the Testimony
of these very Witnesses who had Confronted him in three former Trials, and were
disbelieved, (through the partial Behavior of the Chief Justice Jefferies, in
brow-beating your Petitioner's Witnesses and misleading the Juries) was
Convicted of the said pretended Perjuries, and received this Inhumane and
unparalled Sentence, viz. To pay 2000 Marks to the King, to be divested of
his Canonical Habit; to be brought into Westminster Hall with a Paper upon his
Head, with this Inscription, Titus Oats Convicted upon full Evidence of two
horrid Perjuries; to stand in and upon the Pillory two several Days for the
space of an hour; to be Whipped by the Common-Hangman from Aldgate to Newgate on
Wednesday, and Friday following from Newgate to Tyburn; to stand in and upon
the Pillory five times every Year of his Life, and to remain a Prisoner during
Life.

THIS Sentence (as your Petitioner believes) was to murder him, and was
executed accordingly with all the Circumstances of Barbarity, he having
suffered some thousands of Stripes, whereby he was put to unspakeable Tortures,
and lay ten Weeks under the Chirurgions Hands: neither did their Malice and
Cruelty cease here, but because your Petitioner (through the Mercy of God
supporting him, and the extraordinary Skill of a Judicious Surgeon) outlived
that barbarous Usage, some of them got into his Chamber whilst he was weak in
his Bed, and attempted to pull of the Plasters applied to cure his Back, and
threatened to destroy him.

THAT nothing within their Power and Malice might be wanting to complete your
Petitioner's Misery, they procured him to be loaded with Irons of excessive
Weight for one whole Year without any Intermission, even when his Legs were
swollen with the Gout, and to be shut up in the Hole or Dungeon of the said
Prison, whereby he became impaired of his Limbs, and contracted Convulsion-Fits
to the Hazard of his Life. All which Illegal Proceedings and Barbarous
Inhumanities, were not only intended against your Petitioner as a Revenge upon
him, but likewise to cast a Reproach upon the Wisdom and Honor of four
successive Parliaments, who had given him Credit, and upon the public Justice
of the Nation.

DURING the Time that this Prosecution was upon your Petitioner, several
Noblemen and Gentlemen, Citizens and others contributed 4000 l. per Annum for
his Support and Maintenance, which your Petitioner enjoyed till his present
Majesty King, William, at the request of both Houses of Parliament, restored to
him your Petitioner, the foresaid Pension of 40 l. per Mensom, after having
been deprived thereof nine Years, to his loss above 5000 l.

THAT your Petitioner enjoyed the said Allowance of 40 l. per Month, from
September 1689. till Lady Day in the Year 1692. after which time your
Petitioner had not his Pension paid him, to the undoing of your poor
Petitioner, his Friends withdrawing their Bounty from him, when his Majesty
restored your Petitioner to his said Pension, they judging him to be provided
for during his Life: so that your Petitioner is ruined, he having in the time
of his Sufferings, and since his allowance of 40 l. per Month was taken away,
contracted Debts, for which he has bin sued by his Creditors, and has bin
Arrested and his, Goods taken in Execution; and must have perished had not the
Lords of the Treasury relieved your Petitioner with the Sum of 350 l. with
which Sum your poor Petitioner did pay his Creditors in part, but will be sued
for the Remainder of his Debts which amounts to 500 l. and his poor Wife and
Family must perish, and your Petitioner starve at last in a Prison, unless this
Honorable House do take your poor Petitioner's deplorable Case into their
tender Consideration, his said Pension of 40 l. per Month being his whole and
only Subsistence, he having no Estate to live upon.

THE Premises considered, your Petitioner throws himself at the Feet of this
Honorable House, and pray your Honors to take his deplorable Case into your
tender Consideration; so that your Petitioner may receive the Arrears of his
Pension to discharge his Debts, and that he may be restored to his Pension of
40 l. per Month, that he and his distressed Family may not starve for Want of
Bread.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.


