A SERMON Preached in an Anabaptist Meeting IN WAPPING, On SUNDAY the 19th. of
February,

By the Reverend T.O.D.D depiction of man in pillory Upon this Text, Heb. Chapter
XI. v 1. Faith is the Evidence of things not seen.

Printed, at the request of his Congregation, for Zachariah Marshal near the
Long-Cellar in Wapping. 1699. Price 3 d.

HEB. Chap. XI. Part of the 1st. verse. Faith is the Evidence of things not
seen.
Dearly Beloved,
WHo was the Author of this famous Epistle to the Hebrews, whether St. Paul, as
Cornelius a Lapide and his Disciple St. Jerome would have it, or whether it was
written by some other converted Jew, which was the opinion of Alexander ab
Alexandro and some other Lutheran Divines that opposed the proceedings of the
Council of Constance in the sixth Century, it is not material here to
determine. For my part I must own that St. Paul seems to have the fairest title
to it, but tho I have Sworn to a thousand bold things in my time, yet I would
not swear, Beloved, that this Epistle was written by the aforesaid Apostle. But
leaving this Controversy where we found it, let us now proceed to our Text.
Faith is the Evidence of things not seen.

From which words I draw these four Propositions, First, That Faith is an
Evidence. Secondly, If Faith is an Evidence, that an Evidence consequently
ought to be believed. Thirdly, That there are many things talked off in the
world, that were never seen. Fourthly and Lastly, That an Evidence and through
him any Nation, may, nay ought to believe in things not seen.


First, I say then that Faith is an Evidence. The sacred Writer of this Epistle
positively asserts it, how then dares any man that professes himself a
Christian, revile, censure, and speak contumelious things of any Evidence. I
don't speak this because it was my own Case to be one of this number, but
because the truth requires it, and the truth ought never to be stifled. An
Evidence ought to be respected, and his words should in all civilized Nations
be received for Oracles, for if Faith is an Evidence why then may not we be
saved by an Evidence as well as by Faith? I believe, my Beloved you remember
the time when I was the top Evidence in the horrid Popish Plot, but if you
don't, I do. When ever I came to Westminster Hall, or to the Old Baily, or to
any well-affected Coffeehouse in the City, the people ran in shoals to view my
person, and made a lane for me as I passed along. One cried make room for the
King's Evidence there. How, says his Neighbor, is the Gentleman there with his
mouth in the middle of his face, he that saved our Wives and Daughters from
being ravished by the Man of Sin. Thus was I respected, and admired by all.
Truly I may say it without vanity, that little England, never since it was
little England had so much Faith, as when the Lord made me his unworthy
instrument to broach the Popish Plot at both ends. The Nation believed my
Salamanca degree, and the White-horse Consult, they believed my Forty thousand
Pilgrims with black Bills, and Father Ireland's forty thousand Masses. In short
they in effect believed, when I said the words, that Chalk was Cheese, and that
Cheese was Chalk. These were blessed times, now my Beloved, for an Evidence to
live in. And accordingly then it prosper'd with the Nation for their
extraordinary Faith. We hanged up scores of Idolatrous Priests, and sent their
Bishops to Grass; we seized their Collars of Brawn for concealed Jesuits, and
their Silver Tankards, and Gold Watches for Popish relics. In short we made
the Whore of Babylon take down her sign, so that the Protestant Religion
flourished exceedingly. But when the Nation began once to be possessed with the
Spirit of Infidelity, and my Evidence was not received as formerly, observe
then my Beloved how the Lord powered the vial of his indignation upon these
sinful people. Popery came upon us like an armed man, and Superstition overran
our Pastures like a Flood. Magdalen-College was disparked and laid out to the
Common; the Boys of St. Omers bearded us in Westminster Hall, we had four
Popish Biships like the four winds blowing from the four corners of the Map.
The Monks walked publicly in their Habits; and Carted Bawds had the impudence
to set up for Converts. This in short was the condition of our Affairs, when my
Evidence was rejected, and my Testimony turned out of doors. Thus I have made
it plain that Faith is an Evidence.

I come now to the Second point, If faith then is an Evidence, it follows
consequently that an Evidence ought to be believed. The Talmud observes that
the Prophets in the old Testament were called Evidences and it was a proper
title, for they confirmed their messages with an Oath. As my Soul lives says
Nathan to David in Samuel, to instance in no more. Is it not plain and manifest
therefore, that an Evidence is to be believed? Moreover, as it is said, that no
man is a Prophet is his own Country, may it not (such is the incredulity of
this Apostate age) be applied to the Evidences, viz. that no man is an Evidence
in his own Country. As I told you before, Brethren, my Evidence was received at
first, and how? why Unversally, by King, Lords and Commons. I had my Guard of
Beefeaters to protect me from being insulted or assassinated, my ten pound per
Week duly paid without deductions, Venison Pasties and Westphalia-Hams flew to
my Table without sending for, I was as much stared at, at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-house and at Dick's, as a Foreign Ambassador, when he makes
his entry through Fleetstreet. But when an Unbelieving Generation of Scoffers
strated up, of whom the Observ^tor was the Ringleader, and began to examine my
Narrative with the Carnal Eye of Reason; when they were so malicious and ill
natured as to lay aside their Faith, and to enquire after the credibility of
the things by me deposed; when they impudently asserted that my Plot would not
hold water, and that there were several irreconcilable contradictions in my
Book never to be solved, then these Sons of Amaleck neglected me their
Deliverer and Savior, who like Samson slew their Enemies with the Jawbone of
an Ass. It fell out unluckily for me, I must own that I swore Circumcision, a
thing that may easily be discovered, upon the Minister of Duke's place. My
forty thousand Spanish Pilgrims were improbable Devils with a witness, for who
the plague could bring so many of 'em together? however, though they looked so
foolish and ridiculous, who could disprove them? whereas to swear circumcision
against a man, unless the case had been certainly so, was the greatest folly in
the Universe, and if ever I repent, I shall put it among my Retractations.
Every Midwife or Matron, nay, in this knowing age a raw Girl of Thirteen can
tell whether such an allegation be true, but I may thank the Devil, or if the
Devil and a certain Noble person may be put together without a Scandalum
Magnatum, I may thank a certain Lord too for bringing me into this misfortune,
who makes good the Proverb, that all mischief comes out of the North. Thus as I
said before, the Devil or a certain Lord owed me a Spite, and as in Adam of
Paradise all fell, so I particularly fell in Adam of Duke's Place, but if I
could have seen two yards before me, I had never meddled with that one eye'd
Philistian, for he proved the first step to my ruin. Therefore I would advise
you, my beloved, when you are resolved to give a man a civil lift out of this
transitory World, that you would have more discretion than to swear
Circumcision, or any such palpable matter against him, because a Jury may soon
know whether your Testimony be true; but let your Evidence relate to things not
Seen, as Treasonable words, and Treasonable Discourses, and if you stand Buff
to such a Charge, 'twill be impossible to convict you of falsity. It was the
saying of a great Politician, that as every man was not fit to Swear, so every
thing was not fit to be sworn: For an Evidence, if he hopes to thrive upon his
Trade, ought to have several qualifications. Imprimis, he ought to have a
Corinthian forehead, for since he must expect to meet abundance of Enemies in
the world, it is requisite he should be armed accordingly to fence against them.
It Is a common saying that Diamonds cut Diamonds, why then should not Brass be
repelled by Brass? Secondly, he ought to have a never-failing memory, for
Beloved, it is the Devil upon two sticks for an Evidence to be caught in two
different stories; but in case of a defect here, Thirdly, he ought to have a
never-failing invention to bring him off of the hooks again, when his memory
leaves him the lurch. This was once my own case, Brethren. I was asked at the
Council whether I knew Coleman or no. To which I replied in the affirmative.
Soon after a Gentleman was brought into the room, and they asked me whether I
had ever seen him before. No said I, he is an absolute stranger to me. Why says
one of the Counselors, this is Mr. Coleman. It Is even so replied I, but that
confounded Candle there glared so in my face that it made me mistake; and
besides, the Gentleman has a White Wigg on now, whereas he wore a Black one
when I was with him, and that occasioned me to falter a little. Fourthly, an
Evidence ought to be Master of an insuperable obstinacy, otherwise I would not
give a brass Farthing for him. My Brother Bedloe, who now is in the bosom of
the two Elders, that swore against Susannah, was a Hero in this particular. He
confirmed upon his Deathbed all that he had sworn to, and pawned his Salvation
upon the truth of it. In short, he died as hard as a brick-bat, whereas that
puny Milksop Prance, swore back-stroke and fore-stroke about the Antipendiums
and Silver-scrues, about the Murder of Sir Edmunbury Godfry, etc. and owned
himself by his own voluntary Confession to be a damned relenting Villain, and
was rewarded accordingly; that is to say, he was rejected by the Party whom he
swore against, as likewise by those he was converted to. In short, my Beloved,
if a man cannot attain to these four qualifications, he had as good cry Matches
and Brooms about the street, or set up for a Chimny-sweaper, as well as pretend
to be an Evidence. So much by way of digression. To return now to the business
in hand, I come next to prove.

Thirdly, That there are many things talked of in the world, that were never
seen. Upon this Head, were I minded to launch out into my Metaphisics, which I
learned at Salamanca, I should carry the Controversy so far out your reach,
that you would soon loose it, but to condescend to your weak capacities, you
may be pleased to observe that all things may be divided into the following
Branches. First, somethings may be heard that cannot be Seen, as an Echo. We
hear the reflection of the sound, but don't see it. We hear likewise of honest
Courtiers, and honest Churchmen, but they were never seen on this side of the
Globe. I am sure the man that would swear he ever saw any such Monster, will
swear to more than I dare, tho I perhaps I have sworn more than any man in
Europe. Secondly, some things may be seen, that cannot be heard, as dumb a
Woman, but Beloved, I must tell you, by the by, that a dumb Woman is next too a
Miracle. I could never meet with a Woman yet in all my Travels but had more
tongue than I thought came to her share. Thirdly, some things may be both seen
and heard, as a Scolding Wife. Heaven grant that we have not too many of that
sort in this righteous Congregation. Lastly, somethings are neither to be seen
nor heard, as for instance, the Music of the Spheres, and to go no farther, my
forty thousand Spanish Pilgrims with their black Bills. Having as I take it
sufficiently cleared this point, I now proceed to make out my last Proposition,
which was,

Fourthly, That an Evidence, and through him any Nation may, nay, ought to
believe in things not Seen. There are some persons in the world so extremely
difficult and hard to please, that they will believe nothing, but what falls
under the cognizance of their senses. A true Cheapside-Husband will never
believe that his Wife has cornuted his Forehead, unless he finds her and the
Gallant in bed together. My Father Smuel O -- es the Weaver, (and what mortal
man is exempt from humane frailties) was of this Kidney, as it appears by a
story of him in Edward's Gangrena, and was for seeing, and not believing. He
was Spiritual director to some Godly Women, and carried them to the River near
Chelmsford, to see them wash off original Sin, and be Baptized. One of the
Company, who was more shamefaced than the rest of the Sisterhood, after she had
undressed her self to go and wash, laid both her hands upon her Nudities to
cover them, one hand it seems not being large enough to do it: But my Father
Sam, who was resolved to see all or nothing, as you will find in the aforesaid
Book, made her take off her unrighteous hands, and when that was done, he went
on with the Ceremony. This, I say, is the Case of most men; they will trust
their Faith no farther than they can see it: but I would fain know whether an
Evidence is beholding to a Nation, if they will believe no more of his
Narative, than what they have seen with their Eyes. A true Evidence will trump
up several things that were never seen, and it may be, that were never heard
of, and if they have a mind to be saved by him, they must depend upon his
veracity, and ask no more questions. But, Alas! this is a very ungrateful World
we have to deal with, so that if it were not for the private satisfaction which
every good Evidence feels within his own breast for doing a National Service,
he would much sooner take up with the scurvy employment of a Hog-driver. For,
is it not a sad thing, dearly Beloved, that where a man generously offers to
hang half for a Kingdom, and consequently to ease it of a World of troubleso me
fellows, that are a burden to it, he should be brow beaten by a saucy Judge, or
cross-examined by any of your impertinent Counselors that will have an Oar in
every man's Boat, and at last, for twelve illiterate Raskals, called the Jury,
to bring in the Bill Ignoramus forsooth, after a man has been at the expense of
contriving and tacking together a plausible story, and perhaps swore till he is
black in the Face? I would have hanged Sir George Wakeman, and the Popish
Lords, and Parson Eliot, and a thousand more that I cannot think of at present:
But the Government I thank them, were such fools as to obstruct my designs. For
my part, I did all that lay in the power of an Evidence to do, but some person
that shall be nameless, would not let me go through stitch with my work, and
therefore if Popery is not ruined, root and branch, they have none to blame but
themselves. They would not reverse my Sentence when it might have been for the
common advantage, and when my Friends solicited it: So now I don't care a groat
if it continues on till to the end of the Chapter, for though perhaps I may not
meet with my due reward in this World, yet those that thoroughly know me, say, I
shall certainly find it in the next.

Having, I presume, cleared these four points to your satisfaction, give me
leave to say a word to some Objections that may be raised, either against the
Truth of my Evidencing, or the freedom of my Language, in calling a Spade a
Spade: Or, Lastly, against my leaving the Church of England, whereof I have
professed my self to be a Member several years, to return to the Religion of my
Forefathers, and join my self with the Brethren of the Anabaptist persuasion.

Object. the First. If, Doctor, your Evidence was true? say these Gentlemen,
how came it about then, that among so many Priests and Papists of all sorts
that you hanged, not one of them should own the Crime for which he was brought
to the Gallows? but make a perpendicular leap to Hell with a lie in his mouth:
whereas, say they, in George P -- r's Plot, all of them had the Grace to
confess the fact for which they died.

To this I answer. First, It is plain from Suarez, Escobar, and the whole Herd
of their Casuists, that a Roman Catholic may equivocate and perjure himself
for the good of the Church. This I take to be so notorious a truth that I defy
any Raskal of a Jesuit to deny it. But People will reply, If this is the
standing Doctrine of that Communion, how came Charnock and Rookwood to be
without it? or why should they squeak any more than their Predecessors.
Therefore I affirm, Secondly, That the seasons have been so confused an
ddisturbed, and jumbled ever since the late Earthquake, that as that great
Philosopher Mr. Flamsted believes, perhaps the Axis of the Earth is not where
it formerly stood. So then, if so solid a body as the Earth has been removed
from its center, what wonder is it if the Church, which is composed of weak,
wavering, uncertain men, has likewise varied a little from its principles. I
could have wished indeed, that all, or at least some of my Raskals had done the
same as Captain P -- r's Rogues have done, for it might have served to
corroborate my Evidence: however, its my comfort that the Nation believed me
without it, and as we find it in the Text, Faith is the Evidence of things not
seen.

Object. the Second. But, Doctor, if you are a sincere Christian, say they, why
then don't you take more care to clap a Padlock upon that unruly member your
Tongue? Why do you call Rogues and Raskals so plentifully, since the Gospel
tells us, that the man that uses this Pagan Language, even to his Enemies, will
be troubled for it hereafter?

The answer to this is easy and plain. We must so interpret Scripture, as not
to make one part of it clash with another. Now we are positively commanded in
several places to speak the truth of all persons, so that if a great man at
Court, or a Prelate in the Church happen to be Raskals, pray whose fault is it
to give them their true titles? My Father Samuel was an honest Weaver, and his
Son Titus here will be Crucified over and over before he will turn the Devil's
Upholsterer, and sow Cushions to the Elbows of iniquity, though it wears a Star
and Garter. Besides, when this Precept of not calling our Brother Fool, and so
forth, was given, the Church was but in it is Cradle or Infancy, and if it had
any Rogues, they were but little diminitive ones, whereas the Church is now
grown to Woman's Estate, and consequently many of its Children have arrived to
their full Stature in Raskality, and this I take to be the Case.

The third, and, as they imagine, the most terrible Objection is still behind.
For, Doctor, say these Gentlemen, pray do us the favor to tell us what Church
you belong to, that we may know where to find you. First you were a plain
Primitive Protestant of the Anabaptist Cut. Then you faced about to the
Religion then in fashion, went to the University, and took Orders in the Church
of England. After that, you made a Trip to St. Omers and Salamanca, swallowed
the Eucharist as glibly as your Father did the Scotch Covenant, and were a most
zealous Papist. This would not satisfy your turn, but in a few years, you
veer'd about to the old Point, and hanged all the Priests and Jesuits that came
in your way. Then you showed a strange warbling in your Guts to be a
Presbyterian. Now at last you herd among the Anabaptists on Sundays, but all
the week wear the ungodly Livery of the Established Church: So that, say they,
you are a perfect riddle and mystery to us, and the Devil only can tell where
to have you.

To this heavy charge I reply, that ever since I knew my right hand from my
left, I carefully observed the Golden Rule of being ill to all men, that I
might gain some -- money. As for my going to St. Omers, and pretending to be a
Proselyte to their Church, 'twas a mere trick of Youth, and no more, I only did
it with a design to fathom their dark Intregues, and if possible to break the
neck of them, which I think I perfectly performed, for I trussed up their
Priests by dozens. In consideration of these Services, the Nation gave me a
title not inferior to that of the greatest Heroes, and called me their
Savior, and Deliverer. If Papists will equivocate with us Protestants, why
should not we Protestants turn their equivocating Canon upon them, and maul
them with their own Arms. Judith out off Holofernes's Head, but how? not with
her own Sword I trow, because she was a Woman, and wore none, but with
Holofernes's own tilter, and yet we find her commended for it. But then say
they, if it had been your luck to have trooped off when you lived in an
Idolatrous Communion, what had become of you then? Why! perhaps I had been
damned, but what of all that? If I had a mind to hazard the going to the Devil,
in order to save the Nation, I humbly conceive they ought to thank and not
reproach me for it. I am sure a great Minister has since done the same, and
made me the compliment to follow my Copy. To conclude, I have at last thought
fit my Beloved, to settle among you, in obedience to the Apostles command, Try
all things, and hold fast that which is good: for really I find the men of your
persuasion are good, and the women are good, and likewise your refreshments and
Collations are good, yea exceeding good. In the next place my Father was one of
you, and like an obedient Son, I am returned to his way of worship, and this
nature teaches the very Insects. Observe a Summer fly in May, and after he has
flown and buzzed about for some time, you will find him at last by downright
instinct, as it were settle in the original Cowturd, where he was hatched. And
be not scandalized I beseech you, that on the weekdays I wear the rag of the
Church. The malicious world tells a thousand lies of me, but I value them not.
Thus they formerly charged me with the sin of Rigbeism (as they now call it)
and to stop their mouths, I was forced to marry, and yet these censorious
persons are not satisfied with my doing so, but still give out that I am for
the old Sport, because forsooth, I have struck never a Child since out of my
Wives Body, not considering that I am too Fat and Corpulent for that Drugery.
Now if on the weekday I appear in the Canonical equipage, it is only done with
an intention to disgrace it. They whipped my sides for me, and I have no other
way to requite them for it, but by wearing their habit, in order to bring them
into Disgrace and Contempt, which that it may happen to them, let us all Pray,
and every one of us lend a hand, to bring about so pious a Work.

FINIS.

