portrait of Titus Oats TITUS OATS D. D. the first discoverer of the Popish
Plott.


A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Horrid PLOT AND CONSPIRACY OF THE POPISH PARTY Against
the LIFE of His Sacred Majesty, THE GOVERNMENT, AND THE Protestant Religion:

With a LIST of such NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN, and others, as were the CONSPIRATORS:
And the HEAD-OFFICERS both Civil and Military, that were to Effect it.

Published by the Order of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in PARLIAMENT Assembled.

Humbly Presented to His Most Excellent MAJESTY.

By TITUS OTES, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Thomas Cockerill, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. MDCLXXIX.

Die Mercurii 9o Aprilis, 1679.
UPon Report made by the Earl of Clarendon from the Lords Committees for
Examining Matters relating to the Discovery of the late Horrid Conspiracy, That
Mr. Titus Oats complains, That Mr. Basset has not given him satisfaction for
the Printing and Publishing his Narrative of the said Conspiracy imperfectly,
and desires that he may Reprint his own Narrative thereof; which the said Lords
Committees judge to be Reasonable: It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the said Titus Oats be, and is hereby
Authorized to Print a Perfect Copy of his own Narrative of the said Conspiracy.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentor.

BY virtue of this Order I appoint Thomas Parkhurst and Thomas Cockerill,
Citizens and Stationers of London, to Print this Narrative, containing Eighty
one Paragraphs.

TITUS OTES. April 10. 1679.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God Of Great Britain,
France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith.
GREAT SIR,
THIS Narrative of the present Horrid Plot against Your Majesty and Government,
which was first heard, and narrowly discussed before Your Sacred Majesty and
Council, and afterward by Both Houses of Parliament, with universal assent to
the power of Truth herein, is at last to appear abroad, for the satisfaction of
these Nations, and Europe perhaps, touching the mystery and consequence of such
Designs. I hope I have good equity on my side, to presume to dedicate the same
to Your Royal Name and Patronage, and to no other; because I am well assured,
both the rise and progress thereof, has wholly sprung from an inbred indelible
love and loyalty to Your Majesty and Kingdoms, as its support and success to be
owing (under Gods extraordinary and miraculous appearance for his people in its
defense) to Your Majesty's Gracious pardon of several human frailties in the
management.

Great and many are the Arts and Hoverings that have been, and may yet be used
in vain both at home and abroad, to suppress and traduce the Evidence, by those
who are more zealous and industrious not to be thought or suspected, rather
than really not to be very Traitors and Rebels against their King and Country;
whose many past Treasons and Encroachments upon several Princes, for these last
Thousand years in the World, will prove their inclinations for future, whereof
there are as many tragical instances against Your Majesty's own Family and
Person, within fresh memory (and to be made out by new proofs out of their own
mouths and Records, if need) as against any other of Gods Anointing and
Appointment.

Your Grandfather King James, though he escaped their Powder, is well known not
to have escaped their Poison. Your other Grandfather, Henry the Fourth of
France, was basely and villainously stabbed in the Heart, which he had designed
and bequeathed after his death unto them, notwithstanding all the Indulgences
and Immunities that the heart of man could wish or desire, which he had granted
them in his life. Who besides these, were the first Authors and contrivers of
the late unnatural War, by their known diabolical art of inflaming Parties and
Passions against each other, and of Your Royal Fathers unspeakable Sufferings
and barbarous Usage? It was these that brought Him to His end, and fourished
Swords, and triumphed over his dead Body, whom they durst not approach when
living. What shall I say of Him who then cried out, Now is the Enemy of God and
of his Church fallen? I believe Your Majesty has been well-informed of the
Traiterous Executioners, but hardly at all of the Putney-Projectors, who were
in most, if not all the Councels that contrived his ruin. What broke the
Vxbridge-Treaty, but the Romish Interest and Policy? Who continued to baffle
all designs of peace and settlement to this Nation, and prosperity to Your
Majesty's Family, but those Incendiaries? It may not be inconvenient to remind
with what zeal and interest they did persuade the Scots in 1650, to impose that
upon Your Majesty which Your Royal Law has forbidden others; for the effecting
whereof, some Thousands of pounds were spent and given by them. After Your
Majesty's escape at Worcester, how did they, above all men, endeavor to betray
and sacrifice Your Majesty into the hands of Your Enemies? And who was it that
was to pay the Thousand pound promised for Your being discovered and taken, but
Father Joseph Simmonds, and Father Carleton Compton, both Jesuits? It Is true,
that one or two of the Komish persuasion, amongst many loyal and faithful
Protestants, male and female, might then have contributed to Your Majesty's
deliverance: But have not such been well lessened and reproached, and called
Fools by their own party for this grain of Loyalty, more owing to their English
Blood than Romish Principles?

The Popish Lord is not forgotten, or unknown, who brought a Petition to the
late Regicides and Usurpers, signed by about Five hundred principal Papists in
England; wherein was promised upon condition of a Toleration of the Popish
Religion here by a Law, their joint resolution to abjure and exclude the Family
of the Stuarts for ever, from their, undoubted right to the Crown. Who more
disheartened the Loyalty and patience of your best Subjects, than their
confident Scriblers, White and others? And Milton was a known frequenter of a
Popish Club. Who more forward to set up Cromwell, and to put the Crown of our
Kings upon his head, than they? Give me leave to tell Your Majesty, that his
new fangled Government was contrived by a Popish Priest, and Lambert, a Papist
for above these Thirty years. Who betrayed Your Majesty's Secrets and Councels
during your Exile, but they, even the Benedictine Monks, whereof a whole
Convent was maintained with a large Annuity by the late Usurper for such use
and purpose? And he Manning.
that was caught and executed by Your Majesty's Justice for such treachery, was
of the same Red-Letter, and had Masses sung for him after his death, as an
usual Reward and Plaster. After Your Majesty's escape from England, what
promises did they make to Cromwell, to persuade the French King for Your
banishment out of France? and what interest they made use of in order
thereunto, can be made appear to their disgrace. I shall leave it to Your
Majesty to call to mind their usage of your Royal Person when in Flanders: And
a Noble Peer surviving, is able to speak aloud what was there intended against
You, to prevent Your Majesty from Your right to Reign over us. The present
Relation upon Oath, and most true to a tittle, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's
usage, is sufficient to convince all unbyassed Judges, how little they have
flagged or degenerated from their wonted hellish Principles and Natures.

How little therefore the Criminals concerned in this Plot deserve from Your
Majesty, the World will better judge, if they will but consider how graciously
Your Majesty has dealt with them, and connived at them, while the rigor of
the Law was let loose upon Your other dissenting Subjects, who yet continued
more quiet and loyal under their Pressures and Provocations, than these under
Favors and Caresses. Has not Your Majesty hazarded the hearts and affections
of Your best Subjects, and much of Royal Honor, in appearing for the late
Indulgence with frustration, to win and oblige, if possible, these everlasting
holy Cutthroats?

But what Arguments of Clemency and Grace can persuade them to be true to their
Natural, who profess Allegiance out of Conscience to a Foreign contrary
Sovereign? Or how can Your Majesty expect Truth and Sincerity, where Treasons
and Lies are virtues and merits? They are by an orderly Conspiracy wholly
governed by Priests, their Priests by their Bishops, and their Bishops by their
Popes; the sum of whose Religion, or ungodly Ambition rather, or that which we
call Popery, consists, in a word, in an Antichristian pretense of a Fifth
Monarchical Sovereignty over all the Kings and Princes of Christendom, as is of
late irrefragably demonstrated by the Right Reverend and Learned Bishop of
Lincoln; yea in an higher Usurpation upon Christ's eternal and peculiar
Sovereignty over men's hearts and judgments, as is likewise evinced by another
worthy Pen and Sufferer, in his Treatise of the right Sovereign of the heart.
They therefore that brutishly and traitorously surrender their Souls over into
implicit slavery to an Impostor, what Allegiance can they reserve inviolable
with all sober and true Christians, either to King, or Christ, or Conscience?

I question not, Great Sir, but that he in whose hands are the hearts of
Princes, will in time fully convince Your Majesty of all their unworthy
principles and practices, and of my integrity too, how strange soever some open
or secret Papists, whom time also may discover, have endeavored to represent
me. Till that time I commit my Cause to the most Righteous and All-seeing Judge,
with a resolution to persevere through his assistance in my truth and
testimony, against all discouragements or terrors, or blandishments either, to
the last gasp.

And next to Christ and the Truth, I shall with the utmost of breath and power,
according to my Oath and Duty, in what place and station soever I am, endeavor
to be found ever loyal and true to Your Majesty in all Your Rights and Honors,
as all good Subjects and Christians ought, and as I find this Noble and Loyal
Parliament are resolved to be to an hair, or an expression; and therefore
cannot forbear to pray to God out of my sincerity and zeal for public Peace
and Concord between King and People, That seeing Your Majesty must highly trust
some or other for Your necessary ease and help, that God would put it into Your
Majesty's heart more to trust and rely upon Your Two Houses of Parliament (who
will be most true to Your Laws, and consequently both to You and Your people)
than to any single Minister or Ministers whatsoever, unaccountably, who may
pretend to more Loyalty, or more comply with any humor, or human frailty of
Your Majesty's, but are not true friends either to Your Majesty, or their
Country, or themselves therein; but erect and prefer an Imperial Paramount
self-end, or lust, before all; which Your Majesty by their Art must be brought
unworthily to serve and promote, to public disturbance always, and the
confusion of themselves and their posterity, most an end, by Gods just
vengeance.

It Is a false suggestion which such Tempters use, That a King that rules by
Will, is more Great, or Glorious, or Strong, than a King that rules by Law. The
quality of the Retinue best proves the State of the Lord; the one being but a
King of Slaves, while the other, like God, is a King of kings and hearts. No
Prince was ever more absolute to have what he wished, than Queen Elizabeth, who
wished for nothing more than the Subjects Rights and Welfare.

Your Majesty being so often marked out for destruction by these Conspirators,
is, and ought to be as great a proof and demonstration to Your people, That the
Papists themselves hold You not their friend, as any Act of Parliament against
Tongues; but especially Your generous Resentment and proportionable Royal
Indignation against these Assasinates of Your Person, and Destroyers of our
Cities, Murderers of Your Subjects, Corrupters of Christianity, and Disturbers
of Mankind.

But nothing will make Your Majesty so amiable and acceptable in the eyes of
God and man, and Your Name and Memory blessed and glorious for ever, as the
Copying of the Laws of our Savior in your Life, by a decent paternal Example
before the Sons and Daughters of Your people, to increase the Fear of God and
its consequences amongst us: it being the chief End and Work of all Supreme
Powers, To suppress Vice, and encourage Virtue amongst their Charge, according
to St. Paul, Romans 13, which is best done Abroad, when first and effectually
begun at Home in Your own House and Family, according to the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 3, by Banishing all Vicious livers from Your presence and converse, and
advancing the Virtuous in their stead: By the neglect of which principal part
of their Royal Trust and Office, Princes depose themselves, as useless before
God and their own Consciences, whatever may be their State or Glory in fact,
and by human Laws and Power before men.

That Your Majesty therefore may long live to be a great Asserter of Laws, of
the Laws of Christ in Your own Soul, to Your eternal, of the good Laws of this
Land, to the temporal high Peace and Felicity of Your Majesty and People, and
abound in all the blessings of this and the other Life, Health, Grace, Wisdom,
Wealth, Power, and Victory over all your Enemies and Temptations, shall be ever
the study and Prayers of

Your Majesty's Most Humble and most Loyal Subject and Servant, TITUS OATS.

Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with a short Narrative, or Minutes, till I may find an
opportunity to put forth my larger Account and Journal; in which, the whole
mystery of this Hellish Plot shall be more fully laid open. It is true, I did
not absolutely design this for the Press, had not the daily clamours of these
execrable votaries for the Romish Interest stirred me up thereunto, by charging
the Protestants with the horrid Design; and the indirect course of a
Bookseller, who falsely and imperfectly presumed to Print the same, to my great
wrong and detriment. It was presented to His Majesty the Thirteenth of August
last, by the means and introduction of that worthy and honest Gentleman Mr.
Christopher Kirkby; as likewise sworn upon Oath on the sixth of September
following; before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey by my self; and the Twenty eighth of
the same Month, before the Lords and others of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council: and the proceedings afterward made upon the same, being
sufficiently known, I shall not trouble thee with at present; but leave the
whole to thy Candid consideration, taking my leave of thee at present, and will
ever appear

April the 15th. 1679. Thy hearty Well-wisher and Servant in Jesus Christ,
TITUS OATS.

A True and Exact Narrative OF THE Horrid Plot and Conspiracy OF THE POPISH
PARTY Against the LIFE of His Sacred Majesty, THE GOVERNMENT, AND THE
Protestant Religion.
Imprimis.
RIchard Strange, Provincial, John Keins, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, and
Mr. Harcourt, Jesuits, did write a Treasonable Letter to one Father Suiman, an
Irish Jesuit at Madrid, in the Kingdom of Spain, in which was contained their
Plotting and Contriving a Rebellion in Scotland, of the Presbyterians against
the Episcopal Government: In order to which they had employed one Matthew
Wright, and William Morgan, and one Mr. Ireland to go and Preach, under the
notion of Presbyterians, and give the disaffected Scots, a true understanding
of their sad state and condition, in which they were, by reason of the
Episcopal Tyranny, exercised over them: and withal to tell them, they had now
a fair opportunity to vindicate their Liberty and Religion; and that it could
be done by no other way but by the Sword; and that now the King was so addicted
to his pleasures, that he would, and could take but little care in that
concern. And in the said Letter it was expressed, that they had gotten an
interest in His Royal Highness, but they would deal with him as they thought
fit; and that they were resolved to use all means to weaken the King of
England's Interest, by informing his friends of his own intent to betray them
into the hands of a Foreign Power, to wit, to send them to fall by the Sword in
the French King's Wars, against the Confederate Princes, which Letter bore date
of April 19th. Old Style, 1677. and 29th. New Style.

Item II.
That the persons abovementioned gave the Deponent ten pounds to carry the said
Letters to the said Father Suiman into the Kingdom of Spain to Madrid; the said
Father Suiman being their Procurator general for the Kingdom of England and
Ireland; and in order to which message, the Deponent embarked himself in the
Ship called the Biscay Merchant, whereof Luke Roch was then Master to go for
Bilbao, and there took Mules for Valladolyd, but staving a day at Burgos in
Spain, the Deponent broke up the said Letters, and found these Contents in the
same.

Item III.
That they of the Society of Jesus, in the English Seminary at St. Omers, sent
a mission of twelve Students into the Kingdom of Spain, viz. eight to
Valladolyd, and four to Madrid, (there being English Colleges in both places)
in order to study Philosophy and Divinity; which Missioners were sent by
Richard Ashby, Richard Peter's, Nicholas Blundell, and Charles Peter's, as
appeared by the Patents of the several Missioners, by which they had power to
demand admission in the respective Colleges to which they were sent, which
Missioners were obliged by the Jesuits of the Colleges, to renounce their
Allegiance to His Majesty of Great Britain, in the hearing of the Deponent; and
those of Valladolyd were taught by Daniel Armstrong, Jesuit, Minister of the
English College at Valladolyd, that the said Oath of Allegiance is Heretical,
Antichristian and Devilish; and that Charles Stuart the King of England is no
lawful King, but comes of a spurious Race, and that his Father was a Black
Scotch-man, and not King Charles the first; this was delivered in a Sermon,
September. 29. 1677. to the Students there, which Sermon the Deponent did hear,
and in this Sermon the said Daniel Armstrong in plain words did say, that the
King of England was a Bastard; now this Daniel Armstrong goes in Spain by the
name of Joseph Mundford, in Spanish P. Joseph Montefortio.

Item IV.
That the said Daniel Armstrong, alias Joseph Mundford, did bring Letters from
St. Omers to the English College at Valladolyd to the Fathers of that
College, written in Latin (they being Spaniards) in which it was expressed
and related from the Fathers of St. Omers, that the Fathers of the Society in
London had procured one Father Beddingfield to be Confessor to His Royal
Highness, but if they law His Royal Highness did not answer their expectations,
they would dispose of him as they did intend to dispose of his Brother the
King, which they hoped to effect within a year: Which Letters bore date June
the 10th. 1677. and subscribed by Richard Ashby, alias Thimbleby, Rector of the
English Seminary of the Society of Jesus at St. Omers, Richard Peter's,
Minister, Edward Nevill, Prefect of the Studies, Charles Peter's, Prefect of the
Sodality, Thomas Fermor, Prefect of Manners: Which Letters the Deponent saw and
read in the month of September at Valladolyd in the Kingdom of Spain.

Item V.
That Father Suiman abovementioned wrote to the English College, to the
Fathers there, that the King of England was poisoned, to the great joy of the
English Fathers, and that they would serve King, James so, if he did not give
them good assusurance of bringing in of the Catholic Religion, and of rooting
out Protestant Religion; this Letter bore date July the first, 1677. and was
seen and read by the Deponent at Valladolyd, in the month of July, near the
latter end.

Item VI.
That one Father John Blake, alias Cross, who went with the four Students to
Madrid, did bring Letters from Richard Strange, Provincial of the Jesuits, and
one Father Gray a Jesuit, and John Keines, to Father Suiman abovementioned, in
which was specified, that all diligence was used by the said Richard Strange,
Father Gray, and John Keines, to procure some persons to dispatch the King, and
to put a period to his days, which Letter bore date June the 10th. 1677. Stylo
novo. And now the Deponent being sent to Madrid in the month of August, read it
in Father Suiman's Chamber, he showing it also at the same time to James
Archbishop of Tuam, in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Item VII.
That the said Father Suiman received another Letter bearing date July the
20th. 1677. Stylo novo, from Richard Strange, Father Gray, John Keines, Basil
Langworth, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, and Father Harcourt, in which they did
manifest, that they were very sorry for informing him, that he might assure
himself that the business was done, their man William being faint-hearted,
could not then do it, though he had fifteen hundred pounds promised him for his
pains; of which Letters the English Missionaries were one by one informed;
those at Madrid by John Cross, alias Blake, and those at Valladolyd, by Daniel
Armstrong, Jesuits: which Letter of the 20th. of July, the Deponent saw in the
Chamber of the said Suiman at Madrid, at the same time when he saw the Letters
of the tenth of July, mentioned in the sixth paragraph or number.

Item VIII.
That on the third of November. Stylo novo, Father Pedro Jeronymo de Corduba,
Provincial of the Jesuits in New-Castile, did write to Richard Strange, and
John Keines, that if the business of dispatching the King of England could be
effected, they should have ten thousand pound for their pains, which Letter the
Deponent brought from Valladolyd to Bilbao, and embarked in a Ship within five
days after his arrival thither, and in five days more arrived at a little
Town near Exeter, and in six days more came to London, and delivered the
Letter to Richard Strange, and when opened, it was written in Latin, and read
by the said Strange; and he said, that all means should be used to answer
Father Pedro's expectation. And in the Letter to Strange, was one enclosed to
this Keines, by the name of Juan de Neoporto de la Compania de Jesu; which
Letter the said Keines offered the Deponent to read, but being written in
Spanish, the Deponent did not well understand the Letter, and could make but
little of it by reason of the Spanish abbreviations; therefore the said Strange
did give the Deponent the Letter directed to himself, saying, he thought the
Deponent did understand Latin better than Spanish; so that the Deponent read
the said Letter, and in it the Contents abovementioned; and the said Strange
being then ill upon Keines his bed, said, that he hoped God would strengthen
honest William's heart to do his work. Now this honest William is a Servant to
the Society in London. This Strange did then lie at one Mrs. Saunders house, a
part of Wildhouse in Wildstreet, where the Deponent heard this discourse from
the said Strange and Keines.

Item IX.
That the said Richard Strange and John Keines, Basil Langworth, Father
Harcourt, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Gray, Father Jennison, Father
Saunders, and Father Ecclesdon, did write a Letter, and subscribed it, and sent
it to St. Omers, to Richard Ashby, Rector of the English Seminary there; in
which he and the rest of the Fathers were given to understand that the King was
altogether given to his pleasures, and that they had an intent to procure one
to stab him at his Court of Whitehall; and if that could not be conveniently
done, they would employ one of his Physicians to poison him; for which work
they had ten thousand pounds in the hands of one Worsly, a Goldsmith in London;
which money was procured for them by one Father Leshee, a French Jesuit, and
Confessor to the French King; which Letter the Deponent saw and read, and saw
it subscribed by the persons abovementioned, and carried it to St. Omers. He
went to Dover by Coach, a place in which was taken up for him by the said
William their servant, whose name indeed is John Groves. The Letter that the
Deponent carried bore date the beginning of December, old Style.

Item X.
That Letters were enclosed in this Letter aforementioned to the said Leshee,
in which thanks was given him by the said Fathers that had subscribed the said
Letter to Richard Ashby, for his great Charity to them, and his Care for the
propagating the Catholic Religion; and that all means should be used to
destroy the opposers of it, both root and branch; which Letters bore date
either the sixth or seventh of December. and the Deponent carried them enclosed
in those of Richard Ashby to St. Omers, and from St. Omers to Paris, and
delivered them into the hands of the said Father Leshee, about the 18th. of
December, as near as the Deponent can remember.

Item XI.
That other Letters bearing date December the 12th. 1677. were sent from
Richard Strange, and others of the Society in London, to those of the Society
in the English Seminary at St. Omers, and in them Letters were enclosed to
Father Leshee, in which they told him, that they had stirred up the
Presbyterians in Scotland to a Rebellion; and that twenty thousand would be in
Arms, if that His Majesty of France would break with the King of England; and
that a way also was made for the French King's landing an Army in Ireland: And
further, that the Irsh Catholics were ready to rise; in order to which there
were forty thousand black Bills provided to furnish the Irish soldiers withal:
Which Letters were subscribed by Rich. Strange, John Keines, and John Fenwick,
and the outside Letter directed to Richard Ashby, Rector; which Letter was
showed to the Deponent at his return from Paris to St. Omers, by the said
Richard Ashby; and told the Deponent that the Letters to Leshee, for which the
said Messenger had ten Patacoons or Royals of eight, as the said Ashby informed
the Deponent: And the said Messenger was a Drummer, in the Town of St. Omers.

Item XII.
That in another Packet bearing date December. the 18th. 1677. in which was
specified that the Father General of the Society of Jesus had written from
Rome, and had removed Richard Strange from being Provincial, and had conferred
the Provincialship upon Thomas White, alias Whitebread; and the said Thomas
Whitebread ordered, that one Father George Coniers should Preach on St. Thomas
of Canterbury's day, in the Sodality-Church, in the English Seminary, against
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and that he should exhort the Fathers to
stand by the new Provincial, who would be as zealous to promote the bringing in
of Catholic Religion into England, as ever his Predecessor was and would not
leave one stone unturned to promote the same: Which said Letter was directed
to, and received by Richard Ashby, and communicated by him to the Deponent
about the 24th. day of December.

Item XIII.
That in another Packet bearing date December the 26th. it was ordered by
Thomas Whitebread, Richard Strange, John Keines, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick,
Father Gray, Father Harcourt Senior, Father Harcourt Junior, Father Micho,
Father Bennifield, Father Ireland, Father Blundell, Father Jemison, and some
others of the Society, that Father Leshee should be written unto by Rich.
Ashby, and the Fathers of St. Omers, and informed that the Fathers
beforementioned had met together to contrive the Advancement of the Design of
the happy disposal of His Majesty of Great Britain, and of His Royal Highness,
if he should not appear to answer their expectations. But the former giving no
hopes at all, they would endeavor his dispatch with all speed that might be,
that he might not hinder their Designs in bringing in Catholic Religion. And
if they could not find an opportunity to take him from his Kingdom, they would
soon take his Kingdom from him; which Letter the Deponent saw in the hands of
Richard Ashby, and desired to read it, but the said Richard would read it to
him in his Chamber on January 2.

Item XIV.
That in the said Letters of December the 26th. it was specified, that Richard
Nicholas Blundell, was constituted by Pattent from the Provincial, to be
Ordinary at Newgate, to go and visit the Condemned Prisoners, and to reduce
them to the Catholic Faith and Religion; and to Catechize some Youth in the
City of London; and every day in the week he has his several places where he
Teaches the Youth Treasonable and Mutinous Doctrines against the Interest and
Person of His Sacred Majesty, and gives certain sums of money to their Parents
(if poor) to encourage them to send their Children to be thus instructed; which
passage was contained in the aforesaid Letters, and afterward practiced in
London.

ITEM XV.
That another Packet came to Richard Ashby to Saint Omers, from Thomas White,
John Keines, and others of the Society of Jesus in London; in which Letters,
from them and others, were enclosed Letters to Father Thomas Stapleton
Procurator at Brussels, to persuade the Father Confessor of Duke de Villa
Hermosa, to inform, that his Majesty of Great Britain did not intend to assist
his Majesty of Spain, but to stand a looker on till he was ruined by the French
King, which Letter, being not sealed, was seen and heard read by Richard Ashby
then Rector of Saint Omers; in which it was further ordered, that if the said
Father Confessor should not be ready to comply with the said Stapleton, that
messengers should be forthwith sent to Father Swiman at Madrid to inform his
Majesty of Spain of the said concern, and to make the same relation of the
business to the Archbishop of Tuam in the Kingdom of Ireland, now at the
Court at Madrid, that he the said Swiman, and he the said Archbishop might
jointly give an account to the King of Spain of the motion made or to be made,
to the said Father Confessor of Duke de Villa Hermosa, and also to advise the
Spanish King to seize the estates of the English merchants in the several
Factories in his Dominions; for that they had endeavored to transport their
Estates, and did transport them to England, which would tend highly to the
prejudice of the Kingdom of Spain, and for the confirmation thereof they
procured Letters from one Fonseca, sometimes an Agent in London, to attest the
same, to which the said Fonseca willingly condescended, and sent his Letter to
Saint Omers, to be sent to the Court of Spain, that the Fathers might give
their approbation; which Letter was long, and large attestations therein made
against the merchants resident in their several Factories, concerning the
matter of Fact beforementioned, and also other Letters to Daniel Armstrong at
Valledolid, and to John Cross at Madrid, in the which they were ordered to
confirm this affirmation made or to be made by the Fathers in England, and of
the English Seminary at Saint Omers, and of the said Stappleton, together with
that of the said Fonseca, the abovementioned Spanish Agent, who now lives at
Bruges in Flanders. All which Letters bore date the first or second of January
1678. Stilo Novo, and all of them the Deponent saw at Saint Omers; and in the
two Letters to those two Fathers in Spain, viz. Daniel Armstrong and John
Cross, was contained an especial order, that the former, if he could not go to
Madrid, should send his attestations to Don Juan of Austria, for the carrying
on of which two hundred pounds sterling was transmitted by bills of Exchange to
the said father Swiman and the said English Fathers.

ITEM XVI.
That when the Letters came from England about the business aforementioned to
Saint Omers, Edward Nevil and Thomas Fermor, did say, that they would not let
this black Bastard go to his grave in peace (meaning the King of England) for
that he had cheated them so often, and that now they were resolved to be served
so no more. But the Deponent standing by, said, what if the Duke should prove
slippery! They both replied, his pasport was ready when ever he should appear
to fail them, These words were heard by the Deponent on the third of January in
the afternoon, in the Library of the Jesuits of Saint Omers.

ITEM XVII.
That on the fourth of January, 1678. Stylo novo, Letters were sent by Richard
Ashby, Edward Hall, Edward Nevil, Charles Peter's, Michael Constable, William
Busby, James Janon, and Thomas Fermor, Jesuits of the English Seminary at Saint
Omers, as also Francis Williams Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices
there, Sir John Warner Baronet alias Clare, Father Sanches alias Ditchling, to
the Father Confessor of the Emperors Majesty, to advise the Emperors Majesty,
that his Majesty of Great Britain had treacherously ploted the ruin of the
Confederates, especially of the German Empire, and of his Catholic Princes
under him, and had under hand stirred up the Hungarian Rebels against his
Imperial Majesty, and found them money to go on with their rebellion, and that
his design was not to keep any alliance, with his Imperial Majesty, but only
in show, that he might advance his Nephew the Prince of Orange and make him
absolute, and therefore prayed that the States of Holland might be acquainted
with it. Which Letter was seen and perused by the Deponent, it being written in
Latin, all which Letters were sent away by a Lay-Brother that was a Dutchman,
and when these Letters were sending away, one of the Lay-brothers, whose name
was George, did say, That the Prince of Orange, was more fit to rob an Orchard
than to be General of an Army.

ITEM XVIII.
That Letters bearing date January the first, 1678. Spylo novo, arrived at
Saint Omers, January the twentieth, from Talbot Archbishop of Dublin, wherein
it was expressed, that the Fathers of the Society in Ireland, were very
vigilant to prepare the people to arise, for the defense of their Liberty and
Religion, and to recover their Estates, and that if the Parliament that was to
fit in England, should join with the King in declaring War against France, that
a place should be open to receive the French Kings Army in Ireland, when his
most Christian Majesty should think fit to land one there: And in the Letter
head advised the Fathers of Saint Omers to advertise Father Leshee of the same,
and other Jesuits that had an interest in the French King: And that his Majesty
of Great Britain, was brought to that pass that if any Male content amongst
them should not prove true to their design his Majesty would never give ear to
their information, and therefore prayed them to be dilligent, for now was the
time or never: which Letter the Deponent saw and read, and in order to the
Fathers compliance with the Letter of the said Arch Bishop, they dispatched
away Letters to Father Leshee to Paris; and appointed Edward Nevil and William
Busby, to carry and deliver them to the said Leshee, which Letters were
answered with all speed by the aforesaid messengers, Jesuits, as above, the one
of them being the Prefect of Studies, and the other Procurator for the
Seminary, and by them wrote Letters to Thomas White Provincial, and to the
Rector of Saint Omers, viz. Richard Ashby: Of that to the Provincial the
Deponent can give no account; but of that to Ashby the Deponent says, that
there was in it expressed, that the Father General of the Society of Jesus,
would contribute eight hundred thousand Crowns to be paid in the month of June
next ensuing, and that his Holiness, the Pope, would not be wanting to supply
them, when they had made some progress in that glorious attempt,

ITEM XIX.
That another Packet arrived at Saint Omers directed to Richard Ashby, Rector
of the English Seminary there: The Date of which is not well remembered by the
Deponent, but as near as he does remember, it was about the beginning of the
Parliament, for there came the Speeches of the King and Lord Chancellor, and
the Votes of the Parliament, which were put into ridiculous phrases, in
contempt of the King and both Houses of Parliament, for the Fathers and
Scholars to laugh at, and then translated into the French Tongue, and presented
to the Governor of Saint Omers, who sends them to the French King his Master:
and in the Packet was contained an account of the attempt of one Pickering, a
lay Brother, that waits upon the Jesuits lying at Somerset house, to shoot the
King as he was was walking in Saint James park, when he was at some distance
from his Nobles and Attendants, but the Flint of his Pistol being somewhat
loose, he did defer the action till another opportunity, and if he had done it
and had suffered, he should have had thirty thousand Masses said for the health
of his soul* Which Letters were signed by Thomas White alias Whitebread
Provincial, which Letters, when read, the Fathers in the English Seminary were
in great trouble, for the negligence of the said Pickering, and the Deponent
saw and read them in the latter part of January, and the Votes put into such
mock Phrases, as also the Speeches of the King and Lord Chancellor in the
month of February.

ITEM XX.
That the Deponent, went on the nine and twentieth of January to know of his
Confessarius, whether he might keep the thirtieth of January as a fast, the
Confessor replied, that the account with them was on the ninth of February,
because the account of England did differ from the account on that side the
Water: The Deponent asked him, whether then he might keep the ninth of February
as a day of Fasting? The Confessor asked him, why? The Deponent replied,
because of the Martyrdom of the late King, the Confessarius answered, that the
late King was no Martyr but an Heretic, and withal added, that he was none of
King James Son, but a Bastard begotten upon the body of Anne of Denmark by her
Tailor. This Confessarius is a Jesuit, and his name Charles Peter's, Prefect of
the Sodality.

ITEM XXI.
That Letters bearing date, February the first. Stylo novo, from Thomas
Whitebread, John Keines, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, and Father Micho to
Richard Ashby Rector of Saint Omers, (then ill of the Gout) and to the English
Fathers there, did let them understand, that they had sent William Morgan into
Ireland to see how affairs stood in that Kingdom, and expected his return by
the end of March next, and that he set out the six and twentieth of January,
and that they had given him instructions to order the affairs in hand, and to
encourage the Irish Natives to defend their Religion and Liberty: And his
Companion was one Father Lovel, who was to go into the North of Ireland to see
the Fathers of the Society there; and carried two thousand pound to supply
their present wants, and to promise them four thousand pound more in case there
should be any action.

ITEM XXII.
That another Packet came from Thomas White alias Whitebread, Father Micho,
Father Ireland, Father Harcourt and others of the Society in London, bearing
date February the seventh, 1678. Stylo novo: In which was contained an account
of the Fathers progress in Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Essex; in persuading the
Catholics that were Votaries for the order of Saint Ignatius to contribute for
the Irish rebellion, and maintaining a Civil War in that Kingdom, in case the
French King should break with the King of England: And also that they had
received Letters from Scotland, in which they were informed that the people
would rise to oppose Duke Lauderdale, and the Royal party in that Kingdom, and
also that they would endeavor by themselves, their Agents, and their Purse to
provoke the Scots against the English, and withal told the Fathers of Saint
Omers to whom this Packet was directed, and by whom it was received, that they
should be glad to effect such a design. Which Packet the Deponent saw and
read, Letter by Letter.

ITEM XXIII.
That the Fathers of Saint Omers, viz. Richard Ashby Rector, Edward Hall,
Edward Nevill, and others of the English Seminary, did write to Thomas
Whitebread and other Fathers, in which was expressed that it was now apparent,
that the Catholic Religion was to be brought in the same way, that they had
used for the destruction of the Father of this King, and as that could not be
effected till much blood was spilt on both sides, so this must be effected by
effusion of blood: And withal prayed them to prosecute their design in taking
away the King; and if his Royal Highness should not comply with them, to
dispatch him too: for they did fear that never any of the Stuarts were men for
the effecting of their ends and purposes. And in this Letter, instructions were
given to the Fathers to feel how his Royal Highness stood affected. Which Leter
bore date, February the tenth, Stylo novo, and was signed by the persons
abovenamed in the presence of the Deponent, who did compose these Letters for
them, according to direction given him by them: Which Letter was, to the
Deponents knowledge, carried into England by one Father Every, who then went
for England.

ITEM XXIV.
That an answer of the aforesaid Letters of February the tenth, Stylo novo,
dated February the twentieth Old style, came from Thomas White, John Keines and
Basil Langworth, Richard Peter's, John Fenwick, Father Ireland, Father Harcourt,
Father Blundel, Father Matthew Wright, and Father Thomas Wright, Father
Jennison, and one Father Simmons, who some time belonged to Somerset House, who
also signed with the rest, the said answer, which told the Fathers at Saint
Omers (viz. Richard Ashby to whom the Letter was directed and the rest) that
they had found, that although the Duke was a good Catholic, yet he had a
tender affection to the King, and would scarcely be engaged in that concern,
and if they should once intimate their designs and purposes unto him, they
might not only be frustrated of their design but also might lose his favor.
Which Letter the Deponent saw and read in the month of February.

ITEM XXV.
That the Fathers of the English Seminary at Saint Omers did oblige one brother
George a Day-brother in the said Seminary to go for Ghent in Flanders to the
English Jesuits there with a Letter from Saint Omers dated February, 26. Stylo
veteri: In which they had an account of that letter of February, 20 Stylo
veteri; and the said brother George arrived there February 28 Stylo veteri: and
the Jesuits there advised the Fathers in one of March the first Stylo veteri,
that the secular Clergy should be treated withal about the business, but they
finding them then at that time to be men inclined to live in peace and
obedience to their Prince, the Fathers viz. Thomas White etc. answered them in
one of March 10 Stylo veteri That the Clergy were a sort of rascally fellows
that had neither wit nor courage to manage such a great design; and did pray
them of Ghent and them of Saint Omers to be of good Cheer, for their designs
went on well both in Scotland and Ireland, and the fatal blow should be given
to the black boy at Whitehal with all the speed that might be. Which letters to
them at Ghent, and from them at Ghent to the Provincial (they being brought
back to Saint Omers before they went to the Provincial) and also these of March
10. the Deponent saw and read.

ITEM XXVI.
That there was an attempt to make an assassination upon the person of his
sacred MAJESTY in the month of March several days as he was walking in the
Park, and once as he was going to the Parliament House, by this honest William
and Pickering, but opportunity did not offer it self, for the which the former,
viz. honest William, was chidden, and the latter had a Penance of twenty
strokes with a Discipline on his Shoulders, it being judged by the Fathers the
effect of his negligence: Which Passage the Deponent saw mentioned in a Letter
from Thomas White to Rich. Ashby, bearing Date March the 26th. 1678.

Item XXVII.
That of the 5th of April Letters came from Thomas White, and the Fathers in
London, to Rich. Ashby and those of the English Seminary at S. Omers; in which
the Fathers at London did give them of S. Omers an account that Will. Morgan
and Father Lovell were returned out of Ireland, who gave them to understand,
That the Irish were ready to rise at ten day warning, with 20000 foot and 5000
horse, and would let the French King into that Kingdom if he should come to
land an Army there, and that Father Lovell did give an account that 15000 horse
and foot would rise in the North of Ireland, and that the people were very
patient but very resolute; and that the Duke of Ormond, now Lord Lieutenant, is
in a great perplexity to see Catholic Religion thrive so well in Ireland, and
that there are persons that have secretly taken Commissions from the General of
the Society of Jesus, by virtue of a Breve from the Pope, dated October. 1. 1673.
and that they resolve to cut the Throats of the Protestants again, when once
they rise. And in the said Letters the Provincial summoned a General Consult to
be held in London, and therefore commanded the Fathers on the other side of the
Water to be present. In which Letter the Deponent did see himself summoned to
assist at that Consult, as a Messenger from Father to Father. This Letter the
Deponent saw in the Month of April.

Item XXVIII.
That in order to this Command, on April 24. 1678. Stylo Novo, Father Warren,
Rector of Liege, Sir Thomas Preston, Baronet, Father Marsh, Rector of Ghent,
Father Williams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, Sir John Warner
Baronet, ( Rich. Ashby, Rector of the English Seminary at S. Omers, being sick
of the Gout could not go) but out of the said Seminary went Sir Robert Brett,
Baronet, Father Poole, Edward Nevill; there were in all with the Deponent about
9 or 10 who met in London in Consult with Tho. Whitebread, Father Harcourt,
senior, and Father Harcourt, junior, John Fenwick, Basil Langworth, Willam
Morgan, John Keines, Father Lovell, Father Ireland, Father Blundell, Rich.
Strange, Father Mico, Father Gray, and others, to the number of Fifty Jesuits,
met at the Whitehorse Tavern, in the Strand, where they plotted their Designs
for the Society, and ordered Father John Carry, who was also there, to go
Procurator for Rome: At which Consult, thus held in the Month of May, the
Deponent was present to attend the Consulters, and delivered their Concerns
from Company to Company; and then a little after they left the White-horse
Tavern, and divided themselves into several Clubs or Companies. Some met at
Mrs. Saunders house, in Wild-street; others at Mrs. Fenwicks, at Ayre's House,
in Drury Lane; others at Mr. Ireland's, in Russel Street near Covent Garden,
and in other places; all which, though in several Companies, 5 or 6 in a
Company, did contrive the death of the King: In order to which there were
Papers sent from Company to Company, which the Deponent carried, containing the
Opinions of the timeing their business, and the manner how it was to be done:
And within 3 or 4 days after, the Deponent went to S. Omers with the Fathers
that came from the other side of the Water.

Item XXIX.
That on the 10th of June, Stylo Novo, came Thomas White to S. Omers, in order
to visit his Colleges in Flanders and Germany; and in his Chamber the 11th
day, where the Deponent was present, together with Rich. Ashby, Rector, he
there told the Deponent and the said Ashby, That he hoped to see the Fool at
White Hall laid fast enough; and that the Society need not fear, for he (that
is the King) was grown secure, and would hear no complaints against them, and
if the Duke should set his Face in the least measure to follow his Brothers
Footsteps, his passport was made to lay him to sleep.

Item XXX.
That the said Thomas Whitebread, on the 13th of June, did tell the Rector of
S. Omers, That a Minister of the Church of England had scandalously and basely
put out the Jusuits Morals in English, and had endeavored villanously to
render them odious to the people, and asked the said Rector whether he thought
the Deponent might possibly know him? and the Rector not knowing, called the
Deponent, who heard these words as he stood at the Chamber door of the said
Provincial, and when the Deponent went into the Chamber of the said Provincial,
he asked him, If he knew the Author of the Jesuits Morals? the Deponent
answered, his Person, but not his Name. The said Thomas Whitebread demanded
then, Whether he would undertake to poison to assassinate the Author? which the
Deponent undertook to do, having 50 l. reward promised him by the said
Provincial, and appointed to return to England. And the Deponent does farther
testify, that at the same time the said Provincial did in his Chamber say,
That he and the Society in London would procure Dr. Stillingfleet to be knocked
on the head, and also Poole, the Author of Synopsis Criticorum, for writing
some things against them.

Item XXXI.
That Rich. Ashby, Rector of S. Omers, being ill that Evening with the Gout and
Stone, viz. June 13. desired the company of the Deponent, and did tell the
Deponent, That Father Warren, who is now Rector of the College of Jesuits at
Leigh, did, when he was Procurator at Paris, reconcile the late Lord
Chancellor Hyde to the Church of Rome upon his death bed; which words were
occasioned by the Deponent's taking notice of the Duchess of York (Daughter of
the said Lord Chancellor) dying a Papist. And the Deponent, when he heard the
said Ashby speak these words, replied, That he never heard any thing of the
return of the said Lord Chancellor: Answer was made, That he, the said Asahby,
was certain that the said Lord Chancellor was reconciled by the said Warren.

Item XXXII.
That on the 23. day of June, in the morning, New Style, the Deponent, had
express orders presently to go for Calice, and then to take the Packquet-Boat
and so away for England, to attend the motions of the Fathers in London, and to
remain in London till he had orders from the Provincial to the contrary, and
gave the Deponent four pounds for his Charges, and promised him 80 l. for
Services already done for the Society in Spain and elsewhere. And the Deponent
says, That he obeyed the Orders, and that night got to Calice, and there met
with four Jesuits that were ordered for London; and on Friday the 24th new
Style, the Deponent says, they took the Packquet-Boat together, and arrived
safely to Dover on Saturday morning, where the Deponent met with John Fenwick,
who had brought 8 Students to Dover to transport them to S. Omers: And the
Deponent further says, That the four Jesuits and Fenwick who were at Dover by
name of Thomson, and he the Deponent took Coach about 11 or 12 of the Clock at
Noon; and at Borton, six Miles on this side Canterbury, the Coach was stopped,
and a Box was seized of the said John Fenwick's by the Searchers of that place,
and when by them opened, in it they found Beads, Pictures, Images, and Agnus
Dei's, which were to be given by Blundel the Catechist to young Children, to
encourage them to come to his Catechizing Schools, and to be Catechized by him.
Accordingly there was a Direction on the said Box fixed, as, To the honorable
Rich. Blundel, Esquire, London: Which Box remains so seized by the said
Searchers; and if they had searched the Pockets of the said Fenwick, they had
found such Letters upon him, as the said Fenwick, confessed to the Deponent,
might have cost him his life; they being says he, the Concern in hand; but the
said Letters the Deponent did not see.

Item XXXIII.
That in the Month of July, Rich. Ashby came to London with Instructions from
the said Thomas Whitebread or White, that the 10000 l. procured by Father
Leshee, and then in the hands of the Society in London, should be put into the
hands of one Worsly, their Banker; and that the said Rich. Ashby, with other
Fathers, should treat and agree with Sir George Wakeman about the concern of
poisoning the King; and that if he would undertake it he should have the 10000
l. which the said Rich. Ashby told the Deponent, showing him the said
Instructions by way of Memorandum in Writing. In which Memorandum was contained
an Item given by the said Thomas Whitebread for the procuring the Assassination
of the Right Reverend Father in God Herbert, Lord Bishop of Hereford; for the
said Bishop had been educated in the Popish Religion, and was fallen, and they
were resolved not to pity nor spare any Apostate from the Roman Faith. The said
Rich. Ashby asked the Deponent, whether the said Bishop were not a forward Man
against Catholics? and the Deponent not knowing the said Bishop, told the said
Ashby he could not tell; and the said Ashby did say, That times now being ready
to change, they would be ready to give not only Aposiates, but also those
Heretics that had obstinately opposed the proceedings of the Society, and
their Agents, in propagating the Faith and Interest of the Church of Rome, a
just Reward for their Apostasy and infamous obstinacy; and though the
Parliament have taken away the Act for burning Heretics, they should not
escape the Vengeance of Catholics.

Item XXXIV.
That in the Month of July, 1678. Rich. Strange, the last Provincial of the
Jesuits, came to the Lodgings of Mr. Rich. Ashby, who, before he went down to
the Bath, lay in the new Provincial's Lodgings, at Mrs. Saunders house, a part
of Wild-house in Wild-street, and finding the Deponent with the said Ashby, did
desire the Deponent to meet him at his Chamber, at Mr. John Groves in
York-street near Covent Garden, and after a short stay at Ashbies Lodgings,
took his leave of the said Ashby, and presently after the Deponent took his
leave also of the said Ashby, and followed Strange, and got to his Chamber
presently after him; where the said Strange did encourage the Deponent to go on
in assisting the Society in carrying on the Design; And thereupon told the
Deponent that they got 14000 l. in the Fire of London, in the year 1666. The
Deponent asked the said Strange how they came to effect that great and famous
business? The said Strange replied, That himself, and one Gray, and Pennington,
and Barton, Jesuits, with some others, together with one Keimash, a Dominican
Friar, joined with one Green, and met at one William Wests house, who kept de
Green-Dragon in Puddle-dock: The said West was by Trade a Tailor, whom they
employed to make them some Clothes, and there they did debate about the manner
of firing the City, and where they should begin, and did attempt it in February
1664/5. But not being provided of assistance enough, and the Thames being
frozen over, and the Sickness coming on a-pace, they then altered their
purpose: And in January 1665/6. they met with this Green again, who closed in
with them in this Design. And that they might ingratiate themselves with this
Green, furnished him with 30 l. (he being poor) yet they found him an active
man, and fit for their purpose. And the more to engage him the said Green, they
pretended to hold many of the Fifth-Monarchy Principles; which when Green
perceived, (judging them to be real) brought them acquainted with eight others,
who were zealous in the business. The aforesaid Jesuits were earnest to have
the business done in February, before the return of the Inhabitants to London;
but Green did pray these persons, viz. the Jesuits, to suspend that resolution,
because that then they should be sooner discovered, and such a Design must have
an Uproar; and besides all this, the King would not be much in Town, if at all,
till the Plague was more abated, whom Green did say must be cut off too, when
the people were in a hurry by reason of the fire: And this motion pleased the
Jesuits and Dominican well, and so it was put off. In a very little time after
the said Green, and the rest of those Fifth-Monarchy men, together with the
four Jesuits and Dominican abovenamed, were suspected by the said West that
kept the said house in Puddle-dock, and were forewarned his house. And
presently after Green and his eight acquaintance were clapped up in Prison, (but
for what the said Strange did not tell the Deponent.) And upon the Imprisonment
of these nine persons, the said Jesuits and Dominican did go to S. Omers, and
there remained till the May after the Execution of eight of these persons thus
imprisoned. ( Green dying in Newgate.) But one Fitz Gerard, an Irish Jesuit,
and one Neale of White-Chappel, did write to Strange (as the said Strange
informed the Deponent) that none of the Fathers names was mentioned in the
business of these men, and thought they might safely return. So in the latter
part of May they set forth for England, and got to London in the beginning of
June; and then, concealing their Names and Lodgings, they began afresh to
consult about this Fire, which was still carried on by the Society in the
absence of these persons, and determined by them in the Fire-time to cut off
the King, that the number of the Beast might be accomplished. In the uttering
of which words the said Strange broke out into a great Laughter. But, said the
said Strange, to be short, we got fifty or sixty Irish to plye the work, and
one Edw. Everard was very diligent to preserve their Fireworks which they had
made, and put into Granado-shels: And the more to palliate this their design,
they procured this Everard a place in the Kings Service, to look after the
Ammunition that was to be carried down to the Fleet, it being in the time of
the first Dutch Wars. And the said Strange told the Deponent, That great
Attempts were made on the Tower, but without effect. But (says Strange) to
return to our ordering our Affairs, we were in Fee also with several
Frenchmen, who were faithful in the business: And all things being ready, and
the place pitched upon, Strange removes his Quarters, and got to lie at a house
in Fanchurch-street, and went by the name of Walker; and this he did in the
Month of August, 1666. and with him he took Keimash, the Dominican, and lodged
together. And Pennington and Barton lay at an Apothecaries Shop in Shoo-Lane;
and Gray and Fitz Gerard lay at Neales house in White-Chappel; which Neale was
one to see the Fire carried on through Thames Street, and so to the Tower. In a
word the said Strange told the Deponent, that they spent 700 Fireballs, and
when, the Fire-Merchants were at work, then others (Men and Women) were
employed to plunder what they could; and they had a Warehouse in Wild-street,
where somethings so plundered were laid; and other things they concealed in
Somerset House, as Hollands, Cambricks, fine Cloth, and some considerable
quantities of Plate, and a Box of Jewels: The Owner gave the Box to these Men
to carry away, and ordered his Servant to go along with them, but they having
increased their number, ordered the Servant to be knocked down; but the Servant
being afraid he should be killed, ran away. This was the greatest Plunder of
one sort they got; for (as the said Strange informed the Deponent) there were
one thousand Carracts of Diamonds lapt up in several Papers for several
Goldsmiths, and the Diamonds were conveyed away to St. Omers, the first
opportunity they met withal: But the Deponent asked the said Strange how one
Man should trust him with so much Goods, for never any Jeweller had so many
Jewels at one time. The said Strange replied, that he could not tell, but it
was certain they met with them, and sold them for 3500 l. sterling in Flanders,
and had a fish-dinner into the bargain at the Salutation Tavern in Holborn at
the Return of the Money. The Deponent asked Strange, how the Fire began? and he
told him, that Neal came and knocked him up at 12 of the Clock in the Night, and
before he was dressed the Fire was begun. The Deponent further asked the said
Strange, how many Servants the Society employed? He said about 80 or 86, he
could not tell well which. The Deponent asked how the King came to escape? The
said Strange replied, indeed they were resolved to have cut him off, when at
work in person about the Fire, but then they were not secure of the Duke, who
then was but a well-wisher to them, and besides, they seeing the King so
industrious could not find in their hearts to do it. Whilst this Discourse was
in hand a Gentleman knocked at the door, and so we broke off, beginning at Nine
of the Clock in the Morning, and ending at almost Eleven that Forenoon. And the
Deponent went to his Lodging, which was then in Drury Lane.

XXXV. Item.
That Richard Ashby, the day before he went down to the Bath, which was in the
Month of July, had conference with Father Harcourt, Father Fenwick, Father
Ireland, Father Keines, Father Strange, Mr. Jennison, Father Blundell, and
others of the Society, by Order from the Provincial, to send new Messengers
into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and to inform the People of the
great Tyranny they did lay under, by reason of their being denied then Liberty
of their Conscience, and that not being to be procured but by the Sword, they
must take that course to purchase their Liberty. By which means (said the
Fathers thus assembled) we shall weaken both the Presbyterian and Episcopal
Faction. At which Conference the Deponent was present, and heard these words.

XXXVI. Item.
That in the Month of July, the said Richard Ashby, went down to the Bath, in
order to be cured of his Gout, and on the Morning he went away, the Deponent
being then in the Chamber of the said Ashby to take his leave of him; Father
Harcourt, Rector of London, came to him, and told him, that if after he left
the Bath, he could make a Progress into Somersetshire, to inform those of the
Society of the intended Design, it would do well, and with all desired the said
Ashby to hasten to Town after he had finished the said Information. All which
the Deponent did hear.

XXXVII. Item.
That on the first of August came Letters from Thomas Whitebread bearing Date
July the 22, to John Fenwick, in which was, that he would that 15000 l. should
be proposed to Sir George Wakeman, if he refused 10000 l. But whether Sir
George has been treated with about with about that Concern, the Deponent
cannot inform here in this Article; but Sir George Wakeman has been diverse
times in the Company of the said Ashby; and he saw the Letters to John Fewick
on Fourth of August, 1678.

XXXVIII. Item.
That Letters arrived to London bearing date August 5, 1678, from Thomas White
or Whitebread, Provincial, to John Fenwick from St. Omers, in which he did
inform the Fathers, that he had made his Visit within his Province, and that he
had ordered Twelve Jesuits to go for Holland, and to inform the Dutch that the
Prince of Orange did intend to assume the Crown of a King, and that he resolved
to bring them under another Government. Which Missioners took their leaves of
the said Thomas White on St. Ignatius's day, July 31, but got no farther than
Watton, by reason of a mischance they met withal upon the way. By which
mission the said Thomas White did design to beget in the Dutch an evil Opinion
of the Prince of Orange, and to cause a Commotion there amongst the Dutch,
against the said Prince and his Party. Which Letter the Deponent saw and read
in Mr. Fenwick's Chamber on the Eleventh of August.

XXXIX. Item.
That another Letter of the Tenth of August, came to Blundel and the Fathers in
London, from Thomas Whitebread, in which he blamed the Fathers in London for
not giving him an account of what progress they had made in their proposal,
made or to be made unto Sir George Wakeman; And if made, how he resented it; If
hot made, to make it quickly, for it would not be convenient to defer it; and
told them, Ireland was safely arrived to him at St. Omers, who only told him,
That the King was very secure; and therefore, he, the said Provincial,
admonished the Fathers to be very vigilant. Which Letter Blundel showed the
Deponent on the Nineteenth of August.

XL. Item.
That another Packet of the 15th of August came from St. Omers, from Thomas
White Provincial, to Father John Fenwick, in the which were Letters enclosed to
Father Harcourt, Jennison and others, which the Deponent did not see; but that
to John Fenwick the Deponent did see and read it. Therein the said Thomas White
did say, that the Figure 365 should lie as low as ever 666 did; and if Poison
would not take the King away, Fire should, for Catholic Religion would never
Flourish unless IHS took this Course. Now the Deponent says that 365 is to be
understood Westminister, and the Figure 666 London, they being the Ciphers for
both those places, and the letters IHS Jesuits, they using it always.

XLI. Item.
That the Deponent was informed by the said John Fenwick and others of the
Society, then in his Chamber, that the Jesuits have 60000 l. per annum good
Rents, and 100000 l. in Bank, and that he and the rest of the Society have in
the name of their Trustees Lent out Money at 50 l. per Cent. the improvement of
which Money in Bank is used about these practices; and that it costeth them
4000 l. per annum in intelligence, besides their daily special Messengers, on
which vast Sums of Money are spent, and besides another part is transported
beyond the Seas by Bills of Exchange, which the Deponent himself knows in a
great part to be true, and of the rest they themselves have informed him at
several times: All which tends highly to the damage of the Kingdom.

XLII. Item
That on Monday the 5th of August, Father Harcourt, Father Keines, John
Fenwick, and another of the Society, whose name the Deponent does not remember,
did say, that they did intend to raise a Commotion in the Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales which also did appear to the Deponent by several Letters
which the Deponent did see and read: The date of which Letters the Deponent
does not well remember, but saw them in August 1678.

XLIII. Item.
That two new Messengers were sent into Scotland, on the said 5th of August;
one by the name of Father Moore, and the other by the name of Father Saunders
alias Brown, with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist
Ministers, and to Preach to the disaffected Scots, the necessity of taking up
the Sword for the defense of Liberty of Conscience. These the Deponent saw
dispatched and ordered to go by Father Harcourt in the name of Thomas White
Provincial.

XLIV. Item
That they have several times communicated, and do still communicate what
secrets they can have revealed to them of the King, which they purchase by
giving Money, and then send them over to Leshee the French Kings Confessor. And
the Deponent has seen several particulars (as they pretend) bow the King
stands affected, for War or Peace: And this they do by one Smith, who daily
lurketh about White Hall, and in Parliament time about Westminster Hall and the
Lobby. And the said Smith did say, that he was in fee with the Clerks of the
Parliament, who give him the Intelligence, and with the Clerks Officers of the
Privy Council and Cabinet Council. The Deponent says further, that one Coleman
formerly Secretary to her R. Highness does assist this Smith, with private
intelligence, as John Keines, Jesuit, and this Smith have told the Deponent
several times in the Months of July and August.

XLV. Item.
That these Jesuits drive several Trades in Town, as Merchants, Tobacconists,
Goldsmiths, Scriveners, and by means of their Scriveners they come to the
knowledge of several Estates of several Persons of Quality; and by other
Scriveners, of their Religion and Practices: By which means they take an
estimate of the strength of the Nation, their Scriveners having great practice
in the City of London, as John Keines informed the Deponent in the Month of
August.

XLVI. Item.
That on Friday the 9th of August, came Letters of the 16th Stylo novo, by an
especial Messenger from Thomas White Provincial, and subscribed by the Fathers
at St. Omers; in which they did rejoice very much that Sir George Wakeman had
taken the business into his hand, and if he did it, the 15000 l. should be
paid: But ordered, that Pickering and his Companion viz. Honest William, should
not desist their endeavoring to Assassinate the King's Person: Which Letters
the Deponent read, and asked Fenwick, how the Provincial came to understand
that Sir George Wakeman had undertaken the business? He the said Fenwick told
the Deponent, that they had dispatched away a special Messenger, and that the
said Messenger brought this answer, and withal the said Fenwick did tell the
Deponent, that it cost Ten pound to send him word of it.

XLVII. Item.
That because one William Berry, now a Secular Priest, who had formerly been a
Jesuit, had written and was about to print some sheets of Paper in Vindication
of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and in it persuaded Roman Catholics
to a more charitable Compliance with Protestants, Basil Langworth, and others
of the Society, did offer 10 l. to the Deponent to kill the said Berry; and if
the Deponent dared not to do it himself, to procure some other to do it,
assuring the Deponent, that whosoever did it, and were questioned for it,
should have a Pardon. This was proposed August 9th 1678.

XLVIII. Item.
That on the 9th of August in the evening in the Chamber of John Keines,
Jesuit, in Warwick-street, where John Fenwick and the Deponent were together,
there came one Rich. Heath, a Lay-Brother of the Society, who after some
Discourse about the Design of Killing the King, did say, that he was a Bastard,
and did endeavor to rule by the Sword. Which Words the Deponent did hear, and
so did Keines and Fenwick, who after one another replied, the Bastard should
not trouble the World long.

XLIX. Item.
That on the Tenth of August, still. vet. the Deponent did meet with John Groves
in Wild-street in the Afternoon, and as near as the Deponent can remember, it
was about Five of the Clock, and he having made several promises to the
Deponent, to give him an account of the Fire of Southwark in the Year 1676, the
said Groves took the Deponent into Wild-house Garden, and thus began. He said
that he had certain Fireworks made for that very purpose, and he with Three
Irishmen, that were his Assistants, went into the Borough, and not finding an
opportunity nor a fit place, went to St. Margarets-Hill, where they found an
Oyl-shop, which the said Groves bragged he sir'd. The Deponent asked the said
Groves, how he came acquainted with the said Irishmen? He said his acquaintance
with them was not much, but they were procured by Dr. Fogarthy, the Irish
Doctor, for which the Society ( Richard Strange then Provincial) gave them 1000
l. viz. 400 l. to Groves, and 200 l. a piece to the Three Irishmen. And the
said Groves told the Deponent, that the Society got at least 2000 l. by that
fire, which was also told the Deponent at another time by Richard Strange.

L. Item.
That on the Eleventh of August being Sunday, the Deponent saw Letters from St.
Omers, bearing date August 17th New style, written by Father Ireland, in the
Name of the Provincial Thomas White alias Whitebread, to John Fenwick; in which
Letter, by the Contents thereof, there were Letters to John Keines, Mr.
Jennison, and Mr. Blundel, and others, which the Deponent did not see, but in
this to John Fenwick it was specified what diligence was used for the
destruction of the Duke of Ormond, and for the procuring another demonstration
of zeal for the promoting the Catholic Religion and Interest in that Kingdom,
and that which Arguments could not effect the Sword should, to the great
vexation of the Protestants there; and he intimated the great joy that he had,
that there was yet great hopes, that the disaffected Scots would not lay aside
their endeavors for and after the Defense of their Liberty and Religion, and
that the Catholics of Scotland had promised to use the utmost of their
Interest to keep up the Commotions there; and the said Father Ireland bad the
said Fenwick exhort the Fathers to be earnest in their Designs, for now was the
time that the English Nation was to be reduced. And furthermore ordered, in the
Name of the Provincial, that Letters should be written to all the Society in
England, that they made it their business to encourage the Friends to braveness
of mind, for that God had hitherto given them such a hopeful Prospect of
things, and that no Opportunity on his part was or should be lost, and that
they in London (if they thought it fit to communicate these things) should have
a care that they did it to no more than to one at a time, lest they should be
baffled in their Enterprise. Which Letter, when read by the Deponent, the said
Fenwick, to whom the Letter was directed, told the Deponent, that it was his
Duty to offer up a Mass or two, that God would prosper those Holy Endeavors of
the Fathers of the Society, in promoting Catholic Religion and Faith; and told
him further, That if he, the Deponent lived till Christmas, he should see a
good Change of things, either that Forty Eight should be taken from the World,
or the World (especially the little he was concerned in) should be taken from
him; And one that was a Catholic should play such a Game, as never was played
since the Conquest. All which the said Fenwick told the Deponent in his
Chamber; and the Deponent asked the said Fenwick, Who this Catholic was? And
Fenwick said it was the Duke of York. And the Deponent says, the Ciphers 48
are put for the King.

LI. Item.
That on the said 11th. of August in the Evening, the Deponent went to the
Lodgings of John Keines, where he found another Jesuit with him, whose Name the
Deponent does not remember, in whose presence the said John Keines told the
Deponent that the Provincial had taken great care of Keeping Alive the
Difference betwixt the Disaffected Scots and Duke Lauderdale, and that the
Affairs in Ireland went on with great Expedition, and that all Means were now
used to beget a Difference betwixt the Dutch md the Prince of Orange, and if
that could be effected, there was no question to be made, but that the
Protestant Interest would fail in Holland, and that Forty Eight would not last
long in England, for it was high time to hinder Forty Nine from being effected:
That Barly-Broth-Trade should grow dead, and Twelve would be Cut off, and that
Mum and Chocolate should be put down, and the Order of Mag-Pies should be
turned into their Primitive Institution and Habit. Now the Deponent says, that
the words [hinder Forty Nine from being effected] is an Odd Expression, that is
amongst them used for the Cutting off the King, that he may not live to be
complete Forty Nine Years of Age. And by Barley-Broth, is meant the House of
Commons, which shall be turned out and Sit no more. And by Mum and Chocolate,
is meant the Protestant Peers; which, if not destroyed, shall never have any
Vote in the House of Peers more, after the Death of this King. And by Mag-Pies,
they understand the Bishops, whose Habit in Parliament is Black and White,
which shall be changed into Purple. And by Twelve, is meant the Duke of
Monmouth.

Whilst the said Keines with the other Jesuit entertained the Deponent with
these Treasonable Expressions, Mr. Jonnison came to the said Keines, and told
him, that he had lost a Letter which he had received from Tho-white, the
Provincial at St. Omers, in a Walk he took to Islington, and would give ten
pounds to any friend that would give it him, and was afraid that some
Inconvenience might follow; if found by some Heretic: Which words put the said
Keines into such a Consternation, that he asked him, Whether he had a mind to
ruin them all: But Jennison bad the said Keines be quiet, for none could
understand it; which words the Deponent did likewise hear.

LII. Item.
That Mr. Keines on the 12th. of August, determined to go for Windsor, in order
to settle some business there in and toward the dispatching Forty Eight (which
the Deponent says is by them understood the King) at Windsor, if the King
should go down thither. And it was judged that the said Forty Eight would go to
Windsor, to make his abode there for some weeks, but the said John Keines told
the Deponent, that he might chance to fall short of his Return again. These
words were spoken by John Keines to the Deponent in his own Chamber: But the
said Keines did not go down to Windsor so soon, as afterward it appeared to
the Deponent.

LIII. Item.
That Smith, within mentioned, lies in Drury Lane, at one Mr. Lowds a Tailor,
in Cockpit Alley in the aforesaid Lane, and is also employed to go from house
to house to see how the Catholics stand affected: And Jennison said, That if
the Catholics had Courage enough, they might Rise and Cut the Throats of a
hundred thousand Protestants in London; which Expression of the said
Jennison's, the said Smith did tell the Deponent, asking the Deponent's Opinion
of the same: To which the Deponent did say, That Mr. Jennison talked like a
Person that had more Heat than Light. The said Smith did at the same time tell
the Deponent, that the Society did give him fifty pound per annum for his
Intelligence that he gets of the Affairs of the Court, and of the King's
Actions, Words and Counsels, and transmitteth the same to John Fenwick, which
the said Fenwick transmitteth to St. Omers, and there it is translated into the
French Tongue, and sent to Father L' Chaise, the the French King's Confessor:
Which daily Intelligence the Deponent did daily see from the said Smith, he
lodging in the same house with the Deponent. And the said Smith, did at the
same time tell the Deponent, that he was a Lay-brother, of the Society of
Jesus, and was of the Order of the Politians, as they term it, and attended
Father Blundel to Newgate, in order to convert the Prisoners. All which the
said Smith did tell the Deponent on August the 12th, 1678. And likewise the
said Blundel did say as much to the Deponent, who has seen the said Blundel
and Smith go together to Newgate.

LIVE. Item.
That one Matthew Medburn, a Player in the Duke's Theater, and Mr. Penny, Mr.
Mannock, Mr. Sharp, Mr. Seddon, Will. Smith Schoolmaster at Islington, and Mr.
Edw. Everard, meeting in a Club on Thursday Nights, and Sunday Nights, with one
Jones a Priest, and Kemash within mentioned, and all these are employed by the
Jesuits to villify the House of Commons, and go about the City of London to
incense the People against them and against the Bishops of the Nation; And they
deliver this Treasonable Position; That the Commons Assembled in Parliament are
the Devil's Representatives and not the Nation's. Which Treasonable and
detestable words, the Deponent did hear in the said Club (which is kept at the
Pheasant in Fullers Rents near Grays Inn) in the Month of August. And the
Deponent was ordered by the Jesuits in London, to give the said Persons great
Respects, and in their Names to thank the Club for their faithfulness to them
in that particular.

LV. Item.
That Mr. Jennison did on the 12th August say and boast, that he had put
several out of Love to the King's Interest, and would so continue, if that the
King did not turn a Roman Catholic, and if the King did not become R. C. he
should not be C. R. long.

LVI. Item.
That a Packet on Aug. 20th, New Style, arrived in London from Thomas White,
Provincial, Mr. Stapleton, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Peter's. Mr. Busby Procurator,
together with the Masters of the Humanity-Schools, to John Fenwick, in which it
was specified, That the twelve Jesuits were gotten into Holland, and would use
all their Skill and Interest to make a Commotion there: and that Apple Tree
Will. (which the Deponent says is meant the Prince of Orange) should not be
great, and that they hoped that the Fathers in London would follow their
Business closely there. Which Letter the Deponent saw and Read.

LVII. Item.
That a. Packet went from London, dated August 12, in which the Provincial was
informed by John Fenwick, and the rest, that the King was gone or going for
Winsor, and that the Fathers and honest William were ready to attend the Court
there, as the Deponent was informed by John Fenwick abovenamed.

LVIII. Item.
That on August 13 in the afternoon, about six of the Clock, a Sermon was
preached by John Keines to twelve persons, Men in poor Habits, yet men of
quality, as the Deponent does suppose by the whiteness of their hands; in which
Sermon he delivered, That Protestant and other Heretical Princes were ipso
facto deposed, because such; and that it was as lawful to Destroy them as an
Oliver Cromwell, or any other Usurper. At which Sermon the Deponent was present,
not designedly, but by accident.

LIX. Item.
That on the 15th of August John Keines and John Fenwick, went to a Gentleman
in or about Westminster, and persuaded him to remove from his quarters, lest
God should destroy him with the Sinners of that City; for God had raised him
and others of that Society to do such things against that City, as should make
a man's Ears ring that should hear it. The same day toward the Evening the
said John Keines and John Fenwick told the Deponet the said story, and laughed
to think what a fright the said Gentleman was put into. And they told the
Deponent the Name of the said Gentleman, but he has forgot it.

LX. Item.
That John Keines came to the Lodgings of the Deponent, on Saturday August 17,
and said it was endeavored to dispatch Forty Eight at Windsor, if possible (by
which number the Deponent says, they mean the King) and withal told the
Deponent, That Mr. Howard, Prior of the Benedictines, and Mr. Hitchcock
Subprior, and Mr. Skinner, Mr. Corker, and other Benedictines, had promised to
assist them with 6000 l. in order to the design. The said Monks did then lie at
or near the Wardrobe behind the Savoy; which report the Deponent did believe,
because the said Mr. Howard, Prior of the Benedictines, and Mr. Hitchcock
Sub-prior, told the Deponent in the morning, August 17, that they had promised
such a sum, and withal that the securing of his Majesty's person in his
Flight from Worcester was the worst days work that ever simple, Jack
Huddlestone did in all his Life. But now it was their business to get the
Stuarts out of the way: which the Deponent related to John Keines, and then
Keines did tell the Deponent, that if he would undertake to assist in the
dispatching of the King, he should be well rewarded, if not here, in Heaven:
and the Deponent replied that he never shot off a Gun in his Life, and withal
told Keines that he could not be guilty of such a thing for the World. And then
the said Keines did further inform the Deponent, that Mr. Coniers a Benedictine
Monk was resolved to pursue the Design of dispatching the King, which did
appear to be evidently true to the Deponent, because he did hear the said
Coniers on the 14th of August lay a Wager of a 100 l. with a Gentleman not
known to the Deponent, in the Benedictine Convent in the Savoy: ten Guinies
were deposited in the hands of Hitchcock Subprior of the Benedictines* Now the
wager which Coniers did lay was, That the Villain, the KING, should not live to
eat any more Christmas Pies; and the other Gentleman did lay that he would: So
that the Deponent says, That Keines told him no more of the Concern of
Coniers, than the Deponent had heard of the said Coniers before, on the 14th of
August. But the Deponent before he parted from Keines, asked him, What news
about the Town? Keines replied, That all the news about the Town was, War with
the French: and Keines did say, that if that held true, then Have at the Rogues
of the House of Commons, they should be remembered for all their Long Bills
against the Catholics. The Deponent replied, that (with submission) he thought
the Revenge proposed against them would not do the business, and therefore not
a Resolution consistent with a Catholic Spirit, for the Enterprise must be
more Noble: And withal the Deponent urged, that he feared the Death of the King
would scarcely do the business and effect the Design, unless his R. Highness
would pardon those that did the business, and stand by them in it. To which the
said Keines replied, that the Duke was not the strength of their Trust, for
they had another way to effect the setting up the Catholic Religion: For when
they had destroyed the King, they had a List of 20000 Catholics in London,
that were substantial persons and fit for Arms, that would Rise in twenty four
hours time and less: And if James did not comply with them, to Pot he must go
also.

It being late in the Night, the said John Kienes prayed the Deponent to come
to him the next morning, and he would have one hours discourse with him before
he went to Mass, and being about to take leave of the Deponent, asked him, What
he meant by those Words [He could not be guilty of any such thing, as to assist
in dispatching the King] there being no guilt in the Case; the Deponent smiled
and said, He could not be guilty of so much Courage. Besides the Deponent
says, That he told the said Keines, that it was his opinion, that it would be
more safe to let Sir George Wakeman try his skill, and then the People would
not apprehend it so much.

LXI. Item.
That the Deponent went to the Chamber of the said Keines about eight or nine
in the morning, on the 18th of August, but he was gone abroad, and ordered the
Deponent to call upon him about four in the afternoon, and then he would have
some discourse with him: And the Deponent accordingly went, but met with the
said Keines in the: Mews, who told the Deponent that he was to meet with some
Fathers in Covent Garden, and there would meet them, some Dominicans, and would
have the Deponent go along with him, and at the House where they were appointed
to meet, the Dominicans were already met, viz. Mr. Vincent, Provincial of the
Domiminicans in England, Joseph David Keimash, Mr. Dominick, Mr. Collins, Mr.
Fedding, Mr. Mansel, and Mr. Lumsdale (as they said) in the Name of all the
rest of the Order in England, to consult and comply with the Fathers; of the
Society to propagate the Catholic Faith; and when John Keines was set, with
the Fathers of the Society by him, all of a side, viz. John Keines, Father
Harcourt, Fa. Fenwick, Fa. Wright, Fa. Blundel, the said John Keins propounded
to the Dominicans to contribute to the design of killing the King, and carrying
on the business of England and Scotland: The Dominicans replied by their
Provincial, that they were poor and not able to do much, for they had but
little or no money, but they would let them have their personal assistance and
counsel, and would procure what Interest they could, but as for Money they could
not part with any at all, for they were in debt, and had scarce 400 l. in
stock, and the most they could make per annum of their, Estate, was not above
360 l. At which Consult the Deponent was to and fro, and what was more said he
cannot tell, for he was sent with the Proposals to the Carmelites, viz. Dr.
Handson, Mr. Kimbal, Mr. Trevers, and they said that they had not one penny in
stock, nor any In-come besides what the Spanish Ambassador allowed them for
assisting in his Chapel.

But they by the Deponent did present their Service to the Fathers met
together, and bad the Deponent tell them, that their Prayers to God and our
Blessed Lady should not be wanting: All this was acted by Order from the
Provincial of the Society.

LXII. Item.
That the Deponent went to see John Fenwick on August Nineteenth in the
afternoon; and whilst he was with him, in came John Keines, and presently after
him Mr. Blundel; and after a Salutation was passed, they asked the Deponent,
What News? The Deponent told them, he heard none but what was in the Gazett:
And Blundel said, he had been with his Workmen, and they wanted Oil: What the
meaning of this was, the Deponent cannot tell, but believes it was Sheeps Fat;
and the said Blundel would not tell the Deponent his meaning when asked by him.
The Deponent asked Keines, When he was for Windsor? He replied, The Court was
scarcely settled as yet; but said, that Mr. Conyers and one Anderson was to go
down on the morrow Aug. 20. in the morning; and if they did any thing as to the
business in hand, it would hasten his going down; and therefore as yet, could
not be certain when. The Deponent asked further, How honest William did?
Keines replied that he was troubled with a sore Throat, and was very bad with
it; and so indisposed, that he could not Ride down to Windsor; and that it
would be dangerous for him to go by water, lest a Cold being by that means
Contracted, he should be unfit for Service. And then the Deponent took his
leave of them, it being near six of the Clock in the afternoon, and went to the
Monks Convent, and inquired of one Rumly a Lay-brother of that Order, for Mr.
Conyers; he said, he was not within, but not far off; however, not to be spoken
withal, for he was with some of the Benedictine Fathers about business, and
would go out of Town to morrow betimes hi the morning: And so the Deponent left
him, and being but a little way from the place met the said Conyers; who
laughing upon the Deponent, told him, That the Hill People were Fools, to set
upon 48. at Windsor, because he was seldom in a posture to receive their
kindness: But he would see his Worship, and talk with him in some other
Language than in Tormentilio: The Deponent asked, How? He Replied, that if the
shirt on his back should know, he would burn it. But if that should not take
effect, no opportunity should be neglected in order to the dispatch of 48. He
further told the Deponent, he was in have, and his time was short, and his
business great; but told him also, that honest William and Pickering should
stay in Town, seeing the party concerned was Hic and ubique, never long in one
place.

LXIII. Item.
That on Wednesday twenty first of August, a Consult was held by the Jesuits
then in London, with certain Benedictine Monks, about three of the Clock in
the afternoon, concerning a Packet that came from Talbot, Archbishop of
Dublin, to the fathers of the Society: In which they were given to understand,
that Four Irish Jesuits had undertaken the death of the Duke of Ormond; and
that upon his death, the Irish were ready to rise. In this Letter he told them,
that a Legate was arrived in Ireland, and had asserted the Popes right in that
Kingdom; and that the Kings of England being no longer Catholics, they did
cease from being concerned there; it being given to them during the good
pleasure of his Holiness; and therefore did encourage the said Archbishop to
contrive and use all means for the recovery of the said Kingdom out of the
hands of the English. And in the said Letter it was mentioned, That if
opportunity did not permit the said Jesuits to do their business, that then
they should send one Doctor Fogarthy, now lodging at Mrs. Simmonds, the Widow
of one Simmonds an Apothecary in Drury Lane, and that he and the Fathers in
Ireland, together with the said Fogarthy, would find out an expedient way for
the death of the said Duke. And furthermore he did specify, that they had
procured several Irish to be made Commission-Officers in the Garrisons in
Ireland; and that he and the rest had dispensed with them to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. And that the Irish, who had gotten Commissions by
means of the Archbishop, had promised to betray their interest into their
hands, when the business should be ripe; and desired the Fathers to be as
diligent in England, as he and the rest of the Clergy were in Ireland: which
Letter John Keines did show the Deponent, and was read by the Deponent: And
Kenies and Blundel gave him an account of the Consult; and the said Fogarthy
did himself tell the Deponent the same, and on the said Twenty first of August,
did say, That he had a great interest in the Court of Ireland.

LXIV. Item.
That the said Fogarthy is a main Agent in this Hellish-Plot, and has
promised, That if this Bishop Talbot will make use of him, he will do all the
service he can: which the Deponent is ready to justify to the face of the said
Fogarthy; who did tell the Deponent, that he and Coleman were in the Consult,
when Wakeman was contracted withal in order to Poison the KING; and said, That
if he had the interest in the KING, as Wakeman had, he would have undertaken it
himself. And all this was told the Deponent on the Twenty first of August, in
die Chamber of the said Fogarthy. And furthermore, the said Fogarthy then and
there did tell the Deponent, That he had hired Four Irish Russians, whose Names
he did neither tell the Consulters that met on the Twenty first of August, nor
the Deponent, and these Irish Russians were to mind the KING's Postures at
Windsor: But the Deponent telling the said Fogarthy, that he heard the KING was
going to Portsmouth, he was wonderfully troubled at it, and said, It did very
much impede their Design, and nothing would be Attempted so long as he was
absent from Windsor.

LXV. Item.
That the Lord Ambassador, Sr. William Godolphin at the Court of Spain, holds
great Correspondence with Hierom Swiman the Irish-Jesuit (who as
beforementioned, was Procurator for the Jesuits of the Kingdom of England and
Ireland) and with the Irish Archbishop of Tuam now at Madrid; and is a friend
in this business, as the said Swiman did inform the Society in one of July the
thirtyeth New-style; and likewise in one to the Deponent, wherein he did
specify, that Sir William was as industrious as any Man could be, to answer the
expectation of the Society; and that he had but one Protestant-servant then in
his House, viz. the Cook, and the Parson (when there) made up a goodly Couple:
And the Deponent knows, that Godolphin is a Papist, and has perverted a
Kinsman of his own; and the Deponent knows, that the said Ambassador is very
familier to the said persons, the Irish Jesuit at Madrid, and the
Irish-Arch-Bishop of Tuam. And the Deponent does verily believe, that Mr.
Hodges, sometimes Chaplain to the said Lord Ambassador, can, if required,
Testify as much; and the Deponent does furthey say, That when he was at Madrid,
the said Chaplain of the Ambassador left the employ, because of the
Embassador's being a Papist; and the Deponent has seen the said Ambassador at
Mass; and he has a Jesuit that comes to his House, who has Read both
Philosophy and Divinity to the said Ambassador; of which the Deponent was
personally informed by the said Hierome Swiman an Irish Jesuit, and by the said
Irish Archbishop when at Madrid: but the Letters of which the Deponent speaks,
he saw and Read them at Mrs. Saunders House in Wild street the Twenty second of
August.

LXVI Item.
That on the 22th of August, Money was sent from the Society, by a Servant of
theirs, to supply the Expenses of the four Irish Russians abovementioned, who
were gotten to Windsor on the 21th at night; and the sum so sent was Eighty
pound, which the Deponent saw told: And they were written to, and informed,
that if more were wanting, they should have it. And they were bidden not to be
frequent in one another Company, and always to profess but small Acquaintance
one with another. Which Order and Money was dispatched away by Harcourt, Rector
of London, in the name of the Provincial and whole Society.

LXVII Item.
That the Deponent went to the Chamber of the said John Fenwick, who told him,
that he was to go to St. Omers with some Students thither, (about ten or
eleven, as near as the Deponent can remember:) and the said Fenwick was to
attend the Provincial, and was to return, as he said, within tenor twelve days,
together with Mico and the rest. And whilst the Deponent was with the said
Fenwick, a Messenger came in, viz. John Grove, with order from Harcourt Rector
of London, John Keines, Richard Blundell, Mr. Jennison, Mr. Wright, Basil
Langworth, and four other Jesuits that lay at Somerset house, to pray the
Provincial that he would write to Leshee the French King's Confessarius, and
give him to understand how well the business in Ireland stood: and that in his
Letters to Leshee, he should pray him to certify the French King thereof. The
Deponent asked Grove where those Fathers were met? Who said, they met again at
Mrs. Sanders house. And the Deponent, after he had read the Order or Memorial,
(as indeed the Title was) and saw their Names, about two in the Afternoon, went
to the house of Mrs. Sanders, where the Deponent saw those Fathers, who told
him of the said Order, and after a short stay, took his leave of them; and by
them was ordered to meet them at four of the Clock at Mr. Keines his Chamber.
And at four of the Clock the Deponent met; where he saw Dr. Fogarty, who showed
him a Letter written to Mr. Bedingfield by his own hand. And likewise the
Deponent saw Letters from Blundell and John Fenwick, with one from Father
Ireland, at St. Omers. That of Dr. Fogarty to Mr. Bedingfield, did contain in
it an account of Eighty Letters that were written to the Jesuits in England;
some of which were delivered to the Post Office in Russel Street; others to the
Post Office General; others were sent by private Messengers; and one to Mr.
Peter's a Jesuit, that lives now with Sir Charles Shelly in Sussex, that
married the Relict of the Baron of Abergaveny: In which the said Peter's was
ordered to meet the Provincial at London, about the Design in hand: which if
it took not effect at Windsor speedily, then John Keines was to go to Windsor
to meet with Coniers, who was designed to go out of Town on the 20th of August
with Mr. Anderton to 440, (which number is by them put for Windsor:) And after
their business was done in Keines his Chamber, the Deponent left them.

LXVIII Item.
That the Deponent being to meet with Dr. Tongue on the 22th of August, at the
Kings head in Grays-Inne-lane, about six of the Clock at night, accordingly
went; and finding that the said Doctor was not there, he walked in
Grays-Inne-walks, and there he met with Coniers, who was supposed to be gone to
Windsor. The Deponent asked him, how it happened that he did not go his
Journey? he replied, that his horse fell so lame, that he could scarce carry
him five miles on the way, and so was forced to return; and that he himself was
taken ill with the Sciatica, which had given him great trouble for all the
night before. The Deponent was then urgent with him to tell him how he would
kill the King, seeing he did laugh at the means the Fathers intended to use,
viz. by shooting him. Then the said Coniers, by reason of the Deponents
importunity, showed him a Dagger or Knife two edged, with a very sharp point;
and it was broader and broader toward the haft, which was of Buckhorn, and was
a foot long in the blade, and near half a foot in the haft. With this (said he)
the Villain shall fall to the ground, if possible. Coniers demanded of the
Deponent, what he thought it might cost him? the Deponent said, he could not
tell: Coniers replied, Ten shillings, or thereabouts. The Deponent told him it
was too dear: he replied, Nothing could be too dear for the King. The Deponent
asked him where he bought it? Coniers replied, Of the old Cutler in
Russel Street. The Deponent asked him why he would have it so long? he replied,
That the Villain might fall by it. The Deponent asked, How? he replied, Through
my Cloak will I stab him. The Deponent asked him, how he thought to escape?
Coniers answered, that he doubted not but to obtain a Pardon, if he were not
knocked on the head upon the place. The Deponent, after some discourse, went to
the Kings head, where he met with Dr. Tongue between six and seven of the Clock.

LXIX Item.
That the Deponent did on the 22th of August, about nine of the Clock, meet
with Blundell; and seeing him have a Bag, asked him what he had? and he
replied, Tewxbury Mustard-balls, a notable biting Sauce, and would furnish
Westminster when he had enough of them. The Deponent says, that by Tewxbury
Mustard-balls, we are to understand, Fireballs.

LXX Item.
That on the 24th of August, Blundell told the Deponent in Fenwick's Chamber,
that it would be so ordered by the Society, that the Catholics of England
would advance the design of shortning the Kings days; and bad the Deponent be
of good Cheer, for Protestant Religion was on its last legs.

LXXI Item.
That the Deponent met with Blundell on August the thirtieth, who told him,
that he must show him what Westminster, and the houses on both sides the Water,
were to be done withal; and carried him to Fenwick's Chamber, and there drew
out of a Paper-Case a Paper, in which was the manner of Firing Westminster and
Wapping, Toolies-street, Barnaby-street, and St. Thomas Apostle. First for
Westminster, if the wind blew nothernly, then they were to begin at the next
house to the Palsgraves-head Tavern, where the Jesuits and their Agents were to
carry on the Fire to the Savoy; and then the Benedictines and they, to carry it
on both sides to Charing Cross; and then the Fire was by them and their Agents
to be carried to Whitehall: and near the end of the Stone-gallery another
Company is to begin and carry it on to Kings-street and Channel-Row; which was
first designed to be acted in the time of the great Frost, in the year 1676;
but then they were not assured of the French Kings assistance, of which they
are now assured by Leshee, the French Kings Confessor. At the same time
Wapping, and the Ships in the River, were to be burnt: and the said Fire (in
case the Wind blow up the River) is to begin at a place near Bugbies-hole or
Limehouse-hole, and is to be carried on by four men (of whom they had made
choice) to Wapping middle-stairs, and then four or five more were to carry it
up higher. And the Deponent found himself, with seven more, ordered to ply
about the Armitage; and his business was to encourage the seven men committed
to his care; and for his reward One thousand pound was therein promised him,
besides Eighty pound for his former services. But the Deponent says, if the
Wind stood contrary, they were to change the Commencement of the Fire. At the
same time others were to have the Charge in Barnaby-street, Toolies-street, and
St. Thomas Apostles on the other side of the Water, committed to them; and the
Fire was to begin at Redriff when it was begun on Wapping-side: And this is to
be done when the Water is low, that the Ships might not get off from the Keys.
In order to the Deponents managing that part of the Fire that was to be begun
about the Armitage, he was ordered to remove his Lodging into Wapping as soon
as order was given him, and he should have a Priest come and say Mass unto him
in his Chamber every day for a good success on the Design. But the Deponent
says, he did not know he was to be an Agent in the business, till he saw that
Paper; which Paper was signed by the Provincial Tho. White, in the name of the
whole Society.

LXXII Item.
That the Deponent says, the Pope has issued out a Bull, a Copy of which
Blundell showed the Deponent on the said 30th of August; and as near as the
Deponent does remember, it bears date either the month of November or December
last; in which the Pope has been pleased to order and dispose of Bishoprics
of England, and other Dignities of the same, as follows.

ARCHBISHOPS.
Canterbury. Cardinal Howard, with an Augmentation of 40000 crowns per annum,
for the maintenance of his Legantine Authority. York. Perrott, Superior of the
Secular Priests: he has power of Probats of Wills, Licenses for Marriage, and
all Episcopal Jurisdiction; Ordination and Confirmation only excepted.
BISHOPS.
London. Corker, President of the Benedictines. Winchester. White, Provincial
of the Jesuits. Durham Strange, last Provincial of the Jesuits. Salisbury. Dr.
Godden. Norwich. Napper, a Franciscan Friar. Ely. Vincent, Provincial of the
Dominicans. Exceter. Wolf, one of the Sorbon. Peterborough. Gifford, a
Dominican. Lincoln. Sir John Warner Baronet, a Jesuit, and Confessor to Lord
Powis. Chichester. Morgan, a Jesuit. Bath and Wells. Dr. Armstrong, a
Franciscan Friar. Carlisle. Wilmot, alias Quarterman, a Secular Priest.
Chester. Thimbleby, a Secular Priest, now Canon of Cambray. Hereford. Sir
Thomas Preston Baronet, a Jesuit. Bristol. Mundson, a Dominican. Oxon.
Williams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, a Jesuit: He is also to
have the Deanery of Christ-Church, and is to preside over the Professors of
Divinity in that University, and peruse their Letters before they read them
publicly. St. David's. Belson, a Secular Priest. St. Asaph. Jones, a Secular.
Bangor. Joseph David Keimash, a Dominican Friar.
ABBOTS.
Westminster. Dr. Sheldon, a Benedictine Monk. Sion-house. Skinner, a
Benedictine Monk.
DEANS.
Canterbury. Betton, a Sorbonist. St. Paul's. Leybourn a Secular, and Secretary
to the Cardinal. Windsor. Howard, with twelve Benedictine Canons. Chichester.
Morgan, a Secular. Winchesten Dr. Watkinson, President of the English College
at Lisbon.
Many Dignities of the Church, not here mentioned, are to be supplied with
Spaniards and other Foreigners, because they have not Clergy enough to be
Professors: Nor are there any Prebendaries or other places undisposed. And in
the same Bull it was ordered, That the Jesuits should read Philosophy and
Divinity in all great Towns and places where they had Colleges; but not give
Degrees. And whilst the English Jesuits were employed in instructing Youth in
Humanity and Philosophy, and others reading Divinity, and preaching and
catechizing, they should be supplied with Spanish Jesuits and other Foreigners,
to assist them at the Altar, and in the care of the Colleges.

LXXIII Item.
That the Deponent on the second of September, saw a Packet out of Scotland,
directed to John Grove, dated August 10. 1678, in which the Fathers, met at
Edinburgh, from thence did tell the Fathers here, That they had not much to
write, but that Eight thousand Catholics were ready to rise and assist, when
the business should grow hot; and would join with the disaffected Scots, when
required by the Scotch Jesuits there. And in the said Letter was mentioned,
That one Westby was destroyed by one that was Servant to Lovel the Jesuit, for
endeavoring to detect the Rebellion, with its Authors and Contrivers, to the
Council in Scotland.

LXXIV. Item.
That the Deponent saw on the said Second of September Old Style, Letters of
the forth New Style from St. Omers, Written and Subscribed by Thomas White
Provincial; in which, Notice was given to Rirchard Blundel, to whom they were
directed; that Twelve Scotch Jesuits were sent into Scotland by order from the
General of the Society, and have One Thousand pound given them by Lashee the
French Kings Confessor, to keep up the Commotions in Scotland, that the French
King might Land an Army: And that the said Jesuits had Instructions given them
to carry themselves like Nonconformist-Ministers amongst the Presbyterian-Scots.

LXXV. Item.
That on the Third of September, the Deponent saw a Letter from the Provincial
at St. Omers, Dated December First, by which the Deponent did perceive, that
though the Letter were Dated from thence, yet it came not from thence, because
it was Old Style; and did believe, that the said Provincial was then in
England. And in this Letter directed to Blundel, it was specified, that the
Provincial was informed of some Discovery that was made, at which he was
somewhat surprised. But upon second Thoughts, he ordered the said Blundel, not
to desist the business in hand, but to write to Bedingfield not to take notice
of what Keines said; it being but a Conjecture of his own. And the said Blundel
did on the third day write to Bedingfield, and did advise him of the
Provincialls thoughts concerning what had passed about that Concern. And in the
Letter of the Provincial to Blundel, it was ordered by the said Provincial,
That thanks should be given to Doctor Fogarthy for his Care in the business of
Forty Fight (which is the KING) and for his forwardness to assist those in
Ireland: and ordered Letters to be written with all speed into Ireland to give
them his thanks, and to tell them, That he would not cease to pray for their
good success.

LXXVI. Item.
That the Provincial came to London the third day at night; and the Deponent
went to the Provincialls Lodgings, and was ordered to wait on him the next day
in the morning.

LXXVII Item.
That the Deponent went on the Fourth of September in the morning, according to
the aforesaid Order given him over Night; and when the Provincial saw the
Deponent, he asked him, With what face he could look on him, since he had
played such a treacherous trick with them? And struck the Deponent three blows
with his stick, and a box on the Ear; and charged him with being with the KING,
and a Minister with him, whom he suspected to have informed the KING of those
things; because that Bedingfield had Related in a Letter to Blundel, that the
Duke of York had related some such thing to him; and did therefore judge that it
must be the Deponent that must have been drawn in by some persons to the same.
But at last the Provincial told the Deponent, that he was willing to be
reconciled to him, if he would discover what the Parson was, his Name and place
of Abode, to the end they might be secure of him; and were resolved to kill
him. And in the mean time the Deponent was ordered to make himself ready to go
beyond the Seas within fourteen days, as he the Provincial said. And that the
Deponent might not Cheat them, they were to pay for his Coachhire, and ordered
his Entertainment at Sittingburn, and in other places upon the Road to Dover,
and there Mr. Conyers, Master of the King's Head, was to pay for his passage to
Callice; and the Master of the Feathers in Callice to pay for his Passage to
St. Omers, where the Deponent was to Remain till further Order from the
Provincial. And Richard Blundel was to take care of carrying on the Fire in
Wapping in the Deponents room.

LXXVIII. Item.
That on the Sixth of September, Mr. Pickering told the Deponent, that Conyers
was gone for Windsor; and he said, that after Ten Days stay there, he would go
to the Lord Brudenals House.

LXXIX. Item.
That at night the Deponent attending at the door of the Provincial, and about
to go in, heard White, and some others (whom the Deponent supposed by their
Voices to be Mr. Mico, and one Mr. Poole) consulting about the disposing of a
Person, whom the Deponent supposes to be himself. Their Words were these:

This Man has Betrayed us, and therefore we will give a Coachman Twenty Pound
to take him up, and Carry him directly to Rochester to Esquire Lees House, who
lives near the Town; and from thence to Dover, by some By-way, because he is
acquainted at Sittingburn; and said, that if they could but get him on the
other Side of the Water, they would torment him till he had confessed to them,
who it was that had been with the KING, and Informed Him of the business.

When the Deponent heard these Words, he went down the Stairs with all the
speed he could make, and durst not return to his lodgings that night, but lay
in another place.

LXXX. Item.
That the Deponent, on the Seventh of September at night, returned to his
lodging, where he intended not to lie; but only to take some Necessaries for
his use the next day; but meeting with one Grigson a Papist, at whose house he
had formerly lodged, near the Red-Lyon in Drury Lane, who told him, the Jesuits
were displeased with him, because he had not answered their Expectations, in
being true to them; and that the Jesuits were dangerous persons, and would ruin
him (the Deponent) if they could.

And the said Grigson said further, That he had known their Roguery these
Twelve or Fourteen Years.

And the Deponent being, through Discourse, detained by the said Grigson, was
forced to lie in his lodging in Drury Lane; and when he was lain down in his
bed, one Stratford (a Person utterly unknown to the Deponent, and whom he never
discoursed or any way provoked) endeavored to break open the house where the
Deponent lay; and did break down a door to get into his lodging, but was forced
to Retreat, because he law himself observed by some of the servants of the
house.

And when he saw he could not come to Assassinate him (as the Deponent verily
believes) he Reviled him, and broke several Quarries of Glass in a Window,
under the lodgings of the Deponent.

And therefore being verily persuaded, that the said Stratford was Employed by
the said Jesuits to do him a mischief, made his escape thence early on Sunday
Morning; and did not return thither again, because the said Stratford threatened
to Kill him. Now, the house in which the Deponent lay, Was a School, where the
within-mentioned Blundel used to Catechize every Sunday in the Afternoon.

LXXXI. Item.
The Eighth day, being Sunday, whilst that the Deponent was going to attend the
public Worship of God in the City, a Papist, who goes by the Name of Nevil,
as the Deponent remembers, met him in the Strand, and told him:

That there was a very great Murmuring amongst the Jesuits against him, because
of a Complaint that was made against them by some Persons, of whom they
suspected him to be one.

And said further; That the Deponent must either destroy the Jesuits, or the
Jesuits destroy the Deponent.

And told him Moreover; That the Bishop of Rochester was made acquainted with
the Complaint, and would lead them such a dance as they never followed since
the Fool their Founder appeared in the World.

To which the Deponent made no Reply, suspecting this Person to be a Trappan;
and when at parting, he asked the Deponent Where he Lodged? the Deponent gave
him not that account as he desired.

A List of such Noblemen and Gentry, as are in this Conspiracy, whose Names
occur at present.
LOrd Arundel of Wardour Lord Chancellor. Lord Powis Lord high Treasurer of
England. Sr. William Godolphin Lord privy Seal. Coleman Secretary of State.
Stafford.
The Sea-Officers were named to the Deponent, but their Names being most French
and some Irish, occur not.

Militia.
Lord Bellasis Lord General. Lord Peter's Lieutenant General. Sr. Francis
Radcliff Major General. John Lambert Adjutant General. Langhorn, Advocate
General. Mr. Arundel of Wardour Commissary General.
All these had their Commissions or Patents stamped by the General of the
Jesuits Johannes Paulus d' Oliva, and sent from Rome to Langhorn; and were
delivered to them with pleniary Indulgences sent also from Rome, and additional
Patents stamped by the Provincials, Strange or White: White and his Seal are
taken.

Colonels, Who have their Commissions from the Provincial.
Lord Baltimore, Colonel of Horse; at whose Lodgings Five Hundred Case of
Pistols, etc. were found, as is reported. Colonel Thomas Howard, deceased,
confessed he had received and accepted his Commission. Lassels, Roper, VVinter
or VVitter, received their Commissions from the Deponent, and accepted them.
Captains.
Roper, Son to the Colonel aforementioned; Radciff Esquire Medburn, the Player;
Penny, Caryl Junior, Townly, did also receive their Commissions from the
Informant, and accepted them. Sir George VVakeman, Physician to the Army.
Irish Officers.
Lord Legate, Bishop of Cassal in Italy. Peter Talbot, Lord Chancellor. Richard
Talbot, Esquire Lord General. Viscount Mountgarret, Lieutenant General; His Office
to be Executed by Mr. Butler his Son. John Pipard, Esquire Colonel.
Note, That the Major Part of the Colonels appointed for the English-Army, are
also Irish.

Note also, That Mr. Pierson, Secretary to the Lord Powis. did in the
Informant's Presence, promise on the Behalf of his Lord, that he should raise
and furnish Three Hundred Horse, and had Three Hundred Armed Men, ready to rise
in less than Twenty Four Hours. These Words were spoken a little aster the
Consult, to White the Provincial, at Wild-House.

The said Lord Powis has also Contributed Three Hundred Pound, toward the
Jesuits Design.

Note, That Lord Stafford is a principal Officer of State, and a chief
Conspirator; having Contributed several Sums of Money, not remembered by the
Deponent.

The Names of the Conspirators.
Benedictines.
Mr. Howard, at Doway. Mr. Hitchcock, at Doway. Mr Reaves, at Doway. Mr.
Anderton, in England. Mr. Conyers, in England. Mr. Rumly, in England. Mr.
Corker, in England. Mr. Skinner, in England. Mr. Crosby, in England.
Carmelites.
Dr. Handson, in England. Mr. Trevers, in England. Mr. Kimball, in England.
Franciscans.
Dr. Armstrong, Mr. Napper,
Dominicans.
David Joseph Keimash, in England. Mr. Dominick, in England. Mr. Collins, in
England. Mr. Vincent, in England. Mr. Fidding, in England. Mr. Mansell, in
England. Mr. Lumsdale, in England. Mr. Bingly, in England. Mr. Cooper at Rome.
Mr. Munson in England.
Jesuits.
England. Tho. White Provincial. England. Rich. Strange late Provincial.
England. Rich. Ashby alias Thimbleby. England. Mr. Harcourt England. Mr.
Jennison England. Mr. Keines England. Mr. Wright England. Mr. Blundel Mr.
Pennington in England. Mr. Gray Mr. Pool in England. Mr. Mico in England. Mr.
Bennyfield in England. Mr. Simmons in England. Mr. Langworth in England. Mr.
Morgan in England. Mr. Rich. Peter's in England. Mr. Dorrington in England. Mr.
Lacy in England. Mr. Vanghan in England. Mr. Ewry in England. Mr. Conyers in
England. Jo. Peter's in England. Mr. Wilkinson in England. Mr. Wolf in England.
Sir Tho Preston at Liege. Mr. Saunders at Liege. Sir Jo. Warner at Watton. Mr.
Williams at Watton. Mr. Eggleston at Watton. Mr. Janion at Watton. Mr. Crane at
Watton. Sir Pob. Bret at St. Omers. Tho. Stapleton at St. Omers. Tho. Fermour
at St. Omers. Tho. Ditchling at St. Omers. Edw. Hall at St. Omers. Mr. Cannel
at St. Omers. Charles Peter's at St. Omers. Mr. Nevile at St. Omers. Mr.
Constable at St. Omers. Mr. Sabrand at St. Omers. Mr. Walter at St. Omers. Mr.
Roper at St. Omers.
JESUITS.
Mr Marsh at Ghent. Mr Blake, alias Gross in Spain. Mr Mundford Vore* in Spain.
Armstrong, Mr Carry at Rome.
English JESUITS in SCOTLAND.
Mr Lovel. Mr Saunders. Mr Moore.
Twelve Scotch JESUITS lately gone into Scotland, whose names I know not, but I
know their persons.

Secular Persons.
Dr Fogarthy, Sir George Wakeman, Mr Coleman, John Groves. Four Irish Ruffians.
Lay-Brothers.
Pickering, Smith.
These Fourteen Secular Priests I have only by Information from Thomas
Whitebread.
Mr Perrot, In England. Mr Morgan, In England. Mr Wilmot, In England. Dr
Godden, In England. Mr Jones Senior, In England. Mr Jones Junior, In England.
Mr Gerard, In England. Mr Henrique, In England. Mr Fisher, In England. Mr
Jackson. In England. Mr Pinchard, In England. Mr Sharp, In England. Dr Bettam
In England. Mr Wolf in France at the Sorbon.
Other Persons.
Archbishop Talbot, Archbishop Lynce, Hierom Swiman, Sir William Godosphin Lord
Ambassador in Spain.
Titus Oats Clerk makes Oath, That the Information set down in these Papers,
containing Eighty One Articles, all Written and subscribed by his own Hand, are
true in the whole, and every particular thereof, that is to say, that such
Particulars as he has set down, to be seen, heard, done, or known by him, he
knows to be true, and what he has set down only to be heard by him, and
related to him, were so heard and related as he has set them down, and he
believes to be true:

Witness his hand, the 27th day of Sept. 1678. TITUS OATS.

SEPTEMBER 27. 1678.
Sworn before me Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Middlesex.

Edm. B. Godfrey. Witnessed, Ez. Tongue, Chr. Kirby.

The General Design of the POPE, Society of JESUS, and their Confederates in
this PLOT, is, the REFORMATION, that is, (in their sense) the Reduction of
GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, and all His Majesty's Dominions by the Sword (all
other ways and means being judged by them ineffectual) to the Romish Religion
and Obedience. To effect this Design;
1. THe Pope has Entitled himself to the Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

2. Sent his Legate the Bishop of Cassal in Italy into Ireland to declare his
Title, and take possession of that Kingdom.

3. He has appointed Cardinal Howard his Legate for England to the same purpose.

4. He has given Commission to the General of the Jesuits, and by him to
White their Provincial in England to issue, and they have issued out, and given
Commissions to Captain Generals, Lieutenant Generals, etc. namely, the General
of the Jesuits has sent Commissions from Rome to Langhorn their
Advocate-General for the Superior Officers: And White has given Commissions
here in England to Colonels, and inferiout Officers.

5. He has by a Consult of the Jesuits of this Province Assembled at London,
condemned His Majesty, and ordered Him to be assassinated, etc.

6. He has Ordered, That in case the Duke of York will not accept these Crowns
as forfeited by his Brother unto the Pope, as of his Gift, and settle such
Prelates and Dignitaries in the Church, and such Officers in Commands and
places Civil, Naval and Military, as he has Commissioned as above, extirpate
the Protestant Religion, and in order thereunto ex post facto, consent to the
assassination of the KING his Brother, Massacre of His Protestant Subjects,
firing of his Towns, etc. by pardoning the Assassins, Murderers and
Incendiaries, that then he be also poisoned or destroyed, after they have for
some time abused His Name and Title to strengthen their Plot, weakened and
divided the Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND thereby in Civil Wars and
Rebellions as in His Fathers Time, to make way for the French to seize these
Kingdoms, and totally ruin their Infantry and Naval Force.

Besides this Papal, there appears also another French Plot or Correspondence
carried on by Sir Ellis Lay^^on, Mr Coleman and others.

More particularly,

1. The Royal Family of the STUARTS are condemned to be Cut off Root and
Branch, and namely the KING, Duke of YORK and Prince of Orange, because that
Family has not answered their expectations, nor have they any hopes that any
of them will comply fully with this, their bloody design, when fully discovered
to them. 1. The King person which stands in their way they more especially, and
in the first place design to remove with all possible speed, by Dagger, Pistol
or Poison. To Stabb Him, Conyers and Anderton Benedictine Monks, and Four Irish
Ruffians are employed. To Shoot Him, Groves and Pickering are furnished with
joynted Carabines. To Poison him, Five Thousand pound has been told out,
entered in their Books, and affirmed to be paid to Sir George Wakeman, in part
of Fifteen Thousand pound, upon a Contract made with him in presence of Doctor
Fogarthy and Mr. Coleman.
2. The Duke of York, notwithstanding they acknowledge his sincerity and
affection to their Religion, and the Society, and his demonstration thereof by
his taking Bedingfield a Jesuit for his Confessor, they design to dispose of
him as is abovesaid. 3. The Prince of Orange is also condemned and designed
against by Name, and Twelve Missioners sent into Holland have in charge to put
that People in Mutiny against his Person and Government. 4. The Conquest and
subduing of his Majesty's Dominions is designed and contrived in this manner.
I. The Conquest of Ireland and subduing it to the Tyranny of the Pope and
French.
1. By a general Rebellion and Massacre of the Protestants as formerly, which
they term another Demonstration of Zeal for the Catholic Faith: This to be
done immediately upon the Assassination of the Duke of Ormond, as the
Watchword, for which four Jesuits are employed.

2. By the Popes Nuntio sent thither, and Commissions there given out by the
Provincial of the Irish Jesuits, etc. to a General, Lieutenant General, etc.

3. By Arms and Money already sent, whereof Eight hundred Thousand Crowns by
the Pope.

4. By Traitorous Officers who are dispensed with by the Archbishop of Dublin
and the Clergy there, to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, upon
promise to betray their Garrisons and other Trusts.

5. By the Assistance of the French Forces to be landed there, and received by
Twenty five thousand Irish ready to join with them.

II. England and Scotland are to be divided, weakened, wasted and exhausted of
their Infantry, Naval Force and Wealth, by Civil War, Rebellion, etc. and
finally exposed to foreign Force of French, etc.
To attain to this Design, they apply themselves and Agents:

1. By impudently Questioning and Denying the Kings Legitimation, and
consequently his present Right and Title to his Crown, and so exposing him as a
Tyrant without Title.

2. By Confuting and Weakening as much as possibly they can the Obligation of
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, causing them to be Renounced, rendering
them very Odious, as Blasphemous and Heretical, and terrifying all of their
Communion from Writing for them, offering Money to have Berry the Priest
murdered for writing in favor of them.

III. By Disaffecting the Kings best Friends at home and abroad, and Subjects,
against his Person and Government.
1. Charging him with Tyranny and Designs of Oppressing, Governing by the
Sword, and without Parliaments, and exposing his mod faithful and valiant
Subjects to be wasted and slain in foreign service.

2. By aspersing, deriding, exposing and declaiming against his Person,
Counsels and Actions in Parliament and elsewhere; and particularly scoffing at
his Security and Confidence in them, and by this means animating and
encouraging their Party and Assassins, especially to attempt upon his Life, and
to hasten his Ruin.

3. By disclosing the Kings Counsels to France, by Coleman, Smith, and others.

4. By mis-reporting and raising false News of his Affairs, etc.

5. By disaffecting his Majesty's Allies, Holland, Spain, the German Emperor
and Princes, by false Intelligence, etc.

6. By disturbing Trade.

7. By seditious Preachers and Catechists set up, sent out, maintained, and
directed what to Preach in their own or other private or public Conventicles
and Field-meetings.

8. By setting up pretended false Titles to the Succession of the Crown, and
animating different Parties one against another on this or such like false
pretenses to Arm, and put the People in Blood upon the Kings Death.

9. By Firing and Plundering our best Cities and Towns, by Irish, French,
Lay-Brethren and others, disguised in Frocks and otherwise, directed by Order
under the Provincials hand how to carry on these Designs.

10. By Poisoning and Assassinating by picked Quarrels or otherwise, those whom
they suppose to be ready or able to detect or otherwise obstruct their Designs;
of whom they keep Catalogues in their Books.

11. By horrid, worse than Jewish Interest, Transportation of Trading, People,
Stock and Money, adulterating Money and Plate. To which ends they have Bankers,
Brokers, Merchants, Goldsmiths and other Traders, whom they stock and set up
with Money of their Society, of which they boast to have a Hundred thousand
pound Cash, etc.

12. By suborning Felons condemned, by Blundell their Newgate Ordinary, through
hopes of Pardon or Transportation, to turn Papists, and then putting such as
they find fit and desperate, on Firing Houses, Plundering, and other wicked and
mischievous Designs.

FINIS.

