portrait of William Owtram R. White Sculp:
^ELMUS OUTRAMUS S.T.P. Sti. Petri apud Westmonasterienses Canonicus.


TWENTY SERMONS PREACHED upon Several Occasions.

BY WILLIAM OWTRAM D.D. Prebendary of Westminster, and one of his MAJESTY'S
Chaplains in Ordinary.

Printed after the Authors own Copies.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is well known that the Author of these following Sermons could never he
prevailed upon, either by the Entreaty of his Friends, or the Authority of his
Superiors (though very much urged by both) to publish any of his Sermons in
Print; and his nearest Relations would have paid that respect to him in this,
as in all other things, to have denied them to the Public, for the sake of his
own Judgment in this matter; had not a forward Bookseller, only to serve the
ends of his own profit, thrust out into the World Six Sermons under his name,
not many Months after his Death. To promote the Sale of which, he endeavors,
in an Epistle before them, to make the Reader believe that although (as he
confesses) they were taken from the Author by a Short-hand-man many years
since, yet they were allowed and corrected by himself; That they were agreeable
to his sense; And that there was no other more perfect Copy to be procured.

If all this had been true, What right had the Bookseller, and his Shorthand
Friend by this to publish them in the name of this Author? Did the Author
Correct them for the Press? Or is it sufficient to justify the publishing of
such Discourses under a Man's name, because they are agreeable to his sense? Or
if no other Copy could be procured, was it therefore necessary to publish this?

But this pretense was so far from being true, that whosoever has been abused
by this Publisher so much as to buy, and look into those Sermons, will find,
that they are so far from being Corrected by the Hand of this Author, that they
were never Corrected by any; That they are so far from being agreeable to his
sense, that in very many places they are no sense at all; And the Publisher
knows very well that he never inquired of any of the Authors Relations for any
Copies or Papers remaining in their hands.

If he had, he might have been showed Three Sermons upon the first Text, Heb.
10.38. whereas he has published but Two of them, and those two put together as
one, and that so imperfect, so incoherent, and so ungrammatical, that the
Reader must be very kind if he would excuse the Author in many places as well
as the Printer. One might point to mistakes in almost every Page, some of which
are very absurd and intolerable: But in regard some Friends of the Authors have
thought fit to collect a Volume of his Sermons upon Theological Subjects
(amongst which it will be most proper to insert these upon the 10th of the
Hebrews concerning the Life of Faith in connection with other. Discourses of
Faith) it is sufficient to acquaint the Reader, that these shall be reprinted
after the Authors own Copy.

In like manner the Publisher, if he had consulted the Authors Friends, might
have seen that the Second and Third Sermons of Providence upon St. Matt. 10.29.
are but a part of his Discourses upon that Subject, which it will be most
proper to put together, and publish (if at all) in a Volume of the Attributes
of God, upon which the Author has several Sermons: But besides that, these are
but apart of his Meditations upon Providence, they are also very broken and
imperfect in many places, though the Short-hand-man has endeavored, according
to his skill in Divinity, to supply and fill them up.

Of the three following, two of them cannot yet be found amongst the Authors
Papers, so that it is very doubtful whether they be his or no; and therefore
the Publisher, besides the wrong he has done the Author, and the World too, in
exposing his labors imperfectly, has also (very probably) fathered upon him
those that are none of his. The just indignation which the Authors Friends have
taken to this injurious dealing of the Publisher, together with Reports brought
frequently to their ears of a design of other persons to publish other of his
Sermons, inclined them (though they are sensible against the Authors own
opinion) to set forth a Volume at present according to his own Copies: And
these Twenty being lately preached upon particular occasions, and some of them
in the most august and solemn Audience, and all of them designed to obviate the
evils of the Age, and to secure Men in the belief and practice of the true
Religion, are thought not improper to be first offered to the public view.

The Author was sensible by what Artifices, what degrees, and what parties of
Men, this most excellent constitution of the Church of England is endeavored
to be undermined; and denying to no Man the liberty of Disquisition and
Discourse, he understood the strength both of their Arguments and their
Interest: And the Reader may discern by these Sermons that he apprehended our
danger to arise of late from (a confederacy, it may be, one cannot say but) a
complication of enemies, Papists, Libertines, and Dissenters; but chiefly from
the first, who employ the two latter to work under them, and to weaken the
Church of England, one by Profaneness and the other by Separation, that so
they may argue against the sufficiency of our constitution to maintain good
Life, and preserve Unity, and dispose those who are of no Religion and no
Church to become Proselytes to theirs. Amongst the Libertines may be reckoned
that sort of Men who, though indeed they have natural conviction of a supreme
Being, pretend to more wit than to be satisfied with the Authority of our
Blessed Savior; and so because they have no good opinion of the Truth of his
Religion, they neglect Religion in general: for what Theist was ever known to
live according to the Principles of natural Religion, to which notwithstanding
he owns himself obliged? For the Dissenters, they have many different Opinions
amongst themselves, some of which are here taken notice of, either ex proposito
in some Sermons, or by the by in others.

So that the whole Collection is an Antidote Very seasonable for the malignity
of the Age, and, by the blessing of God, may have some profitable effect from
the Press, as, by the testimony of the Hearers, they had from the Pulpit; and
they are offered to the world for that end; not as a Character of the great
abilities of the Author, and his great Accomplishments in almost all kinds of
Science, but as an instance of his Zeal for the Truth, and goodness of the
Christian Religion in general, and the Church of England in particular;
especially in this juncture.

His extraordinary skill in Rabbinical Learning, and the use and service of it
to the Confirmation and Illustration of the Christian Theology, he has made
appear to the learned World some years since with great propriety and accuracy
of style in his Book De Sacrificiis: wherein he has also given a proof of his
profound skill in the highest points of the Divine Wisdom.

But what his abilities were in other parts both of Divine and Humane
Knowledge, he had not leisure enough, from his Ministerial labors, to let the
world know. Nor have I ability to make it sensible how great they were; or to
represent the Gravity, Sobriety, Simplicity, Truth and plainness of his
Conversation; his Devotion to God, and his Charity to the Neighborhood,
especially the sick and afflicted; His indefatigable Industry in his private
Studies, as well as in the public offices of his Profession, and his readiness
to impart and communicate the effects of his mighty pains and industry to his
Friends; His Civility, and Beneficence to Learned Foreigners; His Respect and
Reverence to his Superiors; together with his Humility and Candor to his Equals
and Inferiors: Which excellent Virtues as they rendered him very valuable and
useful to the world whilst he was alive, so they will imbalm his memory now he
is dead.

All that needs further to he added is to beg thy pardon, Reader, for the
Errata of the Press, which are too many, and to desire that if a Sermon of the
Authors upon the Sin against the Holy Ghost, or any other, be in thine or any
other hand that thou know, thou would please to restore, or send notice of
it to the Printer, that it may be inserted in another Collection.

TEXTS OF THE SERMONS.
SERMON I. Isaiah xxxiij. 6. And Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the stability of
thy Times. Fol. 1 SERMON II. Psalm lxviij. 28. Strengthen, O God, that which
thou have wrought for us. fol. 33 SERMON III. Philip. i. 27, 28. That ye stand
fast in one Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the Faith of the
Gospel, and in nothing terrified by your Adversaries. fol. 60 SERMON IV. St
Matthew. vi. 23. -- If therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, How great
is that Darkness? fol. 89 SERMON V. St Matthew. xvi. 18. -- And the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. fol. 110 SERMON VI. 1 Cor. xiv. 15. What is it
then? I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also.
fol. 129 SERMON VII. 1 John iij. 3. And every Man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as He is pure. fol. 149 SERMON VIII. Galat. v. 13. Ye
have been called unto Liberty, only use not your Liberty for an occasion to the
flesh. fol. 171 SERMONS IX, X. St Luke xij. 1. -- Beware ye of the Leaven of
the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. fol. 194.216 SERMON XI. St John xiv. 1. --
Ye believe in God; Believe also in me. fol. 237 SERMON XII. Philip. i. 10. That
ye may approve things that are excellent -- fol. 261 SERMON XIII. St John vij.
17. If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether I speak of my self. fol. 290 SERMON XIV. Malachi i. 6. -- If
then I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where is my
fear? fol. 309 SERMON XV. St Matthew. v. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy
the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. fol. 334
SERMON XVI. Psalm. cxix. 59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy Testimonies. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. fol.
355. SERMONS XVII, XVIII. 1 John iij. 7. Little Children, let no Man deceive
you; he that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous. fol.
390.411 SERMON XIX. St Luke xvi. 8. For the Children of this World are in their
Generation wiser than the Children of Light, fol. 432. SERMON XX. St Matthew. vi.
21. For where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also. fol. 453
The First Sermon.
ISAIAH 33.6. And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times.

The whole verse is thus:

And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of
salvation: The fear of the Lord is his Treasure.


ALthough the effects of the great calamities which we have suffered in this
Nation, namely, those of a raging Pestilence, a devouring Fire, several
grievous and bloody Wars, be in some measure now removed, yet were the minds
and thoughts of men never more disturbed, or more uneasy than now they are.
The reason hereof seems especially to be this, namely, that most desperate
Plot, which was designed to murder our Prince, and to overthrow our Laws, our
Liberties, our Religion, our Spiritual, as well as our Temporal welfare. This,
and the fears that it has awakened sit so close upon men's hearts, and give
such sensible apprehensions of future troubles and calamities, that we enjoy
not what we have, we find no ease or satisfaction in any thing which we as yet
possess. We have indeed a Peace at present, but it is unsettled and uncertain;
we have a Religion and that reformed according to the word of God, but it is
dangerously undermined. We have good Laws to preserve our Liberties and just
Rights, but know not how long we may retain them: we have a good and fruitful
Land, but are not without all apprehensions of dispossession, or at least of
great disturbance in it. Which things being so, it should seem our present
fears and troubles arise not so much from the sense of any present want, as
from the uncertainty of what we have; not from the evils we feel at present,
but those we fear may fall upon us, that is to say, from the instability of the
times.

This was the thing which cast my thoughts upon the words I have now read, and
made them seem to be suitable to the present occasion. Now these seem to have
been delivered after Sennacherib had spoiled Hezekiah of his treasures to make
conditions of Peace with him, but before his Army made its approaches toward
Jerusalem, which it seems it did in a little time after the making of that
Peace, as may appear 2 Kings 18.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Which false dealing of
Sennacherib is noted and censured by the Prophet in the beginning of this
Chapter, Isaiah 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled, and
dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee. The case in
short seems to be thus. Sennacherib had invaded Judah, assaulted and taken the
fenced cities as it is recorded 2 Kings 18.13. He so distressed both Hezekiah,
and his people, that he freely offered to submit to what conditions,
Sennacherib would please to impose upon him, Return from me, says Hezekiah, and
that which thou put on me I will bear, v. 14. These conditions were so hard
(being no less than three hundred talents of Silver, and thirty talents of
Gold) that he was constrained to make them good, by giving Sennacherib as well
the treasures of the Temple, all the Silver found in the House of the Lord, as
the treasures of his own House, and what was still more dishonorable, to cut
off the Gold from the Doors of the Temple, and the Pillars which he himself had
made, v. 15 16.

Yet such it should seem was Sennacheribs treachery and false dealing, that
having, as was before related, spoiled Hezekiah of his treasure, he presently,
contrary to his promise, sends up an Army toward Jerusalem, the dread whereof
filled that City with great amazement and confusions. In these confusions had
the Prophet Isaiah an intimation, that God would exalt his mighty power in the
deliverance of Hezekiah, and of the City of Jerusalem from these so great and
imminent dangers, and also confirm the same deliverance, and give secure and
settled times. The former whereof the Prophet declares v. 5. The Lord is
exalted, for he dwells on high, he has filled Sion with judgment and
righteousness; the latter in the following words, And wisdom and knowledge
shall be the stability of thy times. Stability signifies strength, and
settlement, stability of times, safe, secure and certain times, times not so
liable unto change, as that the fear of domestic Troubles, or foreign
violence, should either disquiet the minds of men, or interrupt them in their
duties to God, or their neighbors, or themselves.

And then that wisdom, or that knowledge, by which the times should be thus
established, is the knowledge of God and of his will, and hearty obedience
thereunto, in the whole compass of his Laws, as well of those which prescribe
our duties to one another, as of those that direct us in Gods worship. I need
not say, that this is the sense, wherein wisdom is frequently taken in the
Scriptures; for that is a thing that all acknowledge, who pretend to any skill
in them: nor need I labor much to prove, that this is the sense of wisdom and
knowledge in the words which I now insist upon; for plain it is, that what the
Prophet styles judgment and righteousness in the words immediately antecedent,
is here styled wisdom and knowledge. He has filled Sion with judgment and
righteousness. So he speaks in the fifth verse, and then immediately adds the
effect those things should have, under the name of (...) and knowledge; for so
it follows, and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, that
is to say, judgment and righteousness shall be so. He varies the words, but not
the sense, for then his discourse would not be coherent. Add hereunto, that
what he had styled wisdom and knowledge in the beginning of the verse, is
immediately called the fear of the Lord; wisdom and, knowledge shall be the
stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the Lord is his
treasure. Where he suggests that although Sennacherib had spoiled Hezekiah of
his treasures, which are the usual nerves of War, and the common instruments of
defense; yet that he had such a treasure still, namely, the fear of the true
God, as should give stability to his times. For as much as this is the truest
wisdom, and such wisdom the firmest foundation of peace and settlement. This
reaches all the ends of wisdom, and therefore justly bears its name. So that
the sense of the words in hand is the same with that of those before, chap. 32.
v. 17. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever.

Now the words taken in this sense offer two things to our consideration.

1. The former whereof is a blessing promised, which is stability of the times,
settled, quiet, and easy days. 2. The latter the proper means or terms, whereby
this blessing is procured, which is obedience to Gods will in the whole extent
of his holy Laws, styled by the Prophet wisdom and knowledge. For so he speaks
to Hezekiah, and in his person to the nation, wisdom and knowledge shall be the
stability of thy times.
I shall begin with the blessing promised, which is stability in the times, a
singular blessing to a Nation being such as most effectually tends, or is at
the least wholly necessary to the producing of all others, whether we consider
it with relation

1. To the advantages of this World.

2. Or those that concern a better life.

Of the former of these I should not speak, being not so suitable to this
place, were it not proper for the occasion, were it not seasonable in point of
time, and now, if ever, to be considered, when the great Council of the Land is
studying how to settle the Nation, to confirm our Peace, to establish true and
firm foundations of future settlement and tranquillity; and may expect to have
an account of the usefulness of their undertakings opened and laid before the
People. But being these are our present circumstances, I judge I may justly
take occasion to insist a while upon those advantages, which every Nation may
expect from quiet, certain, and stable times.

1. And first of all, such times as these give ease of heart, vigor of mind, a
free and cheerful and active spirit, take off the weights of fear and sorrow,
that troublesome times generally hang upon men's minds, and so prepare and
dispose to diligence, and give encouragement thereunto, by promising good
success in it. For in such times may every person duly hope to reap the fruits
of his own Labors, to gain advantage by his diligence, to find an account in
his undertakings, he now believes that he serves himself, or his posterity,
which he values equally with himself. And this, as it gives a great
encouragement to his diligence: So it sweetens the labors that attend it, and
makes him easy to himself, as well as useful to public ends. It is not so in
troublesome and distracted times. In such times every man suspects that one may
sow, and another reap, one may build, and another inhabit, one may plant, and
another probably gather the fruit; as we have seen in our own age, and many
felt by sad experience. And this is a very great discouragement to every man's
diligence in his calling. Where is the man that will toil and labor, weary
his body or his mind, where he cannot hope that he or his heirs shall find
advantage by all his pains, who will employ and busy himself at all
adventures? build, or plant, or lay up treasure, when he has reason to
suspect, that he is laboring for a stranger, or preparing rich, and pleasant
spoils for an enemy to feed his lusts upon? And what is the effect of these
discouragements, but a disconsolate, useless sloth, or else a diversion from
those labors, whereby he might profit himself and others, to live by spoil on
other persons? which when it once becomes common, ends in general want and
poverty, and brings destruction upon a Nation. So useful, nay so wholly
necessary are stable times to give encouragement to care and diligence in those
labors, whereby every man serves himself, as the public good is served by all.

2. Stable and settled times give men the happiest opportunities of enjoying
the fruits of their own endeavors and Gods blessings in peace and quiet and
tranquillity, without which nothing is enjoyed, but often become the greatest
burdens. Honor it self becomes contemptible, and merit exposes to reproach in
popular tumults and seditions. So the Prophet suggests to us, Isaiah 3.5. The
people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his
neighbor: the child shall behave himself proudly again the ancient, and the
base against the honorable.

What advantages are large fortunes, when they are so far from giving security
to the owners, that they expose them to spoil and rapine; when the fear of
losing them gives more trouble, than the possession gives content? which is the
case in unsettled times.

And lastly what satisfaction is it to have a numerous and hopeful issue, when
a man's children are in danger to have their minds abused by error, by Popery,
Atheism, or Infidelity, and their bodies enslaved by a cruel tyranny? So far
are any of these things from being comforts in such an age, that they then
create the greatest troubles.

Now therefore happy are those days, those fixed, and certain, and stable
times, when every man may enjoy himself, enjoy his friends, possess his estate
in peace and quiet, without the dread of domestic troubles, or foreign
enemies, when there is no fear of plots at home, or of a Sennacherib from
abroad to interrupt the enjoyment of them.

3. Quiet and settled times discourage ill designing men from attempting
seditions and commotions. They leave no ground for the lusts of men to hope to
prosper in ill designs, no expectation of success, and therefore either remove
the lusts, or put a restraint and check upon them. Whereas unstable and
unsettled times are an open Theater for men's lusts to appear, and act their
designs upon. Then is every man's Pride encouraged to endeavor advancement by
any means, good or evil, it makes no matter; every man's avarice put in hope of
making spoils upon his neighbor; and every man's private animositie of taking
revenge upon his enemy. Here is a door set wide open to all inordinate lusts
and passions, which presently hatch and produce confusions, and in these
confusions he that speaks loudest is best heard, and most believed, though
neither the best, nor wisest man, from whence it generally comes to pass, that
the ill designs which were conceived in unsettled times break out at last in
wars and tumults, and end in ruin and desolation. And therefore happy are
those assured and settled times, wherein there is no occasion given for the
lusts of men, for Pride, and Avarice, and Ambition, whether in domestic, or
foreign enemies, so much as to hope to make a change, to shake the foundations
of peace and righteousness, and therefore consequently no encouragement to
attempt it. For plain it is that such times are of mighty moment and importance
to all the advantages of this World.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that they are of great importance also in
order to those that are far greater, that is to say, to those that concern the
life to come.

It Is true indeed the greatest stability of the times, the firmest settlement
of affairs is not of it self a certain cause of faith, and piety, truth and
righteousness, and of the flourishing of Religion. But yet it is such a cause
hereof, that religion cannot flourish without it. It gives the happiest
opportunities for the free and quiet practice of it. And this is the ground of
the exhortations of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of
all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet,
and a peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. He takes for granted, that
Gods blessing upon Kings and those that are in Authority is the great cause of
peace and quiet, and then again, that peace and quiet are the most happy
opportunities for the exercise both of Godliness and Honesty, that is to say,
of all our duties to God and Men. Unquiet times are apt to distract and disturb
our minds, to create many confusions in them, whereas all the duties of
religion are then performed with the greatest pleasure to our selves, and best
acceptance unto God also, when he is served without distraction.

Unsettled days divert the minds and thoughts of men from the consideration on
of things to come in a better World, to secure their affairs, to preserve their
concernments here on earth, which seem to be in present danger. In such days is
every man apt to think with himself, how he may provide against that storm
which seems just ready to fall upon him; how he may secure his life and
fortune, preserve his Family, help his Friends, or escape his Enemies, and this
generally in great distraction and trouble of mind; and in the midst of these
confusions his thoughts are scattered, his mind disordered, and loses those
divine affections, which give our prayers the best success both upon God, and
upon our selves.

To this I might add, that unsettled times, being, as was before discoursed, the
most encouraging opportunities to excite the inordinate lusts of men, Pride,
and Avarice, and Animosity are apt to destroy mutual Charity, mutual confidence
amongst men, to leave them jealous one of another, and so to extinguish the
true Spirit of Christianity.

How blessed therefore are those days, those fixed and stable and settled times,
which nourish Charity, produce peace, and make men easy each to other? When
every virtuous and pious person may make his addresses unto God with fixed
attention, with steadfast thoughts and with pure affections; when he may pray
for what he wants, and render his thanks for what he enjoys, without
interruption and distraction either by his own fears and sorrows, or from the
lusts of other men. When God, to speak in the words of Zachary, grants unto us
that we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, may serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

2. Having thus given you a short account what a singular blessing it is to men
to live in stable and settled times, let us now proceed to the second general,
where we are to consider the proper methods, whereby this blessing may be
procured, that is to say, the times established. Those, says the Prophet, are
wisdom and knowledge; and these in the language of the Scriptures are due
obedience to Gods will in the whole extent of those duties, which every man
owes to God, and his Neighbor.

Perhaps you may think that this is a poor and mean expedient to give
establishment to the times. You rather judge that secular Wisdom, humane
Policy, the projects of subtle and crafty men, are the only way to settle a
Nation, and to give security to the times. And true it is, these may shist and
patch up things for a little while; they may serve a turn, and put off a danger
for the present: But sure I am, that no Policies, no Devices of humane Wisdom,
can ever lay any firm foundations of peace and settlement without the
establishment of true Religion, both as it relates to God and men. All other
methods whatsoever leave the foundation weak and ruinous, though the
superstructure may be specious, and carry a face of strength and beauty. He
that made the World, and now governs it by his Providence, has so contrived
the nature of things, that they can never be firmly settled without the
practice of truth and righteousness, but may by these be strongly settled. As
will appear if we consider that these things are,

1. First of all the natural causes of Peace and Settlement.

2. And then secondly, that they prucure the especial aids of divine
Providence, to give a greater success to them, to strengthen, and render them
more effectual.

1. I shall begin with the former of these, and show that the practice of true
Religion, as it respects both God and men, is a natural cause of peace and
settlement: For so it is in two respects.

1. As it renders every person secure and easy in his station; so it prevents
intestine Troubles and Seditions. 2. As it produces strength; so it secures
from foreign Enemies.
1. It renders every person secure and easy in his station, and so it prevents
intestine Troubles. These arise from mutual injuries, and these injuries from
men's unreasonable lusts and passions, which Christianity would destroy. From
whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even from your
lusts that war in your members? ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to
have, and cannot obtain, ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because you ask
not; ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you way consume it
upon your lusts. He speaks of the Jews in the lesser Asia, and it may be, of
some Judaizing Christians mingled with them, who destroyed and ruined one
another by mutual slaughters amongst themselves, arising from their inordinate
lusts. They were full of Avarice, and Sensuality, swelled with Ambition and
Animosity, and these created mutual injuries, and oppressions, and these
oppressions wars and tumults amongst themselves.

But blessed and happy are that people, who unanimously live in the fear of
God, and practice justice, and mutual charity amongst themselves. They enjoy
themselves, and God's blessings in peace, and quiet, neither designing nor
fearing evil amongst themselves; and this gives settlement to the whole by the
ease it gives to every private and single person. When no man is himself
oppressed, nor has any desire to oppress another; when every man is just to
every other, when charity is added unto justice, and supplies the wants of such
persons, as are not able to help themselves; when every man finds his life
secure, his fortunes safe, his name unblemished; when he finds that every man
is his friend, and himself is so to every other, then is his condition easy to
him; and who will attempt to make a change, to promote confusions and
seditions, when he finds every man easy to him, and himself easy unto himself?

Nor would these errors and mistakes that will attend humane frailty, while we
continue here on earth, considerably alter the case before us: For the mutual
mistakes and inconveniences, which arise merely from infirmity, are neither
wilful, nor pernicious, nor of long continuance; and would readily be repaired
on one hand, and easily pardoned on the other, if there were Sincerity of
Religion, although attended with imperfection; that is to say, if Christianity
were so practiced, as every man may and ought to practice it, even with the
alloy of humane frailty, and the disadvantages that attend it. Now if what I
have said be so clear and evident, that it cannot reasonably be contradicted,
the consequence necessarily must be this, That the fear of God, and love of
Righteousness, the general practice of Christianity would naturally render
every person easy both to himself and others, and give establishment to the
times, so far as this could be effected by preventing all intestine troubles.

2. Let us add to this in the second place, that it would also produce
strength, increase the power of any people, and by so doing greatly contribute
to their security from foreign Enemies.

Strength most certainly it would produce, for it would unite men amongst
themselves in the bands of mutual love, and charity. It would give them
confidence in one another; it would animate them with the same mind, diffuse
the same spirit into them, possess them all with a public spirit, and join
their counsels and endeavors for the defense of public welfare. And would not
this be a great security against all Enemies from abroad?

Nor would Religion unite them only among themselves, but it would also
increase their treasure, and make preparation of all those aids, that public
occasions might require for their defense against foreign Enemies. What has
consumed the wealth and treasure of this Nation, but Pride, and Luxury, and
Sensuality? and what can increase the same again, but the Reformation of those
vices by sobriety, temperance, and frugality? which are as truly Christain
virtues, and as real parts of true Religion, when practiced in the fear of God,
as any other Virtues whatsoever.

Nor must I omit to put you in mind, what courage it would produce amongst us,
to find our selves firmly united amongst our selves, to find our Virtues
increase our wealth, and to give a sufficient stable fund to make preparation
against an Enemy: and how would this courage be heightened, if we were
conscious to our selves, that we were a people fearing God, and loving
righteousness? For then we should easily be persuaded to believe that God would
give us assistance in all our straits, that he would defend us against our
Enemies; that he, who is just, and true, and righteous, would defend a just,
and a righteous people.

2. Which leads me to the second method, whereby the practice of Religion in
its whole extent to God and men, would give stability to the times; and that
is, by procuring the aids of Divine Providence, and by engageing the Power of
God to give security to that people by whom he is faithfully served, and
honored.

The whole History of the Jewish Nation is little else but an account how God
Almighty raised or depressed, blessed or punished that people, according to the
various instances of their obedience or disobedience. When they provoked him to
displeasure by the iniquities of their lives, he forsook, and abandoned them to
themselves: when they repented of their sins, and humbly returned unto him
again, he then delivered them from their Enemies, and that many times, when
their deliverance was beyond the power of second causes.

This was the case in the very days of Hezekiah, which the prophet Isaiah had
in his eye, when he delivered the words before us. Salmanasar had not long
before invaded, and conquered the ten Tribes, and carried them away into
Captivity. Sennacherib had now made an attempt on the other two, he had
besieged, assaulted, and taken several of their fenced Cities: He had so
straightened Hezekiah, that he was forced to buy his peace, or rather a false
appearance of it, by surrendering all his treasures to him. For afterward his
Army marches toward Jerusalem; the approach whereof was so dreadful, that it
filled the City with great amazements and consternations. Yet in the midst of
these confusions, in these unsettled and shaken times did God assure that pious
King, that he would establish him in his Throne, and give him stable and
settled times. Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times: and he
made good what he promised to him by the slaughter of Sennacherib's Army by an
invisible Power from Heaven, Isaiah 37.36. So great is the faithfulness of Gods
Providence over righteous and holy Princes, and Nations; so great his care to
give encouragement to Piety, Righteousness, and Sobriety, when they are
faithfully and duly practiced.

I do not say, but that unrighteous Nations also may thrive and flourish for a
time; for I know that God uses the power of one unrighteous and wicked people
to punish and to destroy another. But this is done, when both are wicked and
ill-deserving; to which I add, that when the one has done Gods work upon the
other, when the strong has eaten up the weak, the strong it self either
becomes a spoil and prey to another stronger than it self (as the Assyrians did
to the Persians, and as the Persians to the Greeks, and the Greeks themselves
unto the Romans, and the Romans to the Goths and Vandals) or else is crumbled
and broke to pieces by intestine factions and seditions as the Christian Empire
in the East, which made it a prey to the Turks and Saracens.

In the mean time, allowing the fall and desolation of one unrighteous and
sinful Nation by the unrighteousness of another; yet will not this afford any
argument to conclude that a faithful, righteous, and holy people shall find no
aids from Divine Providence to secure them from a wicked Enemy, although more
powerful than themselves.

Having thus showed that Piety, and Virtue, Truth and Righteousness compose the
disorders, settle the affairs, confirm the peace, and strength of Nations, and
gain stability to the times, let us now reflect, upon this discourse, and so
apply it to our selves.

1. And first of all hence we learn, what has disquieted, what has unsettled
our own times, and made them troublesome and uneasy. We have not studied what
the Prophet styles wisdom and knowledge, we have not lived in the fear of God,
and Christian Charity each to other; and the want of these has hindered the
settlement of our days, and the vices quite contrary to them made them
troublesome and unstable.

I need not say, that our Vanity, Luxury, and Prodigality have impoverished us
to a great degree, and poverty created discontents, and made us uneasy and
unquiet. I need not take any pains to prove that our Pride, and Avarice, and
Ambition have caused and fomented mutual enmities amongst our selves, and that
these have disordered and unsettled us. But that which I cannot forbear to
mention, and something largelier to consider, is the monstrous Atheism, and
Infidelity, that have secretly taken root amongst us, and filled the land with
strange profaneness, with contempt of Piety and Religion, nay scorn of the
very profession of it; and that to such prodigious measures, as were never
known in former ages of Christianity.

And can we wonder that our condition is so unsettled, that our affairs are so
uncertain, while the very foundations of all true peace are so much shaken, and
undermined?

Perhaps you may think it very strange that Popery should ever have adventured
to lift up its head in this Nation; that a Religion expressly contrary to the
holy Scriptures, contrary to all Christian Antiquity, contrary to natural light
and reason, disagreeable to our very senses in the strange fiction of
transubstantiation; a Religion contrary to our Interests, that would enslave
our minds and bodies both at once, and was upon all these accounts justly
abandoned by our Ancestors, should ever attempt to return upon us. But this
will not appear so strange, if we consider how much Atheism, and Infidelity,
how much profaneness and scorn of piety, how many divisions among our selves,
how many dangerous Schisms and Heresies have infected and overflowed the
Nation: for how could it be, but that these evils mult give a very great
encouragement to Popish Emissaries, and Seducers to conspire the destruction of
Religion? They know that they who have no Religion (and many such there be
amongst us) by being such are prepared for any; that all Religions are alike to
them that are of none at all. Upon this account I make no doubt but that they
themselves have greatly labored to open a door to all vices, all profaneness,
and immorality, that so Popery might creep in with that profane and wicked
Spirit, which themselves had spread, and diffused amongst us.

Moreover, is it not most apparent, that they have put on all shapes, and
dressed up themselves in all the disguises of the several parties in the
Nation, the more to divide us amongst our selves, and to make us odious one to
another, as well as ridiculous to our neighbors? that so being weary of these
confusions among our selves, and despicable by our rents and factions, we might
at length consent to settlement on their foundations, and rather choose to be at
rest by being reconciled to them, than still divided and rent in pieces by
infinite fractions amongst our selves. If things be thus as I fear they are, I
need not say what that is, which has given us unstable times. We have
undermined our own foundations by our profaneness, and irreligion; we have not
studied that wisdom, that would have given us stable times.

2. Seeing wisdom and knowledge, seeing the true fear of God, and hearty
obedience to his Laws are the expedients the Prophet offers to give stability
to the times, hence we learn what is the true and proper method to gain that
blessing amongst our selves.

The practice of these two plain commands, which enjoin us, To love the Lord
our God with all our hearts, and to love our neighbors as our selves, would
give us stable and quiet times, give us peaceable and easy days, procure us
rest and peace, and order, after all our labors and confusions. These would
certainly do the thing, that no wisdom, power, or policy can ever possibly
effect without them.

Can a Nation be wasted and exhausted by its own riot and prodigality, and not
be exposed to a foreign Enemy? or can a Nation be so exposed, and enjoy a
secure and settled Peace? Can the members of the same Society live in mutual
hatred and animosity, arising from Avarice and Ambition, and yet enjoy quiet,
and certain, and easy days?

The wisdom of God has so contrived the very nature of things themselves, that
peace and war, strength and weakness, health and sickness are as consistent
each with other, as quiet times with restless lusts, peace with wickedness and
irreligion. The wicked are like a troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt, there is no peace says my God to the wicked.
Isaiah 57.20, 21. Sin is uneasy to it self, a constant disease, a daily
vexation to the sinner; and it is so to a Nation likewise, when it is national
and universal. And sure it is one of the greatest vanities to hope that God
should preserve by miracle, where people wilfully serve those lusts, which
naturally work their own destruction. Whensover providence works a miracle to
preserve a person or a Nation, it is to preserve those that cannot; not those
that will not preserve themselves, but wilfully rush upon their ruin.

But is there any man in the world that wilfully studies his own destruction?
do we not all wish, and long for such stability in the times, as may give us
easy and quiet minds, secure our Affairs, succeed our labors, confirm our
strength, and deliver us from all those fears and dreads, that have given us so
much pain and sorrow?

I make no doubt but that we do desire such days with all our hearts. I make no
question but there are many of such a Spirit, that they would willingly
undertake the greatest labors to procure them. I do not question but that the
generality of the Nation, if they were assaulted by an Enemy, would hazard
their fortunes, expose their lives, adventure what was dearest to them, to
maintain their ancient rights, and liberties. And would it not be as easy for
us, and more efficacious to these ends, to reform our lives, to forsake our
sins, and turn from the evil of our ways? Why should a man be willing to spill
his very blood, and unwilling to reform his sins for the security of his
Country? Why are we willing to use those means, that are more grievous and less
effectual for our welfare, namely to hazard life and fortune for securing these
very things themselves, and neglect the easy and efficacious, the reformation
of our lives? Would it be a burden to love God with all our hearts, to place
our hope and trust in him, to serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness all our days? Would it be troublesome and uneasy, to love our
neighbors with sincerity, and to be so beloved by them; to be freed from
mutual fears and jealosies, from all animosities each to other?

O how blind are the minds of men not to see the things that concern their
peace, not to observe that Christ's commands are a light, an easy, a gentle
yoke! but rather to study their own security by those very things that
overthrow it, by fraud, or violence, or worldly craft, than by the practice of
those virtues, which would ease their minds, secure their fortunes, succeed
their labors, and make them happy as well in the life that now is, as in that
to come.

How blessed and happy might we be, if we would follow Gods directions! how
easily might we spend our days even in this frail and mortal life, how firmly
might we settle the times, which are now so wavering and uncertain, if we would
spend but half that time in the subduing of our lusts, that we do in the
gratification of them; if we would but take half that pains to possess our
hearts with love to God, and mutual Charity each to other, and in fervent
Prayers, in humble thanksgivings, in Holiness, Righteousness, and Sobriety,
that we do in the service of our lusts? This would undoubtedly amend the days,
settle our Interests, and bless us with quiet and stable times. This would be a
fair return to God Almighty for the favor which we now commemorate, for
restoring our Prince, our Laws and Religion, after we were deprived of them by
former Ruins and Confusion.

Thus God of his mercy open our eyes, that we may timely understand and
practice the things that concern our peace: then should there be no breaking
in, nor going out, no. complaining in our streets, and happy is that people
that is in such a case; yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord. Psalm.
144.14, 15.

God of his mercy grant, etc.

The Second Sermon.
PSALM 68.28. Strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought for us.

The whole verse is thus:

Thy God has commanded thy strength: Strengthen, O God, that which thou have
wrought for us.


THIS Psalm, as judicious men conceive, was written by David, when he removed
the Ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom to Sion. Which may be the reason,
why it begins with these words, which Moses used on the like occasions; namely,
when he removed the same Ark, which are recorded Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and
let thine Enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee.
So David here in the first verse, Let God arise, and let his Enemies be
scattered, and let them that hate him flee before him. And having lived to see
the day wherein the holy Ark, of God, the Symbol of his especial presence, was
to be fixed in its own place, which God himself had chosen for it, he thought
it meet to recollect the many other favors and mercies, which God had granted
the Jewish Nation, and to render him hearty thanks for them; namely, for his
singular Providence in conducting the People thorough the Wilderness, after
their deliverance out of Egypt. 6, 7, 8. verses. for his planting them in the
promised land, a land flowing with Milk and Honey, and fruitful even to a
miracle, so at the ninth and tenth verses; for the powerful Aids of his
gracious Providence in dispossessing the former Inhabitants, in scattering the
Armies of their Kings, that his people might possess their Countries, 12, 13,
14.

And having then in the following verses largely returned his thanks to God for
all the great and admirable things, which he had wrought for the Jewish Nation,
in order to their strength and settlement, he prays for the continuance of his
favor; and of their present peace and welfare, Strengthen O God what thou have
wrought for us. In which words you may observe these two generals.

1. An acknowledgement made to God that it was he (and he alone) who had
planted and settled them in the land, and wrought those great and mighty works,
whereby they were planted and settled in it. Whath has been done, says he,
have wrought for us. 2. An ardent Prayer to God to strengthen, that is, to
continue what he had pleased to work for them, Strengthen O God that which thou
have wrought for us.
1. I begin with the first, which is the acknowledgement made to God, that it
was he, who had planted and settled them in the land, and wrought those great
and mighty works, whereby they were planted and settled in it: where I must not
omit to take some notice that divine Providence concerns it self in the
Administration, Rule, and Government of the affairs of mankind.

Which though it be a general subject, yet must I stay a while upon it, because
the truth of this one thing is the very foundation of all Religion, and more
especially of that particular part of it, which we are to exercise at this
time, which is, to render our thanks to God for restoring our lawful Prince to
us, and the blessings attending his Restitution, namely, our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties. If this was not done by Divine Providence, it would be flattery
or mistake to return any thanks to God for it; but if it was, as it was indeed,
then to neglect to praise him for it, would be a Sacrilegious ingratitude. Now
therefore let us a while reflect upon the Arguments and Demonstrations that
make it evident there is a Providence, that is, that God concerns himself, and
interposes his power and wisdom in the Administration of humane affairs, and
all the concernments in the World.

1. And first of all, had we no more than the light of nature to give us
assurance that this is so, even that might effectually serve to do it. That
very light evidently shows that there is a God who made the World, and all the
Creatures therein contained, from the admirable structure and contrivance,
clearly appearing in he whole, and every part thereof. And such are the works
of Gods Creation, as evidently show an infinite wisdom, power, and bounty in
him that is the Author of them; and there is nothing more unreasonable, than to
imagine that infinite wisdom, power, and goodness, either cannot, or will not
interpose in the ordering of the affairs of men. No man will say he cannot do
it, for this is against the natural notion of a God, and, is most evidently
contradicted by what he has already done in the Creation of the World, a work
of infinite power and wisdom And if any will say he will not do it, his reason
necessarily must be this, namely, want of concernment in God for us, that is,
want of kindness to us, the noblest works of his own hands, which is most
evidently contradicted in the love already showed to us, in that he has not
only made us, but provided all things needful for us, and given us infinitely
great advantages over all the rest of his visible Creatures, and still
continues all these favors; from whence it appears that there is nothing more
unreasonable, than to imagine or suspect, that God either cannot, or that he
will not interpose in the administration of our affairs. It is no toil to him
to do it, his wisdom and power are never weary. To do it, is suitable to that
goodness which he has already showed unto us, and besides it is most extreme
folly to fancy that God would employ an infinite power and wisdom in the
Creation of the World, and then abandon it unto chance, and concern himself no
further in it.

The same wisdom that could not but make it for an end, cannot but still pursue
the end for which he made it, in the ordering, Rule, and Government of it. To
act for no end argues folly; to cease to pursue an end propounded, evidently
argues want of wisdom: from whence it appears that the wise God both had an end
in the Creation of the World, and that he still pursues that end, by the Rule,
and Government of his Providence.

2. Thus far speaks the light of nature, but now if we rise a degree higher,
and take a view of Revelation made by God in his Holy Word, here we find
express witness, and Authentic record of Gods Providence in the rule and
Government of the World.

1. For first of all, God does in most express Language own the Government of
the World, assume and vindicate it to himself, see now, says he, that I, even
I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill and I make alive, I wound and I
heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. Deuter. 32.39.
Whereunto add that of the Prophet, I am God and there is none like else, I am
God and there is none like me; declaring the end from the beginning, and from
ancient times the things that are not yet done. Saying, my counsel shall stand,
and I will do all my pleasure. lsaiah 46.9, 10. From whence, observe, that God
expressly declares himself to be the Governor of the World, assumes this as his
proper right, and certainly God does not declare himself to do what indeed he
does not, nor assumes what does not belong to him.

2. And then further, as God himself exprefly owns the Rule and Government of
the World, so do all wise men ascribe it to him: Thou even thou art Lord alone,
says Nehemiah, Thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their
host, the earth and all things that are therein, the Seas and all, that is
therein, and thou preservest them all. Nehem. 9.6. Where he ascribes as well
the preservation, as the Creation of all to God; and certainly he did not
design to flatter him by ascribing more than he did unto him.

3. And add hereunto the style and Title, wherein the Scriptures represent God.
They style him Lord, and thereby own his right and title to the World. They
style him King, and thereby own his Government of it. The Lord is King for ever
and ever, Psalm. 10.16. and the Lord sits King for ever, Psalm. 29.10. Nay
they expressly style him Governor, the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the
Governor among the Nations, Psalm. 22.28. and call upon the Nations to rejoice
under the righteousness of his reign. O let the Nations he glad for joy, for
thou shall judge the people righteously and govern the Nations upon earth,
Psalm. 67.4.

Now so universal is Gods Providence that it is concerned in every Creature; in
man, as bearing his own Image; in meaner Creatures, as made for man. Are not
two sparrows sold for a farthing; and yet one of them shall not fall to the
ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are numbered; fear
not therefore for ye are of more value than many sparrows, Math. 10.29.

So far does God consider man, that he concerned is in all his actions; he
commands, he assists, he rewards the good; he forbids, and punishes what is
evil; and though he permit it to be done, though he do not irresistably hinder
it, yet has he an end in that permission, which is to bring good out of evil,
and uses it for his own glory. This is the nature, this is the extent of Gods
Providence, a thing so necessary to be believed, that all our Prayers, all our
thanksgivings, all our obedience depend upon it. He that believes God will do
nothing, has no reason to pray for any thing. He that believes he has done
nothing, has no reason to give him thanks. He that believes he is unconcerned
in the good, or evil of mankind (as every man must that denis his providence)
has no reason to love, or fear him, that is, no reason to obey him.

But being, as we have now proved, God does concern his power and wisdom in the
administration of our affairs; hence we learn to own and acknowledge the hand
of God in all our successes and advantages, and to render him hearty thanks for
them. Call upon me in the day of trouble and 1 will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.

They are words of God himself, Psalm 50.15. wherein he requires a double
acknowledgment of his Providence, first in making an address to him in all our
difficulties, straits, and dangers; and then in the grateful return of praise
for our deliverance out of trouble. This he requires as due unto him, this he
challenges as debt, nor can it be denied unto him without ingratitude and
injustice, and that which should so much the more persuade us to a cheerful
thankfulness toward God for every mercy we receive, is because our hearty
thanks and praises is all the return we can make to God, and because this is so
easily made, prompted even by nature it self, and by the love we bear to our
selves; and because that mercy is never well and duly used, that is not also
thankfully received; and it were better to want the greatest and highest
blessings, that can concern this present life, than to abuse, or not use them
well. The former is but a calamity, the latter a very provoking sin; the former
only troublesome to us, the latter dishonorable unto God.

And being we are so far concerned to make a return of thanks to God for every
single and private favor, how much more for public blessings? how much more
for that so happy and gracious Providence, which calls us together at this
time; the restitution of our Prince to the possession of his Throne, and to the
exercise of that Government, which by inheritance belongs unto him.

You cannot expect that I should attempt, much less be able to give a perfect
and full description of this so great a mercy to us, this is indeed beyond my
purpose, because so much above my ability. But something of it may appear if we
consider First, the great effects and issues of it; Secondly, the several
difficulties and obstructions, that seemed to lie in the way to it; Thirdly and
lastly; the manner wherein it was done.

1. If we consider it in its effects, these were not only the reestablishment
of the Nation upon its ancient Laws and Liberties, but of the true Reformed
Religion, wherewith it had been formerly blessed by the infinite mercy of God
to it: both very great and signal mercies.

1. We had been greatly oppressed and grieved by a long and violent Usurpation,
we had been broken all to pieces, changed from one form to another, tossed and
tumbled to and fro, those that oppressed us never finding a firm foundation to
fettle themselves or us upon; no man could guess, no man conjecture the year
before, either who should Govern the year following, or what kind of Government
should be amongst us. Every year brought forth new Counsels, new Designs, and
forms of Government, and so indeed was like to do, when we were beside the true
foundation.

All this while whatsoever hands had power over us, wheresoever the Usurpation
lay, the power was Arbitrary and unjust, oppressing and vexing where it pleased
without control and contradiction. To say no more the Counsels of those that
ruled over us were foolish, tyrannous, and unstable. The folly of them made us
ridiculous, the tyranny of them made us miserable, and their instability made
us weak.

This being so, methinks we should never recollect the singular favor and
grace of God in restoring our lawful Prince unto us, in restoring our ancient
Laws and Liberties by the restitution of our Prince, without a deep and feeling
sense of this so timely and great deliverance, and serious and hearty
thankfulness for it.

2. Especially if we further consider, that the same wise and gracious
Providence, which restored our lawful Prince to us, brought back the free and
public use of that Religion which is without all doubt and scruple, the most
agreeable to the Scripture, the most agreeable to Antiquity, the most Primitive
and Apostolical in Doctrine, Worship, and in Government, the most peaceable,
wise, and holy, the most consistent with civil Government, the aptest to make
men good and happy both in this and the other world, of any Religion whatsoever
publicly owned in any Nation. And as to that particular instance of obedience
to the civil Magistrate, I may very truly and justly say, first, that they of
the Roman Church teach Doctrines inconsistent with it; and then further, that
there is not any other Church that so expressly declares for it, that professes
it an indispensable duty rather to suffer, than move sedition, with that
frankness, with that openness, with chat clearness, nor, as I believe, with
that sincerity, that the Church of England does profess it.

Being then, the benefits which attended the restitution of our Prince were
both so numerous, and so great, Let us heartily praise the Author of them, let
us remember who it was, that wrought so great deliverance for us, and not deny
to return so deserved, so small a tribute as our praises, and thanksgivings to
him.

2. And which may serve to move to this with greater efficacy and success, is
the several difficulties and obstructions, that might have hindered our
deliverance, had not God himself appeared for it. Many attempts had been made
before to shake of the yoke that was upon us, and to restore our Prince and
Liberties, but these attempts were not successful, nor had they other effects
or issues, than to increase our former burdens and enrage the Enemy they should
have conquered.

The Usurpation had been long, and length of time had given some strength and
credit to it, and made it seem almost ridiculous to hope for any deliverance
from it. Besides all this, it had spread an interest far and wide throughout
the Nation, it had drawn in many to share in it, it had made it self many
friends, and alliances, and relations; It had given greatness and power to
some, riches and honors unto others, it made it self useful and necessary as
was suggested, and believed; believed, I say, by many persons, to the very
welfare of the Nation, which gave no little strength unto it.

3. And yet when God appeared against it, when he, whose Providence rules the
World, designed to put an end unto it, how easily was it blown away, and
scattered like chaff before the wind? What a wonderful folly and infatuation
blinded the Counsels that were for it? what a change was wrought in the hearts
of men, unanimously to appear against it? what general desires and inclinations
now suddenly kindled in men's hearts to their rightful Prince, their ancient
Laws, and the former Government of the Nation? and whence was this zeal and
vigor, this general harmony of inclinations, this agreement of Councils and
endeavors, but only from the God of Spirits, from him that moves the hearts of
men, when, and where, and whither he pleases by strong though invisible
operations. And which further entitles God to our deliverance, was that it was
wrought without Arms, without war, without the effusion and loss of blood, in a
still, and quiet, and peaceable manner.

This shows that it was from the God of peace, this owns him for its proper
Author, and to him belongs the honor of it. To us the due and proper use of
such a timely and great deliverance.

2. Having thus dispatched the former general, namely the acknowledgment made
to God, that it is he that settles Kingdoms and Commonwealths, proceed we now
unto the latter, which is the prayer put up to him; Strengthen O God what thou
have wrought for us: where we have these two things suggested.

1. The necessity of Gods assistance for the confirmation and establishment of
the Societies of mankind especially

2. And Secondly, his willingness to establish them upon their due and right
behavior, both which things are plainly granted by him that made this prayer
for it, else had the prayer it self been useless.

1. The first thing then that is suggested, is the necessity of Gods assistance
for the establishment and confirmation of the Societies of mankind. And had we
no more for the demonstration of the necessity of Gods assistance to this
purpose, than the very nature of mortal men, even this might serve for the
proof of it.

All the affairs of mankind depend upon the actions of men, their actions
depend upon their Counsels, and their Counsels (generally) upon their passions,
and these upon so many accidents, so many little uncertain causes, so numerous,
so various things, that it is no wonder that every day produces so many
alterations; the wonder is, that the greatest things that depend upon such
uncertain causes, the greatest Kingdoms and Commonwealths, have not more and
quicker revolutions, greater, and more sudden changes, than what we generally
find have been.

The strength and settlement of every Government, of every Kingdom and
Commonwealth, depends not only upon the close and entire Union of the members
of the fame Society amongst themselves, (a thing not easy to be had) but upon
all the several causes, that keep the balance even and steady between the
neighboring Nations also; which causes are so very numerous, and so various,
mutable, and uncertain, that the balance would daily change and vary, did not
God himself hold the scales, and keep things even by his own power. It is
impossible to give an account of all the causes that may produce strange
alterations in the Societies of mankind, unless providence shall interpose for
their continuance and preservation.

A sudden fire may break out in a Capital City, and presently consume the
greatest part of the Wealth and Treasure of a Nation. A tempest, or violent
inundation, an earthquake, or thunder from above may have the very same
effects. A general Plague may sweep away such vast multitudes of the
Inhabitants, as that the rest may be exposed to the invasion of their
neighbors. This gave Sparta a great advantage against Athens. The dullness and
idleness of one Country may give opportunity to another to overgrow it in
wealth and power, and so to conquer and enslave it.

The Vice and Luxury of a People may soon consume their own strength, and bring
the same distress and difficulty upon a Country that they usually bring on a
single Family: Ease and plenty, and wealth it self may first occasion disuse of
Arms, and then infect a whole Nation with a general softness, and effeminacy,
and so expose it to the Usurpation of a hardier and more needy People. Thus
fell the Persians before the Greeks. The death of a Prince or a great Man may
prove destructive to a People. When Epaminondas the Theban fell, Thebes it self
fell with him, was never prosperous before nor after him. Add hereunto what
violent changes and alterations domestic Seditions may produce in every
Nation, and how many causes and little accidents may easily produce such
Sedition. The errors and mistakes of Magistrates, the natural inconstancy of
the People, the ambition of Men of Wit and Parts, or such as fancy themselves
to be so, their mutual enmities amongst themselves, their envy at each others
greatness, their infinite rage and indignation, when they fail of what they
aspire after. These, with infinite other causes, (which are impossible to be
numbered) do as naturally tend to the dissolution of public bodies of Civil
Governments and Societies, as all the diseases, and fatal accidents to which
man's body is obnoxious both from within and without also, to the destruction of
his body.

Now to what end is this discourse? to show the need, that all the concernments
of mankind, that the greatest States and Kingdoms have of support from Divine
Providence; being not only so inclinable to crumble to pieces of themselves by
the diseases that are within them, but likewise so obnoxious too to be dashed
to pieces each by other.

And if the very Civil Societies of mankind need the assistance of Gods
Providence for their continuance, how much more does Religion want it?
Religion, if true, is a ray from God, and depends as much upon his influence as
the beam depends upon the Sun. And being planted in us men, must needs partake
of our infirmities, and therefore is apt even of it self like other
establishments and constitutions, to vary from Primitive institution, and lose
its original strength and purity. So it came to pass, that Christianity, which
in the first and Primitive ages maintained it self against all the cruelties of
persecution by the zeal and piety of its followers, afterward suffered strange
decays; first by infinite swarms of Heresies, and then by Ignorance and
Superstition, which now is reeled to the other extreme, namely, to Atheism and
Infidelity, and to the contempt of all Religion.

Nor need we wonder it should be difficult to preserve so wise and holy a
Religion as that which Christ has revealed to us in its original strength and
purity, for it has strong and numerous Enemies. Every man's lusts are at enmity
with it, every man's vanity apt to corrupt it, every man's Ignorance apt to
mistake it, nay the very Religion of some persons, their pride and pretense to
Inspiration the greatest Enemy to this Religion.

Besides all this, there are several accidents that may have dangerous effects
upon it according to the nature of times and places. If the Ministers of it be
poor and mean, this generally brings contempt on them, and upon Religion for
their sakes. If they be rich, this creates envy, and then Sacrilege is
Reformation.

If a National Church be guarded and settled by the Laws of the State,
Dissenters complain of perfection; and if it be not so guarded, it is
impossible it should be national, that is, that one and the same thing should
ever be able to approve it self to an infinite difference of apprehensions. If
a Church be settled by the Laws of the State, and those not put in Execution,
opposers have a double advantage; the Laws of the State being against them,
give them all the advantage of being thought to suffer persecution; The not
executing those Laws gives them all the advantages of Toleration, and truly
they have great advantages that have both these put together, that of a seeming
persecution, and that of a real Toleration. To these I might add many other
instances to show the frailty and mutability of all the Societies of mankind,
and how much help they do require from the power and Providence of God Almighty
for their establishment and preservation.

2. But I have said enough of this, and shall now proceed to die next
particular, which is the willingness of God Almighty to afford his help and
assistance to them upon their due and right behavior.

Now the terms whereupon Divine Providence usually strengthens and settles
Nations in peace, and quiet, and prosperity, are (1) either general, or

(2) More particular.

(1.) The general terms are the piety and virtue of a Nation.

(2.) The more particular are due reverence to the Magistrate, and cheerful
obedience to the Laws.

The former of these, that is to say, piety and virtue are so necessary, so
indispensable to this end, that it is impossible that any Nation should
flourish and be secure without them.

Profaneness, impiety, and irreligion, riot, and luxury, and oppression are so
destructive to the peace and strength of every Nation, that would God leave
them to themselves, and to their natural effects and issues, would he stand
neuter, or indifferent, and bring no other evils on them, than what they bring
upon themselves, they would at length destroy a Nation; for a people abandoned
to profaneness can have no conscience, faith, or truth to knit them together
in society, and the vices of luxury and excels are like a flame that eats and
devours its own fuel, and then perishes together with it, dies and vanishes
when that is consumed. But God is far from being indifferent to any National
sins or vices; his Judgments indeed may be delayed, but they are sure to come
at last, and that in most severe displeasure, they have iron hands though
leaden heels, and come with so much greater violence for having been so long
delayed. Profaneness, wickedness, and impiety destroyed the Kingdom of the
Jews, a Kingdom settled by peculiar Providence, and under a Family chosen by
God, and anointed by his special Command. God has prescribed it as a Law, as a
certain Rule to his own Providence not to protect any such people, as live in
rebellion against himself: and this we learn from his own words, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O
that there were such a heart in them that they would fear me, and keep my
commandments always, that it might he well with them, and with their children
for ever. Where he is pleased to represent it as a thing ven out of his own
power (because so contrary to that Law, which he has prescribed to his own
Providence) to make it well with an impious people; so necessary and so
indispensable are piety and virtue to the establishment of a Nation.

2. But now the more particular terms requisite to the same establishment are
due reverence unto the Magistrate, cheerful obedience to the Laws, quiet and
peaceable dispositions. These are so requisite to this end, that whatsoever is
contrary to them, Rebellion, Tumult, and Sedition immediately tend unto
destruction: which is the; reason why God has charged and required obedience
to the Magistrate in such express and explicit language, and under a most
severe penalty. So has he done Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
But this is a duty that I need not persuade in this Audience

All I have further to add is this, that while we return our thanks to God for
restoring our Prince, and Laws, and Government, we do not omit the like for the
peace we now enjoy under them, while all our Neighbors are in want. We dwell
at home in our Country, and sleep Securely in our beds, while they are driven
from place to place, and alarmed with daily fears and dangers.

We build, and plant, and adorn our houses and habitations, while theirs are
burnt and battered down, and lie in ruin and desolation.

We sow and reap, eat and drink in peace and plenty, and enjoy the fruits of
our own labors, while others reap what they sow, and the owners, it may be,
starve for want, and think it well to save their lives (which yet they cannot
always do) with their loss of all accommodations. What full we render unto the
Lord for these and all his mercies to us? Let us love the Author of all our
happiness, let us demonstrate that love by free and thankful obedience to him.
Let us thus study peace with him, and let us also duly study the things that
make for peace amongst our selves. Let us heartily and really love one another:
Let all bitterness; and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from us, with all malice: and, Let us be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God fir Christ's sake has
forgiven us. Let us fear God, honor the King not meddling with them that are
given to change. So will that God who has wrought our deliverance, strengthen
what he has wrought for us.

To him, etc.

The Third Sermon.
Philip. 1. 27, 28. That ye stand fast in one Spirit with one mind, striving
together for the faith of the Gospel; And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries.


THere were two sorts of bitter Enemies that opposed themselves to Christianity
in the primitive Ages of the Gospel; the former were the Idolatrous Gentiles,
in whose hands the secular Government then remained. The latter were those of
the Jewish Religion, who had toleration amongst the Gentiles. Both which,
though differing each with other, did yet conspire and agree in this, to
extinguish and root out Christianity. The former, because that this Religion
did as well demonstrate the Gods they worshipped to be no Gods (but Devils, or
Beasts, or dead men's Souls, Images, and inanimate Creatures) as the worship
itself to be vain and barbarous. The latter, because it disannulled the
temporary Rites of Moses his Law, much more the many Superstitions, which
themselves had added thereunto. Upon this account the Apostle St Paul, being
now in bonds, writes this Epistle to the Philippians, whom he had converted to
Christianity, not only further to inculcate what he had before delivered to
them, but also to fortify and prepare them against such sufferings and
persections, as their Religion drew upon them. He lets them know, that he
himself was now a prisoner for the Gospel, that he was so far from being
terrified either by his bonds, or death it self, that were it not for their
sakes, to whom his life might be more useful, he should rather desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ. He further acquaints them with his design to
visit them again in order to their support and settlement, if God should rescue
him from his bonds. In the mean time, gives this admonition: Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come, and see
you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs; that ye stand fast in one
Spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing thing terrified by your adversaries. That ye stand fact, etc.

In which words you have an account, what are the most effectual means for any
Church, which God has blessed with the true Faith of Christianity, still to
abide and continue in it. Firmness of mind in every man's private belief of it,
close union amongst themselves, zeal and diligence in joint endeavors for its
defense and propagation, and courage against such oppositions as others may
possibly make against it.

1. Firmness of mind in every man's private belief of it, which is suggested in
these words: Stand fast, that is to say, as it there follows, in the faith of
the Gospel.

2. Union amongst themselves: Stand fast in one spirit with one mind.

3. Zeal and diligence in joint endeavors for its defense and propagation:
Stand fast in one spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of the
Gospel.

4. Courage against such oppositions as other persons make against it: And in
nothing terrified by your adversaries.

These are the methods which our Apostle here propounds for a Church to retain
the true Faith, that is, to continue a true Church.

1. The first of which is firmness of mind in every man's private belief of
truth. For feeing that every particular Church is made up of particular
persons; so far as particular Members fail in the true Faith, so far is that
Church, they are Members of, maimed and mutilated in its parts, and the whole
in tendency to dissolution.

Now seeing the firmness of belief depends upon clear and evident proof, I
might here offer a demonstration of the truth and excellency of Christianity.
But being this is neither so needful, nor yet so seasonable to the occasion of
our meeting, I shall rather choose to address my self to what the occasion now
requires, which is, to show the truth and excellence of Christianity, as it is
professed in our own Church in opposition to that of Rome: which I shall do by
comparing theirs and ours together in point of Faith, and Worship, and Manners.

1. And first of all, for matter of Faith, we firmly believe the holy
Scriptures, and every thing therein contained to be the infallible Word of God.
We believe the Scriptures do contain all things necessary to Salvation,
according as St. John assures us: Joh. 20.31. These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have life through his Name. Which we could not have, if every thing
necessary to Salvation was not written, was not contained in this very Gospel
of St. John. Nay further yet, we believe and receive all Creeds that were ever
received in the Catholic Church. These Creeds are taken into our Liturgy, they
are repeated in our Churches, we signify our assent to them by standing up
when they are repeated, and are we still to be judged Heretics, and deficient
in the Catholic Faith?

On the other hand, the Roman Church deny the Scriptures to be a complete Rule
of Faith, they build their faith upon Tradition, a thing uncertain. They rely
upon Councils, which may err; nay upon such as have grossly erred. They vary as
well from the Primitive Church in many cases, as from the holy Scripture it
self. And last of all, they pretend a power of making new Articles of Faith,
that is, such as were not made by our Blessed Lord and his Apostles; which
being so, let reason judge, whether they or we be likeliest to err in point of
Faith.

2. For matter of Worship (in the second place) their public Prayers are made
and used in a tongue unknown unto the people; ours in a tongue which we all
understand. And here let St. Paul decide the controversy that is between us, I
Cor. 14, 15, 16, etc. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with
understanding also. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with
understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he
that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving thanks, seeing
he understands not what thou say? For thou verily give thanks well, but
the other is not edified. From whence it appears what edification may be
expected from their prayers, that is to say, none at all. And therefore the
Apostle further adds, I thank God, I speak with tongues more than you all; yet
in the Church I had rather speak, five words with my understanding, that by my
voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

But to proceed: as we make our prayers in a known tongue, so in them we invoke
the true God, and him only. We use no other Mediator, no other Patron but only
Christ, whom God has appointed so to be. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. But they that
are of the Church of Rome, make their addresses to Saints and Angels, as well
for patronage and protection, as for their prayers to God for them; and some of
those (the Virgin Mary) do they invoke in as magnificent and high a style, as
they invoke God himself.

We pay no worship to any Images, seeing that God has expressly said, Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that
is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth,
thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. But they bow down and
prostrate themselves before the Images of Christ, and others. And though they
affirm that the honor they give unto the Image passes through it to the
person, whom it represents; yet still they acknowledge they worship the Image,
that this, at least, is a transient object of their Worship.

And then again, we give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto the people as
well as the Priests in both kinds. So it was instituted by Christ himself, so
it was given all along for many Ages: but others, in perfect contradiction to
the Institution of our Lord, deny the Cup unto the Laity.

We believe that after Consecration the Bread and Wine set apart and
consecrated for the Sacrament, do still retain the natural substance of bread
and wine. And so the Apostle himself believed, when he styled that bread, of
which we partake in that Sacrament, 1 Con. 10.17. We are all partakers of that
one bread; and that the Cup, of which we drink, and thus believing, we do not
give Divine worship unto the Elements in the Sacrament. But they, in absolute
contradiction both unto Scripture, and unto Reason, and unto four of their five
Senses, believe that after Consecration there is no bread, but the natural
flesh of Christ's body; no wine, but his very natural blood. Upon which account
they pay a Divine worship to them, worship that which is not God, that which is
really bread and wine.

To all these things I might now add the Superstition of their Devotions, their
Prayers for delivering departed Souls out of that place they call Purgatory, a
place that is of their own making for gaining Wealth unto their Church. Their
Pilgrimages to the Tombs of Saints, an infinite Mass of Rites and Ceremonies,
for which things they have no precept in the Scripture, no example either
there, or in the primitive Ages of Christianity; Rites which obscure and burden
Religion with a numberless heap of Superstitions, contrary to the very nature,
to the simplicity of Christianity.

From matter of Worship pass we on to matter of common life and action.

1. As it relates to moral Duty.

2. And also unto Civil Society.

1. And for the former our Church declares that true repentance is absolutely
necessary to gain the remission and pardon of sin. We also affirm that
reformation is the best and most essential part of true repentance. We do not
pretend to any power to give Absolution to any person, who does not practice
such repentance; that is to say, who does not truly reform himself in life and
action, in case life be continued to him; or in real purpose and resolution, in
an effectual change of heart. We make no pretense to an Authority of giving
Indulgences and Remissions, or of admitting any Penances and Commutations for
the Expiation of the sin, where the sin is still continued in. Whereas they of
the Church of Rome give Absolution to Attrition, that is, to the mere fear of
Hell, and these two things, namely, Attrition and Absolution they judge
sufficient to Salvation. They admit of Penances and Commutations for the
Expiation of men's sins, and by these means teach their Followers to hope for
remission of the punishment, although they retain the sin it self. And lest the
Penance should seem burthensom and too severe, they can give Indulgence for
that too to them that will be at the cost to buy it. By all which means they
make the Precepts of the Gospel, the Laws of Christ, of no effect, make it
needless to obey them, unless a man have a mind unto it, and to do more than
what is needful.

2. For Civil Society, it is well known how many there are in the Church of
Rome, who do affirm that it is not needful to discharge a promise to a
Heretic; and all are Heretics in their account, who make profession of
Christianity, and do not communicate with their Church. We know there was safe
conduct promised to John Hus and Jerome of Prague to the Council of Conslance,
and how that promise was performed. The promise was broken, and the men burnt,
and so indeed they justified their Doctrine by their practice.

They exempt the Clergy from the Authority of secular Power, till they be
surrendered thereunto by their Superiors in the Church, and they surrender them
when they please; and when they please, they do not. Upon which account many
Villainies, many Murders have been committed in the State, to the infinite
scandal of Religion. It was complained in the sixth year of King Henry the
Second, that there have been above an hundred man slaughters committed by the
then Clergy since the beginning of his Reign.

But that which is of the vilest consequence in this point is, that they affirm
that the Popes of Rome have power to depose Kings and Princes, and that
pursuant to this Doctrine, they have excommunicated and deposed lawful Princes
in several places, and given their Kingdoms and Dominions to other persons:
that there are infinite numbers of Authors, who defend and justify this
Doctrine: that these are countenanced by a Council (that is to say, the fourth
Lateran) which they themselves call a General Council. For it is there expressly
said, that in case a Prince does not purge his Country from heretical pravity
in the space of a year, after admonition so to do by the Metropolitan and his
Comprovincials, then this be signified to the Pope, that he may deprive him of
all Authority, and terram ejus exponat Catholicis occupandam, expose his
Country to be possessed and seized by Catholics. In direct pursuance of which
Doctrine, private persons have stabbed Princes, and have been commended and
applauded by the Pope himself for so doing. For so it was in the case of Henry
the Third of France.

These are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome relating unto Civil Society;
what ours are, I need not say. We own our selves obliged to do good to all
men; and that although we have not obliged our selves thereto by any particular
promise to them, much more discharged our faith to all. We own the King to be
supreme in his own dominions, and that there is no power in any to depose him.
And to conclude, we own the truth of S. Peter's words, and that in the very
fullest sense. Honor (or as the margent reads it) esteem all men, love the
Brotherhood, fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. We own all to be obliged
to submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as supreme, or to Governors as sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers.

I have here given you an account of some of the most material differences
between us and the Church of Rome in point of faith and worship, and manners,
and should now persuade you to stand fast in all these things as they are
taught in this Church, not suffering your selves to be abased by vain Sophistry
of deceivers. If they ask you, where our Church was before Luther? ask you
again, where theirs was before the fourth Laterane Council, nay before that of
Trent it self? For sure it is there was never any Church before those Councils,
that did in all things teach and practice, as the Church of Rome at this
present time. Tell them, our Church, that is, a Church, wherein the same faith,
and worship, the same obedience to Gods commands, were taught and required,
which are now taught and required in ours, were many ages before theirs. Such a
Church there was as soon as there was a Christian Church, such a Church planted
by Christ himself, such a Church propagated by his Apostles, such a Church for
several hundred years, for several ages after that.

Afterward there arose a time of darkness upon the face of the Christian
world, in that darkness many errors crept into the Church, many corruptions in
worship, and manners; then was our Church depraved and corrupted, as theirs now
is: but now is our Church by Gods grace reformed and restored to primitive
purity; which theirs is not.

Whether theirs or ours be the better Church in point of faith, may be easily
known by this instance, we make the Scripture the rule of faith, and this is a
most unerring rule; they add tradition unto Scripture, and this is greatly
exposed to error; we have added nothing as absolutely necessary to salvation,
to the faith contained in the ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church, they have
added much to those Creeds, they have added some such things to them, as do by
consequence overthrow some parts of the very Creeds themselves. Whether theirs
or ours be the safer Church for a man to hope for Salvation in, may easily
appear from these particulars. We teach such worship, such practice, as are
most clearly and fully lawful, lawful beyond all peradventure, for sure it is
undoubtedly Jawful for a man to worship the true God, to use no Image in his
worship, to use him as Mediator whom he has appointed so to be. It is lawful
beyond all peradventure to have our prayers in a known tongue, to give the
communion unto the Laity in both kinds, to reform, as well as confess our sins,
to use no art or commutations for the expiation of our sins, but to forsake the
sins themselves. These things are lawful without all doubt, but that the
contrary to these are lawful, is the doubtfulest thing in all the world, or
rather to speak more properly, it is most certain, they are not lawful. And
therefore I leave it to you to judge, whether communion with our Church, or the
Church of Rome, be the safer way unto salvation and if you judge, as I know you
must, stand fast in the faith you have received, and the Church wherein you
were baptized. And so much may serve for the first method for a true Church to
preserve it self in the true faith, firmness of mind in every man's private
belief of it.

2. Proceed we now unto the second, and that is Union amongst themselves, as it
is suggested in these words, stand fast in one spirit with one mind. If a
kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand. If a house be
divided against it self, that house cannot stand, Mark 3.23, 24. Neither can a
Church, which is so divided; If the members of the natural body be rent and
torn each from other, this is the destruction of the whole, and death to every
single part. Disunion does of its own nature naturally tend to dissolution,
there needs no Enemy from abroad to destroy and ruin such a Church, as is
divided against it self, the mutual discords that are within, the divisions
amongst its own members, their mutual envyings, and animosities, that naturally
arise out of these divisions, effectually tend to separation, and separation to
dissolution. Besides the intestine strifes and divisions, which are seen and
observed in any Church invite its Enemies to attempt its utter ruin and
destruction, they open a breach for them to enter, they give free and an easy
entrance to swarms or seducers to invade it, they give a plausible and fair
pretense for a very plausible and specious objections; you have no union
amongst your selves; from whence it appears you have not the truth, Truth is
one, and so is the Faith that is built upon it. You are not one amongst your
selves, and therefore you have not the true faith. Now therefore leave and quit
that Church which has no unity in its members, and come to that which is
united. To these assaults (and these are dangerous to weaker minds) does every
Church expose it self, which is not at unity in it self.

Now therefore let us be most cautious to be at union amongst our selves; and
in order to so good an end, let us take care to make our breaches no wider than
indeed they are. We do agree, exactly agree amongst our selves in point of
faith, in the belief of all those Doctrines, that are absolutely necessary to
salvation, thus far we agree with the Protestant Churches that are abroad, and
further yet, with the generality of the Diffenters that are at home. And as for
this Church it self, there is as great, and greater consent in all the parts
and members of it, than in the Church of Rome it self. They have divisions
amongst themselves, and greater than any amongst us. They charge either other,
in some points, with nothing less than heresy it self. We have no such charges
amongst us. They have their Dominicans, and Franciscans, they have their
Molinists, and their Jansenists, one Order bandying against another with bitter
discords and animosities. They are not agreed in the very rule of faith it
self, some make the Decrees of the Pope only, some the Decrees of a General
Council, others the Decrees of the Pope and Council both together, to be the
only rule of Faith; from whence it most inevitably follows that that must be
Faith unto one party, which is not so unto another. Seeing some things have
been decreed by Popes, that have not been decreed by Councils, some things by
Councils, and not by Popes. From whence it appears that after all the boasts we
hear of union in the Church of Rome; there is in truth less of union in that
Church, than in this that we are members of.

And for the increase and preservation of this so blessed and needful thing,
let us take care not to advance any private opinions in opposition to public
wisdom. Let us not insist upon any Doctrines as absolutely necessary to
salvation which the Church has not proposed as such. Let no particular sort of
men presume to style themselves the Church, or the only genuine Sons of it, in
opposition unto others, who belive the Doctrines of the Church, who have
promised due Conformity to it, and evidently practice what they promise. These
in truth are the sure and genuine Sons of the Church who go so far as the
Church requires, and content themselves to go no further. And if any deny them
so to be; they have private fancys of their own, and by obtruding these on
others, and censuring those that receive them not, they weaken the Church,
disturb its union, disquiet its peace, and take a course to bring a dangerous
Schism into it.

Now therefore let it be our care to maintain Charity, to cherish Peace, to
study Union amongst our selves. And this is the second of these methods which
powerfully tend to our preservation, and of the Faith which we do profess.

3. The third is singular zeal and diligence in joint endeavors for its
defense and propagation. For so the Apostle farther adds: Stand fast in one
Spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. There must
be zeal, there must be endeavor, there must be joint endeavor used for the
promotion of this end.

1. Our enemies have a zeal against it, and if we our selves have none for it,
how can we hope that we shall preserve it, unless there be zeal opposed to
zeal, unless we be concerned for truth, as they concern themselves against it,
can we reasonably judge we can secure it? No, if they find that we our selves
are cold and indifferent in our Religion, that we show no hearty affection for
it, that we value our ease, love our pleasure, esteem the smallest concerns and
interest more than we prize and value that, may they not then justly conclude
that we shall easily part with it? And will not this excite their diligence,
and encourage attempts to take it from us? May I speak what I verily think is
true? It is our indifference in our Religion, the gross neglects that very
many, and the foul contempts that some others have clearly showed unto this
profession, that has given encouragement to our enemies to design and attempt
its extirpation. If they can say (and I wish they may not) they have no
concernment for their Religion, they have no regard for the Ministers of it,
they neglect, they despise it in life and practice, many of them very seldom
appear in their public Assemblies and Congregations, very few frequent that
holy Sacrament, which is the great and solemn profession of joining in
Communion with it. They give no evidence of any zeal or affection to it, and
therefore, no doubt, they will part with it upon very cheap and easy terms;
bring their Estates, or ease and safety, bring the advantages of this world
into a competition with it, and there is no doubt but they will abandon and
quit the one, that they may quietly enjoy the other. They will rather choose to
enjoy their Estates, ease, and safety without their Religion, than their
Religion without these. If we could penetrate into the hearts of those that
design the extirpation of our Religion, I fear we should find these thoughts in
them, and that these have encouraged that design; which cannot otherwise be
resisted, than by letting them know they are deceived, that we have as great
and warm a zeal for the preserving our Religion, as they for its ruin and
destruction.

2. To this zeal we must add endeavor, it is not the goodness of a cause that
is sufficient to defend it. If it be true, and just, and reasonable, it must be
evidenced so to be, and endeavor used for its defense. If it be true, it is so
much fitter to be pleaded. If it be just, it is just to appear, and labor for
it, it does still so much the more deserve the use of reason in every private
Prosessor of it, the use of Authority in every Magistrate for its advancement
and preservation. The wisest Laws will not secure the best Religion, if they
themselves be not secured. They can neither plead, nor execute themselves. They
rather excite contempt and scorn, and irritate enemies to opposition, where
they are left to shift for themselves, without any countenance from the
Magistrate.

Now therefore it would still retain the Reformed Religion; reformed I say, by
the blessing of God upon the pains of our Forefathers, and at the expense of
the very blood of many of them, if we desire to deliver it down to our
posterity, as they transmitted it unto us; we must upon every fair occasion
profess our hearty belief of it, profess our zeal for its defense; maintain its
truth against opposers, give no occasion to them to think, that fraud or force,
hopes or fears, rewards or punishments in this world shall ever chase or remove
us from it.

And may not the diligence of our enemies, for the subversion of our Faith,
awake our minds, excite our diligence to maintain it? If they insinuate and
intrude into all societies, all places, all degrees and ranks of men, and use
the utmost of their skill to seduce them, and impose upon them, to move them,
both by hopes and fears, to embrace their errors and delusions; shall we be
idle, or remiss in the mean time in the securing of real truth? Have they so
much of zeal and fervor for mere vanities and superstitions? And have we none
for real piety? Are they so active, as that they compass Sea and Land to make
men Proselytes unto them. And have we no care to secure our selves, at least at
home? Do they neglect no opportunity, do they omit no endeavors, no not the
foulest and most unlawful to promote and propagate their Religion? And are we
asleep, are we in a maze, are we in a dream, while we should defend and secure
ours?

Awake we then from that security, and from that coldness and indifference,
from that remisness and neglect, which gives encouragement to our enemies to
attempt the destruction of our Religion, and may (if not in time reformed)
exceeding justly provoke God to deliver us up into their hands.

3. Let us all awake while it is day, and unite our selves in joint endeavors
(the third particular I proposed) to defend and propagate our Religion. Let us
join together in the clear and open profession of it. Let us coustantly attend
the Worship of God in the public Assemblies, where the Religion is professed.
Let us frequently join in the Celebration of that holy Sacrament, which is not
only a Communion with Christ our Head, but the aptest and clearest
signification of our Communion each with other. Let us mutually counsel and
advise; let us encourage one another to retain and hold fast that Faith, which
was once delivered to the Saints, striving for the faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing terrified by our adversaries.

4. Which is the fourth of these methods which our Apostle here propounds for
the defense of the true faith, and so is that which we profess.

Our Faith is that which our blessed Lord came down from Heaven to reveal to
men, he confirmed it by many mighty Miracles, he died on the Cross, he rose
again, he ascended to Heaven, he gave the Spirit to his Apostles and holy
Fellows to preach and propagate it in the world. These and several after them
for diverse Ages laid down their lives for its defense, and made it victorious
in the world, notwithstanding all the oppositions that the powers of the world,
and the lusts of men made against it; and why should we fear the wit or malice,
the craft or strength that any enemy can use against it? if we will be
faithful our selves to it. We can at most but die for it. And have we not
reason to encourage us so to do, if ever the times (which God forbid) should
call for that? What says our Lord in this case? Luke 12.4, 5. Be not afraid of
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but I
will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him, who, after he has killed,
has power to cast into hell; yea I say unto you fear him. Fear God, and
nothing but God only. Fear him, and you shall not need to fear any other thing
but him only. He can discover the darkest Plots, he can defeat the greatest
craft, he can disarm the greatest Powers, and scatter them all into confusion.

And we are not without very good hopes that he will concern himself for us,
and employ his Providence for our help.

We have a Cause that God has favored, wonderfully favored in former times.
How many Plots against this Cause did he discover, confound, and punish, during
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth? How did he do the like again, when her Successor
began his Reign? How has he still preserved and blessed it in many confusions,
many divisions amongst our selves since that time? How has he now at the
present time wonderfully discovered the works of darkness, brought hidden and
secret evils to light? Made those discoveries, done those things that we could
never have done for our selves?

God will never be wanting to us, or to the Religion we profess, if we our
selves be not wanting to it. Let us therefore awaken all our powers to
diligence in our own defense, and then commit our cause to God, making our
daily prayers to him, that he would defend his own Truth, that he would protect
his own Inheritance, and water the Vine that himself has planted.

Yea, let us make our appeals to him, whether we or cur enemies be in the right.

And then, O God, who art a just and righteous God, take the matter into thine
own hand, do thou judge between them and us. Pardon our sins, forgive those
evils which may provoke thine indignation against us; but for our cause, for
that Faith that we do profess against our enemies, that we freely leave to
thee, we do appeal unto thy judgment, and are willing to stand or fall by it.

Let us therefore adorn it in our lives, this is the first and principal way of
procuring the blessing of God upon it. Let us seek and improve all occasions to
gain it credit and reputation. And seeing that it has pleased the King to
recommend the rebuilding of St Paul's unto our Charity at this time, and himself
to set us a great Example; let us not be wanting to this Work according unto
our proportion.

It is certainly a Work of Christian piety to build up places for Gods Worship.
No sooner were the Christians freed from the Persecutions of the Heathen, but
they did zealously apply themselves to this work, and raised magnificent and
noble Structures for the public places of Gods Worship.

This Church, which is now to be rebuilt, may be styled the chief of all the
Nation. It has formerly been its greatest glory in its kind, and we hope it
may be so again. What pity were it that such a Work should fail or flag at such
a time, when we are to give especial evidence of a public Spirit of free, and
noble, and generous minds. The time is an extraordinary time, the work an
extraordinary work. Let us open our hands to a more than ordinary bounty
toward it.

And as for us in this place, we have singular reason so to do; seeing it
pleased Almighty God to preserve our Churches and Habitations from those flames
that devoured our Neighbors. Now therefore let us at this time honor the
Religion we do profess by this particular work of piety, as well as in all
other instances; making our prayers to Almighty God, that he would defend his
own Truth, that he would protect his own Inheritance, and preserve the Religion
himself planted.

And thou, O God, etc.

The Fourth Sermon.
Matthew. 6.23. -- If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
is that darkness?


THE great security of man's life, as well from the cheats of his own as from
the temptations of the world, depends upon true and stable Principles of Faith
and Piety. And the ground of all these Principles is, a true judgment of what
is happiness, what is the great end of life, and what are the ways that lead
unto it, and a choice suitable thereunto. This is the thing which our Lord
suggests, 19, 20, 21 verses. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth,
where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:
hut lay up for your selves treasures in heaven where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal, for says he, when
your treasure is, there will your heart be also: that is to say, that which you
choose to be your happiness, that will you place your hearts upon, and pursue in
all your deliberate actions. Having thus exhorted us to take care to choose that
for our chief good, which is indeed really so, to conduct our lives by true
Principles, he speaks a Parable wherein he shows the great advantage of so
doing, and the danger of doing otherwise. The former of these in those words,
verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body is full of light. The application of which words is this: The
judgment of the mind is the guide of life. Wherefore if the judgment be true
and good, the life has a true guide to rule it. And then the danger of a false
judgment is declared in the words that immediately follow: But if thine eye be
evil, thy whole body is full of darkness. And so he comes to the words of the
Text: If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? that is, if thy judgment be corrupt, if thy mind and conscience be
erroneous, how great and dangerous are those mistakes which thou art then
exposed unto?

Now that which the words thus explained offer unto our consideration, is the
mighty danger that they are in to lose their souls, who are led and governed by
false Principles. Which will appear, if we consider that such Principles,

1. Leave them dangerously exposed to sin.

2. And not only so exposed unto it, but that they also encourage to it. I say,

1. They leave them dangerously exposed to evil: which will be very clear and
manifest, if we consider,

1. First of all, that our present condition and state is such, that we are
under many temptations thereunto.

2. That the nature of man is apt of it self to close and comply with those
temptations.

3. That we have nothing else, save only true and right Principles, assisted by
the Grace of God, to prevent and hinder complying with them.

4. From whence it most inevitably follows, that where those Principles are not
found, we are most dangerously exposed to evil.

1. I shall begin with the first of these, which is, that our present condition
is such, that we are under many temptations unto evil.

The world is full of deceits and snares: wherever we tread we are in danger
to fall into them. There is no business, no employment, no condition or state
of life, but lies exposed unto temptation. Sometimes we are courted by sensual
charms, by the hopes of favor, or wealth, or honor to part with our innocence
and integrity; sometimes we are in great danger to have it extorted and wrested
from us by the dreads and dangers of the world. Sometimes an occasion is
offered to men to oppress or to defraud their neighbor, and by these means to
gain Estates, and heap up abundance of wealth and riches. And there are the
like occasions also of gaining esteem, applause, and honor, of gaining them,
by unlawful means; and yet are these, and in these circumstances, no small
temptation unto many. And as for sensual satisfactions, I need not say what
great temptations they are to many; how they infatuate, how they bewitch the
minds of men in strange forgetfulness of themselves, and of the accounts they
must make to God in the world to come,

Add hereunto the great provocations unto evil, men often offer each to other,
and that not only by ill example, but by many other ways also. Who is he that
lives without an enemy? and what will not an enemy do to blacken the Name, to
injure the Estate, to blast the Fortune of him he hates? And shall I need to
say, how far such injuries and affronts are apt to prevail with most men to
anger, and malice, and animosity? And what a dangerous thing is it to admit and
entertain these passions? Of that St Paul has said enough, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Be
angry and sin not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place
to the devil. Which puts us in mind of another Tempter, who is most busy, and
most subtle in making all the other temptations we meet withal operative and
effectual upon us by his delusion? and seductions. For he walks about as a
roaring lion seering whom he may devour.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that as we are under many temptations in
this world: so are our natures of themselves apt to comply with these
temptations. They are too ready to gather fire from every spark, to find
occasion of doing evil, or lusting after it in the very least suggestion to it.
What will not those that love the world readily undertake and act, when an
opportunity of gaining wealth freely offers it self unto them? They that will
be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. And how many are there
that six this Principle in their minds, and govern all their designs by it,
that they will be rich, however it be they gain their end?

I need not say, how great a temptation sensual pleasures are to others, nor
how far others are inclined to popular fame and reputation; how proud, and
stomachful, and ambitious, and how they swell with rage and anger, with envy,
and malice, and animosity, when they are opposed and contradicted. I need not
trouble my self to prove, that the nature of man is much corrupted, strangely
degenerate and decayed. What are all the Histories of the World, but a Record,
for the most part, of the corruption of humane Nature, of Wars and Tumults,
fraud and falseness, oppression and cruelty, as an effect of those corruptions:
insomuch that the wise and learned Solomon after all his experience and
observation of the ways and manners of mankind, gives us his judgment in this
conclusion, Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this only have I learned, that God has made man
upright, but they have sought out many inventions. So God made man at the
first, but they have much corrupted themselves, and greatly depraved and abused
their nature.

3. These things being so, that we are under many temptations unto evil, that
humane nature is of it self apt to comply with these temptations: hence it
appears in the third place, that we have nothing but good Principles, assisted
by the Grace of God, to secure and to deliver us from them. Suppose an occasion
and opportunity to do an evil presented and offered unto a man, suppose the
nature of this person does of it self move and incline him thereunto, that it
be a singular gratification to some predominant lust in him. Is it imaginable
that this person should refuse to comply with this temptation, if he have no
firm and stable Principles fixed and settled in his mind to prevent and hinder
that compliance? If he be not first persuaded fully, that the thing is unlawful
he is about, that it will involve him in great guilt, that this will expose him
to Gods displeasure, and the severe effects thereof? If he be not possessed with
these Principles, what should secure him from that sin? Will the sensual person
deny himself the delights and pleasures of sensuality; or he that inordinately
loves the world, refuse the occasions and opportunities of all unlawful gains
and interests; or the proud, and envious, and malicious pine by the advantages
that are offered him, to revenge himself, and hurt his neighbor, while he has
no principles and rules of life to resist and oppose these temptations, and his
own inclinations to close with them? Suppose him destitute of such Principles,
of steadfast purpose and resolution never to vary from God's will to serve and
gratify his own lusts, never to lose eternal Glory to possess the advantages,
enjoy the pleasures of this world; and he is left as a naked man against the
weapons of his enemy, and in no capacity to make resistance.

No sooner were the Gentile World for the violation of natural light abandoned
by God unto themselves, and let to the government of their lusts without the
guidance of good Principles, but that they fell into most prodigious and horrid
evils, as you may see it at large described in the first Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans. They fell into all degrees of evil, they persisted and continued
in them without the least remorse of mind.

And when the Jews by their traditions corrupted the sacred word of God, when
they mistook the rules of life, they also degenerated like the Gentiles, they
were as blind in their superstititions, as the other were in their Idolatries.

Add hereunto that we are so far from being secure from the greatest evils
without the fiercest and strongest Principles of hearty obedience unto God,
that we find it difficult for those Principles, to retain and hold us in
obedience. Men know evil, and yet they do it; understand their duties, yet
neglect them. They forsake and omit what they approve, they choose and practice
what they believe, and know is evil. They resist the light, they violate
Conscience, they offer violence to their Principles; and while temptations are
so strong, and natural desires so ill inclined, as to lead them Captive unto
evil against the convictions of their minds, against their Principles, and
resolutions; how much more must the same things, have the same and worse
effects upon them, where they have no Principles to oppose to their temptations
they meet withal, and their own depraved, and corrupt affections.

The sum of all I have said is this: That we are under many temptations unto
evil, that humane nature is of it self, apt to comply with those temptations,
that we have nothing but good Principles to prevent and hinder such compliance.
From whence it most inevitably follows; that where such principles are not
found, where men are under the power and guidance of evil Principles, they are
most dangerously exposed to evil. This is the least of the ill effects, that we
can possibly expect from them.

2. But then secondly, we must consider, That as all ill principles in Religion
leave us at least exposed to evil; so are there many do very highly encourage
to it. There are such principles to be found, as turn the greatest crimes to
merit, and make men hope for a reward, hope to gain eternal glory, by the
foulest practices in the world; by those that tend to eternal misery. Our
blessed Lord foretold his followers, that the time would come wherein they
would put them out of the Synagogues, and not so only, but also that whosoever
killed them should think he did God service by it, John 16.2. So did the Jews
use his Disciples. They first accused them of Schism, and Heresy, and then
persecuted them unto death. And just so does the Roman Church to all Christians
dissenting from them. They pronounce them guilty of Schism, and Heresy; they
excommunicate them out of the Church, they flatly deny that they can be saved,
they doom them all unto damnation; they pronounce it lawful to destroy them, to
destroy the very greatest Princes when they have once judged them Heretics.
They make it a meritorious act in those that adventure so to do; and lest men
should not venture upon it, some of them teach that they are obliged, and bound
to do it, extremo animarum suarum perieule, si vires habeant ad hoc idoneas
(Philopator,) under the pain of the loss of their Souls; if they have
sufficient strength to do it. Could a man have thought that such practices, as
these are, should ever have been undertaking by any, making profession of
Christianity? could he have thought that although these should be undertaken,
they should be justified and defended? nay urged, and pressed with great
severity? under no less a tie, and penalty, than that of the loss of a man's
Soul? But this it is to have the mind and conscience defiled, as the Apostle
himself expresses it, Tit. 1.15. This it is, as he speaks elsewhere, 1. Tim.
4.2. to have the Conscience seared with a hot iron. If a man's Principles be
corrupt, his conscience perverted and depraved, what will not such a conscience
admit, and such Principles urge upon him? If the very light that is in him be
darkness, how great then is that darkness. And now to apply what I have said
upon this point,

1. Seeing the danger of false Principles in Religion is so prodigiously and
strangely great, let this be a mighty caution to us to avoid communion with
such persons, as govern themselves by such Principles, and more especially the
Church of Rome.

It is not imaginable how this Church has perverted the Doctrine of
Christianity, and quite overthrown the practice of it in many considerable
parts of it. There is scarce any one command of God, which they have not
clouded and perverted by some perverse interpretations. And besides all this,
they have formed and stated general Principles, which effectually lead to the
overthrowing of all the precepts of Christianity. And some of these I shall
instance in:

1. The first of these is the Doctrine received in the Roman Church of acting
according to probable opinions, received not only among the Jesuits, but by
many others as well as them.

1. They teach, that although an opinion seems to be false to any man,
considering the reasons that make against it, yet that it is a probable
opinion, if it be maintained by two, or three, nay by one Doctor of note
amongst them.

2. And then secondly, that any person may lawfully act and govern himself by
such an opinion in point of practice, by an opinion maintained by others,
although it seem to be false to himself; just contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. The very words they
use are these: Ex anthoritate unius tantum posse quem, illam in praxi amplecti,
licet a principiis intrinsecis falsam and improbahilem existimet; that is, That
a man may lawfully follow an opinion in practice upon the authority of one
Doctor, though he himself, considering the reasons of that opinion, judge it to
be false and improbable. (Guimen. page 55) My Author adds an example to this,
and that is, although a Confessor shall himself believe it to be unlawful to
absolve a man in a certain case; yet that notwithstanding he may absolve him,
if others judge it to be lawful. Now here I observe in the first place, that
this is directly against the Scripture, which pronounces that to be unlawful,
which a man acts against his own mind and conscience, although agreeably to
other men's. And then secondly, that this opinion gives all men liberty to do
whatsoever a few Doctors, nay any one of the Roman Church have judged lawful:
And what is it, that some of them have not judged lawful, especially against
all those persons, upon whom they fix the name of Heretics? And if you
inquire, what is the design of those persons that do maintain this opinion, it
is most evident, that it is this: That the spiritual Guides of the Roman Church
may have a pretense to lead the people boldly to act what they require,
although against the minds and judgments of them they lead. That is; in case a
private person judge it unlawful to break his faith, to falsify promise to a
Heretic, or to deprive him of life, or fortunes, or reputation, yet that he
may still lawfully do it, if two or three of their Guides and Teachers, nay if
any one of them judge it lawful.

3. But then thirdly, they further teach, That where there are any two
opinions, one less probable than another, that a man may lawfully guide his
practice by that which appears to be less probable. So Martial de Prado,
concludes, and abundance of others as well as he, (as Guimen. p. 64.) Saepe in
praxi licitum est sequi opinionem minus probabilem, relicta probabiliori: It is
often lawful in matter of practice to follow a less probable opinion, forsaking
that which is more probable. Which is as much as if they said, that a man is
not bound to govern his life according to the best of his judgment, but may
very lawfully do what is worse, where he knows and believes he might do better.
And is this for a man to guide his life according to the rules of Charity, or
that integrity, that sincerity, which true Christianity requires from us?

4. And yet I must add what is still worse; for it is added upon this point in
the Church of Rome, That it is lawful for any person to follow a less probable
opinion rather than one that is more probable, and that although the more
probable be also safer than the other. And for this an Author of that Church
cites the Testimonies of above forty of their Doctors, ( Guimen. p. 62, 64.)
And is this to teach like true and faithful Guides of Souls? Is this for men to
behave themselves like faithful Pastors? and careful of the Salvation of men,
to give them license to guide their lives by such opinions, as are not only
less probable, but less safe than the direct contrary are? But these are the
Methods, these are the Arts of the Roman Church to draw men in unto their
Church; to allow them liberty to please themselves, to do the things that are
most pleasing, though least safe; to gratify sinful inclinations, though to
the prejudice of their Souls. By these liberties they fill their Church with
numerous Proselytes and Disciples, and gain Authority to themselves to put them
upon the foulest actions, by teaching them, that it is lawful for them to
follow the Judgment of their Teachers, though it seems false unto themselves;
which is to rob every private person of his Conscience, Reason, and
Understanding, and to oblige them to follow others, who, as appears from these
particulars, have nothing at all of conscience in them.

2. Add hereunto another Principle, taught and maintained in the Roman Church,
concerning the rectifying of the intention, which is, that a man may lawfully
do such things as are materially evil, provided always that he direct the
inward intention of his mind unto a good and an honest end. As for example,
that a man may lawfully smite with a sword, where he has received a blow with
the hand, and is secure from further prejudice, provided he do it non ad
sumendam vindictam, sed ad vitandam infamiam, Guimen. page 199, 200. that is to
say, not for revenge, but to repair his reputation. Or as Father Escobar has
expressed it (Letters Provincial, p. 143.) One may lawfully kill another, who
has given him a box on the ear, though he run away for it, provided he do it
not out of hatred or revenge. In short, that a man may do any evil to him that
has offered him an affront, in case he do it not out of malice, or to revenge
himself upon him, but only to repair his credit, and defend his honor and
reputation. But if this be true and Christian Doctrine, what shall we say to
the Precept of Christ, Mat. 5.39. I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. That
is to say, if any injury passed upon thee, leave thee secure of life and limbs,
if it only touch thy reputation, as this is measured amongst men by vulgar
judgments and opinions, do thou patiently bear the injury, and be content to
expect a reward hereafter for it, whatsoever becomes of thy reputation.

In the mean time let it be observed, how the Teachers in the Church of Rome
loosen the reins to the lusts of men, indulge their vain unchristian humors,
while they teach them to value their reputation, and that in the eyes of vulgar
Judges, more than the very lives of men. While they allow them to preserve the
esteem of vain men, by the spilling of their neighbors blood; as though his
life were of less value, than the opinion of such persons.

Two things further I shall observe: First, That this Doctrine of good
intention, justifying actions of this kind, is in effect no other than that, of
doing of evil that good may come; or of the using of evil means for the
attaining a good end. A Doctrine most severely censured, Romans 3.8. And then
further, that a good intention justifies an indifferent action, a thing that is
lawful in it self; but never justifies things unlawful. In these things it has
no place, but in indifferent things it has.

Now then to conclude what I have to say, seeing evil Principles do not only
leave us exposed to sin, but also encourage us thereunto, seeing they expose us
to death eternal by so doing; let us have a care of such persons, and such a
Church as teach and promote such Principles. Let us be steadfast in that Church
where the saving Doctrine of Christianity is faithfully taught and offered to
us. We have no other certain helps against the most pernicious evils, to secure
us from the foulest sins, but firm Principles, Faith and Holiness, assisted by
the Grace of God. These are the things that must preserve us against our
natural inclinations, against our depraved and corrupt affections; these are
the things that must secure us against the temptations of the world, and
recover us, if we chance to fall through humane frailty and infirmity. He that
commits a sin by Principles, has nothing to retrive him from it, and to
recover him from his fall, while such a Principle remains in him. But he that
falls through inadvertency, may be soon recovered by good Principles. He will
remember he has done amiss, his conscience will check and smite him for it;
these checks will send him to his prayers to beg the pardon of what is past,
and a greater vigilance, a greater assistance of Gods Grace for time to come,
and so recover him from his fall, and restore him to his former station.

And therefore let it be our care to govern our lives by stable principles of
integrity: In doubtful cases let us always follow the safer part, and not do as
they of the Church of Rome, forsake a safer to follow a more unsafe opinion.
And where the case is plain and obvious, that it is unlawful to do a thing; let
us not cheat our own reason with any deceitful arts and reasonings, to make it
seem to be lawful for us. If we do this, we expose our selves to the guile and
Sophistry of our lusts, and may make the plainest things obscure. But if we
heartily love the truth, and use no means to contradict it, it will be a
faithful guide unto us in this life, and so conduct us to life eternal.

How many are there that are so far from believing Schism to be a sin, that
they value themselves upon this account, and believe themselves the only
Saints, because they separate from the Church, make that a Character of
Religion which tends to its ruin and destruction?

The Fifth Sermon.
Matthew. 16.18. And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

The whole verse is thus:

And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my Church: And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.


ST. Peter having in the 16 verse of this Chapter made this confession of our
Lord, That he was Christ the Son of the living God, is in return for this
confession first pronounced a blessed person, and then adorned with an
excellent Character by our Savior. He is pronounced a blessed person at the 17
verse, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed
it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. He is adorned with an excellent
Character in the words immediately following those, And I say unto thee that
thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, which privilege
although it was not peculiar unto S. Peter, but common to the other Apostles
with him, yet being first declared of him, adds to the Dignity of his
Character, and yet detracts nothing at all from the power of the rest of
Christ's Apostles, upon whom, as upon a sure foundation S. Paul assures us the
Church was built, Ephe. 2.20. It was built on them together with him, whom our
Savior mentions in this place, it was most firmly built upon them, for so it
appears from these words; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
For the better understanding of which words we must,

(1) consider that (...), translated Hell is frequently used in the holy
Scriptures as well as profane Authors to signify the grave, to denote the
place, and state of the dead; so it is used in these words, Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see
corruption. And then further,

(2) We must consider, that the grave, or place and State of the dead is
sometimes compared unto a house, If I wait, the grave is mine house, Job.
17.13. and to a house with gates, or doors shut up and locked with bars and
locks, and hence that saying of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.10. I said in the cutting off
of my days I shall go to the gates of the grave. Hence mention is made of the
bars of the pit, Job. 17.16. and of the keys of hell and death, Revel. 1.18.
and of the keys of the bottomless pit, Revel. 9.1.

(3) Being then that the grave, being that the place and state of the dead is
compared to a house with gates and doors, shut up and fastened with bars and
locks; from hence likewise it comes to pass, that Death or Destruction is
described by entering into the gates of the grave; for so you find in the words
which I have already cited, Isaiah 38.10.11. I said in the cutting off of my
days (when God told me that I should dye) I shall go to the gates of the grave
am deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord in the
land of the living; I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the
world, where [entering into the gates of the grave] plainly signifies death it
self, or entering into the place of the dead, as all the other expressions show.

(4.) This being so; if the Church be taken for Gods people, not considered as
a Society being together in Communion, but as single Members of Christ's Body;
then these words that are before us, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against the Church, imply no more, than that the Members of Christ's body shall
overcome death and the grave by a Resurrection to Immortality. But then if the
Church in this place be taken, as it usually is, and as I judge it ought to be,
for the general Society of Believers considered as they are a Church, living
together in Communion in the use of all Christ's Institutions; then are the
words we have in hand (which tell us, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against the Church) a promise that there shall be a Church professing the true
Faith of the Gospel, and living in the use of its Institutions, in visible
Fellowship and Communion, till the second Coming of our Lord.

Then when it is said, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the
Church; the meaning will be, that the Church shall never enter into those
gates, which is as much as if it were said, that it should never be destroyed.

Having thus interpreted the words before us, I shall proceed in this Method.

1. I shall show what Church this is, which is designed in these words.

2. And then secondly, how far this promise of our Lord made to that Church in
these words, secures it from error and defection.

1. It is needful to understand what the Church is, which is designed in these
words, where it is promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it.

And the reason is, because the Patrons of the Roman Church have assumed this
promise unto themselves with as much confidence and presumption, as if it had
been expressly said, That the Church of Rome should never fail, but always
continue firm and stable, nay absolutely infallible in the Faith, in the true
Doctrine of Christianity; whereas in truth, this is as well a great arrogance
as a most wide and foul mistake.

For certain it is, that our Savior here speaks not of any particular Church
planted in this or the other place, but only of the Universal Church, the whole
Society of those persons who profess the Doctrine of the Gospel. He speaks
indefinitely of his Church, Upon the rock will I build my Church; and speaking
indefinitely of his Church, cannot possibly understand any particular part of
it, the Church of any particular place, but the Catholic Universal Church.

The truth is, the Church of any particular place, seated in any particular
Country, may utterly fail, and be extinguished. How many great and excellent
Churches have failed and perished long ago? How many others have so decayed,
that they seem near unto destruction? Where are those many famous Churches
which once flourished in the Coast of Africks? Where are those seven Churches
of Asia largely mentioned by St. John in the three first Chapters of the
Revelations? Where are those many other Churches which formerly flourished in
the East? How many of them are extinguished? utterly ruined and destroyed with
the very Cities where they were planted? How many others are decayed almost to
a total dissolution? Be it then concluded, that this promise, that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against the Church, belongs to the Church Universal
only, and not to any Society of Christians, seated in any particular place, not
unto any particular Church. Which being so, I cannot dismiss this point without
an Inference and a Caution.

1. The Inference is, That seeing this promise of our Lord, that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against his Church, belongs to the Church Universal, and
not to any particular Church. The consequence which the Romanists draw from
these words, namely, that the Church of Rome is indefectible and infallible, is
most inconsequent and unreasonable. This promise belongs to the whole Church,
of which the present Church of Rome is but a part, and a part infected with
strange corruptions. This promise belongs to the Universal Church of Christ,
the Church of Rome was never more than only a particular Church, that is, a
member of the universal; and is now, what it has long been, a most corrupt and
unsound member. And as that Church has strangely sunk into heathenish and
barbarous Superstitions, so may it utterly fail and vanish, and disclaim the
very name of Christ, and yet this promise of our Lord remain a firm and stable
truth, That the gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church.

2. Seeing that this promise belongs to the Church Universal only, and not to
any particular Church; this may suggest a severe Caution to all particular
Churches in the World, wheresoever they are fixed and planted, carefully to
study their preservation, and duly to mind and use the means that may be
effectual to that purpose. The promise of God does not fail in the failing of
any particular Church, seeing that no particular Church has the warranty of
any promise from him that it shall not cease to be a Church, and lose the
profession of Christianity. If the Professors of Christianity in any particular
place or Nation, shall become vain in their imaginations, exchanging plain and
wholesome Truths for fond Speculations and Opinions; if they shall turn factious
and schismatical, neglecting their spiritual Guides and Pastors; if they be
dissolute in their manners, and confute their profession in their lives, they
do in effect dissolve themselves, and break the bonds of their own communion,
and what is more, provoke God to bring confusion and ruin upon them. They were
these miscarriages that opened the way to the Turks and Saracens to overflow
the Eastern Churches, and let Mahometism into the World. They were the same
that brought that deluge of Goths and Vandals, and barbarous Nations upon the
West: and what may happen upon our selves for the same miscarriages that are
amongst us, the wisest man amongst us cannot tell, unless those evils be
reformed, which plainly threaten destruction to us. Sure I am, that Christ's
Admonition to the Church of Ephesus may duly he applied to us: Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of its place, except
thou repent Rev. 2.5. Christ is so far from promising safety and protection to
any particular Church and People, where they neglect their own safety, where
they wilfully violate his Laws, that he threatens destruction and ruin to
them; and therefore it is no particular Church, but the Catholic or Universal
Church, to which our Lord makes this promise, that the gates of hell full not
prevail against it. This being cleared,

2. Let us now proceed to the second point, which is to consider how far this
promise of our Lord made to the universal Church secures it from error, and
defection.

1. And first of all, there is no doubt, but that it secures it from such
errors, as destroy the foundation of Christianity, for wheresoever these
prevail, the gates of Hell prevail in them, which is a contradiction to Christ's
promises made to his Church, in this place. Error in matters fundamental
destroys the being of a Church, and therefore the promise which assures us,
that there shall always be a Church, assures us there shall always be a society
of Christians which shall not err in fundamentals, that is to say, which shall
profess all Christian Doctrine absolutely necessary to salvation.

2. But then secondly, although this promise of our Lord secure the universal
Church from error in fundamental points, yet I conceive, it does not secure it
from error in things not fundamental. I do not say, that the whole Church, the
Church universal of any age, even since the Decease of Christ's Apostles, has
actually erred even in things of less concernment. But this I say, that this
promise does not secure it from such error. The reason is, because the Church
may err in matters that are not fundam^ntal, and yet continue a true Church:
for as a particular or single person may be a true and real Christian, although
he mistake in lesser matters, in such as do not appertain to the foundation of
Christianity; so also may a Society of men be a true Church although they err
in the like matters. Error in matters of less concernment does no more destroy
the being of a Church than lesser irregularities in practice, and certainly
such irregularities do not destroy the being of it. There was something of
faction, and something of profaneness also in the Church of Corinth, one was
of Paul, another of Apollos, another of Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. And when they
came to the Lords Supper, one was hungry, and another was drunk, and the rich
despised and contemned the poor, 1 Cor. 11.21 (which certainly were no small
miscarriages) and yet S. Paul does still acknowledge, that they were a true and
real Church. And so he styles them, 1 Cor. 1.2.

There were not many of the seven Churches whereunto S. John writes by the
spirit, and in the name of Christ himself, as unto true Christian Churches, but
had some considerable faults in them. For thus is our Lord brought in as
speaking to the Church of Ephesus. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, etc. Revel. 2.5. to the Church of Pergamus, I have a few
things against thee, because thou suffer them that hold the Doctrine of
Balaam. Revel. 2.14. to the Church of Thyatira, I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezebel which calls her self a
Prophetess to seduce my servants, etc. Revel. 2.20. to the Church of Sardis, I
have not found thy works perfect before God. Revel. 3.2. to the Church of
Laodicea, I would thou were cold or hot so then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth (unless thou reform in
due time.) Revel. 3.16, 18. The sum is this, as there may be a true Church
where there are defects in point of practice; so there may be a true Church
also, where there are defects in point of truth, provided they be not in those
truths which are fundamental to Christianity. And therefore since this promise
of Christ, that the gates of hell shall not prevail aginst his Church, imports
no more, but that there shall always be a true Church, it does not secure the
same Church from error in matters not fundamental. And now to reflect upon
this point.

1. Hence we learn what it has been that has preserved the Church of Christ,
and the Christian Faith in that Church, in all its several dangers and hazards
in the several ages of Christianity, Namely, the faithfulness of our Lord to
this his stable and gracious promise, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against his Church, which faithfulness will appear more signal, if we shall
make a short reflection upon the several dangers and trials that have in several
and diverse ages assaulted the Church, and Faith of Christ.

1. And first of all, when that Church and Faith did first appear, they were
assaulted by persecution; by persecution from Jew and Gentile, and that both by
the tongue and the sword, the Scribes and Pharisees amongst the Jews, the
Philosophers also amongst the Gentiles, bent all their wit, to confute the
Faith; and the higher powers, the Princes and Potentates of the World exercised
all external violence to destroy, and kill the professors of it. No reproaches
were thought too foul to blacken, no tortures too cruel to destroy the
professors, of the Gospel of Christ, for the three first ages of Christianity,
insomuch that they had but little time to breathe in the intervals of
persecution, while they continued under heathen Emperors.

2. No sooner did the supreme power own the profession of Christianity, no
sooner did peace dawn upon the Church by the favor of Constantine the Great,
but that the professors of Christianity broke and divided amongst themselves.
Then was the Church as much troubled by the Errors and Heresies, by the
Schisms and Factions of them that professed the name of Christ, as it had been
in former ages by the open violence of persecution. It Is true indeed, there had
been Errors, there had been factions amongst the Christians before that time,
but now they grew to greater height, especially concerning the person of
Christ; for the repressing of which errors, the four first general Councils
were called.

3. Next after the mutual strifes that arose among the Professors of the
Gospel, they fell into the sleep of ignorance, dark and stupid, and profound
ignorance, which began in the sixth and seventh Ages, and continued for diverse
Ages together. And then it was, that all the follies and superstitions entered
into the Christian Church, which are still retained in the Church of Rome. Then
were Images set up in Churches, and great Veneration given to them; then came
in the Invocation of Saints, then the Adoration of Angels also, then the
opinion of Transubstantiation, then infinite forgeries of Epistles, forgeries
of large and great Volumes, fictions of the Lives of Saints, fictions of the
Miracles done by them, to advance the Glory of the Church of Rome: which were
no sooner disclaimed and baffled by the Reformation that still continues, but
they of that Chuch presently fell to practice the very same cruelties, the same
bloody Arts upon the Reformed, that the Heathen Emperors had formerly
practiced upon the whole Church of God. Such were the methods that have been
used to prevail against the Church of Christ, violence from without, divisions
within, the troubles of danger, the temptations of ease, all the cruelties and
arts of Satan to bring confusion and ruin upon it; and yet behold it still
continues, and will continue in the world, either in one place or another, by
virtue of the promise of Christ, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against his Church.

2. Seeing that Christ our Lord has made it the matter of a promise, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church; that is to say, that there
shall always be a Society professing the Faith of Christianity, and living
together in communion in the use of all Christ's Institutions, this may serve
for an admonition to all Christians to study Unity amongst themselves, to make
no breach in the Church of Christ, where it is possible to keep together with
piety and good conscience. He that promised there should be a Church to the end
of the world, promised the unity and Christian communion of its members amongst
themselves; without this there is no Church. And he that does any thing
directly tending to break this unity and communion, does what is in him to
frustrate the very promise of Christ, and to destroy that Church which he has
founded upon a rock. In the mean time I must profess, that I am much more than
well satisfied in our separation from the Church of Rome, or rather in their
separation from us, and from the Catholic Church it self, by their infinite
variations from it. But on the other hand, I cannot but tremble to think of the
many grievous divisions amongst them, that are divided from the Church of Rome.
These, if not timely cured and removed, will certainly bring confusion amongst
us, and then will that old Enemy enter in the smoke and darkness of that
confusion. I wonder to see how little regard, how little value many men have
for the preservation of peace amongst us. I wonder to see what little
exceptions, what groundless cavils are made pretenses to separate from us.
Certain it is, that these men are infinitely wanting either in knowledge, or
sincerity. If they do not understand, that the peace of the Church is a thing
of most important value for the preservation of Faith, and love, and the very
essence of Christianity; if they do not understand how weak and trifling all
their Arguments against us are, and that it is next to an impossibility to find
a Church against which nothing shall be objected: if they do not understand all
these things, they are guilty of very great ignorance; but if they do
understand these things, and yet persist in separation, they are guilty of
equal insincerity.

The duty of every good Christian in these distractions and divisions, that so
much trouble the Christian World, is to put up constant prayers to God, and
also to use his best endeavors for the peace of the whole Church of Christ.
They are short sighted in Christianity, and very mean and narrow spirited, that
mind or study peace no further than concerns a particular Congregation, nay the
Church of any particular Nation. Christ has a care of his whole body, and
requires an unity and communion not only of the particular Members of any
Church, but of all particular Churches also. These make up the Catholic
Church, and the Catholic Church is Christ's body. There is one body and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith,
one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.

There is, says he, one body, one universal Church, the unity and the peace
whereof he recommends unto our study. Now therefore study the peace and unity
of this Church as much as possibly lies in you; adorn it by your Faith and
Piety, labor its purity and its peace. For to this end did Christ our Lord
give himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it might be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

The Sixth Sermon.
1 Cor. 14.15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray
with the understanding also.


OUR Blessed Lord having a while before his death promised his Apostles another
comforter who should for ever abide with them. John, 14.16. that is to say, the
spirit of truth to lead them into all truth, renews this promise again unto
them a little before his ascension into Heaven, Act. 14. and commands not to
depart from Jerusalem, but there to wait for the promise of the Father; And
long it was not before this promise was fulfilled, and that in a very signal
manner, for when they were assembled together on the day of Pentecost, suddenly
there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all
the house where they were sitting; and there appeared unto them cloven tongues,
like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them
utterance, Acts 2.2, 3, 4. which same Spirit also then endued them with all
other kinds of gifts and powers requisite for the infallible preaching, and
sure confirmation of the Gospel. And as these miraculous gifts and powers were
now bestowed upon the Apostles; so afterward on great numbers of other
Christians. First on those that were Jews by birth, as you may see, Act. 4.3.
and 8.17. and afterward on the Gentiles also, as it appears from what we read
Act. 10.44.

Then came it to pass that all the Churches wherein the Faith of Christ was
planted, much abounded with such persons as had the miraculous gifts of the
Spirit; but no where were there more of these than in the famous Church of
Corinth, which as it was zealous of these gifts (1 Cor. 14.12) so had it a
plentiful measure of them, as plainly appears from the 13 Chapter of this
Epistle.

Upon this account the Apostle directs them in this Chapter how they should use
these spiritual gifts, Namely, for the edifying of the Church: so you read
verse. 12. for as much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye way
excel to the edifying of the Church, and because the Church could not be
edified by any thing uttered in an unknown tongue, unless interpreted in one
that was known, he adds as follows verse. 13, 14. wherefore let him that
speaks in an unknown tongue; pray that he may interpret; for if I pray in an
unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful, that is,
my spiritual gift is exercised, but my understanding is not exercised, so as to
render what I say intelligible and useful to other persons; which being so, he
puts this question, what is it then? that is to say, what is the most
desirable thing? what should we desire in point of Prayer? to which he answers
in these words, I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also. That is, the thing to be desired is, that when the Spirit
suggests and dictates a prayer to any man (as he did to many in those ages by
an immediate inspiration) he my so far use his own understanding, when he prays
in a public congregation, as to utter the prayer in a known tongue, and in
easy and intelligible expressions, that others may be edified by it.

Now from these words compared with other places of Scripture, I shall take
occasion to observe, That there were two ways of praying by the Spirit in the
first Age of Christianity.

1. The first of these was extraordinary, as when the Spirit dictated a prayer
by an immediate Inspiration.

2. The other ordinary, as when a man prayed heartily and fervently, but not by
immediate Inspiration; but in the use of Faith and Hope, and all such other
Christian Graces, as are the fruits of the holy Spirit, and the causes of holy
and good affection.

1. The former of these, that is, the extraordinary gift of prayer seems to
have been of two kinds likewise.

1. In the former whereof the understanding of him that prayed seems to have
been wholly passive, so far as not to have employed it self, either in the
inventing of the conceptions of the prayer, or in the uttering those
conceptions in a tongue commonly understood. Such was the prayer the Apostle
mentions verf. 14. of this Chapter, If I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit
prays (that is, the spiritual gift that is in me) but my understanding is
unfruitful, that is to say, my understanding does not employ and exercise it
self to express the conceptions of this prayer in a tongue or manner known to
all them that hear me.

2. In the latter kind of this extraordinary gift of prayer, (prayer by
immediate Inspiration) the understanding of him that prayed seems to have been
passive and active likewise; passive so far, as to have received all the
conceptions of the prayer from the immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost:
active so far, as to have employed and exercised it self to express and utter
those conceptions in a tongue unknown to them that heard and in a familiar
easy manner. And such was the prayer the Apostle mentions in these words: I
will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. I will
utter the very same conceptions, which the holy Spirit suggests to me; but I
will use my understanding to utter them in a known tongue and in easy and
familiar expressions.

Concerning both these several ways, I have something to observe unto you:

1. Concerning the first, wherein the understanding was wholly passive, wherein
a man used both the gift of tongues, and received the conceptions of the prayer
from an immediate Inspiration, I observe the Apostle did not allow the use of
this in Christian Assemblies, unless that either the person that prayed, or
else some persons present had the gift of interpreting what was said. The
ground of which his determination was, that nothing was to be spoken in the
Church, but what might edify all that were present, even the most illiterate
persons, and that such as these could not be edified by that which was uttered
in an unknown tongue, though dictated by the holy Spirit, unless it was
afterward interpreted. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also, i. e. so, that others may understand. And so should every
man pray in the Church, else, says the Apostle, when thou shall bless with the
spirit, how should he that occupies the room of the unlearned (how should a
vulgar illiterate person) say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say. For thou verily give thanks well, but the
other is not edified, ver. 16, 17. So then the Apostles judgment is this, That
no office is to be performed in the Church, but so, that all may be edified by
it, that no man is edified by that which he does not understand; and therefore
that an unknown tongue was not to be used in the offices of the Church, unless
there were some that could interpret. So he suggests at the 18, 19 verses: I
thank God I speak with tongues more than you all, yet in the Church I had
rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach
others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. So he more expressly
concludes verse. 27, 28. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by
two, or at the most by three, and that by course, and let one interpret. But if
there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church.

Now here I cannot but observe the most insufferable contradiction of the
practice of the Roman Church to the Apostles determination. The Apostles, you
see, would not allow that the prayers of the Church should be uttered in an
unknown tongue, but there they pray in a tongue unknown unto the people. The
Apostle would not allow this, no not in them who spoke by immediate Inspiration
they practice contrary to the Apostles express Decree, and that where no such
Inspiration can be pretended with the least appearance and show of reason The
Apostle supposes no man edified by the prayers which he does not understand,
they either judge that a man may be edified by such prayers, or that they may
be duly used, although the Church be not edified by them; both which expressly
contradict the Apostle. If the Church of Rome be in the right, then the Apostle
is mistaken: if the Apostle be not mistaken, the Church of Rome does grossly
err in judging such prayers edify, which St. Paul affirms cannot edify, or
in judging them fit to be used in the Church, although they do not edify at
all.

And is it not now a wonderful thing, that they who so grossly so expressly
contradict the Doctrine of Sr. Paul, should boast themselves to be infallible?
Is it not yet a greater wonder, that any who have had the education, where the
Scriptures are read in a known tongue, should suffer themselves to be overborn
into a belief that they are infallible, who err in so plain and clear an
instance, and in a thing of such concernment?

Certainly, if men were not infatuated by most unreasonable lusts and passions,
they would never apostatize, never adhere to such a Church as sound, nay
infallible in all her Doctrines, who uses its public Prayers and Offices in a
tongue unknown unto the people, a thing so contrary to common sense, and to the
practice of primitive times, and to what the Apostle himself teaches in as
full, and clear, and express words, as any thing possibly can be spoken.

2. But to proceed to the second kind of the extraordinary gift of prayer,
which was when a man received all the conceptions in prayer from an immediate
Inspiration; but so far used his understanding, as to contrive the expression
of them into a tongue known to them that heard him, and into plain and easy
expressions in that tongue. Concerning this I must observe, that it was a gift
of the Holy Ghost peculiar to the Apostles times, or at least to those that
immediately followed, as the rest of those miraculous powers and gifts were,
which God did then bestow on the Church to confirm the truth, of Christianity.
I do not deny but that God does still in some cases suggest to the minds of
good men that is convenient for their condition, and what it is they should
pray for. I do not deny, but that when they fall into such straits, as that
they know not what it is best to pray for, God does direct and guide their
minds by the assistance of his Spirit* For as there is need of such assistance
in such cases, so God denies not what is needful to such persons. And this is
the meaning of the Apostle, Romans 8.26. Likewise also the Spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to. pray for as we ought. He speaks in this
place of times of great distress and danger, when the Christians were often in
such perplexities and doubts of mind, that they knew not what to pray for, at
least with faith and resignation, entire resignation to Gods will. Now here it
was, that the Spirit of God directed them to pray for such things, and in such
a manner as might tend effectually to Gods glory, though to their sufferings in
the world. And thus far I doubt not may we expect the like assistance of Gods
Spirit in the like cases, if we heartily pray for it. But now for any man in
these days to expect an immediate Inspiration of all the conceptions of a
prayer, such as the Apostles arid Prophets had in the primitive times of
Christianity, for any man to pretend to pray by the same immediate Revelation,
Whereby they prayed in the Christian Churches, is a very groundless and great
presumption. And therefore when you hear men pray with a great torrent and flow
of words, you are not presently to. imagine (as diverse ignorant persons do)
that such a man prays by an immediate Inspiration, that what he speaks is just
then dictated and suggested by the Holy Ghost, as things were suggested to the
Apostles, unless he could also speak with tongues, and heal the sick, and cure
the lame, and in a word do such Miracles as they did, and give the same proof
of his Inspiration, which they did evidently give of theirs: which is a thing
that is not done by any that now pretend unto it, and therefore shows the
pretense is vain, and the Pretender to be deceived, if not a cheat, and
Impostor likewise.

Is there then no way in these days, whereby a man may truly be said to pray by
the Spirit, in the sense and language of the Scriptures, and that in ordinary
and common cases? Yes, that there is. For,

2. Such is that other way of praying, which I have before mentioned to you,
which is, when a man prays in the use of Faith and Hope, and all the Graces of
Gods Spirit, and with such pious and good affections, as are the effects of
those Graces, though not by immediate Inspiration, that is to say, the
immediate dictate of the Spirit. Such is the prayer our Savior supposes in
those words, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship
him in spirit and in truth, not carelessly and without attention, not without
the affections of the heart and inward sense of the mind and spirit, as the
Jews had worshipped him in former Ages; but fervently, heartily, and sincerely.
Such is the prayer the Apostle mentions Ephesians. 6.18. where he requires them to
pray always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit: that is, with
spiritual and holy minds, with fervent and devout affections. Like whereunto
was that singing also, which he represents in these words, Speaking to your
selves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in
your hearts, Ephesians. 5.19. Where you plainly see, that the holy offices, wherein
the heart was moved and affected, are said to be spiritual on that account. See
also Col. 3.16. Now concerning this way of praying by the Spirit, wherein men
pray in the use of Faith, and with real, and hearty, and devout affections,
though not by immediate Inspiration, I shall observe several things.

1. That this way or manner of praying is grateful and acceptable to God. This
is in truth such a worship of God as our Savior himself did understand, when
he said, that they that worship God must worship him in spirit and truth. This
is the worship that God requires, and therefore this he accepts also. This is
really prayer in Faith, in belief of the promises God has made, and certainly
God accepts such prayer. This is a prayer put up to God with devour, and
humble, and holy affections (for so I state the nature of it) and such was that
the Apostle required, Ephesians. 6.18. and therefore supposed to be grateful to God,
and so will every one believe, who knows that the heart is in such prayer, and
that it is the heart which God requires. And to say no more, such prayer as
this, although it does not proceed from an immediate Inspiration, a present
dictate of the holy Spirit; yet is it the mediate effect of the Spirit, as
being the effect of that Faith, that Hope, that Love, and Charity, and
Humility, which is the fruit of the Spirit of God. It is the fruit of these
Graces (and.whatsoever else is of the same nature) and these are the fruits of
the Spirit of God, Gol. 5.22, 23.

2. The second thing which I must observe concerning this way of praying by the
Spirit is, that it is applicable to a form of prayer, The words of Scripture
are a form of words, and will any men say that he cannot read, or hear those
words read unto him, and heartily believe what he hears, or reads, and be as
heartily affected with it? If he cannot do this, let him confess that he does
not believe the Word of God when he hears it read, and that he is nothing
affected with is; but if he will not confess this, let him confess that faith
and zeal; faith, and pious, and holy affections may be applied to a form of
words, and consequently to a form of prayer.

2. Most of those persons who disallow a form of Prayer and thanksgiving to
God, allow and practice a certain form in singing Psalms, and what are such
Psalms but certain forms of Praying and rendering thanks to God? and if men can
heartily pray to God in verse or meeter, why not in prose as well as in verse?

3. All the Protestant Churches of other Nations, all the Christians Churches
in the World, have set forms for their public Offices, and so has the whole
Church had for fourteen hundred Years at least; and therefore certainly it was,
and is the sense of the universal Church, not only that it was very lawful, but
most expedient and useful also, that the public Offices of the Church, should
be performed in a set form; and that men might pray in a set form, and pray by
the spirit at the same time, that is to say, in Faith, and Hope, and with holy,
and devout affections.

4. Add hereunto that there are diverse forms of Prayer expressly prescribed in
the holy Scripture, a form of benediction, whereby the Priest was to bless the
People, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. a form for the offering of the First Fruits,
Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6. etc. That David composed many of the psalms (as the titles of
them expressly show) to be used as public forms of Prayer in the solemn worship
of God in the Temple. That our Savior himself gave that, which is called the
Lords Prayer, as a form of Prayer to his Disciples, according to the custom of
the Jewish Doctors, and John the Baptist, who did the like for their Disciples.
Now had it not been a possible thing for men to use a form of Prayer with faith
and zeal, and holy affections (as every man always ought to pray) we should
have had no forms of Prayer expressly prescribed in the holy Scripture,

5. And to conclude the present point, were not faith, and zeal, and devout
affections applicable to a form of Prayer, no man could heartily join in a
Prayer, which he hears uttered by another person, for all such prayers,
whatsoever they be to him that speaks, are certain forms to them that hear
them; to them they as are limited forms when they are spoken, as if they had
been printed, and read; for the words are still the very same, and all the
sense contained in them. And so I conclude the second observation, that is,
that a man may pray by the spirit, that is, in Faith and holy Zeal, and pray by
a Form at the same time.

3 I must further observe unto you, that as the way of Praying by the Spirit is
applicable to a form of Prayer, so that it ought in very truth to be applied to
every Prayer we make to God, whether it be with, or without a form; God hears
no Prayers, accepts no service offered to him, where there is no attention of
mind, no Zeal, and Affection in the heart. It is a great neglect of God, a
dangerous irreverence to our Maker not to attend to what we speak, or what is
spoken in our name, when we make our addresses to him by Prayer: does any man
speak unto a Prince, not minding what he speaks unto him? does any man make an
address to a King without giving heed to his own address? and if we judge it a
great irreverence to speak to a Prince without attending to what we speak, what
shall we judge of that affront men do to God, when they atend not to those
Prayers, which they themselves offer to God, or are offered by others in their
names, in their presence and behalf?

And then for Faith, and Zeal, and Fervor, these are the very life of Prayer,
Prayer is but sound and noise without them. Men may pray, and pray acceptably,
where they do not utter express words, Romans 8.26. but the most excellent words
in the World are not true and real Prayer, where there is nothing of desire,
nothing of affection added to them; Confess your faults one to another, faith
S. James, cap. 5.16. and pray one for another that ye may be healed. The
effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avai leth much. It Is the fervent
Prayer that is effectual, the effectual Prayer that is useful to us; and who
can wonder that God should not hear those Petitions, which are void of
affection, and desire? if we our selves neglect our Prayers, those very Prayers
we seem to make, how much more will God neglect them? why should he grant what
we our selves do not desire? especially since it is an affront, a mocking of
God, to ask of him what in truth we do not really desire, what we have no mind
to receive from him; which is indeed the very case, when our Prayers have
nothing of attention, nothing of zeal and affection, in them. What then shall
we say to all that coldness, all that remisness which appears in our public
and solemn worship of God? By this we lose those spiritual joys, those sensible
warmths and feeling comforts, which always attend fervent Prayer, and tend to
the strengthening of Faith and Hope and all other Virtues and Christian Graces.
By this we fail of Gods acceptance, and of gaining the things we ask of him. By
this we give scandal to other persons, who take occasion from our remissness
and want of zeal in our addresses unto God, either to refuse to join with us,
or despise the worship of God in General.

See then how highly we are concerned to awake into a sense of God, to stir up
our selves to a greater exercise of Faith, and Zeal, and holy affections in all
our addresses unto God. Think who it is, in whom you live, in whom you move,
and have your beings; think who it is, who is the donor of all good things
relating to this, or a better life; think of your own daily wants, and of the
numerous harms and dangers, the many temptations and seductions, you are every
day exposed unto; and think how justly God may expose and give you up, either
to those dangers or temptations; unless you constantly apply unto him by
fervent Prayers and Supplications for his protection and assistance, for his
good Spirit to guide and help you, to enlighten your minds, to cleanse your
hearts, to purge your affections, to order your ways, and so to conduct you to
Life Eternal.

The Seventh Sermon.
1 John 3.3. And every man that has his hope in him, purifieth himself even as
he is pure.


THE Apostles speaking to such persons as labored under many trials and great
indignities in the world, are always wont to put them in mind of two things,
first of love of God to them under their sufferings and persecutions, and then
that these very persecutions are a signification of this love. So this Apostle
begins this Chapter: Behold, says he, what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: Therefore the world
knows us not, because it knew him not. And lest he should seem to impose upon
them by mere words, to court them with an empty title, while he says they were
called the sons of God; he further adds, that they were really and truly so;
for so he proceeds in the second verse, Beloved, now are we the sons of God.
And that they might further understand the great advantage of this relation, he
adds to this, as it there follows, and it does not yet appear what we shall be;
but we know that when he shall appear (or as some others read the words) when
it shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, we shall
enjoy him in that Glory wherein he appears in Heaven it self to those that are
admitted thither. We shall see him not through a glass darkly, but we shall see
him face to face. From whence it follows, that we shall be like him both in
purity and immortality, seeing that none that are not so, can possibly so enjoy
or see him.

And then that the promise of this Glory might prove effectual for its end, by
moving every man to imitate him in this world, whom he hopes to enjoy in that
to come, to purify himself.as God is pure; he lets them know the mighty power
of the very hope of enjoying God in immortal Glory in order to a holy life. And
every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure. Where I
shall not need to put you in mind that these words, purifieth himself as he is
pure, design and express an imitation, not an equality of Gods holiness and
perfection: the latter of these is wholly impossible to every creature, the
former necessary for every person that seriously aims at immortality. Nor shall
I stand to divide the Words into any small minute parts, lest by insisting upon
them, I should, as it happens in such cases, lose or obscure the sense of the
whole, and trifle away the design of them.

And therefore omitting useless care and curiosity, I shall consider,

1. The nature of this Hope, which is said to purify them that have it.

2. And then secondly, the several ways whereby it has this effect upon them.

3. To which I shall add some considerations as consequences of the words
before us, and the discourse I shall make upon them.

1. And first of all it will be requisite to observe the nature of this Hope;
which purifies men as God is pure, seeing there are some kinds of hope, and
those of future bliss and happiness that have no such influence upon men, as to
purge and cleanse them from their lusts, but rather to move them to indulge
them. We plainly find there are great numbers, who profess the hope of future
Glory, we have no reason to imagine but that they really hope for it according
to their own profession, and yet experience clearly shows, that it has not
this effect upon them, which the Apostle here describes, they still continue in
their sins. From whence it appears this hope of theirs is not that which is
here designed, it wants the efficacy and success, and therefore also the nature
of it.

What then is the hope, which our Apostle here designs? A firm expectation of
gaining that happiness which God has promised, consisting in Purity and
Immortality, upon the terms whereupon it is promised, and by the assistance of
his Grace, which he will not deny them that ask it. This is styled a hope
(...), for the words in him respect not the person possessed with, but God upon
whom it is fixed and settled; a hope deficient in any of these will not purify
them that have it. A hope that is not so deficient must of necessity be thus
qualified.

1. It must be an expectation of that happiness which God has promised,

2. It must be an expectation of it upon the terms whereupon it is promised.

3. It must be a firm, and not a wavering expectation.

4. It must be a firm expectation of it, that is to say, of attaining to it by
the assistance of Gods Grace, and not by the power or strength of Nature. This
is the nature, these the conditions of that hope that purges the hearts, and
reforms the lives, and consequently saves the souls of men; no other kind of
hope will do it.

1. It must be an expectation of that very happiness God has promised,
consisting in the enjoyment of God in perfect purity and immortality. The hope
of a carnal sensual Paradise would never purge and cleanse the spirit, but on
the contrary defile and stain it. For although it be very true indeed, that a
man may possibly deny himself one sensual pleasure in the expectation of
another, greater than that he foregoes at present; yet is it a thing wholly
impossible, that the hope of any sensual happiness should any way mortify
sensuality. He that makes any sensual pleasure the very end and design of life,
and hopes for this as for his happiness, can never by virtue of this hope study
to mortify and subdue sensual appetites and inclinations: from whence it
appears, that that hope which shall deliver and purge the soul from sensual and
corrupt desires, must be a hope of such a happiness as God has promised,
namely the fruition of God himself in purity as well as immortality.

2. Nor is it sufficient for this end, that it be a hope of the very happiness
God has promised, unless it expect that happiness upon those terms and no
other, whereupon it is promised in tha Gospel; and those are faith working by
love, those are, as God himself declares, to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the world. Whence that of
the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 12. verse. 14. Follow peace with all men and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. he that hopes for happiness
without these terms, cannot by virtue of that hope be any way moved to practice
these; so far is such a hope as that, from moving men unto their duties, that
it gives them the very greatest encouragement to live in the perfect neglect of
them. What need they to deny themselves, and their vicious appetite and
desires? What need they to offer any violence to their sinful lusts and
inclinations? Why should they part with a right hand, why should they pluck out
a right eye, forego the pleasure, lose the profit of any lust, if they can hope
for eternal Glory in the fruition of their lusts, and reconcile the hopes of
Heaven with all the desires of flesh and blood, and soft indulgence to those
desires? From whence I conclude, that that hope, which purges the hearts and
lives of men, must be a hope of that happiness that God has promised upon
those terms, and those only, whereupon it is promised in the Gospel.

3. And yet further we must observe, that it is only a firm assurance of
arriving at that eternal happinefs upon the performance of those terms, that
shall enable us to perform them. Conjecture is too weak a thing to overcome
those strong temptations, that dare men into sin and folly. No man will deny
himself what he feels to gratify his sensual appetites at the present, upon
mere guess of what may possibly be hereafter. Strong desires are not subdued by
weak hopes. Men will not deny their present ease, their present pleasures,
their present joys, though never so contrary to the Gospel, upon mere
probabilities and peradventures; they will be sure of something future, before
they part with what they have; they will be sure of something better, before
they forsake what they feel or apprehend to be good and useful at the present.
And it was want of this assurance in the Philosophy of former days that made
its Precepts and Institutions so ineffectual in the World, and so Lactantius
then observed. Omnia ibi conjecturis aguntur, and ideo nemo paret, quia nemo
vult in incertum laborare. Philosophy affords but mere conjecture in the point
of suture life and happiness, and therefore no man observes its precepts,
because no man will labor at all adventures. From whence I conclude, that that
hope which shall effectually persuade with men to obey the Precepts of our
Lord, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, must be a
firm and strong assurance of gaining the happiness God has promised upon the
terms that he requires, sincere obedience to his Precepts.

4. But now because it is impossible for flesh and blood in this degenerate
state of man, and in the midst of these temptations, which daily assault him in
this state, sincerely to obey those Precepts without the assistance of Gods
Spirit; there is yet a further qualification that is required in that hope
which shall enable us so to do, which is, that it wholly grounds it self upon
the promise of Gods grace, and moves a man to apply to God for the assistance
and help thereof in the purifying of his heart and life. Nature will never
raise it self to a supernatural state of life, or to a supernatural end. Man is
of the earth earthy, and in no capacity so to elevate his own thoughts, so to
advance his own desires, as to prepare and fit himself for that happiness which
lies in likeness to God himself, in perfect purity and incorruption, without
the assistance of Gods grace. And therefore that hope must of necessity be
successless, must fail to cleanse and purge our hearts, to purify us as God is
pure, which shall not be so far instructed as to teach us to apply to God for
the assistance of his Spirit in a work above the power of Nature.

But now (to recollect the sum of what I have said upon this point) that hope
which fixes on that happiness which God has promised in the Gospel, consisting
in purity and immortality; which is a hope of this happiness upon those terms,
and those only, whereupon it is there promised to us; which is a firm and full
assurance of that happiness upon the performance of those terms; which grounds
it self upon the assistance of Gods Spirit in that performance (and therefore
moves to apply to God by fervent prayer for the attaining of that assistance,
which is never denied when so desired) that is the hope the Apostle intends in
these words, that is, the hope that purifies us as God is pure. Which leads me
to the second general.

2. Where I am to show the several ways, whereby it has these effects upon us,
and these I refer to two particulars.

1. This hope moves and excites to strong endeavors in order unto this end,
namely the purifying of our selves.

2. It is of such a nature as cannot but render those endeavors truly
effectual unto that end.

1. It moves to strong endeavors in order unto this great design which is the
purifying of our selves from all our inordinate lusts and passions; and the
reason is, because it has firmly fixed the soul upon future glory and
immortality, as its only happiness and perfection, the only thing that is fit
or worthy to be made the end and design of life, and also fixed and settled this
as a most sure and certain truth, that the purifying of a man's heart and life,
according to the Laws of Christ, is the only and certain way of attaining to
that bliss and happiness. God has made us all of such a nature, that we cannot
forbear to love our selves, nor can that creature forbear to desire his own
happiness, that cannot forbear to love himself; nor can the desires of that
enjoyment, wherein a man has placed his happiness, cease to urge and press
endeavors in order to the attainment of it.

Suppose we then that a man believe that true happiness lies in the purity and
immortality, that God has promised in his Kingdom; suppose he believe that a
holy life is the only means to attain this happiness; suppose these things
fixed and settled upon his heart by the operation of Gods Spirit; can we imagine
but that the hope of such an end should most effectually excite and move him to
purify himself as God is pure?

Will he not be content to resist his sinful lusts and appetites, subdue his
inordinate inclinations, in consideration of such a happiness? Will he not be
content to deny himself all the unlawful joys and pleasures, all the poor and
mean advantages that any sin can offer to him in the steadfast view and hope of
it?

Will he think any loss or disadvantage that a holy life can bring upon him, to
be compared with the loss of it? Will he think it much to suffer the loss of
wealth, or honor, or life it self, rather than that of eternal glory, if he
cannot retain the possession of one without plain forfeiture of all his title
to the other? If he must abandon one of these, can he doubt whether he shall
reject? and that under full and clear conviction wrought by the very grace of
God (which we suppose in this hope) that he cannot retain them both together? I
may boldly say, supposing the things I have supposed in this hope, he can no
more refuse to do, or yet suffer whatsoever can be proposed unto him in this
life, rather than forfeit that to come, than he can put off humane nature, than
he can cease to be a man, and forbear to desire his own happiness. The stable
hopes of Eternal Glory, of the fruition of Gods presence in perfect purity and
immortality, will recommend that purity to him as an essential part of
happiness and felicity; it will also teach him to do and suffer whatsoever is
requisite to obtain so great a happiness and felicity. Thus Moses esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.26,

So Christ himself for that joy that was set before him endured the Cross
despising the shame, Heb. 12.2. So did S. Stephen part with his life in view of
the glory which he saw, Acts 7.6 and that with such content and charity, that
he prayed for the very men that stoned him, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge. So did the rest of Christ's followers in the Primitive Ages of
Christianity rather choose to part with their very lives, as well as their other
advantages in the World, than with their title to future Glory. They all judged
as S. Paul did, the suffering of this present time were not worthy to be
compared with the Glory that should be revealed in them, Romans 8.18. which is a
sufficient demonstration what strong endeavors, to do and suffer the will of
God, and that in very greatest trials, flow from the firm and stable hopes of
future bliss and immortality.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that the nature of that hope is such, as
that it does not only move to such endeavors, but likewise carries that in it
which cannot but render them efficacious in the subduing every lust, in the
producing of every grace, in the accomplishing every thing requisite unto Life
Eternal.

For besides, that the hope I have described is always quickened and encouraged
by the operation of Gods Spirit, which makes it powerful for the purifying of
men's hearts and lives; it takes the very force and sting out of all the
temptations of this World, whether they lie in the good or evil, in the hopes
or fears of things below.

1. It destroys the force of those temptations, that arise from wealth, and
power, and honor, from sensual pleasures, and satisfactions, by raising the
thoughts and desires of men, and transferring them to the things above. So it
subdues those Capital Lusts, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
pride of life, Sensuality, Avarice, and Ambition, and all the spawn of these
Vices, Fraud, Oppression, and Revenge, Envy, Malice, and Animosity. So it
begets the Graces contrary to all these Vices, Charity, Purity, and Humility.
For no man that has placed his hope upon Eternal Life and Glory as his only
happiness and felicity, as his supreme and sovereign good, can so esteem the
perishing pleasures, the fading profits of this World, as to envy those that
abound in them, or despise those that have them not; much less to deceive, or
to oppress, to lie, or flatter, or dissemble, to defame, or reproach his
Neighbor, to do an injury, or deny a favor to attain them. And hence it is
that this hope makes men plain, and simple hearted, makes them merciful, kind,
and gentle, makes them pure and heavenly minded. It elevates the mind, raises
the thoughts, inlarges the heart, alters the frame of man's nature, and makes
him imitate that God, in whom he has settled all his trust, and in conformity
to whose likeness with the enjoyment of his presence, he has placed all his
joy and happiness. And thus does the hope of this happiness raise him above the
force and power of those temptations, that the profits or pleasures of this
world can offer or suggest unto him.

2. Nor is it any thing less effectual in securing him from the loss of
innocence by those that arise from the evils of it, reproach or poverty, or
death it self, or any of those many calamities which may assault him in the
world. He knows these things cannot deprive him of that glory, wherein he has
placed all his happiness; he knows they will shortly have an end: in the mean
time he is content rather to suffer all the evils that the present world can
bring upon him, than the loss of the hope of life eternal. This hope gives him
strength and courage, it gives him patience and resignation to his will, from
whom he expects eternal glory, and an increase of that glory, as a reward for
all his patience and perseverance in well doing under all his sufferings in the
world. Besides, that God never fails to bless and streng^^^n those persons that
patiently suffer his will with the joys and comforts of his Spirit; as the
Apostle himself assures us, Romans 5.2, 3, and following verses, We rejoice in
the hope of the glory of God, and not so only, but we glory in tribulations
also, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience, experience, and
experience hope and hope makes not ashamed; because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

The sum is this, the stable hope of eternal glory in the fruition of God
himself in perfect purity and immortality, renders the man possessed with it,
so indifferent to this world, as to pursue and to enjoy the good of it with
great sobriety and moderation, without sensuality, fraud, or injury, without
animosity, pride, or envy, with purity, gentleness, and Christian charity. It
renders him so indifferent to it, as to endure the evil of it with constancy,
patience, and perseverance, in all simplicity and integrity. By these he is so
endeared to God, that as he before gave him the assistance of his Spirit, so he
gives him now the joys thereof in the testimony of his love to him; which love
still further excites a mutual have to God, and also to men for his sal^^^ and
by these means further improves all his graces, and purifies him as God is
pure; which is the second of those generals which I propounded to consider.

And now to conclude with some reflections upon the words.

1. If every man that has this hope, purify himself as God is pure, then
first of all hence it appears, that whosoever does not this, whosoever indulges
his sinful lusts, has not really that hope, as it has been described unto
you, he either hopes for nothing at all after this life, or for another kind of
happiness than that is, which God has promised, or to gain it without a holy
life, or so to live without the assistance of Gods grace and application to God
for it, or he reels and staggers in his hope, and is not firm and stable in it.
Some or other of these defects do always attend that hope, which does not
purify and reform the lives, and hearts, and spirits of men; and that which I
take to be the general and great defect in those that profess the Christian
Faith is, that they hope for life eternal without performing those conditions,
whereupon it is promised in the Gospel, namely, repentance and reformation.

Although there be scarce one single page in the whole Gospel, wherein it is
not expressly said, or clearly implied, that no man shall ever be admitted into
eternal bliss and glory, who does not yield sincere obedience to Christ's
precepts, and purify himself as God is pure; yet will they not see what is
most visible, they will not believe what is revealed, they will trust to a
fruitless, liveless Faith, or to some Penances, and Satisfactions, and
Commutations made with God, doing what he has not required instead of what he
has commanded. No persuasions shall prevail to move and excite them to do
this, no reasons, arguments, or demonstration, no not the express words of God,
that it is necessary to be done; or to forbear to censure them as enemies to
the grace of God, who do with clear and express Scripture show the absolute
necessity of it. They blindly and wilfully shut their eyes to the light that
shines as clear as day in the very Oracles of God himself, and so they stumble,
and fall, and perish, and brand, and revile all those persons, who refuse to
err and perish with them.

2. But secondly, if every man that has the hope before described, purify
himself as God is pure:

Hence we learn the great advantage the Gospel gives us for the purifying of
our hearts and lives. For it has given the firmest reasons to settle that very
hope upon, and qualify it with the very conditions which may make it useful
and efficacious to purge and cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit. The Gospel has promised eternal glory upon these conditions; and no
other; it has also promised the Spirit of God to them that ask it, to enable
them to yield sincere obedience to Christ's precepts, that is, to perform those
conditions. The Gospel has given firm foundations of that true and powerful
hope, which, where it is, never fails to purge the impure, to humble the proud,
to soften the hard, and bring them to eternal happiness.

3. But what then? what if the Gospel have done this? done it to infinite
satisfaction to all that believe and entertain it. Why then, take heed of
departing from the living God by an evil heart of unbelief. Take heed lest a
promise being left you of entering into eternal rest, any of you should come
short of it. Fix your hope on eternal glory, but hope not for it on other terms
than those whereupon it is promised to you, than in obedience to our Lord, than
in conformity to Gods image, than in mitation of that God of whom you expect
and hope for it. Fix and settle this kind of hope in the very bottom of your
hearts, and when you have done, use it in every part of your lives, and live by
the power and virtue of it. Ask its counsel in all the temptations that any
forbidden joys or pleasures, any unlawful gains or profits offer to you, and it
will confute and resist them all; it will not suffer you to embrace a trifle, a
shadow, a perishing vanity instead of eternal life and glory. Ask its counsel
in all the temptations whereby the dangers of the world may attempt your
innocence and integrity, and it will resist them also, and make you choose
rather to suffer the greatest evils in this life with patience, courage, and
perseverance in your duties, than lose your part in Gods Kingdom. It will
subdue and overcome all the inordinate desires and appetites of the fruitions
of this world. It will remove the fears and dreads of all its sufferings and
calamities. It will make you sober, just, and holy. It will make you wise, and
strong, and patient. It will establish you in obedience, and place and settle
you in that Kingdom, which is in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

The Eighth Sermon.
Galat. 5.13. Ye have been called unto liberty, only use not your liberty for
an occasion to the flesh.


ALthough the Law given by Moses was so heavy a yoke upon the Jews, that they
themselves, who were otherwise apt to glory in it, sometimes complained of the
burden of it, saying, What a weariness is it? Malach. 1.13. Yet were there some
of the very Gentiles, and these converted to Christianity, who were willing
enough to embrace that yoke, which the Jews themselves were not able to bear.
S. Paul had no sooner planted the Gospel amongst the Galatians, a Colony of
Gauls seated in Asia; but there arose some false Apostles amongst these
Converts to Christianity, who taught the necessity of Circumcision, pretending
they could not be saved without it, and so fuccessful was this attempt (as
strong pretenses use to be upon ignorant and unsettled minds) that the Galatians
began to waver, and yield themselves to the importunity of those that opposed
the Apostles Doctrine.

Upon this account he stirs them up to stand fast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ has made us free, and that they should not suffer themselves to be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage, v. 1. of this Chapter. And because
they might judge that Circumcision was less troublesome, and more needful than
the other Rites of Moses his Law, he assures them that they that submitted
themselves to that institution of the Law, left all the advantages of the
Gospel, Behold, I Paul say unto you, That if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing, v. 2. And this he proves in the next words. For I testify
again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to the whole Law:
that is to say, to all the rest of its ritual Precepts, and to the penal
Sanction it self in all its rigor and severity; and therefore no gainer by the
Gospel. And having showed in the following verses, what is the sum of
Christianity, namely, faith working by love; having persuaded them to persist
in the Faith, which he himself had taught them, having sharply censured the
false Apostles, who labored to pervert that Faith, he adds what you read in
verse. 13. For Brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not your
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. In which words we may observe these two
things.

1. An assertion of the liberty wherein the Gospel of Christ has placed us: Ye
have been called unto liberty. 2. A caution against the abuse of this liberty:
Only use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh.
1. The former of these, the liberty wherein the Gospel has placed us, might
be represented in more particulars than the time will allow me to consider; and
therefore I shall confine my self to those two special instance of it, which
are much considered in the Epistle.

1. Liberty from the numerous precepts, wherewith the Law perplexed the Jews in
things indifferent in themselves.

2. And then relaxation of the rigor of the penal Sanction of the Law.

1. The former instance of Christian Liberty is far greater, than is usually
taken notice of, as will appear, if we consider that there was scarce any one
instance of Life, and Action, Religious, Moral, Civil, or Natural, wherein the
Law given by Moses did not scrupulously charge and oblige the Conscience.

The Jewish Writers reckon six hundred and thirteen Precepts in Moses his Law,
most of which were mere restrictions of that liberty, which natural Religion,
nay which Christianity it self allows. It would tire your patience to hear a
Catalogue of all these positive institutions, and therefore I shall only remark
a few particulars in several kinds,

1. And first of all their solemn and public worship of God chiefly consisted
in gifts, and sacrifices, which they might not offer in any place, which they
should judge the most convenient, but at the place which God should choose,
which afterward proved to be Jerusalem. Every adult, or grown man, was here to
appear thrice in the year, and none to appear empty handed, none to make his
address to God without a sacrifice for acceptance; a burnt-offering, and a
peace offering, besides a sacrifice for expiation in the cases wherein the Law
required it; which cases were exceeding numerous. These sacrifices were to be
free from blemish, and these blemishes were very many, and so were the several
rules prescribed in offering, killing, and consuming every sacrifice made to
God, all which things rendered Gods service under the Law, a far more nice and
scrupulous thing than Christianity now makes it.

2. Next to the several rites of worship enjoined the Jews by Moses his Law, I
might instance in the scrupulous precepts, which much perplexed their moral
actions: for there were few moral duties, which were not nicely circumscribed,
and punctually determined in point of circumstance: The several dues of the
Priests, and Levites, their very Charities to the poor were so determined in
point of time, so circumstantiated in point of place, so scrupulously limited
and prescribed, as made it hard to avoid offense in the greatest heed and
observation; as will appear from several instances which I shall hereafter
mention to you.

3. Nor were they thus* perplexed and disciplined with abundance of nice and
scrupulous Laws in the worship of God, and morality only, but in all their
other affairs also.

1. They could not so much as build a house, but after a certain form and
manner, with Battlements added to the roof, Deuteronomy. 22.8. They might not dwell in
the house they had built (at least as they interpret Moses) without certain
Schedules of the Law affixed to the gates and parts of their doors, Deuteronomy. 6.9.
Their houses were subject to disease, that is to say, to the Plague of
Leprosy, as well as themselves to be pulled down, where they were not cured,
and in case of cure to be purged, and cleansed by diverse rites and expiations,
Levit. 14.

2. They were not without restraint of Law in the clothes wherewith they
covered themselves. They might not put on any garment of linen and woollen
wove together: they were to edge their clothes with fringes: they were (as
themselves expound the Law) to wear certain Schedules of the Law upon their
foreheads, and their arms, which are styled Phylacteries in the Gospel, Matt.
23.

3. Their meat, and the preparation of it were bounded with far more numerous
Laws than any thing which I have yet mentioned. It would be infinite to give an
account of the several kinds of living creatures, the flesh whereof were by the
Law judged unclean; and the blood and tallow of the clean, yea the flesh it
self in several cases, might not be eaten upon pain of death.

4. Nor was the preparation of their food any freer from the scruple of Law,
than their food it self. They might not join diverse kind of Creatures, as an Ox
and an Ass, in the same yoke: They might not set their Orchards or Vineyards
with diverse kind of plants together, nor eat of the fruit of the three first
years, nor of the fourth but at Jerusalem,

They were forbidden to sow their fields with several kinds, or sorts of seed;
nor might they either plow, or sow, either in the seventh, or fiftieth year.
They could not reap where they had sowed, nor gather the fruits where they had
planted without the observation of such rules, as were troublesome at least in
point of circumstance. A corner of the field, Olive-yard, and Vineyard was not
to be reaped, or gathered at all, but left behind them for the poor; they might
not glean where they did reap, or gather the fruits, either in their fields, or
their plantations. They might not stoop to take up any little quantity of what
might chanceably fall in gathering. If they had forgotten a sheaf of Corn, they
might not return again to fetch it, Such were the scruples which encumbered
them in their very Charities to the poor.

After they had gathered in their fruits, they might not apply them to their
use, before they had separated diverse portions for other uses. First a portion
to be carried up to the Temple, and there presented before the Altar; Then
another portion for the Priests, to be given to them in the Country, neither of
which was to be less than a sixtieth part of all their fruits by the Decree of
their wise men; Then a first Tithe to be given to the Levite; then another
Tithe two years together to be carried to Jerusalem (in kind, or value) and
there spent; and the third year given to the poor of the Land.

After all this, whenever they kneaded a mass of dough: a part must be
separated for the Priest: Whenever they killed of the herd, or flock, the
Priest was to have his share in that. It would be endless to reckon up all
particulars in this kind. The general account is thus stated by the Jews, the
Poor had nine several gifts allotted them by a standing Law, three in the
Field, four in the Vineyard, two in Plantations of other kinds, besides the
second Tithe every third year: the Levites had the Tithe of all the fruits that
were considerable; the Priests had four and twenty other dues, all but one at
the peoples charge, and of the dues that were so charged, one was the flesh of
the expiatory Sacrifices, and these Sacrifices were required for above fifty
kinds of sins.

But that, which I now insist upon, is not the greatness of the expense, which
the Law charged upon the Jews, but that all their Offices of Love and Charity
were so circumstantiated by the Law, that they, who had the best inclinations
to these duties in the general, must of necessity be much encumbered by the
circumstances which the Law required in the exact performance of them.

5. Add hereunto the numerous Rites prescribed to the Jews in the very culture
of their bodies, and that in the very minutest things. They could not so much
as cut their hair, or shave their beards but under the restraint and scruple of
Law, Levit. 19.27. They were not begotten, they were not born without a ritual
stain upon their parents; every woman that had brought forth a child was to
take a journey to Jerusalem to sacrifice for her purification; and the child it
self was to be redeemed with a certain price, if it were a son, and her
firstborn.

And now that I have mentioned Purification, what shall I say of the numerous
cases wherein the Jews were made unclean by the sentence and judgment of the
Law? What shall I say of the several Washings, the several Sacrifices,
sometimes required to purge and make them clean again? What shall I say of
their confinement, and separation from the Congregation, during the time they
were unclean? The Jews observe that there were eleven general Fountains (so
they style them) of pollution, and these generals were almost infinite in their
particular parts and branches. If a man had touched an unclean creature, or any
of the clean, which died of themselves; if he had touched a dead man's body, or
any thing else which that had touched; if he had an issue of blood in himself,
or had touched another that had such an issue, or any thing else, which he had
touched. In these and innumerable other cases he was by the Law pronounced
unclean, and being unclean, upon pain of death to purge himself, sometimes by
Sacrifice, sometimes by the water of separation, always by bathing himself in
water.

Time would fail me, if I should insist upon all the minute and scrupulous
Rites which the Law of Moses enjoined the Jews: and indeed I have said enough
already in order to my present purpose. For, as it appears from what I have
said, they could not legally worship God without abundance of nice observances,
wholly indifferent in themselves, but hard and troublesome in performance. They
could not discharge their moral offices toward men without most scrupulous
observations in point of circumstance of time and place, and other minute
considerations. They could not manage the least affairs, they could not do the
commonest things without the scruple of Law and Conscience: For they could not
build or inhabit their houses, they could not so much as cloth themselves,
they could not plow, nor sow, nor plant, they could not reap, or gather in
their fruits; they could not eat, or prepare their meat; they could scarce
discharge any one action, religious, moral, civil, or natural, but under the
check of a positive Law.

And that which is further to be observed is, that the most exact performance
of the letter of all these positive Laws might leave them vicious and immoral,
full of hypocrisy, pride, and malice, slaves to the world and their own lusts,
and that where it left them in this condition, it did neither improve them in
themselves, nor recommend them to Gods acceptance, much less procure eternal
life. Which plainly appears from the Scribes and Pharisees, who although the
most exact observers of all these ritual institutions, were most impure, and
foul within, and least acceptable unto God.

Yet after all it was not needless, and therefore no unreasonable thing, that a
people, amongst whom God himself in the first Ages of their Polity held the
place of a Civil Magistrate, a people prone unto Idolatry, and living among
idolatrous Nations, should be thus bound up by positive Laws in every instance
of life and action; that so whatsoever they saw or did, the commonest actions
in the world might put them in mind of the true God, and of his absolute
Sovereignty over them. Especially seeing that their bondage under this toilsom
Dispensation might better dispose them to embrace the easier state of
Christianity, when God should please to call them to it. S. Peter tells them,
that Moses his Law (meaning its positive institutions) was such a yoke as
neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, Act. 15.10. Christ tells us,
that his yoke is easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11.30. They were in bondage
under the elements of the world, Gal. 4.3. And as S. Paul himself styles them,
under weak and beggarly elements, v. 9. We are under a royal law, Jam. 2.8. We
are under the law of liberty, Jam. 1.25. a Law recommended by better promises,
a Law attended with greater helps, larger effusions of Gods Spirit, a Law that
requires little else, but what is immutably good in itself, a Law, that where
it proceeds further, rests in few and easy instances, in Baptism, and the
Lords Supper: these are the Sacraments of the Gospel; these are but two, and
both of them easy in practice, easy in sense and signification, and also
greatly useful to us both to oblige us to our duties, and to increase our
strength and comforts. Such is the liberty wherein the Gospel has placed the
professors of Christianity, a liberty from those numerous rights, those
scrupulous precepts and injunctions, which fettered and perplexed the Jews in
every instance of life, and action

2. Yet secondly there is a further liberty, wherein the Gospel has placed us
Christians, arising from the relaxation of the rigor of the penal Sanction,
which was added to the Law of Moses.

The Law, indeed, did not threaten death to every sin, but in some cases
allowed a sacrifice for expiation; but wheresoever it threatened death in
express words, it did not allow repentance it self as a condition of remission.

Add hereunto that the same Law did threaten death to abundance of several
kinds of sins (which the time will not suffer me to enumerate) whenever
committed against knowledge. So that whosoever had so sinned in any of those
numerous kinds, had no dispensation from the Law, no not upon repentance it
self, but was by the sentence of the Law, to die by God or the Magistrates hand.

It Is true indeed the Lawmakers did sometimes, that is, in some extraordinary
cases, dispense with the rigor of his own Law. An example whereof we have in
David, who although he was the supreme Magistrate (and therefore not to account
to men for his transgression of the Law) was liable to the hand of God, a
punishment threatened in the Law) for his sins in the matter of Vriah, yet was
not cut off by Gods hand, but pardoned upon his deep repentance. But this
pardon was not the Act of the Law it self, but the dispensation of the
Lawgiver. And so indeed were these promises, wherein the Prophets proclaimed
pardon, where the Law expressly death, as when they promised remission and
pardon to Idolaters themselves, if they would repent.

For such was the rigor of the Law, that whenever it threatened death, it did
not dispense with the guilty person, no not upon repentance it self, not upon
amendment, and reformation. This is the meaning of the Apostle, when he says,
that the Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. when he styled it the ministration of
condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.9. This is the reason, why having opposed it to the
Gospel, as the letter unto the Spirit, he further adds, that the letter
kills, but that the spirit gives life, verse. 6. of the same Chapter: this is
the reason, why Christ is said to have come in the flesh to deliver them, who
through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15.
For as the Law threatened death to very numerous kinds of sin: so it admitted no
expiation, no sacrifice, no repentance unto life, where it expressly threatened
death, and here was the rigor of the Law.

Now the Gospel, on the other hand, although it threaten Eternal Death to
obstinate, and impenitent sinners; yet it allows, and accepts repentance as a
condition of remission in all degrees and kinds of sin, wherein the Law did not
allow it as to the punishment it threatened. And this is the thing which S. Paul
suggests, Act. 13.38. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that
through this man (that is, through Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of
sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all those things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. There were numerous sins
from which the Law did not absolve the offending person. The Law did never
absolve, or justify, where a man had wittingly committed a sin, to which that
Law threatened excision, but left him without any promise of pardon to the
Sovereignty of the Lawmaker. Whereas the Gospel in express words admits
repentance and reformation as a condition of forgiveness in all those kinds and
degrees of sin: no sin so heinous in its nature, none so aggravated by
repetition, none so heightened by long continuance, whereunto the Gospel does
not expressly promise pardon upon the sinners return to God. Here is that grace
that pardons the sensual and impure upon their amendment and reformation: here
is that grace that pardons the violent and injurious upon repentance and
restitution. Here is that mercy that forgives the impious and profane, if
peradventure they shall reform and return to God by true repentance. A grace so
great and undeserved, that it is seldom mentioned in Scripture without
expressions of admiration. A grace so signal and so eminent, that when the
Apostle had described it in the fifth Chapter to the Romans, he found it
needful to spend the sixth in caution against the abuse of it. Not that the
liberty of the Gospel, either in this or the former instance, is really such in
its own nature, as that it gives any reasonable grounds for men to indulge
themselves in sin, but that they, being bribed by their own lusts, take
encouragement to do this, where none is given, that is (to use the Apostles
words) use the liberty, given in the Gospel, for an occasion to the flesh.

2. And so I pass to the second part, the caution which the Apostle gives
against the abuse of that liberty, which is allowed us in the Gospel.

Now as this consists in two instances, liberty from the numerous Rites, and
from the rigor of the penal Sanction of Moses his Law; so was there something
of abuse of both these parts of Christian liberty in the primitive Ages of
Christianity.

1. For first (as to the former instances) some there were, who being
acquainted with their liberty from the Rites and Injunctions of the Law earlier
than many others were, used the liberty of their consciences to ensnare the
consciences of other men, scorned and censured them as weak and ignorant, and
by their censures and examples engaged them in the neglect of some Laws
relating to certain days and meats, before they understood their liberty, or
had due time to understand it. And this abuse of Christain liberty is censured
in S. Paul's writings both to the Romans and Corinthians.

2. Others, observing that S. Paul denied the necessity, nay in some cases
forbad the use of the works of the Law (that is, of the Rites before mentioned)
in order unto Justification, took liberty, as S. James suggests ( Jam. 3) to
absolve themselves from the works and graces of the Gospel, from justice,
mercy, and humility, from love, and patience, and veracity, from the
engagements and obligations not only of the Laws of Christ, but even of natural
Religion it self: An error, which to this very day so infects the Divinity of
many persons, that it is no wonder to see their Followers ever learning, but
never coming to the knowledge of the truth.

2. But to pass on to the second instance. The relaxation of that rigor, which
was in the penal Sanction of the Law, seems to have been no less abused than
liberty from its numerous Rites. For it should seem, that some persons
observing that the Gospel promised pardon, where the Law of Moses had denied
it, and judging that the grace of God was highly magnified by that pardon, took
leave to indulge themselves in sin, under pretense of magnifying Gods grace.
Which is the error St. Paul censures, Romans 6.12. What shall me say then? shall
we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. God offers no pardon but
to the penitent; the design of his grace in offering pardon to the penitent, is
to invite men to repentance; and therefore to use that grace as an
encouragement to impenitence, is to use it just against it self, contrary to
its own design, as well as against a man's own advantage.

How much of this unthankful folly may yet remain in the Christian world, I am
not able to determine; but sure I am, that there is something like unto it in
very general use amongst us, which is the delay of reformation grounded upon
the promise of pardon to every man that forsakes his sins, although he have
long continued in them, a great abuse of the grace of God. God promises pardon
to prevent despair, these abuse that promise to presumption: God admits
repentance after sin to encourage us to forsake our sins, these abuse his grace
in that instance to encourge them to continue in them, which is to contemn the
goodness of God, and despise the mercy they should adore. And so S. Paul
himself suggests, Romans 4.4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance?

Add hereunto the great imprudence of the delay of reformation, whatsoever may
be the occasion of it. For that a man, who is born to dye, and after death must
come to Judgment, should put off repentance till the morrow, when for ought he
knows he may dye to day, and eternally perish for want of it, is such an
imprudence and neglect, as that it would never have been believed that any man
could have been guilty of it, had it not been evident in experience.

The genuine use of that liberty, whereunto God has called us by the Gospel
is, to use the freedom that God has given us from the many and scrupulous Laws
of Moses, as a motive to a freer compliance with the excellent Precepts of the
Gospel; always remembering that these Precepts design our freedom, not our
bondage. Is it bondage to live in the faith and hope of a world to come? Is it
bondage to be just and temperate? Is it bondage to be kind and innocent? And to
be short, is it any bondage to love God with all our hearts, and to love our
Neighbor as our selves? that is to say, to do to others, as we would that they
should do to us. No, this is bondage, to serve our lusts, and to lose the
government of our selves, and the command of our own actions by their
unreasonable importunities. There is no such thraldom in the world as to be
denied the very liberty of pursuing that, which our own reason, our own
conscience approves as good, and avoiding that which it disallows. And this is
the liberty our lusts deny us; namely, liberty to use our selves for our own
advantage in things of the greatest weight and moment in the concerns of the
world to come.

I have but one thing more to add, which is, That seeing God, through the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, is pleased to admit us to repentance, and upon
repentance to pardon of sin, and eternal life, we make acknowledgment of this
his grace by the diligent practice of that duty, which has the assured promise
of it; neither refusing, nor delaying, where duty to our Sovereign Lord, and
gratitude for his grace and mercy, and prudence and charity to our selves,
oblige us both to speed and diligence.

The Ninth Sermon.
Luke 12.1. -- Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.


IT is not unusual to find such things as are very different each from other
sometimes compared to the same thing, either because this same thing may have
several qualities answering to those in different things, or else because the
things that otherwise greatly differ each from other, may yet possibly have
some one thing (equally) common amongst themselves. Upon this account we find
the very Kingdom of God, that is, the Gospel of our Lord (which is the Doctrine
of that Kingdom) compared to Leaven in the Scriptures. So we find it Luke
13.20, 21. Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? it is like leaven which
a woman took, and hid in three measure of meal, till the whole was leavened.
Where the Gospel is compared to Leaven, because as a little lump of this
spreads it self through the whole mass wherewith it is mingled: so did the
Gospel of our Lord (as it is here foretold it should) propagate and diffuse it
self from small beginnings amongst the Jews far and wide through other Nations.

On the other hand we also find, that the doctrine and hypocrisy of the
Pharisees are by our Lord compared to Leaven; and that not only as apt to
spread and diffuse themselves as that cloth, but also as swelling the minds of
men with pride and bitterness, as that sours and (wells the lump it is mixed
withal: insomuch that the prohibition of Leaven in the Paschal Feast was made a
Symbol in the Law of the mortification of those vices; and this the Apostle
alludes unto, 1 Cor. 5.8. Let us keep the feast not with old leaven, neither
with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth.

The doctrine of the Pharisees is styled Leaven, Mat. 12.6. And their
Hypocrisy is so styled in the words I have now read unto you: Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.

Now hypocrisy is an affectation of seeming to be what a man is not in point
of piety toward God, or love and charity toward men. It is the counterfeit of
Religion, an outward show and appearance of it without the truth of the thing
it self.

And because our Lord bids us beware of the leaven or Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, it will be requisite,

1. To consider the several instances wherein they exercised their hypocrisy.

2. To give an account of the Precept which commands us to beware of it.

1. Now the instances of Pharisaical hypocrisy seem especially to have been
these:

1. They pretended to a greater holiness and devotion, an exacter knowledge of
the Law, and an exacter obedience to it, than any other sort of people, yet
were no better than others were; they made a greater show of piety, they had a
fairer form of godliness, but had no more of the power of it.

Josephus tells us ( Antiq. lib. 10. cap. 3.) that they pretended to such
exactness in their lives, to such a perfection in obedience as that they judged
God himself rejoiced in them, that he did not only accept of them upon the
greatness of their piety, but that he pleased himself in them, and that they
were infinitely dear to him.

S. Paul himself gives such a character of this Sect, as plainly shows they
judged themselves far better persons than any other, and were so esteemed by
others also. He styles this Sect the strictest sect of their Religion, Act.
26.5. and tells us further, that this was esteemed to teach and act according
to the perfect manner of the law, Act. 22.3. Our Lord himself brings in the
Pharisees openly boasting a greater piety, a stricter life, a higher
righteousness than any other kind of men. This he does Luke 18.10, 11, 12. Two
men, says he, went up to the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a
Publican. The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself: God, I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as
this Publican. Where you find him making a great distinction between himself
and other persons in the very first words he speaks to God. God, I thank thee
that I am not as other men are.

Yet after all, if we observe our Saviors character of these men, we shall
find them so far from being better, that they were worse than other persons,
that though they professed they were no extortioners, yet they devoured widows
houses, Mat. 23.14. that they were within full of extortion and excess, v. 25.
and to be short, that they shut up the kingdom of heaven from men, that they
neither entered in themselves, neither suffered them that were entering, to go
in, v. 13. of the same Chapter. And this was the first of those instances,
wherein they exercised their hypocrisy.

2. The second was, that they confined all their Religion to outward actions,
but all this while neglected the purifying of their hearts.

S. Paul reporting what he was while he continued to be a Pharisee, expressly
tells us, that he was blameless as to the righteousness in the law. Touching
the righteousness which is in the law blameless, Phil. 3.6. His meaning is,
that he avoided the outward actions expressly forbidden in the Law, that he
observed and performed them, which were expressly then commanded, according to
the interpretation which the Pharisees put upon the Law; more than this he
could not mean; he could not possibly believe himself to have been punctually
clear and spotless in the inward affections of his foul, but only in point of
outward action. But being so, he declares himself to have been blameless
touching the righteousness in the Law, while he continued to be a Pharisee:
which plainly shows, they thought the Law required no more than a conformity to
its Precepts in outward action and behavior. And thus does Kimchi expound
those words, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me: that is, says he, if I only think or design iniquity, but do not
accomplish the design, if I only think or wish the evil, but do not act it in
overt action, God will not impute it as fin to me: a gloss just contrary to the
Text, not an explication of the words, but an express contradiction to them.
It Is true indeed the Law did say, Thou shall not covet, but did not expressly
threaten punishment to them that coveted, if they did not act the ill imagined.
Whereupon these Pharisees judged it a counsel rather than a precept, in
gratification to their lusts, and judged themselves exactly righteous, when
they performed the overt actions the Law required, and avoided them forbidden
in it. Such is the nature of hypocrisy, and such was that of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

3. As they placed their righteousness wholly and solely in outward actions,
and the omissions of such actions; so they performed those actions with
abundance of outward pomp and show, that they might be seen and praised of men.
They gave alms, but sounded a trumpet both in the Synagogues and in the streets
at the giving of it, Mat. 6.2. They prayed much, but they loved to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, and this that
they might be seen of men, Mat. 6.5. They fasted also twice a-week ( Luke
18.12.) but they put on a sour countenance, disfigured their faces, that they
might appear unto men to fast, Mat. 6.16. And this, as our Lord expressly tells
us, Mat. 23.5. they did all their works to be seen of men. Which is the nature
of hypocrisy, and a certain signification of it.

4. They were far more nice, far more scrupulous in lesser things, than they
were in things of greater moment; far more punctual in the observance of their
own precepts and institutions, than those that were of Gods appointment, and
far more diligent in the observance of Gods appointments in ritual matters and
constitutions, than in the very Laws of nature, and things of indispensable
goodness. These are the things our Savior often objects to them, and more
especially, Matt. 23. the 23d and following verses, Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and
have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith,
those ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides
which strain at a Gnat, and swallow a camel, which make such scruple in lesser
things, and none at all in things of moment. And yet again in the following
words, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye make clean the outside of the
cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess: to
wash the cup before they drunk, to cleanse the platter before they ate, was an
institution of their own, and this they very duly observed; to purge the heart
from all extortion and impurity was a Law enjoined by God himself, but of this
they made no account at all.

5. As they much abounded in institutions of their own, so some of these were
so extravagant, that they were contrary to the very Laws of God, and nature.
What Law more sacred and indispensable, what more natural, and more agreeable
to humanity, than that which requires us to honor our Parents, to relieve and
assist them in their wants, which is both a part, and a signification of that
honor? yet such was the blindness of the Pharisees, that they licensed a man
to make a vow to deny relief unto his Father, and pronounced the vow to be
obliging; so our Lord, Mark, 7.10, 11. Moses said, honor thy Father and
Mother, and who so curses Father or Mother let him dye the death: but ye say,
if a man shall say to his Father or Mother, it is Corban, that is to say, a
gift by whatsoever thou may be profited by me, he shall be free, and ye
suffer him no more to do ought for his Father or his Mother, making the word of
God of none effect through your traditions: inventing a vow flatly contrary to
Gods Law, and making the former oblige and bind to the destruction of the
latter. Thus did they use a pretense of Piety toward God to absolve and quit
them from their very duty to their Parents, used Religion against Religion, and
made the very pretense of it a ground to neglect and contradict it.

6. They prescribed to others what they themselves would not practice, their
precepts were stricter than their lives, to others they were extremely severe,
but kind and gentle to themselves; whence that reflection of our Lord, Matt.
23.34. Do not after their works, for they say and do not, for they bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they
themselves will not move them with one of their fingers: an evident instance of
Hypocrisy, of prevarication and deceit, for if the duty though hard and
difficult, was yet necessary unto others, why was it not so to them likewise?
and if it was not so to them, as it should seem they judged it was not, why was
it then so to others? why did they then impose it on them? why reprove the
neglect of it? why upbraid the mote or atome which they espied in their
neighbors eye, while they suffered a beam to blind their own.

But to proceed to the last instance of the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, this
lay in the flaming zeal they had to make Proselytes to their Party, to make
Disciples to their Sect, while they made them worse, and not the better, nay
greatly worse by so doing. And this is the thing objected to them by our Lord,
Matthew. 23.15. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye compass Sea
and Land to make one Proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more
the Child of Hell than your selves. And so in truth it came to pass; for the
Proselytes made by these Pharisees became much worse than they themselves, the
Scholars much outdid their Masters in their iniquities and wicked lives, the
imitation outdid the original, being encouraged by the example; and this was
observed by Justin Martyr, (...). The Presbyters, says he, that are made by
you do not only not believe, but do blaspheme the name of Christ twice as much
as you your selves, So efficacious are your examples and your Doctrines to make
the Disciple exceed the Master, to make the Gentile exceed the Jew in his
Impiety and unbelief.

2. Having thus the showed the special instances of the Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, which was the former of the two generals before propounded, proceed
we now to give an account of the latter also (that is) of the precept which
bids beware of it. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy,
which words suggest these things:

1. The greatness of the evil which we are commanded to avoid. 2. The diligence
that must be used if we will duly obey the precept.
1. I begin with the first, namely the greatness of the evil, which we are
commanded to avoid.

1. And here first of all observe, that Hypocrisy falls exceedingly short of
the very thing it pretends unto, namely, of being true Religion, for it is no
more than the shadow of it: Hypocrisy pretends to the very height of all
Piety, but is no more than a poor mean appearance of it.

(1.) It wholly consists in outward actions and omissions, performs the acts
that seem most plausible unto men, avoids those that are most scandalous and
expensive, but all this while neglects the purifying of the heart. It does
disguise, but not reform the lust within, it gilds and paints the outward man,
but does not produce a new life, or a better nature in the heart, it does not
mortify any lust, it does not quicken with any grace, it is no more a true
Religion, than a picture is a living man, nor does it reach the design and end
of Christianity, which is to reform and change our nature, and form the Image
of Christ in us, which is in righteousness and true holiness.

2. Charity, Sincerity, and Integrity, are the very life of Christianity, if we
have not those, we have nothing of it, we cannot pretend unto perfection, we
cannot say we have attained to the utmost degrees the highest measures of
obedience; so that if we can lay no claim to Charity, if we cannot truly
profess Sincerity and Integrity, although attended with imperfection, we have
nothing to say for our being Christians, nothing of the truth of Christianity.
Now so it is, Sincerity, Charity and Integrity are the very things the
Hypocrite wants, it is the nature of Hypocrisy to be void and destitute of
these Graces; if it be not so, it is not Hypocrisy, it is not the vice we now
mention, if it be so, it wants these virtues, and therefore the very life and
spirit of true and real Christianity, and so falls short of the very end of
true Religion: that is the first.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that it does not only fall far short of
true Religion, but that it is a great abuse, a mock, a scorn, a derision of it,
and in very truth of God himself.

(1.) Hypocrisy is insolence against God, but fear and meekness toward men,
it is an irreverence toward him, that searches and knows the hearts of men,
and awe and reverence toward men, who can but observe our overt actions; that
is contempt and slight of God, who clearly discerns the thoughts of the heart;
and an honor and homage unto men, who have no further knowledge of them, than
as they appear in overt actions, which is a great affront to God, and an equal
abuse of true Religion.

(2.) But then farther there is another great abuse that Hypocrisy offers to
Religion, which lies in the use of the name, and title, and show of it in order
to base and unworthy ends, which is to pervert the very nature and order of
things, and of Gods designs and institutions, to turn the end into a mean, and
a mean into the principal end. Religion according to Gods appointment is to be
preferred before any secular ends and profits, to be the chief in all our aims;
and so be propagated and promoted by all the talents that God has given us.
But what is the nature, what is the custom of Hypocrisy? it is to debase and
depress Religion to the service of secular gain and honor, it is to use the
appearance of it, in prejudice to the thing itself, and to make a show and fair
appearance of Piety, Virtue, and Integrity, to supplant these very things
themselves: this is the nature of Hypocrisy.

If he would effectually cheat his neighbor, if he would put a deceit upon
him, he pretends to Piety and Religion, he censures the lives and manners of
others, he complains, he harangues against the iniquity of the times, that he
may better impose upon him, gain his credit and then deceive him. If he would
prefer and advance himself, intrude into places of power and profit, and thrust
out those possessed of them, he presently inveighs against those persons, he
pretends Religion in so doing, pretends reformation of abuses, makes the very
highest profession of Truth, and Justice, and Integrity.

If he would gratify animosity and revenge himself upon his neighbor, here he
pretends Religion again, here his Conscience is engaged, he is concerned for
the public good, a thing he will never forsake or quit whatever it cost him to
pursue it.

If he would disturb the public peace, create Sedition and Confusion, if he
would overthrow the Government, and change its Laws and Constitutions, if he
would destroy Religion itself, Religion must be pretended for it. This he
prostitutes to every base and unworthy end, this he prostitutes to every lust;
he makes it serve his Pride, and Ambition, he makes it serve his Spite, and
Malice, he makes it minister to filthy Avarice, just as the Pharisees under a
pretense of long Prayers devoured and ate up Widows houses, Mark 12.40.

3. And then thirdly, lest you should think it a thing impossible, that any man
should pretend Religion, nay great and extraordinary measures of it, and yet
retain these foul lusts of Pride, and Scorn, and love of the World, of Envy,
Malice; and Animosity; you are to know that these lusts are not only not
inconsistent with such pretenses, but allow the very sins themselves which the
Pharisees were chiefly guilty of, and objected to them by our Lord. Their pride
and haughtiness is reproved, Matt, 23.5, 6, 7. They make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the uppermost
rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the
markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi: here is their haughtiness and
ambition, their presumption and self conceit reproved. And then there censure
and scorn of others is also detected and chastised, Matt. 7.3, 4, 5. Why
beholdest thou the mote that is in thy Brothers eye, but considerest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? or how will thou say to thy Brother, let me pull
out the mote out of thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye? thou
hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou
see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

And although the Pharisee in his prayer thanked God that he was not as other
men, particularly that he was no Extortioner, Luc. 18.11. yet one that knew
them much better than they themselves knew them, our Lord himself, gives us
another account of them, he tells us that they were full of Extortion, greatly
infected with it within, Matt. 23.25. And as for malicious craft and subtilty,
these are not obscurely charged upon them by him that could not be mistaken,
Matt. 23.33. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of Hell? ye, says he, build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish
the sepulchers of the righteous, and say, if we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets; and yet they were of the same spirit their Fathers were, insomuch
that they who here profess, that they would never have shed the blood of the
Holy Prophets, shed that of the very Son of God, and of his followers and
Disciples, and this our Savior well foresaw, and therefore adds ( v. 32.) fill
ye up the measure of your Fathers: from whence I conclude that as hypocrisy is
a mock-religion, and so an abuse of true Piety; so likewise that it leaves the
hypocrite under the power of Pride, Covetousness, and Animosity, under the
dominion of those lusts, that are most flat contradictions to it.

4. Having said so much of the nature and quality of this vice in the three
particulars last mentioned, you will not wonder at what I shall add in the last
place, which is that hypocrisy mightily tends to the utter destruction of true
Religion; not in the hypocrite (for in him it has no place at all) but in the
very world it self, that is to say, in all other persons, and this it does two
several ways.

1. By debauching the nature of it. 2. By bringing a Scandal upon it.
(1.) For first its the nature of hypocrisy to debauch the nature of true
Religion by turning it into mere formality, into nice and scrupulous
Superstitions, in the avoiding, or in the practicing of things indifferent in
themselves, and endless disputes about these things, which do not only employ
men's minds in things that are not of any moment, and take them off from the
study and practice of true Religion, but wholly destroy Christian Charity, fill
men with mutual Animosities, and by their means eat out the very heart of Piety.

It is the temper of hypocrisy to accomodate itself to the opinion and
judgment of men. The generality of mankind look no farther than to the show
and surface of things, and therefore hypocrisy concerns itself in nothing
further, than to obtain the applause of men, either in the observing or the
avoiding of things indifferent in themselves, things that may be done or
omitted (unless commanded by superiors) in the mean time, while it is thought
sufficient on one hand to recommend a man to God if he abound in rite and
ceremony, in an infinite number of outward actions, such as are used in the
Church of Rome; and on the other, while all Religion is placed in avoiding all
that is decent in appearance, every thing that is called a Ceremony, and a man
must certainly be a Saint, that shall defy and rail at this; true Religion is
almost lost, almost forgotten and laid aside in the noise of these disputes and
quarrels.

2. But lastly there is yet another way wherein hypocrisy dangerously tends to
the destruction of true Religion, which is by the scandal which it brings upon
the name of all Religion.

For although it be very true indeed, that men are generally very strangely
charmed by the shows and pretenses of Religion, yet when it appears, as it does
at last where it is not real, that all these shows are void of truth, that they
are but shows and nothing more, this makes the very name of Religion
despicable, odious, and abhorred, it brings profaneness and infidelity, and
makes the very profession of Piety, vile and contemptible in the world, a
dangerous and a destructive issue, as we our selves have plainly found by our
own experience in this Nation.

Hypocrisy being but a counterfeit coin, never long retains its Credit: and so
indeed it happened at last amongst the Pharisees, for although they were in
great reputation amongst the Jews in our Saviors time, yet I find that they
lost it afterward, and became so despicable in the Nation, that they were
branded with scurrilous names, some they called Sechemitical Pharisees, such as
were so for their own profit; others they styled the stumbling Pharisees, who
for an appearance of humility, would scarce lift up their feet in the streets,
others they called the wounded Pharisees, who shut their eyes as they went in
the streets, lest they should perhaps behold a temptation, but by so doing
often fell, and hurt themselves; others they styled the boasting Pharisees,
because they pretended not only to do whatsoever the Law of God required, but
also a great deal more than so: other approbrious names and titles they put
upon some other sorts, from whence it appears that they did at last lose all
their credit amongst people; nor need we question, that even true Religion it
self became contemptible on that account. The life is derided for the deformity
of the picture, the truth is prejudiced by the counterfeit, the faults and
basenesses of hypocrisy ascribed to true Religion itself, and this I take to
be one reason of the infidelity and profaneness that reign at present in this
Nation. God of his mercy remove the Scandals, and heal the distempers that are
amongst us.

The Tenth Sermon.
Luke 12.1. -- Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.


IN these words, as I have observed, there are these two things suggested to us:

1. The greatness of the Evil, which we are commanded to avoid; this I have
already finished.

2. The diligence that must be used, if we will duly observe the precept
intimated in the word beware; which shows it is no such easy thing to avoid
all Pharisaism and hypocrisy, as we may perhaps imagine it is.

And for the clearing of this point, I shall desire you to observe, that an
appearance of Religion, or a Religion in outward show, void of the true spirit
of it, is apt to recommend it self, and strangely to impose on men; as such a
Religion which is,

1. Easy. 2. Pleasant. And, 3. Fit to promote and serve those ends, which the
generality of Mankind are apt to propound unto themselves.
1. It is an easy thing to make an outward show of piety, while the lust is
suffered to dwell within, and men naturally love their ease, and are ready to
content themselves with that which has a fair resemblance of Religion, and
that is favorable to the lusts, to love and embrace it on that account.

Men never quarrel with Religion, till it offer violence to their lusts; they
use it as Herod did the Baptist, speak it fair, and treat it kindly, and bear
fair regard to it, while it is content to oblige no further than to some
plausible outward actions. It is never difficult till it require them to subdue
and mortify the lust within, and those peculiar lusts and passions, which are
predominant in themselves; till it demand an eye, or a hand, something that is
dear or ufeful to them. Here it is that they forsake it, and cast it off, when
it grows pressing and importunate in contradiction to their appetites.

In the mean time, if it will indulge the lust within, if it will permit pride,
and avarice, and animosity to dwell there, and content it self to paint and
gild the outward man, if it will be satisfied with these external shows and
actions, which are plausible in the eyes of men, and thwart no secular end and
interests, no carnal appetites and inclinations, they are ready enough to
entertain it.

Now this is the nature of hypocrisy, it will be satisfied with those things.
This, as I formerly showed at large, was the Religion of the Pharisees. They
did confine it to outward actions, and further yet, to those that made the
fairest show in the eyes of men, adding hereto a due care to omit the evils,
which were so notoriously and grossly, so that they could not possibly be
excused, either by misinterpreting the Law, or by blinding the eyes of men,
that they should not be able to discover them. And this it was that made their
Religion strangely spread and diffuse it self through the Body of the Jewish
Nation.

We are all apt to study for easy ways to Heaven. All mankind desire
happiness, but they desire it may cost them nothing to attain it. This was the
reason why the Gnostics made it lawful to deny Christ, to abjure Christianity
in times of trouble and persecution. This is the reason why the spiritual
Guides of the Church of Rome are glad to accommodate the Rules of life, and the
Conditions of salvation, not to the Precepts of our Lord, but to the ordinary
ways and manners of mankind. This is the reason why they are glad to absolve
from sin upon mere profession of repentance, to promise forgiveness and life
eternal to them that will undergo the penance, although they will not forsake
the sin.

An easy Religion easily recommends it self to men's acceptance and
inclinations; such was the Religion of the Pharisees, such in truth is all
hypocrisy, and therefore scarce to be avoided without considerable care and
diligence.

2. And secondly, What is more considerable, hypocrisy is not only an easy,
but a pleasant Religion to flesh and blood; as exercising it elf in censuring
the vices, scorning the Persons, and opposing the Religion of other men; all
which things, as they pass for Religion with many men, so are they so far from
being troublesome, that they are singular gratifications to pride, and envy,
and animosity.

1. The Religion of the Pharisees, that is, hypocrisy, much consists in
censuring the vices of other persons. They had an eye upon every man's life,
except their own; they had a reproof for every man's faults, great or small,
while they were indulgent to themselves. They were concerned in every other
man's behavior far more than in their own lives. Our Savior tells us, as I
observed in a former Discourse, that they laid heavy burdens and grievous to
be born on other men's shoulders, but that they themselves would not move them
with one of their fingers, Matthew. 23.4. He tells us how sharp and quick they
were in espying a mote in their Brothers eye, not considering the beam in their
own, Matthew. 7.3. Which as it passes for Religion amongst the men that are apt
to use it, so it is grateful to flesh and blood, and the natural passions of
mankind. It gratifies pride and self-conceit, it gratifies anger and animosity,
it feeds self-love with great content, as making the person verily think that
he himself has a detestation unto evil, because he censures it in other
persons.

How eloquent and how free of speech are those men that take upon them to
condemn the faults of other persons! how do the words gush like water from a
Fountain! What heat, what warmth, what zeal and passion may you discover in
their language? and whence does all this Rhetoric flow? what is the Spring of
all this Eloquence, but the pleasure they take in the reproof, in the rebuke of
their Neighbors sins? So pleasant is it and delightful to censure the faults
of other men.

2. Add hereunto another instance of the Religion of the Pharisees, very
grateful to flesh and blood, and the sinful passions of humane nature, which
lies not only in censuring the faults, but deriding the persons of other men. I
need not say how much the Disciples of our Lord, how much our very Lord himself
was scorned and derided by the Pharisees. But that which I now observe is this,
That it passes for a piece of Religion amongst some persons to speak
contemptuously of other men. To scorn a Priest, to deride a Bishop, to mock and
scorn a whole Profession, is judged by some a very considerable part of
Religion. To invent opprobrious names and fables, to forge, to receive and
spread reports, false and scandalous and disgraceful concerning their persons
and their lives, is now become a part of Religion with many men. They do not
only not accuse themselves for this, but they applaud themselves in it; they do
notonly not believe themselves the worse, but better men for so doing; this is
their Religion, this is their Piety, this is the thing for which they prize and
value themselves; and if they should be denied this, they would have very
little to say, little to plead for their being of any Religion at all. If you
should strip them of their zeal in scorning those they ought to value, if you
should quench all that heat that appears in anger and animosity against the
persons of other men, if you should require what God does, what is commanded in
the Gosspel, to show their Religion in Faith and Hope and Christian Charity, in
patience, gentleness and humility, in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, wherein the Kingdom of God consists, Romans 14.17; you would find them far
from being that which they imagine themselves to be, namely, true and real
Christians.

In the mean time being it is so pleasant, being it is so grateful to flesh and
blood, and to the animosity which they have against the persons of other men,
to brand them with opprobrious names, to pour contempt and scorn upon them, and
to believe that it is Religion so to do; I think we have reason to beware of
such a dangerous vice as this, which turns a sin into Religion, and so in truth
makes Religion a contradiction unto it self.

3. One thing more I must further add to what I have said of this Point, which
is the delight that a man may take either in the opposing or deriding of the
Religion of other persons, and the great opinion which he may have of himself
for this, which yet can give him no assurance that he is not a hypocrite in so
doing. I need not say, how sharp and eager strifes are raised about Religion in
the World, I need not show what fierce debates, what hot contentions there are
about it, and have been in all former Ages. These are known and evident things,
but that which is here to be considered, is that the zeal that many men have in
these disputes is rather to destroy the Religion that is professed by other
persons, than set up another instead thereof, it is to subvert and not to
reform, it is to overthrow, and not amend. In the mean time being it is
concerned about Religion, and being it has a mighty passion in this concern,
it passes for Religion itself: so apt are men to mistake them, to embrace a
shadow instead of truth, and to judge themselves to be Religious for a
negative, not a positive thing, for being against the Religion of others,
rather than for any of their own; wherein they gratify their own passions,
please their own corrupt affections, and so easily suffer themselves to be
deceived and imposed upon.

3. But then thirdly, we must consider, that as hypocrisy is not only an easy
Religion, but also pleasant to flesh and blood in many instances and effects;
so that it also powerfully tends to serve those ends, which men are apt to
propound and follow, that is to say,

(1.) The reputation of being judged to be truly pious.

(2.) And the obtaining of wealth and power, and all the advantages of this
World.

1. The appearance of Religion destitute of the power of it, does for a time
gain the reputation of true Religion, nay more reputation for the most part
than true Religion itself obtains.

Our Savior relating how the Pharisees gave Alms to gain the glory of men,
presently adds, verily I say unto you they have their reward, Matt. 6.2.
relating how they prayed in the streets to the same end, adds the very same
words again, verily I say unto you they have their reward, v. 5. relating how
they disfigured their faces when they fasted, that they might appear to men to
fast, adds the very same words again, verily I say unto you they have their
reward, v. 16. of the same Chapter, that is to say, they gain that glory which
they seek, they are esteemed as they desire, the best and strictest sort of men
and so the Apostle St Paul suggests, when he calls this very sect of the
Pharisees, the strictest sect of their Religion, Acts 26.5. when he reports
that they taught according to the perfect manner of the Law, Acts 22.3. for
here he designs not to let us know that the thing itself was so indeed, but
that it was commonly judged to be so: so great was their credit among the
people, that when six thousand of them refused to do what the rest of the
Nation did, swear allegiance unto Caesar, and were fined for refusing so to do:
The wife of Pherotas (a rich man) out of the great opinion she had of their
singular Piety and devotion, was ready to pay the Fine for them, she paid it,
and was applauded for it, nay flattered with hope of the very Kingdom: they
told her God himself had decreed that she, and her husband, and their issue
should have the Government of the Nation, and that he himself had assured them
of it in the communion they had with him, and this their Prophecy was believed
upon account of the great reputation of their Piety, Joseph amiqu. lib. 10.
cap. 3.

Nor must you think it a strange thing that hypocrisy should gain the
reputation of true Religion, for I must fay something stranger still, namely,
that it often gains a greater credit and reputation, at least for a time, than
true Religion itself obtains: the reasons whereof are plain and evident. For,

The Hypocrite makes it his very business to appear in the visible show of
Piety, takes care that every Religious action appear to the eyes, or come to
the knowledge of the World; so did the Pharisees give their Alms, so did they
order their prayers and fasts, that the World might observe and understand
them: whereas the sincere and true Christian thinks it enough to approve
himself to God in private, and takes no thought how to commend himself to men,
further than by avoiding scandal, and by a true and unaffected discharge of
duty to God and men, without the circumstance of pomp and show, of much
appearance in so doing.

The Hypocrite again pretends to the very height of Piety, to the greatest
measures of perfection, the upright person pretends no more than he has really
attained unto.

The Hypocrite makes it his great business to be always speaking of Religion in
every place, in every company at all times, upon all occasions, though they be
never so unseasonable the upright person contents himself to give Religion its
due place, to take convenient opportunities to mention, propagate, and promote
it.

The Hypocrite makes it his design to show a singular zeal and fervor for the
smallest things that relate to Religion, nay things of no concernment in it;
the upright person is more modest, lays no more of stress on things than the
Laws of God or men require. By all which means it comes to pass that the
reputation of the hypocrite sometimes far exceeds that of true, and wise, and
sober Christians; which as it may press a strong temptation to bewitch and draw
men to that sin; so should it move to the greater watchfulness, the greater
diligence to avoid it.

2. But then secondly, as hypocrisy often gains the credit of true Religion,
nay more than that itself can gain in the general blindness of mankind: so does
it most effectually serve for the advancement of other ends, which men are apt
to entertain, namely, the gaining of wealth and power, and all the advantages
of this World.

And here I shall not make any stay upon meaner persons, who yet generally find
it useful for their advantages in the world, to make a show of greater Piety,
than they are really possessors of; But I shall observe to what degrees of
power and honor the Pharisees did advance themselves by their pretenses to
greater exactness in Religion, than other factions amongst the Jews. Josephus
tells us, that there were three sects of Religion amongst the Jews in his time,
the Pharisees, Sadducees, and the Essenes: of these the Essenes, as he tells
us, lived the best, but the Pharisees were of greatest credit, insomuch that
the very Sadducees themselves, if they arrived to any Authority in the Nation,
were forced to accommodate and yield themselves to all the dictates of the
Pharisees, Antiqu. lib. 10. cap. 2. He tells us that these were so esteemed,
that they governed all in matters of State; that they had such Interest in the
people, that they were not afraid to resist and oppose the lawful Magistrates,
to oppose their very Kings and Princes, and to raise Arms, and war against
them. He tells us a very remarkable story relating to our present purpose:
Alexander Jannaeus during his Reign over the Jews had done many cruel and
odious things, and some that highly displeased the Pharisees, and was therefore
greatly hated by them as well as by the rest of the people. In this condition
he falls sick, his sickness at last prevailed so far, that there was no hope of
recovery left. This being observed by his wife Alexandra, who knew very well
how odious he was to all the people, and to the Pharisees amongst the rest, and
the infinite troubles and vexations that threatened his family after his death,
she is presently overflowed with sorrows, as in the prospect of what she feared
might happen. Alas says she to her dying Husband, what a condition do you leave
us in? to whom do you leave your wretched Widow? to whom do you leave your
miserable Orphans? what shall we do when you are gone? Peace says the King,
take my advice, and I will put you into a way, wherein you shall not only live,
but reign in peace and great security: you know the mighty power and credit
that the Pharisees have among the people, for their seeming Piety and Religion,
you know the hatred I labor under, has chiefly and principally been
occasioned, because I have disobliged them. When I am dead, speak them fair,
give them the praises they desire, expose my body unto them, let them use it at
their pleasure, either bury it, if they please; or abuse, and insult, and
trample upon it, and drag it through the mire of the Streets. Let them govern
all your affairs, let them but govern and rule you, and you shall easily rule
the people. Well, this she did, and doing this the Pharisees were quieted and
appeased, and they did not only not abuse, but very honorably interr his Body;
they made Orations in the commendation of his Person, they settled his Widow in
the Kingdom by their Authority among the people; they governed her, and she the
Kingdom. ( Antiq. lib. 13. c. 23, 24.) Such power and interest among the people
did they obtain by the reputation of their Religion. From whence I observe, How
powerful a thing the appearance of Religion is to serve a man's secular ends and
interests, even beyond real piety.

Now that which gives it this advantage for these ends, at least for a certain
space of time, till it be discovered and detected, is because it gives a man
the license of using such methods for his end which no man truly conscientious
can possibly allow himself to use. It gives him leave to say or do, whatsoever
it be, that may serve his end. It gives him leave to promise fair to every
person, although he never design performance; to fill men with infinite
expectations of public good, or their own preferment and advantage, though
nothing of these things be intended. It gives him leave to apply himself to
every man's humor and desire, to flatter the proud, to praise the ambitious, to
bribe the covetous, to serve and caress every man's lusts, and to accommodate
such a Bate for every person, as is most pleasing to his Appetite. By all which
means it often effectually serves its end before it can be well discovered, and
then discovery does not hurt it. It has gained the advantages it designed,
and, it may be, the reputation of wisdom, though it has lost that of piety.

Now being hypocrisy is an easy and a pleasant Religion, grateful in several
Parts and Instances to the sinful passions of Mankind, being apt to serve the
several ends of gaining applause, and wealth, and power, it will require a
singular care, a great watchfulness over our selves to avoid it in all degrees
and measures, to be infected with nothing of it. It will require the more of
this, because a man may be an Hypocrite, and yet not be aware he is so; he may
be infected with this Disease, and that in a very high degree, and not be
sensible of his Malady, not feel and observe it in himself. It Is clear that the
very Pharisees themselves were not aware of their own hypocrisies. Had they
been so, they could not have trusted in themselves, that they were righteous,
and have despised others; which Christ expressly says they did, Luke 18.9. Had
they been conscious of their hypocrisies, though they might have boasted this
their righteousness before men, who did not understand their hearts, they could
not have done it before God, who, as they knew, did understand them; and yet
our Savior brings in the Pharisee boasting of his righteousness before God,
Luke 18.11, 12. But they were not conscious to themselves of their own
hypocrisies: And this is the reason why our Lord so often upbraided them with
their blindness. Interest is a subtle thing, it easily insinuates into men's
counsels, easily slides into their designs, and moulds them into a Form of
Godliness, begets an appearance of Religion, when they are little aware of it.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? Jerem. 17.9.

This being so, if we will avoid so sly a vice, if we would exclude so subtle
and so deceitful a sin, it will concern us,

(1.) First of all to avoid the several causes of it, Pride, and Avarice, and
Ambition. For lay this down for a certain Rule, Hypocrisy is no solitary vice,
it is never found alone in any man, it always serves some other lust, it always
ministers to some superior vice within, that is to say, either to the love of
the praise of men, or that of secular wealth and power. If a man design not to
serve these lusts, if these do not bear any sway in him, he is in no danger of
hypocrisy. For that is a vice that always ministers to some other, and these
are the vices which it serves.

(2.) And then further it will secure us from hypocrisy, if we will fully
content our selves with those advantages of Religion, which God has certainly
promised to it, peace with him, peace of Conscience in this World, and eternal
happiness in the other. I know very well that true Religion does often
contribute to further ends, namely, both to welfare and reputation in this very
world, as well as the other. But because there are certain times and
circumstances, wherein it will not serve those ends, wherein the best and
wisest men shall be esteemed the very worst, superstitious, cold and formal
men, by those that are zealous in some Faction, and know no Religion but that
zeal; because such times as these may be, it is safest to content our selves in
gaining those rewards and blessings, that are peculiar to Religion, the
testimony of a good Conscience, and life eternal in the World to come.

(3.) And then lastly, Because hypocrisy is so deceitful and sly a sin, as
always serving worldly interest, which is apt insensibly to blind the eyes, and
infatuate the minds of the wisest men (and yet hide it self from them
themselves) it will concern us to be very frequent and impartial in the
examination of our selves, to weigh our counsels, to try our ends, to prove our
designs in every action relating any way to Religion. It will be needful to
consider whether we indeed design it, really intend to promote and practice it
wherever we make a profession of it. And then because that God alone knows the
heart, and because his Grace is most needful to discover our selves unto our
selves in the midst of the many sins and passions that may infatuate and
beguile us; let us earnestly pray for his Holy Spirit to deliver us from all
the infatuations, and all the seductions of our lusts. Let us make the Address
which David did, ( Psalm. 139.22, 24.) with whose words I shall conclude: Search
me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be
any wicked way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting.

The Eleventh Sermon.
John 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

The whole verse is thus:

Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me.


THESE words are a preface to a very large and kind discourse made by our Lord
unto his followers, wherein he delivers the main foundations of Christianity as
well in matter of Faith, as Practice; which is the reason why he begins it with
such words, as might effectually stir them up to give both attention and belief
to all that he should deliver in it: Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

In which words we have two parts:

1. A concession, or supposition, Ye believe in God; that is, ye believe that
there is a God, and what is consequent hereupon, that he is to be trusted and
obeyed, although some others read the words not as a Declaration, Ye believe in
God, but as a Command, Believe in God; but there is no reason to depart from
our own Translation in this matter. 2. Here is a Precept also, Believe in me;
that is to say, believe that I am the Son of God, sent by him into the world to
reveal the Gospel of life eternal; and therefore judge your selves obliged to
believe whatsoever I reveal, and obey whatsoever I command you.
Now being that belief in Christ, in the sense I have now explained unto you,
is here required as an addition, or further accession to the mere belief in God
only, as he may be known by the light of nature. The Subject which the Words
before us offer to our consideration is, That the belief of Christian Doctrine,
as it is revealed to us in the Gospel, over and above that knowledge of God
which the light of Nature affords unto us, is necessary to our eternal
happiness. In the prosecution of which Point,

1. I must first consider, That the firm belief of the Gospel of Christ is most
expressly required by God, and the denial of such belief forbidden under no less
a penalty than the utter loss of life eternal.

Salvation is always promised to them who believe in him who has revealed it,
and become his Followers and Disciples; to other persons it is not promised. As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted
up; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, Joh. 3.14, 15. Nor is it only promised to those, and those only, that so
believe; but denied to them that believe not, to them that refuse to yield
their belief to him whom God has sent and sanctified to be the Savior of the
World. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already; because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. And so again (omitting several other places of the same
sense and signification) in the first Epistle of St John, chap. 5. ver. 10. He
that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself; he that believes
not God, has made him a Liar, because he believes not the Record that God
gave of his Son. Thrice did God bear this Record, and own our Lord to be sent
by him by an express voice from Heaven, once at his Baptism in these words,
Matt. 3.17. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. A second time at
his transfiguration upon the mount, with some addition to those words, Matt.
15.5. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. And yet
again a third time, a little before our Saviors passion, when praying to God
in these words, Father glorify thy name, he was answered by a voice from
Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it and will glorify it again, John
12.28. To all which clear and express testimonies given by the Father to his
Son, I might first add the glorious miracles wrought by Christ during his life,
then his resurrection from the dead, and the effusion of his Spirit upon the
Apostles sent by him, and all the miracles wrought by them, and all his other
followers also; which being evident demonstrations that he was the very son of
God, and sent by him to save the World, highly aggravate the great sin of
infidelity and unbelief, and teach us to forbear to wonder that it should be
punished with death eternal, and that Christ himself should thus pronounce,
Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not shall be damned.

2. But then secondly, lest you should think that God will have us believe the
Gospel merely because he will have it so, and that he had no further end in the
truth therein revealed unto us, than that we should believe them only: I
further add that the belief of those truths is greatly necessary to several
ends of infinite moment and importance.

1. For the full and perfect knowledge of the duties which he requires from us.

2. For the like knowledge of the great motions to those duties.

3. For our better support under all our trials, fears, and dangers.

1. The belief of the great truths revealed unto us in the Gospel, is necessary
for the perfect knowledge of the duties which God requires from us, and that
upon several considerations: namely (1.) because that though the light of
nature well improved, may in some measure direct us to very many of them; yet
such improvement of that light is no very easy or common thing: and (2.)
because there is now a higher measure of natural duties required from us, than
was accepted in former times, that is, the times before the Gospel: and (3.)
yet again, because there are now even other kinds and sorts of Duties required
from us, than the light of Nature can discover.

(1) Therefore let it be well considered* That although it be very true indeed,
that the light of nature well improved may direct and guide us to many Duties,
yet such improvement of that light is no such easy and common thing. The
strong affections that are in men to the gains and pleasures of this life allow
them but very little time to spend in the study of their Duties, much less do
they prompt them to that Study. They press the gaining of what is easy, what
is pleasing to flesh and blood; they press the pleasing of themselves in the
fruition of what they love, and doing so, strangely infatuate the minds of men,
and render it infinitely hard and difficult to excite those sparks of natural
light which God has planted in their minds. Insomuch that we find by sad
experience, that the generality of mankind in all the Ages of the World have
been much apter to extinguish than to improve the light of nature. If you
consider the state of the world before the Flood, you find that impurity and
iniquity had strangely spread and diffused themselves through the generality of
mankind, God saw, says Moses, that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. Every imagination evil, and only evil, and that
continually. If you descend below the Flood, how did the very same impieties,
and these with a very great accession, namely with that of idolatry it self,
presently deluge the World again? How universal were these impieties, and that
idolatry? Insomuch that the very seed of Abraham had learned the manners,
learned the idolatries used in Egypt, before the giving of the Law, and could
not be so restrained from them, but that they were ever and anon relapsing
after the very Law was given, during all the time of the first Temple. And
though we find them cured indeed of their idolatry after the Babylonian
captivity, yet did they still pollute themselves with strange immoralities and
superstitions. Insomuch that when our Savior came to reform the world, he
found it in such a deplorable state, that St Paul thought fit to represent it
in those words, and many others to the same purpose out of the Psalms, There is
none righteous, no not one. There is none that understands, none that seeks
after God, they are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable: there is nome that does good, no not one, Romans 3.10, 11, 12. See
here into what a wretched state the world was fallen, when our blessed Lord was
sent into it; see, how little success or influence the light of nature had upon
it, either to hinder, or to reform the greatest impieties and profaneness. And
lest you should think the very professors of humane wisdom, the very
Philosophers among the Greeks, to have been better than the people, I must say,
that it was not generally so; but on the contrary, that the generality of these
persons were as profane, and as Idolatrous as the people, and more Atheistical
than they were. And this is the thing St Paul declares, Romans 1.22. and the
following verses, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and
hanged the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things, the
very vilest of the Creatures: for which cause God gave them up to vile
affections, which he largely describes in the following parts of that Chapter.
So far was the light of nature from restraining Idiots and mean Persons, that
it did not restrain the very Philosophers from great impieties and
superstitions, no nor from gross and foul Idolatry, which yet is the greatest
contradiction, the greatliest opposite to that light.

And it is worthy our observation, that there is not now at this very day any
heathen Nation in all the world, that does not worship dumb Idols, save only
those that follow Mahomet; and that the reason why this very sect are not
Idolaters, is because that Mahomet, that great Prophet, took the belief of one
true God from Christian Doctrine, and because his followers live in the
neighborhood of Christian Nations, and have Christians generally dwelling with
them. From all which instances it appears, how hard it is so to secure, so to
improve the light of nature, as that it shall not grossly fail even in the
discovery of natural duties, unless it be helped by Revelation; and therefore
how necessary, how indispensably needful it is, to believe the Gospel for the
assisting of that light in the knowledge even of natural duties.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that there are now greater degrees,
higher perfection in natural duties required from us, since the Revelation of
the Gospel, than were accepted, or required, before the Revelation of it.

Now therefore allowing that natural light, can in a measure teach and prompt
us to practice those two general duties, which consist in the love of God and
Men, and also in the distinct branches, the several instances of those duties,
yet will it be very hard to say, that it can either teach, or move us to
practice all these several offices in those degrees which God does now require
from us: for God requires such a degree of natural duties, that is, of love to
himself and men, as is proportionable to the helps and motives, which he
affords for the performance of these duties, unto whomsoever much is given, of
him much shall be required, and to whom men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more, Luke 12.48. Now natural light does not afford an equal
measure of help, and motives to natural duties, with those that are given us by
the Gospel, and therefore it cannot be imagined but that God requires a greater
degree of these duties, namely, of love to himself and men, and of all the
branches, all the instances of that love, than natural light can work in us,
than is accepted, or required where the Gospel is not published and revealed.
Will any man say, that the very Gospel affords no greater helps and motives,
for the performance of those duties, which the light of nature may suggest,
than this alone can offer to us? is the clear relation of life immortal, the
express promise of that life, and of the assistance of Gods grace, and the
unspeakable love of God in giving his Son to die for us, nothing more, nothing
greater, nothing more powerful or efficacious to persuade the practice of
natural duties, than the very light of nature only? or does not God require a
greater degree of obedience, where he has given greater knowledge, and greater
abilities to obey him? who can deny either of these? and if these cannot be
denied, certain it is, that there is now (since the Revelation of the Gospel) a
greater degree of natural duties required from men, where that Gospel is
revealed, than was accepted, or required before the Revelation of it.

3. To all this add in the third place, that there are now some certain duties
enjoined unto us, which the light of nature can in no wise discover to us: such
are the Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord; such is
the worship of Jesus Christ as Mediator, and such no doubt, is the invocation
of the Holy, and ever blessed Trinity: all which duties purely depend upon
Revelation, and are not in any wise suggested by natural light, howsoever
improved.

If it be said, that these duties are not required, where the Gospel is not
revealed and published, this is no answer, no excuse for those persons, who
live where the Gospel is revealed. They are required to practice these as well
as any natural duties, and sure the wilful neglect of them is wilful
disobedience to God; and therefore renders the guilty person liable to death
eternal: from all which instances it appears, that a belief in Jesus Christ, a
full belief of his Gospel is absolutely and indispensably necessary for the
full and perfect understanding of the duties which God requires from us.

2. And secondly it is equally necessary for the clear, and full, and perfect
knowledge of the great motives to those duties; namely (1.) that of eternal
life, and (2.) the admirable love of God to men declared and evidenced in Jesus
Christ, and (3.) the express and clear promises of the assistance of his Spirit
to enable us to perform our duties.

1. Certainly the promise of life eternal, upon condition of Faith and
Holiness, is the highest motive to obedience; but such a motive, as is so far
from being clear to the light of nature, that there was a sect amongst the Jews
(who had not only the light of nature, but the Law and Prophets to inform them)
that is to say the sect of the Sadducees, who denied the being of Angels or
Spirits, and the immortality of men's Souls.

Nor was there any one sect amongst the Philosophers, but either flatly denied
this, as the Epicureans, and some others; or else spoke doubtfully in the
point, as the Academicks or those of Plato's School, or had infinitely false,
as well as useless conceptions of it, as the Pythagoreans had of old, who held
the transmigration of men's Souls out of one body into another, yea into the
bodies of brute Creatures, so that this chief and principal motive to
obedience, the very immortality of men's Souls, much more that of their bodies
also, was either doubted, or disbelieved, or else believed in such a manner, as
rendered it useless to that end amongst the wisest of the Heathen. And as for
the common sort of people, who were led by the fictions of the Poets, those did
at best no more than fancy a sensual Paradise after death; which could no more
purge and cleanse them from sensual appetites, than the hope and desire of a
carnal happiness, can make men holy, pure, and Spiritual.

2. But then further what shall we say of the incomparable love and kindness,
that God has declared to mankind in the Gospel of our blessed Lord? which all
the skill of humane wisdom, the most improved natural light could never have
discovered, or imagined? That God should send his beloved Son into the world to
take our nature upon himself, and reveal eternal life to men, and show them the
way to attain unto it by the example of his life! that he should give him to
dye for us, to make expiation for our sins! that he should raise him from the
dead, and give him power to raise us, and make our very Redeemer himself to
become our Head, and give him authority to be our Judge, who knows our frailties
by his own experience and sense of them, are demonstrations of such an
incomparable love to us, such a concern for our salvation, as would never have
entered into the thoughts of mortal men, had it not been thus revealed unto us.
These were mysteries hid from Ages, discoveries of a greater love than natural
light could have imagined, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Herein is love, says St John, 1 Ep. 4.10.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. And so St Paul, Romans 5.8. God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. Now the
Gospel having clearly revealed infinitely more of the love of God to mankind,
than the light of nature could discover, has likewise given us infinitely
greater and stronger motives to love God, and trust in him, and consequently to
obey him, than the light of nature could afford.

3. Add hereunto the express promise, which God made us in the Gospel, of
giving his Holy Spirit to us, to strengthen our faith, to confirm our hope, to
inflame our love, to enable us to perform the Duties which we cannot perform by
the strength of nature. So our Savior, Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your heavenly
Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask. him? Could all the skill of
humane wisdom, or the best improved natural light, give us such assurance of
God's assistance in order to a holy life, as this express Promise gives us? Did
the Philosophers ever speak at this rate? Did they dream of Divine assistance
to make them wise, and just, and holy? What says Tully in the name of Cotta on
this Point? lib. 3. de natura Deor. Virtutem nemo unquam acceptam Deo retulit;
No man ever judged he had Virtue from God. And afterward, Nunquis quod bonus
vir esset, gratias Diis egit unquam? At quod dives, quod honoratus, quod
incolumis. Did ever any man thank the Gods, because he was a good man? No, but
because he was rich, and honorable, and safe. These were the things they
ascribed to God, but they never dreamed of his assistance to give them Virtue;
that they ascribed unto themselves.

Now how could men that never expected God's assistance in the purifying of
their hearts and lives, ever attempt to arrive at equal degrees of piety with
those that expect and verily hope for that assistance? How could they hope to
overcome their inordinate lusts and inclinations? or, whatsoever they might
hope, how could they really overcome them without the assistance of God's
Spirit? which was a thing they did not only not expect, but flatly rejected and
denied, judged it absurd to look for it.

Whereas now on the other hand, the firm assurance of a supernatural power and
help, to subdue the corruptions of our natures, grounded upon the promise of
God, gives those that really believe the Gospel such faith, and hope, and
strength, and courage, which gives them victory over the world, and their own
inordinate lusts and appetites. From all which instances it appears how many
singular helps and motives the Gospel gives us in order to a holy life, which
the light of nature cannot give; and consequently that it is most necessary to
believe the Gospel over and above all the Principles which the light of nature
can discover.

3. Add hereunto in the third place, That as this is necessary for the perfect
knowledge of our Duties, and the helps and motives thereunto; so likewise for
our support and comfort under all the trials, fears and troubles that assault
us in the present world; whether those arise from, (1.) Outward evils; or, (2.)
From inward guilt and fear of punishment.

(1.) And for the former: Man, says Job, is born for trouble as the sparks fly
upward; that is to say, The state of man is naturally troublesome in this world
So many are the afflictions and trials which fall upon us in this life, so many
the dangers or disappointments, so many losses and calamities in our names, or
persons, or estates, or in the persons related to us, which four and imbitter
the present world, that there is nothing can support us, and make our lives
easy to us, but the firm assurance and expectation of a blessed and glorious
immortality, which, as I have clearly showed before, was never found among the
Heathen, never clearly known by the light of nature. Could they then so enjoy
themselves in all the confusions, in all the calamities of this world, they,
who had no assured hope of immortality, as we may do, that have that hope? or
as the Primitive Christians did? We are troubled, says the Apostle, on every
side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, Not destroyed? no,
we do not faint, we do not languish under our troubles; so he adds at the 16.
verse, and would you know how they were supported, how sustained under all
their trials, persecutions? that appears from the first words of the following
Chapter. We know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a buildin with God, a house not made with hands eternal in the heavens.
And this it was, this certain knowledge, this which the light of nature wants,
which gave support and comfort to them under all their sufferings, and
afflictions.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that the light of nature can never give
men that assurance of the grace and favor of God toward them, and the
remission of their sins, which the Gospel most expressly gives: and therefore
never so support us under the fears and sense of guilt, as the declarations of
the Gospel.

The Gospel assures us, that God sent his beloved Son to be the propitiation
for our sins, 1 John 4.10. The Gospel assures us, that the Son of God appeared
in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. that he interceeds a Priest for us.
The Gospel tells us, that he will continue so to do, so to intercede for ever,
and that his intercession for us is most prevalent for our Salvation; that he
is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. And that he is not able
only, but also willing so to do, as being a merciful and faithful High Priest,
Heb. 2.17. upon which account we are exhorted to come boldly to the throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need, Heb.
4.16. And are not these express declarations of the mighty efficacy of Christ's
Sacrifice to make atonement for our sins, and of his intercession for us to
commend us to the favor of God, infinitely great supports to us, under our
fears of guilt and punishment? or could the very light of nature give such
assurance of Gods mercy to mankind as Gods express promise gives? The light of
nature could never give us that assurance. It did indeed convince men of their
sin and guilt, and of the danger of Gods displeasure thence arising; and
therefore labored to atone, and to remove divine displeasure by many
Sacrifices and Oblations, yea by the blood of humane Sacrifices; but still
alas! left the Offerers under great confusions and uncertainties: whereas God
has clearly and expressly declared himself reconciled to us by the spotless
Sacrifice of his Son

Having thus showed the absolute necessity of believing what the Gospel reveals
over and above, what the light of nature can discover, Let us hence observe the
sin and danger of those persons, who pretend indeed to believe in God, but not
in him, whom God has sent to be the Redeemer of the World.

1. They reject the Lord of life and glory, whom God has made the very judge
of the quick and dead, to whom he has given all Authority in Heaven and Earth.
They reject the head of that body to which alone Salvation is promised, for
there is no name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but
that of Christ, Acts 4.12. And he that believes not on the Son full not see
life; but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36.

2. Nor can it reasonably be pretended, that the light of nature affords the
same helps and motives to make men righteous, good, and holy, which the very
Gospel itself affords. There is nothing falser, nothing vainer than that
pretense, as I have already clearly showed. Nor do those men who do pretend to
believe in God, but yet refuse to believe in Christ, refuse this upon other
reasons, but only because the Laws of Christ are too severe, and holy for them:
they will not do what he commands, and therefore will not believe the Gospel;
nor would they pretend to obey the very light of nature, save only because by
these means they gain a liberty of doing as little as they please; for if you
reprove them for any sin, their answer is that it is not so by the light of
nature. They make that light to be what they please, and then do what they
please also, pretending the light of nature allows it.

But let all those, who would not ruin their precious Souls, who do in deed,
and good earnest, desire eternal life and happiness, fully and faithfully
believe the Gospel; believe in him, who has thereby brought life and
immortality to light, who has offered himself as a spotless Sacrifice to make
expiation of their sins, who, as he is now in Gods presence making intercession
for his body; so will appear to the World again at the last day, and reward men
according to their works. Let us all steadfastly believe in him, the only
begotten Son of God, for he that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son of God, has not life, 1 John 5.12.

The Twelfth Sermon.
Philip. 1.10. That ye may approve things that are excellent.


ALthough God, in his infinite wisdom, never enjoined any thing to men, but
what, considering all circumstances of times, and places, and persons likewise,
was useful and convenient for them, though indifferent in its own nature (such
were the numerous Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's Law;) yet are there other
instances of Duty, which are immutably good in themselves, and therefore proper
for all Ages. So are these two general Duties, to love God with all our hearts,
and to love our neighbor as our selves. So are the particular Branches of
them, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously
and godly in the world. And, so with very little exception, are all the Duties
of the Gospel. Which, impartially tried and weighed, cannot but be approved as
good, even, by them that do not practice them.

But a general assent of the understanding, not applied to particular instances
of life and action, is far short of the approbation, which the Apostle here
designs. For although the word (...), used in the Greek, sometimes signify
something less than a bare assent of the understanding, that is, to try and
examine only, as where it is required that we prove all things, (1 Thessalonians.
5.21;) yet here it signifies much more. Here, as also in other places, it
imports such a clear and settled judgment of what is good, as is accompanied
with resolution to practice what we judge to be so. This appears from what the
Apostle joins in the same period with it, sincerity, and a blameless life; and
these retain unto the end. For so is the tenor of his words, That ye may
approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offense
till the day of Christ. The same appears from the Style wherein the Apostle
speaks. For the words of my Text are part of a Prayer, wherein (after his usual
custom of saluting the persons to whom he writes, ver. 1. and praying grace and
peace for them from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 2.)
after his thanks rendered to God for their fellowship in the Gospel, in the
following verses of the eighteenth Chapter, he further prays that their love
might abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, and that they
might approve things that are excellent. Being then the Apostle prays this for
them as a thing of singular concernment to them, and being a cold assent of
mind, an ineffectual approbation of what is excellent, is a thing of no concern
at all, this cannot possibly be the thing which he so heartily prays for them;
but what is far more than this, such an approbation of the mind as (upon a full
and clear survey of all the differences of good and evil in their natures,
issues and effects, both in this and the other world) ends in a certain
determination never to deviate from what is good.

So then, taking this for granted (which the Apostle here supposes) that the
things prescribed to us in the Gospel, are things excellent, and good for us,
worthy thy to be commanded by God, and reasonable to be practiced by us,
especially upon the powerful motives, whereupon the Gospel recommends them; the
proper subject which these words offer unto our consideration is the
approbation of these things, that is, a clear and stable judgment in the Duties
prescribed to us in the Gospel. In the handling of which Subject, it is most
fit that we consider,

1. The singular use and advantage of such a judgment in those Duties.

2. How it may be gained.

3. And lastly, How it must be exercised by them that have attained unto it.

1. And for the first let it be considered, That the judgment which I have now
described is of such singular use to us, that it is,

(1.) Both an effectual cure of all the Diseases of our minds, considered
absolutely in themselves; and,

(2.) Also a constant Guide and Monitor in every instance of our lives. First,
A Guide to discover our Duties to us; and, Secondly, A Monitor to press the
practice of them, and steady perseverance in that practice, whatsoeever may
tempt us to the contrary.

(1.) If we survey the several maladies of our minds, the diseases of humane
understanding, there are,

First, Ignorance. Secondly, Doubt; and Thirdly, Vanity.
Ignorance of what is true and useful, or Skepticism and doubt in what is so,
or Vanity in applying our minds to things impertinent and useless to us, though
we may have certain knowledge of them.

First, The first Disease of the understanding is ignorance of that which is
truly good. For as the knowledge of what is so, is the proper perfection of the
mind, because it was made to know this (and every thing is perfect in its end;)
so the ignorance of what it was made to know, is its greatest malady and
imperfection. Ignorance is that Disease in the mind which utter blindness is in
the eye, that imperfection in the understanding which darkness would be in the
Sun and Stars. It Is that which Death is unto Life, its proper ruin and
destruction. It hides the face of truth from us, it eclipses all the luster of
goodness, it puts us under the power of error, which vitiates and perverts our
choice, and does not only lead to danger, but also reconcile us to it.

Now just contrary to these effects are those of clear and stable judgment, in
things pertaining to life and happiness, or (as the Apostle's expression is) of
the approbation of things excellent. Truth is to the mind as light to the Sun,
its proper luster, and perfection. Besides it powerfully recommends, and sets
off every thing that is good, it shows it in its native colors, and gives it
the advantages due unto it, so that (to use the Apostles words, Philip. 4.8.)
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
whatsoever there is that deserves our love, it is so represented in the mind,
when the mind is duly informed by truth, that it commends itself to choice, and
gains the possession of our hearts: for as we naturally desire and love, what
our minds recommend unto us, as good in itself and for us likewise: so the
hearty love of what is good, is the gaining the very thing we love; for there
is this remarkable difference between the love of good, or evil, and that of
all other things in the world, that we may love these other things, and yet
fall short of the things themselves, but he that loves good or evil, is good or
evil by so doing. The consequence of which discourse is this, that the
approbation of things excellent, a clear and stable judgment in them, is not
only the cure of Ignorance, the first disease of the understanding; but, what
is more than I said at first, a powerful and a sovereign medicine to the
distempers of our wills, to all our inordinate lusts, and passions.

Secondly, Let us now proceed to the second malady of our minds, from which it
is a like deliverance, and that is Skepticism, and suspense in things both
evident, and useful to us; for general assurance, and general doubt, to believe
every thing, and nothing at all, are equal distempers of the mind, although of
very different kinds, the one proceeding from vain confidence, the other from
the weak suspicions of a shattered, and broken understanding. There are some
men, that can make themselves believe any thing, even that their senses are
deceived, though duly applied to their proper objects; and yet pretend the
proof of this from a Doctrine which (being grounded on miracle, the proper
object of our senses) is grounded upon the truth of sense. So do they, that
believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; others had rather deceive
themselves by the Sophistry of their own wits in nice and uncertain
speculations, than content, or own themselves to be ignorant in things, the
knowledge whereof is useless. But then as it cannot be denied, that this is a
levity of understanding to pretend certainty in things uncertain: So is it a
more unhappy weakness, and a greater craziness of understanding, to doubt and
suspend in those things, which are both evident, and useful likewise A man may
doubt in things impertinent to life and happiness without any danger, or fear
either; because he neither really is, nor judges himself concerned in them: but
if he be doubtful in those things, wherein his greatest concernments lie; if he
question the difference of good and evil, if he call Divine Revelation in
question, if he doubt of the very truth of the Gospel, if he scruple what
Christ has brought to light, eternal life, and immortality; if he be under
suspense, and fear what is the way to life immortal; if he question what he
shall be hereafter, happy, or miserable, or neither of both, that is, as the
very brute that perishes; if he be held in suspense, and doubt of such
important things as these; what reelings and fluctuations of mind, what
anxieties and pangs of heart, what irresolution in life and practice, must
these uncertainties bring upon him? This is part of that very bondage, from
which our Savior came to free us, who was made partaker of flesh and blood,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil, and deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15. Which very deliverance Christ has wrought
by the clear discovery, and certain proof of life eternal, and all the means of
attaining to it; for so has he given us a firm foundation of clear, and
certain, and stable judgment both in our duties, and rewards: and so delivered
the minds of men from the bondage of suspense and doubt in their only true and
great concernments.

Thirdly, Now for the vanity of the mind in applying itself to useless things,
the last disease of the understanding; this also is effectually cured by the
approbation of things excellent, that is to say, by sound judgment in all our
duties, and rewards, for such a judgment. cannot fall to divert our thoughts
from needless things, from vain speculations, from idle subtilties, from
trivial questions, from angry contentions, and disputes about impertinent and
useless things; the itch whereof has been an epidemical disease in the minds
and understandings of men in most ages, and professions; in the Philosophers
among the heathen, in the Pharisees among the Jews, in the Schoolmen among the
Christians; to say nothing of the Mohammedan imposture, which is a trifle from
beginning to end: multitudes of volumes have been written upon impertinent and
trivial subjects, multitudes of Libraries hive been filled with troublesome and
unuseful rubbish, with the ruins of humane understanding, for all the vanity
we find in books was first of all in the minds of men.

It was the complaint of one of the greatest of the heathen, that all the
Philosophers before Socrates employed their studies in the speculation of those
things, which were of very small concernment; and did not only all that while
neglect the culture of life and manners, but left the very things they studied
in the same obscurity, they found them in. Socrates indeed made an attempt to
transfer knowledge from useless things into the lives and manners of men, and
certainly the attempt was great, but the success was not such, but that still
many professors of wisdom misspent their studies in useless trifles and
obscurities; the knowledge whereof made no man better, nor ignorance any man
ever the worse.

The same disease has long reigned among the Jews; those of their writings
that are most trifling, fable in history, and tattle in dispute (so is their
very Talmud itself) are most of all valued amongst them. This first began
amongst the Pharisees, and was so infections in that Nation, and so difficult
to be removed, when it had once seized the mind, that several Proselytes to
Christianity abused themselves, and troubled others with foolish questions, and
genealogies and contentions and strivings about the law, which the Apostle
reprehends as unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3.9. These are the men whom he
describes, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. who were proud, knowing nothing, doting about
questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmizings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth: where, by the way, we may observe, that they that made the greatest
pretense of striving for truth, lost piety, nay truth itself, while they
pretended to strive for it.

Now I will not say, that the same dust has been raised by the Schoolmen among
the Christians, that the same vanity and curiosity has had all the same
effects. But this, I think, I may aver, that whatsoever wit the Schoolmen show
in the subjects whereupon they treat, the choice of many of those subjects
demonstrates a strange want of judgment.

But to what purpose is this discourse? To clear the use, to show the necessity
of sound judgment in the things the Apostle styles excellent, in things
pertinent to life, and happiness: which very judgment is in itself an effectual
cure of all this vanity of understanding, that diverts the mind from its proper
food; from solid, useful, pertinent truth, from the knowledge of God, and of
our selves to trivial disputes, and speculations, which, after all a man's
pains and studies, leave his mind vain and empty, his temper proud, and
supercilious, and his life (for any thing gained by them) utterly unreform'd,
and vicious. So is not he that stedily approves the things that are excellent;
for the very excellency of these things thoroughly digested and approved, clears
his thoughts, and feeds his mind, and calms his affections, and corrects
exorbitant heat, and passion, and powerfully moves and inclines the Soul to
sobriety, patience, and humility. So is the third disease of the mind, its
vanity in useless speculations together with the effects hereof, perfectly
cured by sound judgment in things excellent, and worthy knowledge.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that the same judgment is a constant
guide, and faithful monitor to all our duties, in every instance of life, and
action.

1. A guide it is, that points out the way to life eternal through all the
varieties and uncertainties, that perplex the minds, and pervert the practices
of them that want it: a guide it is, that does not stoop to groundless
dictates, that is not frighted with bold Anathema's, nor yet misled by soft
persuasions, by fair pretenses or shows of Piety; no man's confidence shall
amuse it, no man's zeal impose upon it. If it be said, lo here is Christ, here
an unerring way to life: If it be said on the other hand, no, he is not there,
but here; there is nothing but imposture under the name of infallibility,
nothing but Vanity and Superstition under a mask of external piety. But here is
the spirit of Jesus Christ, here is his Doctrine truly preached, here are his
ordinances pure and entire without humane mixtures, and inventions; he that
has clear and stable judgment in the things, the Apostle styles excellent,
knows what to believe, and what to practice in the midst of all this noise, and
clamor. He is not put upon demurrs, first to doubt, and then to put off, and
delay his duty, till interest, passion, or example, till the hopes or fears of
the present world prejudice, and beguile his judgment; much less by a mistaken
zeal to pursue a crime instead of a duty, and think he is doing God service,
when he is violating Gods Laws, breaking the peace of a Church, or State, or
censuring those, whom he ought to honor. Such is the singular help we have
from the approbation of things excellent, from stable judgment in all these
things. It is a constant guide unto us to show us what our duties are in every
instance of life, and action.

2. Nor is it only a ready guide, but a faithful monitor to these duties: for
judgment informed by practical truth is one and the same thing with conscience,
and conscience is (...), conscience is a domestic God, conscience is Gods
vicegerent in us, which both declares our duties to us and powerfully presses
us to obedience. No man offends it, but wounds himself, no man follows it, but
finds content in so doing: whence that practice of St Paul recorded in his own
words, Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men.

And certainly did we take a survey of all the several considerations, that
recommend our duties to us, and then so six these considerations in our
thoughts, as to turn them into a stable judgment, this would so confirm and
strengthen us in the choice, and practice of what is good, as that neither the
hopes, nor fears, the charms, nor dreads of the present World should move us to
a wilful sin.

Let a man consider that his duties are made to be so by the Laws of God, who,
having made us out of nothing, has made himself our Sovereign Lord by so
doing, and being so, has all Authority to command us. Let him consider that
these Laws are good, and excellent in themselves, as highly tending to the
welfare both of Societies, and single persons. Let him consider with what
variety of application God recommends our duties to us, how he exhorts,
invites, and entreats, how he expostulates, and reasons with us, how he
upbraids, and chides our folly in many places of the Scripture. Let him
consider what he has done, and what he has promised to do hereafter, that he
may persuade us to obedience, that he has given his Son to die for us, to
redeem us both from sin, and punishment, and promised his grace to assist
obedience, and eternal happiness to reward it: And having considered all these
things, and digested the consideration of them into a firm and settled judgment,
can we imagine that such a judgment shall not persuade a free choice and ready
practice of every thing thus recommended to him?

Especially if he shall further consider, what are the principles within
himself and what the temptations also without, that urge him to reject his
duty: and what unhappy and sad effects attend the wilful rejection of it.

The principles within, that corrupt our choice, and practice too, are (as St
John himself has told us, 1 John 2.16.) the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, sensuality, covetousness, and ambition:
infatuations as well as sins, and torments as well as infatuations; especially
in their effects and issues, in the cares, and Envyings, and Animosities, which
they kindle upon the minds of men. The temptations that move these vain desires
are bodily pleasures, secular riches, and the esteem of vain men (for none but
such can value a proud ambitious person:) These are the things, even these
which are not satisfactions to the mind of the meanest man in the World, these
which bring regrets and pangs, cares, and anxieties, death, and misery along
with them, that tempt us to forsake our duties: These are the things, that
offer themselves in recompense for the loss of innocence, the loss of holiness
and true righteousness, the very Image of God himself: These are the things
that offer themselves in recompense for the loss of peace of Conscience, of
Gods favor, and the care of his good providence over us. Nay these are the
things that present themselves in exchange for our immortal Souls, the loss
whereof cannot be made up by gaining the whole world it self; for what shall it
profit a man, says our Savior, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Mark 8.36, 37.

So then let a man take an exact survey of all that recommends his duty, and of
all that moves him to forsake it. and then compare them both together; and the
comparison will be thus:

On one hand there is the law of God, who has all Authority to command him, on
the other his own extravagant passions, urging him to forsake that Law; on one
hand behold all the virtues all the graces of Christianity, that is to say, all
the perfections of humane nature; on the other all its sins, and follies, all
its degeneracies, and decays: on one hand there are stable joys, peace of
Conscience, peace with God, and assurance of his grace and favor; on the there
muddy and fleeting pleasures, mixed with abundance of regrets: on the one hand
clear and settled hopes of future life, and immortality; on the other want of
these hopes, nay the fears and dreads of eternal misery.

Now when a man makes this comparison, when he clearly discerns, and firmly
judges of all these things, as this comparison represents them, when he applies
this judgment to every instance of life and action, is it not an effectual
principle to restrain him from every wilful sin, to urge, and press him to
every duty? will he choose what is no way recommended? and refuse what is
represented to him under all the motives to choice, and practice?

No man chooses, or does amiss, but he that is ignorant, or forgetful either in
the nature of good, and evil, or in the effects, and issues of them. If there
be nothing of this in the case, let the charms of the world entice to evil, he
knows they are deceits and vanities, and cannot believe what he knows is false,
nor be cheated by what he does not believe. Let the dreads and calamities of
the world encomber and perplex his duties, he reckons (as the Apostle speaks)
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. This gives him courage,
strength, and patience, and makes him choose afflicted innocence, rather than
guilty, and short prosperity. Insomuch that all the great examples of the
highest and the noblest virtues, all these victories over the world, and all
its troubles and adversities, that are recorded in Sacred History, all the
great things that have been done, all the great things that have been suffered
for the advancement of Truth and Piety, have sprung from a settled resolution
(grounded upon stable judgment) never to vary from Gods will, and the way to
everlasting happiness. So Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.16. So Christ himself for that joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2. And so did his first and
faithful followers (for the securing of their innocence, and the rewards
thereunto belonging) patiently endure all their sufferings, as knowing that
their light affliction, which was but for a moment, wrought for them a far more
exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Thus is the approbation
of things excellent that is, a clear and stable judgment in all the duties of
the Gospel as there declared and recommended, not only, a perfect cure and
remedy of all the diseases of our minds, to wit, Ignorance, Doubt, and Vanity,
but also a constant guide and monitor in the whole course of our lives in the
World. Which being so,

2. Let us now consider what are the means of attaining to it, the second head
before propounded.

1. And here I shall not need to say, that since every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights (Jam. 1.17.) it must be
sought of God by prayer: Men may be rich, and great, and powerful, merely by
the permission of Providence, by practices not allowed by God, by fraud, and
injury, and oppression. But no man is wise unto salvation but by the special
grace of God, nor does he give this special grace, but where it is diligently
sought of him, which was the reason why St Paul so often puts it into his
Prayers, that God would bless men with this wisdom. So he prays for Timothy
that God would give him understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. for the
Ephesians, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, would
give unto them the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him,
Ephesians. 1.17. for the Colossians, that they might be filled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. and lastly for
the Philippians here, that there love might abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, that they might approve the things that are
excellent: from all which prayers to God for wisdom, for sound judgment in all
our duties, as represented in the Gospel, we learn that it is the gift of God,
and to be sought by fervent Prayer, especially seeing that God has promised to
give his spirit to them that ask him, and that in a promise confirmed by an
argument drawn from common and known experience: for so is that Luke 11.13. If
ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him.

2. Nor shall I need to put you in mind that to our Prayers for the
illumination of Gods grace, something of industry must be joined, in the study
both our of duties themselves, and the motives that recommend them to us: And
yet, in truth, both these things are partly so written upon our hearts, and,
since the revelation of the Gospel, so expressly declared to us, that we need
not weary or waste our bodies, nor vex and torment our understanding to gain
the knowledge of either of them. We need not now, as St. Paul tells us, say in
our hearts who shall ascend into Heaven? That is to bring down Christ from
above, to reveal the mind of God to us? Or, who shall descend into the deep,
that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead, that he may confirm that
Revelation? both these things are already done, so that now, as the Apostle
adds, Romans 10.8, 9. The word is high thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
that is, the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. Where we see the Apostle takes it for
granted, that he that firmly believed the Gospel, could scarce fail in the very
practice, much less in the knowledge and approbation of what is necessary to
salvation; so clearly are all our duties revealed, and so effectually
recommended in the Gospel.

3. So that what is now mainly requisite to gain a clear and stable judgment in
the good and perfect will of God, is so much antecedent probity, so much
sincerity toward God, as that we are willing to do his will, when it shall be
made known unto us: and wonder not that this should be requisite for the
gaining of stable judgment in it; for this is no more, than the very belief
that there is a God, may produce in every man so believing.

If a man have nothing of inclination to do Gods will when he shall know it,
why should God reveal it to him? or, supposing (what is so indeed) that he has
revealed it in the Gospel, yet how unapt a man is to believe what he is
resolved not to practice? and what, if believed, and not practiced, will be a
perpetual anguish to him. How easy is it in this case, when the interests of
powerful lusts and passions, bribe and corrupt the understanding, for a man to
prevaricate with himself, and baffle, and cheat his own mind?

But where there are honest inclinations to do Gods will in case it be known
and understood, these open the eye of the understanding, these let the light of
truth into it, and so our Savior tells the Jews, John 7.17. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self. He shall rightly judge of it. For such is the nature of
Christianity, so holy and excellent in it self, so clearly delivered, and
confirmed, that want of will to obey the Doctrine, and that where there are
most cogent motives to produce that very will in us, is the only cause of want
of faith, and judgment in it. So powerful an instrument is the Gospel to
produce a clear and stable judgment in all things excellent in themselves, and
requisite to our eternal happiness.

3. Now the method of using such judgment (which is the last of those
particulars which I propounded to be considered) lies in the application of it
to every deliberate design and action, in every circumstance of our lives, and
in firm purposes and resolutions never to stray or vary from it: As having
taken it up at first, when our minds were clear, and free from prejudice, and
that upon such grounds and reasons, as nothing should shake, or alter it in us;
not all the Sophistry of our lusts, not all the seductions of temptation, not
all the allurements of ill example; not all the advantages, nor all the
calamities of the World.

And therefore whenever we do incline to stray and deviate from that
judgment, which we have before fixed and settled, as the best and wisest
principle of life, whenever we find those resolutions, which that Judgment
did produce, begin to shake, and waver in us, we must remember (what is most
certain) that we are then under a temptation; that every temptation is a lie, a
mere seduction, and imposture, for every man if tempted (says St James) when
he is drawn aside by his own lust, and enticed (Jam. 1.14.) courted to injure
his own Soul: for so it follows in the next words. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death.

If therefore temptation gild the sin with the luster of wealth, and power, and
honor, with the show of safety, ease, and pleasure, we must remember that all
this gloss that seems to shine on the face of evil, is but the cheat of our own
fancies, the dream of vain imagination; we must remember that time will come,
when all this varnish will melt away, and then will things appear again, as
they are in themselves, and their true effects, and as we before judged of
them. And why should we change our minds, and judgments when there is no change
in the things themselves? why should we alter our resolutions, while the things
resolved are equally good, equally necessary, as they were at that very time
and moment, when we first took up those resolutions?

On the other hand, if the temptation, that sets a gloss on the face of evil,
misrepresent our duties to us, as hard and difficult to be performed, as
prejudicial to our contents, as dangerous to our Estates, or interests in the
world, we must remember that these suggestions proceed from mean desires and
fears, that these infatuate and darken Counsel, that if we hearken and yield to
them, we shall lose that which is infinitely better than all the advantages,
all the pleasures of the world, and suffer that which is infinitely worse than
all its troubles and calamities, lose Gods favor, and our own innocence, and
the rewards thereunto belonging, and suffer the insupportable effects of his
displeasure in another life.

But if we steadfastly persevere in the choice and practice of our duties
through all the varieties of temptations, which assault us in this vain world:
If we live by rule, and not by shift, by principle, and not by chance, and
occasion; then shall we preserve our own Integrity, continue in Gods grace and
favor, secure the peace of our own spirits, grow to an excellent habit of
mind, in its strength and steadiness, and tranquillity; and finally, after all
our trials, and all the joys of triumph over them, enter into our Matters joy,
and inherit the Kingdom prepared for us from the foundation of the World.

The Thirteenth Sermon.
John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it he of God, or whether I speak of my self.


WE live in a very inquisitive age, wherein it is very much disputed what is
the true Doctrine of Christ, and what are the most effectual means to find it
out, and understand it: It is disputed, what is the rule of Christian Faith: It
is disputed, what is the way certainly to understand that rule; and amongst
some it is disputed how we are sure that rule is true, whatsoever we understand
to be so. In the mean time, while it is disputed what is truth, Piety is very
much neglected, men do not heartily study truth in order to the practice of it,
they do not seek it with true design to live in due obedience to it; and this
indeed is one great cause, why the disputes concerning truth prove so endless,
and successless, for did men study the will of God with hearty and sincere
designs to practice it when they understand it, they would soon attain the
knowledge and belief of what is necessary to be known, for so we learn from
these words: If any man will do his will. In which words we may observe,

1. An Antecedent, If any man will do his will.

2. A Consequent, He shall know of the doctrine whether it he of God, or
whether I speak, of my self. Both which parts I shall,

1. Explain, and,

2. Then speak to the sense of the whole in an observation from the
Consequence; and first of all for the Antecedent: If any man will do his will.
We must consider,

1. That the persons that are designed in these words are those only to whom
the Gospel is proposed, not those to whom it is not propounded. I do not
undertake to determine how far those of the heathen world may desire to know or
do Gods will, nor how far God may, or may not express any favor, or mercy to
them; but this is all I undertake, that the declaration or promise of Christ
concerns those persons, and those only, to whom his Doctrine is propounded: for
as for others, St Paul himself gives us this account of them, Romans 10.14. How
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? How shall they believe
in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher.
From whence it appears that there is no general promise made (and therefore
none in these words of Christ) that men should believe Christ's Doctrine, unless
it should be propounded to them.

2. To this I add in the second place, that as this promise or declaration
concerns no persons but only them, to whom the Gospel is proposed: so does it
not concern any, but those to whom it is proposed truly, and upon true
accounts; that is to say, with the proper arguments which our Savior used to
confirm his Doctrine; If his Doctrine be not truly proposed it is not really
his Doctrine, but it is the opinion of the preacher; and it is not any man's own
opinion, but it is the true Doctrine of Christ to which the promise of Christ
belongs.

And then further, if the very true Doctrine of Christ be not propounded by
true arguments, by those arguments and demonstrations, which Christ himself and
his Apostles have afforded for the proof of the truth of it, it may possibly
fail of gaining credit for want of true and proper evidence: if men shall
labor to prove the Gospel by arguments of their own invention, and not by
miracles and predictions, not by the true and proper arguments, which were
intended for its proof; the weakness of them that do propose it, may prejudice
the truth which is proposed, and that with those very men themselves, who were
disposed to entertain it.

2. Now these are they, who are ready to do the will of God, when it appears to
be his will; If any man says Christ will do his will; that is to say, whosoever
he be, that is so disposed, so affected toward God, as that he is I willing to
do, or suffer whatsoever God shall require of him, when it appears that God
requires it, whosoever is upright and sincere, not prejudiced by any inordinate
lust, by Pride, or Avarice or Sensuality, but willing to obey the commands of
God, this man will believe, the Gospel, when truly and sufficiently propounded
to him, propounded as it is to us.

2. So it follows in the Consequent: If any man will do his will, he shall know
of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

1. In which Consequent, the Doctrine was that which was taught by Christ, and
that which he taught was his Gospel.

2. And then whereas it is further added, that, if any man will do the will of
God, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether our Lord spoke of himself, or
whether he spoke of God, this is not so to be understood as if there were any
doubt at all, whether he spoke of God, or not; but as a peremptorory
affirmation, that what he spoke, was the word of God, so that the sense of the
words is this: That whosoever is so disposed and inclined, as that he is
willing to do Gods will, will readily believe the Gospel of Christ, when truly
and sufficiently propounded to him.

These things explained, the observation the words offer us is this:

That a hearty and sincere inclination to do whatsoever God commands, is a most
powerful preparation to understand and believe the Gospel, I do not say, that
none but they who are thus prepared do ever believe, or understand it; for
experience often (hews the contrary; this it shows in all thole persons, who
believe it and yet obey it not, and of these no doubt, there are great numbers;
but this I say, that they who are really thus disposed, are under a powerful
preparation to believe the Doctrine of the Gospel, as will appear from several
reasons. For,

1. First of all, whosoever he be that is thus prepared, whole heart and will
is sincerely bent to do whatsoever God shall command him, the same person will
not neglect the use of sincere and true endeavors to inform himself,
especially in the Doctrine of Christ, which threatens no less than death
eternal to them that refuse and disobey it; and promises everlasting happiness
to all that believe it, and obey it.

Whosoever is willing to do Gods will, when he knows it, is willing to know and
understand it, in order to the doing of it. The same probity, the same
sincerity of heart and will, which does dispose him to the one, disposes him
also to the other: He that will not endeavor to know Gods will, will not obey
it, though he know it; he that will obey it, when he knows it, will labor
sincerely to know it also; and certainly this is a fair step to gain the belief
and knowledge of it; we do not find in the whole Gospel that any one man
refuted the Gospel, who duly considered what it was, and the miracles done for
the proof of it; Nicodemus considering these miracles, concludes that Christ
was sent of God; Rabbi, says he, we know that thou art a teacher come from
God, for no man can do these miracles except God be with him, John 3.2.

Lydia attending to the Gospel readily believed and entertained it, Acts 16.14.
The Bereans who applied themselves to consider the Gospel preached unto them,
and compared it with the ancitient Prophecies, readily believed and entertained
it, Acts 17, 12. nor does it appear that any person who did impartially apply
himself to consider it, and the proofs of it, did ever refuse or disbelieve it;
which is no small or obscure evidence, that whosoever uses his best endeavors
to understand the will of God, as every sincere person does, shall not fail to
believe the Gospel duly and rightly propounded to him.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that a true and hearty inclination to do
whatsoever God commands, removes those inward dispositions of Pride, and
Avarice, and Sensuality, which are the causes of Infidelity. Truth has no
enemy but Vice, men never disbelieve the Gospel but upon some prejudice they
have against it, nor are they prejudiced against the Gospel, but by their
lusts, which it forbids and threatens with most severe punishment. This is the
condemnation that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil; for every one that does evil, hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.
Truth is rejected and disbelieved, because disgusted and disrelished; it is
disrelished, because it forbids, because it reproves and controlls those lusts
to which men have enthralled themselves, which hold them in bondage, and
captivity.

1. If we consider the matters of practice which are commanded in the Gospel,
they are so suitable to our reason, they are so plainly good for the World,
they do so evidently design our happiness, they are every way so becoming God,
that it can be nothing but the prejudice of men's unreasonable lusts and
passions, that can persuade any man in the world, that the Laws prescribed us
in the Gospel, are not the Laws of the living God, especially since the first
publication of these Laws were confirmed with many, and great miracles: Could
any man living make a doubt whether it was the will of God, or not, that we
should love him with all our hearts, and do to men as we would that they should
do to us, were he not prejudiced by his lusts? Is it any thing else but want of
willingness to do Gods will, that can raise a scruple in any man's mind, whether
these things be his will or not?

And though the Gospel in some cases, that is, when truth is contradicted,
require us rather to suffer for it, than to forsake or to deny it, yet seeing
suffering in this case evidently tends to confirm the truth, to the glory of
God, to the good of the World, and has also the promise of life eternal: This
very love of patient suffering in this case, cannot offend the minds of any,
but those that are prejudiced by their lusts, those who will not do Gods will,
although sufficiently propounded to them.

2. As for those Articles of our faith, that do not contain matter of practice,
since there is nothing of contradiction, nothing at all of absurdness in them;
since those that declare matter of fact as that our Lord lived, and dyed, and
rose again, and sent the Spirit to his Apostles, are attested by universal
consent of those that could not but know the truth, and had no reason to abuse
it; since all the rest were clearly confirmed by evident and undeniable
miracles, there is no cause we can imagine, why any man should doubt or
disbelieve them, save only prejudice against the precepts, against the Laws of
the same Gospel, wherein these Doctrines are revealed; so that whosoever is so
disposed, as that he is willing to do Gods will, is under an effectual
preparation to believe and entertain the Gospel whenever duly propounded to
him.

3. Add hereunto in the third place, that God has promised his holy Spirit to
assist the upright and sincere, and that a willingness to do Gods will
whenever we know and understand it, is the very nature of sincerity. Ask, and
it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knocks and it shall be opened
unto you, Luke 11.9. and afterward at the 13th verse, If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him. To whom is this
promise of the Spirit made? if unto all that pray for it, much more to them
that sincerely ask it; to these at least, or else to none; to these although to
no other persons. The meek, says David, will he guide in judgment, the meek
will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. and more expressly at the 14th verse, The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
covenant, them will he bless with his assistance, them will he guide by his
Holy Spirit, them will he govern and direct; for as he sometimes offers his
grace to them that refuse to entertain it, so he never denies it to them that
do sincerely desire, and use it.

Now then to conclude the point in hand, being they that are willing to do Gods
will, are willing to use the best endeavors to understand it, being they are
free from those prejudices, that hinder the understanding of it; being they
have the promise of God to guide and assist them to this purpose: hence we
conclude what we have observed, that a hearty and sincere inclination to do
Gods will is a most effectual preparation to understand and believe the Gospel.

Now for the uses of this point.

1. Hence you see, that God is not wanting to those persons who can reasonably
expect assistance from him, to those that are willing to do his will, when it
is duly discovered to them; whosoever he is that is thus disposed, may assure
himself of Gods assistance to guide him into all needful truth, into all things
necessary to salvation; whosoever is not thus disposed, cannot justly expect
assistance from him; for why should God make known his will, where it is
certain before hand, that it will it not be complied withal? why should he
discourse his will to them, who are resolved to serve their lusts whatsoever
the will of God should be? nay to them, who will scarce believe any thing that
contradicts their lusts and passions, though never so duly propounded to them;
which is the case of every false insincere person, who is resolved to believe
nothing, which does not comply with his own corruptions? God has not promised
that they shall fee, who suffer their lusts to shut their eyes, who are not
willing to have the light, nor was their reason for such a promise. This fully
acquits Gods providence, that he has token sufficient care so to recommend the
Gospel in all things needful for Salvation, to give such evidence of its truth,
that whosoever is disposed to do whatsoever God commands (which the light of
nature it self suggests) shall easily know and entertain whatsoever is
necessary to Salvation; such is the course that God has taken in the
revelation of the Gospel, and of all things necessary to Salvation, that none
will complain of want of evidence, but only those that want integrity, those
who will not do Gods will, although they know and understand it. And for this
they are to blame themselves, and consequently for the effects of it, their
infidelity or misbelief.

2. But then secondly, seeing they that are willing to do Gods will, find the
Gospel so attested, as that they who will give credit to it, shall know and
understand whatsoever is necessary to Salvation: hence we may guess at the
great cause of infidelity and misbelief, wheresoever the Gospel is revealed.
The Gospel forbids, the Gospel threatens the sinful lusts and lives of men, and
therefore they who resolve to continue in their sins, cavil, and quarrel, and
contradict it; they hate that Doctrine which reproves them, and will not
believe what they hate, although it flash in their very faces. These men seeing
see not, and hearing they hear not, says our Lord, and in them is fulfilled
the Prophecy of Isaiah, which says, by hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive, Matt. 13.14.

And as there are some who disbelieve the whole Gospel merely in favor of
their lusts: so others upon the same account grossly mistake and misunderstand
it: They will admit no sense of it, but what is consistent with their sins,
what gives them leave to enjoy their lusts, and hope for pardon notwithstanding.

Men who resolve to retain their lusts, who will not part with their darling
sins upon any conditions whatsoever, must search out easy ways to Heaven, find
out other terms of Salvation than what the Gospel has propounded. Let the
Gospel be never so express in the denunciations of Gods displeasure against
those sins they live in, they must find out some arts and shifts to evade and
escape the plainest truths by some reserves, or false glosses, by clouding what
is plain and evident. Let it be never so expressly said, and that by our blessed
Lord himself, If thy right eye offend thee, pluck if out, and cast it from
thee, -- and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee:
for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not
that thy whole body should be cast into Hell, Matt. 5.29, 30. These men must
find out some distinctions, whereby they may retain that eye, whereby they may
reserve that hand, secure their dearly beloved lusts, and yet escape the flames
of Hell. It shall be answered to these and all other like expressions, either
that this is legal Doctrine, and that Christ has so fulfilled the Law, as that
there is nothing for them to do, but to rely on his righteousness or else (as
it is on another hand) that they will make satisfaction to God for those sins,
which they will not forsake; they will confess them to the Priest, they will
receive his absolution, they will most duly perform the penance which is
prescribed them by the Priest, give so much Alms, say so many Prayers, pass
through a course of so many fasts. And when they have found out these shifts,
then will they believe their sins forgiven, although they wilfully still retain
them: they will believe that this is so, in spite of common sense and reason,
in spite of the very light of nature, in spite of the holy Scripture it self,
and the plain design of Christianity; they will have a Creed which shall allow
them in their lusts, though clearly contrary to that Gospel, which our Lord
himself has revealed to us. From whence observe, that no man can be secure of
truth, who is no friend to real Piety; nor is he likely to understand the will
of God, who is not willing to obey it.

3. Hence we understand, that the only safe and certain way to know the will of
God aright, to know what true Religion is, and what is the way to life eternal,
is such a sincere disposition of mind, as renders us willing to obey whatsoever
God prescribes unto us. For so is the Gospel propounded to us, that whosoever
is so disposed, will readily believe and entertain it upon the evidence which
attends it, seeing nothing obscures, nothing eclipses this evidence, but an
aversation to the duties, which are commanded in the Gospel.

There is no Doctrine, no precept, no promise, or threat in the whole Gospel,
that contradicts the hopes or interests of any man that is really good. It Is no
interest of good men, that there should not be a day of judgment, that Christ
should not come to judge the World, that he should not judge it by these Laws,
which are prescribed us in the Gospel. It Is no interest of good men, that any
thing should not be commanded, which is commanded in the Gospel; that every
thing should not be forbidden, which the same Gospel does forbid; on the other
hand, it is most suitable not only to the judgment and reason, but to the
inclinations of good men, that God should command us to love himself with all
our hearts, to love our neighbors as our selves; that he should command all
the virtues that are commanded in the Gospels truth, justice, temperance,
patience, meekness, humility and the like; that he should forbid what is
forbidden, pride, and covetousness, and animosity, fornication, adultery, and
excess; it is suitable to their reason and hopes, that he should distribute
rewards and punishments in another world, according to men's behavior here; and
whosoever is thus prepared to understand and believe the Gospel, will neither
reject nor misbelieve it, nor any thing that is contained in it, which is
absolutely necessary to Salvation, especially seeing that God has promised to
guide and assist them with his Spirit who are resigned unto his will, and
willing to do what he commands them.

Observe we then, the great security that good men have of being led into all
truth, which is needful unto their Salvation: observe what is the ready way to
be guided into all such truth, it is to be upright and sincere, it is to be
willing to do Gods will, willing to do whatsoever it be, that God shall please
to require of us. If you find this willingness in your selves, suffer not your
selves to be overborn with their confidence who vainly boast of infallibility
in the midst of most pernicious errors, and in plain contradiction to the
Scripture. Truth is plain to them that love it, to them that are willing to
entertain it; but as for them, that are insincere, that have no hearty love to
it, the plainest things are obscure to them, showers and snares are in the way
of the froward, Prove. 22.5. which way soever they turn themselves, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, God shall send
them strong delusion that they should believe a lie, 2 These. 10.11.

4. Now therefore let the consideration of what I have said upon this point
persuade sincerity toward God, persuade to willingness, to obedience in every
instance whatsoever.

Sincerity is that which does dispose us to know and believe all needful truth,
sincerity is that which God will bless with the assistance of his Spirit,
sincerity is that which he will reward, not only with his conduct here, but
also with eternal happiness and everlasting life in the world to come.

The Fourteenth Sermon.
Malach. 1. 6. If then I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a
Master, where is my fear?

The former part of the verse is thus:

A son honors his Father, and a servant his Master. If then I be a Father,
where is mine honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear?


THERE are several relative names or titles given to God in the Holy
Scriptures, amongst which are these of Father, and Master: He is styled our
Father, because we receive life from him: He is called our Master, because he
has a just dominion over us. And because he is such a Father to us, as has
created us out of nothing, therefore are we entirely his; and because we are
entirely so, therefore is he such a Master, as has most absolute and most
Sovereign Dominion over us; upon which account he may, and does require the
highest love, and fear, and the most sincere obedience from us. The neglect
whereof in the persons, to whom the Prophet here applies himself, was the cause
of this expostulation: If then I be Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a
Master, where is my fear?

I shall not insist on these two duties we owe to God, that is to say, honor,
and fear, apart and distinctly from one another: But rather observe, that such
an honor is due to God, as comprehends a fear in it, and such a fear, as also
contains an honor in it; from both which things put together, there results a
filial awe, or reverence, which is compounded of love and fear, of love to God,
as he is our Father, and then of fear, as he is our Master.

This reverence then is the duty suggested in the words before us, which I
shall pursue in this method.

I shall show,

1. The degrees of reverence which God requires. 2. The proper effects of it.
3. The contradictions to it. 4. To which I shall add some considerations to
produce this reverence toward God, both in it self, and in its essects, and to
restrain us from all contradictions to it.
1. And for the first; The degrees of reverence which God requires can be no
lest, than the very greatest, that the Soul of man is capable of: For whereas
the reverence we owe to God conlists as I said, of love, and fear,

1. Both these are expressly required by God in the very highest and greatest
measures: Such are the measures of love to God commanded by our Lord himself,
Matt. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind; to which he adds, that we may see, how
indispensably that is required. This is the first, and great commandment: And
such are the measures of fear also which Christ commands toward God, Luke
12.4, 5. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him which
after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea I say unto you fear
him: Where both the motive which he propounds pounds to excite and awake this
fear in us, which is no less than the very danger of Hell it self, and the
reduplication of the command, fear him whom I shall mention to you, yea I say
unto you, fear him; evidently show that God requires the highest measures of
fear from us.

2. Now God has demanded the grratest measures of filial reverence of love,
and fear.

1. In conformity to his infinite goodness, both in it self, and toward us,
and to the Sovereignty and Dominion which he has over us, and all his
creatures, which is most absolute, and entire. He is so good, as that he merits
our highest love: He is so great, that he demands the highest fear: He is such
a Father, as that his admirable bounty to us, ought to inflame all within us
with the greatest love and affection to him: He is such a Master, whole
infinite greatness in himself, and absolute Sovereignty over us ought to create
the greatest fear.

2. Especially seeing that lower measures of love and fear, than those we have
for any thing else, will not secure our duty to him.

For suppose we love any thing, or person in all the World more than we love
God himself; then, when that thing, or that person comes in competition with
him, the love we have for either of these will overcome our love to God, and
cause the neglect, or the violation of our duty to him. And thus in truth it
comes to pals, that the pleasures and interests, the delights and advantages of
this World resist, and baffle, and overcome men's obligations to God Almighty.
They love these things more than they love God himself, and so that love
commands their wills, rules their affections, governs their thoughts, forms
their designs in contradiction to Gods commands, and the great concernments of
their Souls. They are in bondage to the world, to the wealth, and honor, and
pleasures of it, being enslaved and overcome by their inordinate love to them,
for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage, 2 Pet.
2.19.

And then again on the other hand, suppose we fear any person, or thing more
than God, and his displeasures, and the severe effects thereof, it cannot be
but that the greater fear must conquer and overcome the less; whenever there
falls a contest between them, it will so infatuate and blind the man possessed
and over-awed by it, as to throw him into a greater danger, namely, that of
future misery, that he may at present escape a lesser, that is, the loss of
wealth, or power, or reputation, any pleasures and satisfactions, the loss
whereof he more resents, than that of the favor of God himself, and the
rewards that he has promised. And this is the reason, why our Lord, as you
heard before, allows no fear of the very loss of life it self, in compare with
the fear of Gods displeasure, Luke 12.4, 5. This is the reason, why he allows
no love neither to the nearest relations, and concernments, which may not duly
be styled hatred, and is so styled by him himself, in comparison with that we
owe to him, Luke 14.26. namely, because the greatest love, and the greatest
fear, that is to say, the highest reverence is due to God.

A less reverence than this is, will not answer Gods express command; less than
this will not comport with his infinite goodness in it self, with his admirable
bounty toward us, or with his entire Dominion over us; less than this will not
secure our duty to him.

2. Having thus dispatched the first general, where I have showed the degrees
of reverence we owe to God; proceed we now unto the second, namely, the proper
effects of it. And this I the rather insist upon, because there are few, but
will at least profess an awe, pretend a reverence to God Almighty. But how
shall we know that this profession is true, and real? no other way, but by a
singular care and diligence to do whatsoever he commands, and avoid whatsoever
he has forbidden. So true is this, that the very pretense of love, or fear to
God Almighty, without the study of obedience, is a demonstration of
irreverence, as being an evidence of Hypocrisy; and this a contempt of God
himself, as supposing him capable to be deceived by mere profession and
pretense, or to be charmed and pleased by flattery, where he knows there is
nothing of sincerity.

Fear it self, where it is serious, being joined as it is in every person, with
a love and kindness to himself, cannot fail to command a care to serve and
please the person feared. Fear carries danger in its eye, and danger lays a
severe restraint upon every appetite and inclination that leads unto it; danger
excites us to endeavor to secure and deliver our selves from it, when it is
duly apprehended, insomuch that the clear and firm belief, joined with the
serious consideration of the miseries threatened to disobedience, cannot but
check, and restrain us from it. The serious belief of what is to come, cannot
consist with wilful sin and disobedience; for such belief will either subdue
and overcome the pleasures and satisfactions of sin, or else these pleasures
and satisfactions eclipse and extinguish that belief: They cannot possibly
dwell together, men cannot indulge themselves in evil, while they enjoy no
pleasure in it; they can enjoy no pleasure in it, while they so believe as to
dread the punishment threatened to it: Their lusts will be so uneasy to them,
being under the awe of fear and dread, that they will be forced to cast them
off, for their own ease and satisfaction. And this is the reason why those
ages, wherein the Gospel is clearliest taught and understood, produce the best,
and the worst men too; for where the Gospel is proposed in the simplicity and
truth thereof, those that believe and entertain it, are highly improved and
bettered by it; but those that resolve not to reform upon any motives, any
incitements whatsoever, are forced for their own ease and quiet, to abandon the
very belief of it; and having rejected this belief, become exposed to the
greatest evils without the restraint and contradiction of any remorses and
regrets: They have lost that very fear and dread, which, wheresoever it is
retained cannot but put a restraint and awe upon all those sinful inclinations,
that lead to future death and misery.

And now, if the very fear of God, where it is serious and considerate, that is
to say, where it is the thing it pretends to be, carry so great a power in it,
to command and press obedience to him; how much greater must that power grow,
when love being added unto fear, turns it into a filial reverence, and puts
another nature into it? Love freely offers what fear constrains: Love makes
that easy and delightful, which was a burden unto fear; nay Love itself
constrains likewise, but without reluctance and opposition, for it removes
these very things, and this is the meaning of St Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of
Christ, says he, constrains us; we cannot resist its Sovereign Power, we
cannot oppose its mighty influence, but freely surrender all within us, all our
powers and inclinations into obedience to our Lord, who dyed for us and rose
again. And to refufe him this obedience would be an eclipse of our own joys,
would be to resist our own desires, would be a violence to our selves, such an
other violence and contradiction, as it would be to our Lord himself. And this
is the reason why our Lord has represented our love to him as a certain
principle of obedience, John 14.23. If a man love me he will keep my words. He
can no more love and offend, love and displease me both together, than he can
choose to vex himself, and willingly practice and embrace a contradiction to his
will, and although my precepts may engage him to take up his cross for ray
sake, and his own Salvation, yet will not (...) grievous to him, seeing the
(...) had for him moved me to do the some thing, yea infinitely greater for his
sake.

Now then, to conclude this second general, seeing that reverence to God
Almighty carries both fear, and love in it, seeing love and fear cannot fail to
produce obedience to him, hence I conclude that this obedience is such an
effect of that reverence, as cannot be rent and divided from it.

3. Proceed we now to the third general, where I am to show the contradictions
to that reverence, and those are not only those very acts, which are usually
styled contempt, and scorn, and are in themselves expressly so; but all such
actions, and omissions, as evidently flow from gross neglect, and want of
reverence toward God, that is to say, all deliberate and wilful sins. And this
appears from the very words of God himself: A son, faith he, honors his
Father, and a servant his Master, If then I he a Father, where is mine honor?
And if I be a Master, where is my fear? says the Lord of Host unto you, O
Priests, that despise my name, and ye say wherein have we despised thy name?
They wondered, it seems, and were much surprised, that they should be charged
with so high a crime, as that of despising the name of God, that is indeed, God
himself; they were so secure, they were so confident, that they were not guilty
of this crime, that they are willing to come to trial, they plead not guilty to
the indictment, they debate and expostulate with God himself, and demand the
proof of the charge against them, wherein have we despised thy name? But what is
the answer which God returns how does he justify the charge against them? ye
offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and yet ye say, wherein have we polluted
thee? Is there not a Law which forbids you to offer any unclean or polluted
thing upon mine Altar? do ye not know that there is such a Law? and do you not
then despise my name, while you wilfully violate that Law, which you your
selves know to be mine? Thus does God make good his charge against these
persons, who wifully sinned against his Laws; and seeing the very same charge
lies against every wilful sinner, therefore is every wilful sin a flat
contradiction to that reverence which every man owes unto his Maker.

But now although it be true indeed, that every deliberate and wilful sin be a
contradiction to that reverence, which every man ows to the Lord of all; yet
are there some particular kinds of wilful sin, that are more expressly so, than
others. Some there are, that carry the very contempt of God clearly written
upon the brow, some there are, that carry the marks of irreverence to him in
more express and legible characters, although not all in the same degree.

1. The first and greatest of these sins, is the derision of all Religion, not
only neglect, but explicit scorn even of the very worship of God in Prayers,
and Praises, and thanksgivings, as well as of all other parts and instances of
the duties he has required from us. A thing St Peter himself foretold, 2 Ep.
3.3, 4. Knowing this first that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming?
Where he describes such persons, as deny the coming of Christ to judgment, and
then, in consequence of this error, scoff and despise all Religion: now what
is Religion, but the homage we owe to our Sovereign Lord, the great Creator of
Heaven and Earth? and what is it then to despise Religion, but to despise that
homage? and what is that, but a despite to God himself? the thing is evident
beyond denial, and so is another besides that, which is, that it is not matter
of wit to deride and to despise Religion; for if it be frenzy, it is not wit;
and if it be not a real frenzy to despise the homage a man owes to God, and so
to destroy and ruin himself, there is no frenzy in all the World.

2. But to proceed, another sin that carries a signal mark upon it of great
irreverence toward God is drolling upon the holy Scriptures, irreverent use of
the words and expressions therein used, the application of those expressions to
trivial purposes and occasions, profane allusions made unto them, and to be
short, the using of any thing therein said for mirth, and sport, and
entertainment. This is to play with Gods oracles, this is to jest upon Gods
word, and so a reproach to God himself, and visibly betrays a very great
irreverence to him. No man trifles, no man jests upon the words of a mortal
man, turning them into sport and laughter, but in derision and flight of him;
no man doubts, but that he that scoffs (...) ^^rides his words, brings a
contempt upon his person, and exposes him to the scorn of others. And so do
they (so far at least as they are able) expose the Majesty of God himself, that
abuse the words of the Holy Scriptures to entertain themselves, or others.

3. There is yet another sin behind, which I could willingly have omitted if I
could have tolerably satisfied my self, that it does not carry a more than
ordinary mark upon it of an irreverence toward God, though not so great as the
two former; and that is habitual and constant swearing, and that without all
provocation, in common and ordinary conversation, just contrary to that Law of
Christ, Matt. 5.34. I say unto you, swear not at all, that is in ordinary
communication, for so it follows, v. 37. But let your communication be yea,
yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. Comes of
evil? so does every Overt act of sin; every such act flows from some sinful
lust within: for when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when
it is finished, brings forth death. But it should seem, this sin of swearing
in cool blood, and that in ordinary conversation, proceeds from some
extraordinary evil. And what that is will very easily be understood, if we
consider that this sin has no foundation in those appetites, that God has
planted in man's nature, either to preserve himself, or to propagate, and to
continue his kind, as all indulgence to the body, all kinds of sensuality have;
for this sin of common swearing has no foundation in hunger, or thirst, or
bodily pleasure, or in the desire of wealth or ease, nay I may add of power,
and greatness. It is a sin without a temptation from without, nor does it arise
from any of those very inward appetites, that God has planted in our natures:
from whence it appears that it has its rise from an unnatural kind of vanity,
joined with a very high irreverence toward God, who has given an express Law
against it, and that it is in its own nature a bold ostentation of that
irreverence; for it is a calling God to witness in every trivial and slight
affair, where a man would not dare to call a Prince, or a serious person to
give his testimony.

I do confess that some persons may have been habituated to this vice, before
they well understood themselves, or the nature of the vice it self. But why do
they use no care to leave it? why do they not study to reform it, when they do,
or may understand better? What will he do in compliance either with Gods
command, or with his own eternal happiness, who will not labor to quit a vice,
which is so expressly forbid by Christ, and to which he has no greater
temptation, than he has to profane and idle swearing? How can he hope to
overcome the lusts and vices of Sensuality, which are nothing else but the
abuse of natural desires and inclinations, and are by them suggested to him,
and often excited by strong temptations from without? how can he hope to deny
himself in point of wealth, and power, and honor, or to embrace death, or
bonds rather than forfeit his integrity (which is most necessary to be done)
who will not forsake a groundless sin, a sin without any natural appetite to
suggest, and without a temptation to excite it? A small degree of fear and
reverence to God Almighty would easily overcome this sin; which is an evident
demonstration that it flows from great irreverence to him.

4. But to proceed to the last general; namely, the several considerations
which may produce a singular reverence toward God, both in it self, and its
effects, and restrain us from all contradictions to it.

1. Let us first consider the Spirit and quickness of the style, wherein God
demands our fear and honor, wherein he requires our reverence to him. If I be
a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear? which
Language carries this sense in it. Do not you your selves require a singular
love and fear from your relations, namely, from your children and servants,
under the name of the same relations, whereupon I require the like from you?
and, what is more, generally receive what you require? For a son, says he,
honors his Father, and a servant his Master. And had he not reason then to
add, If then I be a Father, where is mine honor, and if I be a Master, where
is my fear.

2. Now therefore secondly, let us consider how great a guilt we must contract,
if we should deny that to God, to the Father of the whole Creation, and the
Sovereign master of all the World, which every Father, every Master demands
from his Children, and his Servants under the name of the same Relations,
though the obligations thence arising be infinitely greater as they stand
between God and men, than between men among themselves. And yet notwithstanding
all this, what Father is there amongst men, who will endure neglect and
insolence, and disobedience in his Son? who will not reject, and disinherit,
and utterly cast him of for it, if he do not repent, and humble himself, and
return to the practice of his duty? Where is the Master, that patiently bears
not only the neglect of service, but wilful injury in his Servant? Where is the
Master that bears this without the greatest indignation against his servant for
so doing? and that does not judge his guilt so great, as to deserve the
severest punishment? And therefore judge what guilt it is which every man draws
upon himself by a wilful irreverence and disobedience to the great Father, and
Lord of all.

3. And although it be very true indeed, that they, who bear the greatest load
of guilt upon them, may not at present find themselves grieved and oppressed by
the sense of it; yet ought it seriously to be considered, that God can in a
single moment (such is his Sovereignty over the very spirit of man) awake that
guilt into fear and dread in the greatest Spirits in the World, awake it by an
invisible dart, a secret arrow of his indignation shot immediately into the
heart. And some such things he did in David, as plainly appears from his own
words, Psalm. 38.1, 2. and following verses, O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath,
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: for thine arrows stick fast in me,
and thy hand presses me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of
thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. -- I am
troubled, and bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. Thus was a
Prince, and a man of War, who never feared the face of an Enemy, who had
encountered, and slain a Giant in a single combat; who had killed two of the
fiercest kinds of savage beasts, a Lion, and a Bear with a naked arm, 1 Samuel
17.36. Thus was he dashed and broken all to pieces by the sense of his guilt,
and Gods displeasure, a wakened by the hand of God.

4. Which teaches us further to consider, how grievous a burden guilt becomes,
whenever a lively sense thereof is moved and excited in the Soul. The spirit
of a man will bear his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove.
18.14. While the spirit within is clear, and vigorous, it will support and
sustain the Soul under every outward loss, or danger: but if the Spirit it self
be broken either by the calamities of the World, or by the sense of its own
guilt, what shall support and sustain it? But then it is here to be remembered,
that although the calamities of this world may indeed break the spirits of men,
yet that there is vast difference between the breaches made by them, and those
that are made by their own guilt. These may seize upon the Soul, but they
cannot seize upon the Conscience; those may enter the outmost trenches, but
they cannot enter the Royal Fort: but guilt attaches and arrests the
Conscience, makes a desolation there, where our chiefest support and comforts
dwell; for it comes armed with Gods displeasures, and these are sharpened with
such a force, as nothing is able to resist, the glorious Majesty, the Almighty
power, the spotless purity, the Sovereign dominion of God himself. And hence
that observation of David, Psalm. 39.11. When thou with rebukes do correct man
for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth: where the
original word that is rendered beauty signifies all that is desirable, all that
is pleasant in any person; that is, not only noble stature, excellent shape,
comely features, lively air, pure complexion, and the like; but gay humor,
pleasant wit, fine address, mirth and briskness in entertainment, and
whatsoever else it be, that may serve to render any one acceptable in common
Society, and conversation. All which beauty presently withers, fades, and dies,
as David here expressly tells us, under the sense of Gods displeasures, when he
rebukes us for iniquity: When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity,
thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth.

What then remains, but that we reverence so great a God, who can stain the
beauty, eclipse the Glory of all flesh with a single frown of his displeasure?
and that we express that reverence in most sincere obedience to him? fear him,
for he is your Sovereign Lord: fear him, for he is a mighty God. The Angels
themselves so love God, as that they fear and reverence his Majesty. The Devils
tremble under his displeasure, and the greatest persons cannot bear it, no
flesh no spirit can endure it: It wastes the one, confounds the other, no
creature is able to stand before it.

But after all, although the Majesty of God Almighty have a most astonishing
glory in it, yet is the dread and terror of it allayed and mitigated by his
goodness; and therefore as he demands our fear, so does he also require our
love. And has he not reason so to do? or do we want most powerful motives to
excite, and kindle our love to him? He has given us life, and breath, and
being: he daily gives us all the supplies, and supports of life. We eat the
fruits of his kindness to us, we wear the livery of his bounty, we lie down,
and rise, we sleep, and awake, live, and move, and have our being under the
shelter of his providence. And to proceed to higher things, he has given his
own Son for us. And he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.
unless we deny them to our selves, by refusing the terms, whereupon he gives
them; What has God by his prohibition denied to men none of the blessings of
this life, none of the joys of that to come; he has not forbidden us wealth,
or power, or reputation, or peace, or pleasure in this World; much less denied
us eternal happiness in the other. There is but one thing in all the World,
which he has denied us, and that is sin: and this very thing he has refused
us, because it is really hurtful to us. And although he has not allowed us
this, yet can he give us that very thing, that very happiness we seek in it
(for this we seek in every thing) this he can give without our sin, and what is
more, will give to them that truly love him, whatsoever is really good for
them. He can give Wealth without Covetousness, he can give Power without
Oppression, he can give Honor without Ambition, and pleasure of life without
any stain, without any spot upon our innocence. He needs not our sin to make us
happy, no nor do we need it neither to this purpose. The truest happiness in
all the World is to love God, as our Lord commands, with all the heart, and
soul, and mind: If we so love him, we shall enjoy him, and shall be eternally
happy in him. Which he for the sake of his only Son grant unto us.

Now to God the Father, etc.

The Fifteenth Sermon.
Matt. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill.


IF you view the following parts of the Chapter, you shall find our Lord
prescribing several rules of virtue, which were, at the least in some
instances, far more perfect and exact, than those that were given in the Law of
Moses, or by the Prophets succeeding him; and all of them stricter than those
were, in the sense received amongst the Jews: which is the reason, why he
opposes what he said, to what had been said to them of old.

Now because this seeming opposition between his precepts, and those of Moses,
and the Prophets, might create a suspicion among the Jews, that he came to
destroy the Law, and the Prophets, to contradict what they had said, and to
offer violence to their Laws, he removes the occasion of that suspicion,

1. By a caution in these words, think not that I am come to destroy the Law,
or the Prophets.

2. By an express declaration of the contrary, I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill.

The former I shall not insist upon, because whatsoever is contained in that,
must be considered in the latter; for the better understanding whereof, it will
be requisite to explain what is understood,

(1.) By the Law and the Prophets.

(2.) What by destroying the Law, or the Prophets.

(3.) And lastly, what by fulfilling them.

(1.) And for the first, although it be very true indeed, that the Son of God
did not in any wise contradict either any history, or prediction contained in
the Books of the Old Testament, but contrariwise confirmed whatsoever is there
related, and accomplished what was foretold of him; yet I conceive that the Law
is taken, in this place, for the Laws delivered in the Books of Moses, and the
Prophets, for those rules of life which are contained in the other Books of the
Old Testament, which were received amongst the Jews: and my reason is, because
our Savior in his following discourse in this Chapter takes no notice of
matter of history or prediction, but only of matter of Law, and Precept.

(2.) And then further, as the Law and the Prophets signify the precepts
delivered in the Books of the Old Testament; so when our Lord assures his
hearers, that he came not to destroy those precepts, his meaning is, that he
did not come to thwart or oppose, or contradict them, or any thing which God
designed in them, for so is the word (...) taken in several places of the
Scripture.

(3.) And lastly, when he further adds, that he came to fulfill those precepts;
his sense necessarily must be this, that he came to advance and improve, or
accomplish whatsoever God intended in them.

Having now sufficiently cleared the sense of the words before us, I shall
proceed to show the truth of the several parts contained in them.

1. And first of all, of the negative part, I am not come to destroy the Law,
or the Prophets.

2. And secondly of that which is affirmative, But I am come to fulfill them. In
my discourse on both which parts, it will be convenient to consider the several
kinds of Laws or Precepts given to the Jews, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial,
apart, or severally by themselves.

1. And to begin with the negative part, plain it is,

1. In the first place, That our Lord did no way contradict any moral precept
of the Law, but left his followers under perpetual obligations to obey all
precepts of that kind: All things, says he, whatsoever you would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets,
Matt. 7.12. Where we find him confirming that general rule, which the Law and
Prophets had delivered touching our duty toward our neighbors, and
consequently settling all particular acts of duty, which the moral Law required
toward them, by the confirmation of that rule. The same is done as to our
duties both to God, and man. Matt. 22.37, 39. where he establishes and approves
the two great commands of the Law, that we love God with all our heart, and
with all our mind, and that we love our neighbor as our selves; whereunto he
presently adds these words, on these two commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets. These were the things which the Law and Prophets aimed at in all
their precepts and exhortations; and these has Christ confirmed and ratified,
but no way prejudiced by the Gospel.

I say not now, how much more holy rules of life our Lord has given in several
cases, than were given by the Law, or Prophets; of that I shall give an account
anon: all that I now observe unto you, is that an addition of higher precepts
of obedience was no destruction, or violation of those that were not so high as
they, but really an improvement of them; just as the growth of a child to a man
is no destruction, but an improvement of the person; or as a greater degree of
virtues includes, but does not destroy the less: from whence I conclude, that
although our Lord has added perfecter rules of holiness, than the Law or the
Prophets had delivered; yet he did not destroy them by so doing, but further
improved what they designed.

But the great difficulty does not lie in reconcileing our Saviors words (I
came not to destroy the Law, or the Prophets) with what he did as to the moral
part of the Law, but with what befell its other branches, namely the ceremonial,
and judicial, both which parts fell to the ground after his coming into the
World, and what he did and suffered in it; and yet in truth he did not destroy
either of them, in the sense, wherein destruction is taken in these words: that
is to say, he did not oppose, or contradict them, or otherwise behave himself
toward them, than was suitable to the mind and will of the Lawgiver.

2. He did not violate, much less oppose any precept of the ceremonial Law, but
caused the Law it self to cease, not by any opposition to it, but by removeing
all occasion of any further use of it: as the Laws of war are not violated, but
cease, and take no place in peace. He introduced that very thing, which the
ceremonial Law designed, the introduced the life and substance of those things,
which were foreshadowed in that Law: and so he made it cease and vanish, not by
opposing or contradicting, but by accomplishing the end of it, as it will
further appear to you, when I shall show how he fufilled it.

3. Nor lastly did our Lord destroy, that is, violate or contradict the
judicial part of Moses his Law, namely, the Law of the Jewish State, for that
Law fell of it self in the Jewish Commonwealth; when the City of Jerusalem was
destroyed, when the generality of the people were carried away into captivity,
when the whole Government was dissolved, and the Country became a Roman
Province, there was an end of that Commonwealth, and so an end of those Laws,
whereby that Commonwealth was governed. For the Laws of the Jewish
Commonwealth were not given, save only to the people of the Jews, nor were
they designed to continue longer, than the Commonwealth it self continued; so
that when this was once dissolved, those also fell of their own accord, without
any violation offered unto them by our Savior: from all which several
considerations it plainly appears, that he did not come to destroy, or opose
the Law, or the Prophets, or any precept contained in them, and that he did not
behave himself to either of them, as one that came to oppose or thwart them. So
careful was he to give no scandal, to create no real offense to the Jews by
contradicting in any precepts, moral, ceremonial, or judicial, which the Law,
or the Prophets had established.

2. Having showed the truth of the negative part of our Saviors words, which
is, that he came not into the World to destroy either the Law or the Prophets;
let us now proceed to give an account of the other part, wherein he affirms,
that he came to fulfill them; that is, as I have before explained it, to
improve, and accomplish what they contained, and what was mainly designed in
them. And here proceeding in that method which I have used in the former part,

1. I first observe that our blessed Lord fulfilled the moral part of the Law,
by giving stricter rules of holiness, than either Moses or the Prophets had
formerly given unto the Jews, according to the received sense amongst the best
of their Interpreters, and, no doubt, in several cases, stricter than Moses
himself designed; and this is the sense wherein St Chrysostom and Tertullian,
and diverse others of the ancient Christians, affirm our Savior to have
fulfilled the moral Law, as well as by personal obedience to it. They teach
that he filled up those vacuities that Moses had left in moral duties (because
the Jews were not able to bear them) by adding higher rules of holiness: for as
he established the New Covenant upon better promises, than those the Old was
built upon; so he gave sublimer and higher precepts, than those that were given
in the Old. If the Law, and the Prophets forbad murder, murder committed by the
hand, our Savior stifled it in the heart; for he has forbiden causeless
anger: I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause
shall be in danger of the judgment, Matt. 5.22. If Moses condemned adultery in
the body, our Lord condemns the very impurity of the mind, and styles it the
adultery of the heart; ye have heard that it has been said by them of old,
thou shall not commit adultery, but I say unto you that whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart,
v. 27, 28. If the Law of Moses allowed divorce upon small disgusts and
animosities, our blessed Lord does not allow it, save only in the case of
Adultery, which is the peculiar and proper breach of matrimonial obligation, v.
32. of the same Chapter. If the Law allowed a retaliation of evil for evil, an
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, our Lord has forbidden us to resist
evil, v. 39. that is to say, to revenge it; for not to resist the evil done us,
is to give place to the wrath of our Enemy, and this is the same as not to
avenge it; and so we learn from St Paul's words, Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved
avenge not your selves; but rather give place unto wrath, for it is written,
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

If the Law and the Prophets forbad perjury, our Lord has forbidden all
swearing in our common and ordinary conversation; let your communication be
yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, v. 37.

If the Law allowed to hate an Enemy, that is to say, any person of the seven
Nations, whom God had devoted to destruction, our blessed Lord has commanded
us to love our Enemies. I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you, and persecute you. v. 44. of the same Chapter. Thus has he fulfilled
the moral Law, by filling up several vacuities that Moses was forced to leave
in it, in condescension unto the Jews, and to the hardness of their hearts; and
by adding higher rules of holiness, than the Law or the Prophets had delivered.

2. Now to proceed, in the second place, to the ceremonial part of the Law:
this did our Lord fulfill likewise, and that also two several ways.

1. By personal obedience to it, and all the rights therein enjoined, whereunto
he freely became subject. He was circumcised the eighth day, according as that
Law enjoined; he was redeemed by a certain price being a Son, and a Firstborn;
he observed the feasts prescribed in the Law, yea and that of the dedication
also, although but of humane institution, as appears in the history of the
Gospel; he did, and permitted to be done, in and upon his own Person,
whatsoever it was that Law required: whence he is said to have been made of a
woman, made under the Law; that is to say, subject to all its Rites, and
Ceremonies, Gal. 4.4.

2. But secondly there is another way, wherein our Lord fulfilled the ritual
part of the Law, which was by accomplishing all those things, and introduceing
all those graces, which were typically figured, and shadowed in it. That had a
shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things: that is to
say, not the things themselves, Heb. 10.1. (and so is the word effigies taken
by no worse an Author than Tully himself, nos solidam et expressan effigiem
virtutis nullam tenemus;) but Christ introduced the very things, which were
foreshadowed in that Law. His Priesthood was antitype to that of Aaron; his
Sacrifice to the Sacrifices of the Law; his entrance into heaven it self, to
appear in the presence of God for us, to the High Priests entrance into the
Holy of Holies on the solemn day of expiation; the expiation made by his
Sacrifice, to that which was made by those of the Law; the spiritual purity of
the Gospel to the legal washings, and purification, and abstinences from things
then impure, the eternal rest, that he has prepared for the people of God to
the Jewish Sabbaths, and new moons; all which things were only shadows of
things to come: and so the Apostle himself assures us. Col. 2.16, 17. Let no
man therefore judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of
the new moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ; that is to say, Christ introduced the things themselves,
which were but shadowed in the Law by typical figures, and similitudes: which
is likewise the meaning of these words, John 1.17. The Law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ; he brought in the very life and
substance of what was but pictured in the Law: and thus he fulfilled the ritual
part of Moses his Law, as well as personal obedience to it.

3. Now for the judicial part of the Law, whereby the Jewish State was
governed, I need not say, how our Lord fulfilled it by submitting himself both
to the Roman and Jewish Magistrate. He was contented to pay tribute, he
suffered himself to be apprehended by the Officers sent to this purpose, he
suffered himself to be tried and sentenced, and yielded himself to the
Execution of the sentence unjustly passed upon him; and though he could not
own the guilt, yet did he quietly receive the punishment; for he was led as a
lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened he
not his mouth, Isa. 53.7.

But the way whereby he did more especially fulfill the judicial Law of Moses,
was by introducing the royal Law of universal love, and kindness; which, if
observed, would more effectually attain the end of humane Laws, than all the
wisdom, force, or power, which can accompany and attend them.

The end of all political Laws is only the safety and the prosperity of the
Commonwealth, that men may live in mutual peace, that every man may possess
and enjoy his life, and estate, and reputation, and whatsoever belongs unto
him, without the trouble of fraud, or violence from other persons; all which
ends would more sucessfully be attained by the Law of universal love,
peculiarly settled by our Lord, than by the wisest of humane Laws, and the
strictest execution of them; those can but bind the outward man, they cannot
change the hearts of men; those can but tie the hands of violence, and muzzle
the mouth of the wild beast; they cannot alter and mend his nature, nor make
him further abstain from injury, than the fear of punishment and revenge may
put a restraint and awe upon him: whereas the mutual love and kindness, that
Christ has commanded amongst men, and also recommended to us by the highest
and most effectual motives, would not only restrain the outward actions of
fraud, and injury, and oppression, but kill the very lust within, wither the
very root of biterness, and render every man easy and helpful to his
neighbor, instead of being injurious to him; and this is suggested by St Paul
Romans 13.8 9.10. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law. For this, thou
shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou
shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet: and if there be any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self: love works no ill to his Neighbor, therefore love
is the fulfilling of the Law. Love thoroughly accomplishes all those ends, which
were indeed designed by the Law, whence it is said, That the Law is not made
for a righteous man, a man animated and inspired by a living Law of love
within, but for the lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9. And thus has our Lord
fulfilled the judicial Law of Moses, as well as the moral and ceremonial, by
the most efficacious ways and methods of settling such a Law within us, as would
most effectually work and propagate the great design of the Law of Moses, which
was added, as the Apostle speaks, because of transgressions, till the seed
should come to whom the promise was made.

Having thus cleared both the parts of the words before us, it now remains that
we reflect upon what has been said, and draw some Observations from it.

First, And first of all, since our Lord came not to destroy, but to fulfill the
Law and the Prophets, hence we learn, That Christianity, that the righteousness
and holiness of the Gospel was the thing that God had in his eye, the thing
that he purposed and intended, and that lay at the bottom of his counsels, in
the whole Mosaical Dispensation, as well in all the external Rites, as the
other parts of Moses's Law.

God never had any delight or pleasure in the flesh or blood of Bulls and
Goats, or any Sacrifices of the Law; he was never pleased with ritual washings
or expiations, as things excellent in themselves; nor did he institute these
Rites for any complacence he took in them, but partly, as the Ancients observe,
to typifie things that were to come, namely, the mysteries of the Gospel; and
partly to retain the Jews, accustomed to such like Rites in Egypt, in the
worship and service of himself, the only true and living God; lest being denied
their former Rites in the worship of the true God, they should have used them
unto Idols, and to have continued in that apostasy, whereinto themselves and
the world were fallen at the delivery of the Law.

Had there been no such Reasons as these for the Rites enjoined in Moses's Law,
they had never been instituted or commanded, nor had God any respect for them,
any regard to the most zealous performance of them, when divided from the
essential parts, the great Fundamentals of Religion, judgment and mercy, and
the love of God.

Hence those words of the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 6.20. To what purpose comes
there to me incense from Sheba? and the sweet Cane from a far Country? Your
burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your Sacrifices sweet unto me. And
those of Isaiah, chap. 1.11, 12. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams,
and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of
Lambs, or of He-goats. Add hereunto those excellent words of the Prophet
Micah, chap. 6. verf. 6, 7, 8. Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and
how my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings,
with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or
with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No, He has showed
thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? These were the
things which he accepted, nay these were the things which he designed in the
very Ceremonies of the Law, and in all its symbolical Types and Figures. And
these are the things which Christ our Lord came to propagate and promote in all
he did and suffered for us. So constant has God been to himself, and to the
advancement of real goodness amongst men in all the Ages of the World, before,
and under, and after the Law. He still designed the same thing, he had still
the same end in his eye, namely, that we should love him with all our hearts,
and love our Neighbor as our selves: on these, as our Savior himself tells
us, hanged all the Law and the Prophets. And the end for which our Lord himself
came into the World was more effectually to promote what the Law of Moses had
designed; and so the Apostle himself assures us, Romans 8.3, 4. For what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit.

Secondly, What then remains in the last place, but that since our Lord came
into the World, not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law and the Prophets, since
he ^ath fulfilled them by introducing that Religion which God always had in his
eye in all the Shadows of the Law, a Religion suitable unto reason, a Religion
that perfects humane nature, a Religion free and disentangled from the load of
Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, a Religion aiming at nothing more than hearty
love to God and our Neighbor, and peace and happiness both in this and the
other world: what now remains, but that we freely embrace and practice a
Religion thus recommended to us, neither reproaching it by our lusts, by foul
and sensual inclinations; nor yet abusing and obscuring it by vain and useless
superstitions.

It is a reasonable and manly service that God is pleased to require from us,
it is the cure of all our maladies, it is medicine unto all our distempers, it
is health and soundness to all our powers. It is not sacrifice and oblations,
it is not circumcision nor uncircumcision, it is not what is hard and
burthensom, but what is useful and good for us, it is righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. So that had we no other demonstration of the infinite
love of God to us, this were sufficient proof of it, that he has made our
Religion our happiness. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision; but a new creature; that is, the renovation of our
minds by a sincere faith and love. And as many as walk according to this Rule,
peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

The Sixteenth Sermon.
Psalm 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies; I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.


THE ways of a man being in the language of holy Scripture, all those actions
and omissions, those words and thoughts and inclinations which ought to be
governed by Gods Laws, here styled his testimonies and commandments; there is
no doubt but that these are the things which David here styles his ways. Nor
need we question what kind of thoughts he employed upon them: for the event it
self declares that they were serious considerations how far they accorded or
disagreed with Gods Commands, together with quick and strong resolutions to
amend what he found amiss in them; wherein he discharged a great Duty, but such
as is very much neglected, yea such as even he himself, as these very words
themselves suggest, had for some time, at least, omitted. Some men are afraid
to make a review of their own lives, as being sensible in the general, that
they cannot account even to themselves for their irregularities and neglects.
This is the reason why they dare not reflect upon themselves, but decline the
test of their own Consciences, like men unwilling to come to Trial in that
Court, where Sentence is like to pass against them.

Others involve and entangle themselves in such a continual throng of business,
and are so perplexed and overwhelmed with the cares and concernments of this
life, that they allow themselves no time for recollection of themselves, and
examination of their lives.

And some there are who spend their days in nothing but pleasures and
diversions, in constant entertainments of fancy, which so possess their
imaginations, that they leave no room for serious thoughts of the very
concernments of this life, much less of that which is to come. Thus it comes to
pass, that few ^eform their evil habits, namely, for want of recollection.

But did we call our selves to account, and make inquisition into our ways; did
we impartially reflect upon them, and allow our Consciences to examine them,
and judge by calm and sober reason, excluding the briberies of our lusts, and
the fallacies which they put upon us; these thoughts, by the Grace of God
assisting, might have the same success on us, that those of David had on him.
And what that was, we understand from these words, I thought on my ways, and
turned my feet unto thy testimonies; I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. In which words he represents these two things:

I. The effect which the thoughts of his ways had upon him, which was the
reformation of them, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies. II. The shortness of the time wherein they wrought this effect, as
it is expressed in the following Verse, I made haste, and delayed not to keep
thy commandments.
For the better improvement of which example in order to our own advantage, I
shall follow the method of the words, and show what it is that the thoughts of
our ways may suggest to us as apt and proper,

1. To work the reformation of them; and,

2. To work it without delay.

1. And to the former of these Generals I refer the serious consideration of
the vast number of our sins, with the many and great aggravations of them; the
sad effects which these sins have had, or yet may have upon us; the vanity and
emptiness of all those pleasures or advantages, which we have yet found in
them, or can reasonably hope to find hereafter, to weigh against those evil
effects; and the solid happiness of that state whereupon we enter, when we cast
off and forsake our sins, and turn our feet to Gods testimonies.

These are the things which the thoughts of our ways may suggest to us in order
to the reformation of them.

First, The first whereof (that I may speak distinctly on them) is the vast
number of our sins with the many and great aggravations of them, which we can
never understand, much less reform, without impartial examination.

Sometimes we forget those very sins which we have committed against knowledge.
Tract of time, decay of memory, multitude of business or diversion wear out the
thoughts of those very sins which we our selves took notice of in former times,
though now they be vanished from our remembrance.

Sometimes we take no notice at all of our sins and follies, while we actually
engage in them. We think vainly, desire inordinately, speak rashly, censure
unjustly, act indecently in the eyes of men, and sinfully in the eyes of God,
not considering what we do while we thus entertain and employ our selves. And
this, no doubt, was David's reason, why herepresents the sins of men as passing
the reach of their understandings, Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou
me from secret faults, Psalm. 19.12.

And if we be often so far surprised as not to observe the motions of our own
minds, (which we may feel within our selves) nor what we speak, what we act
before the ears and eyes of others, we may easily judge we are much more faulty
in our omissions and neglects, which are less sensible and observed both by our
selves and other persons. For sinful actions cry aloud in the scandals they
bring upon Religion, and sensible injuries to our Neighbor, while mere
omissions are dumb and silent, and make no noise or stir in the World.

And yet there are some other things which we observe as little as our
omissions, namely, the circumstances and aggravations of our sins; which are
sometimes wilful and deliberate, sometimes against our former vows and
resolutions of reformation; sometimes against severe corrections, or kind and
fatherly castigations, sometimes pernicious to other persons, as well as
hurtful to our selves; often habitual and long continued, and always against
the mercies of God, in whom we live, and move, and have our beings, even while
we continue to sin against him. Which aggravations of our sins make little
impression upon our minds, much less urge us to reformation, till we seriously
recollect our selves, and impartially reflect upon our ways.

But did we so reflect upon them, did we consider how often we have wilfully done
amiss, and that both against God and men, and how much oftener done the like
through ignorance, error and infirmity, did we consider our many neglects in
the Duties immediately respecting God, while we have omitted, or ill performed
them; adding hereto our great omissions toward our Neighbor, while we have
neglected to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to support the weak, to
assist the injured and oppressed; might not these thoughts by the Grace of God
so represent our sins to us, as that we should judge it most unreasonable still
to persist and proceed in them? Could we think it tolerable to add more evil to
that heap, which is so vastly great already, and to increase a heavy burden by
further accumulations to it?

Methinks the remembrance of that time which we have misspent, to the great
offense of Almighty God, to no true advantage to our selves, should persuade
the redemption of time to come by a singular diligence in obedience. Sure I am,
that this is the Argument St Peter uses to this purpose, I Pet. 4.3. The time
past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when
we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings,
and abominable idolatries. It is enough, and far too much, to have spent a day,
an hour, a minute, much more a considerable part of life in service and slavery
to our lusts. Nor should we remember we have so done, but with sad thoughts for
having done it. These thoughts are so proper to the remembrance of such
miscarriages, that God himself seems to represent them as the natural effects
and issues of them. For thus he speaks to the people of the Jews, Ezekiel. 36.31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings, that were not good;
and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. So black and deformed is that shape, wherein men appear unto
themselves upon a review of their many sins, that then they abhor their own
image, much more the sins that have deformed them. And this is the first of
those motives which the thoughts of their ways may suggest to men in order to
the reformation of them; namely, the number of their sins, with the many and
great aggravations of them.

Secondly, The next to this is the ill effects which those sins have had, or
yet may have upon them in the very concernments of this world, as well as of
that which is to come. And for the demonstration of the former, I might appeal
to the crazy Bodies, the feeble Limbs, the decayed senses of vicious persons,
occasioned wholly by their vices; I might appeal to their broken fortunes,
pitiful shifts, and mean devices, to gain the very supports of life: which are
so evident in experience, that Christ himself represents the miseries which sin
produces in men's souls, by those wherewith it destroys their bodies, and their
prosperities in this world. This he does in the Parable of a younger Son, Luke
15. who having requested of his Father, that he would give him the portion of
goods that fell to him; and being gratified in this request, not many days
after gathers all he had together, and takes a journey into a far Country, and
wastes his substance in riotous living: having done this, and a mighty Famine
arising in the Land, he then began to be in want, and is presently forced to
adjoin himself, that is indeed, to fell himself, unto a Citizen of that
Country, who sent him into the Fields to feed Swine, but, it should seem, so
ill provided, that when he would fain have filled his belly with the very husks
which the Swine did eat, he found not enough of them to do it, and so was ready
to perish for hunger. Observe what a Train of ill effects his pride and vanity
drew upon him; it made him riotous and luxurious, his luxury brought him into
want* being in want he is constrained to sell his liberty, and part with
himself to another person. Being thus inslaved, he is thrust into a base
employment, and made not only a Keeper of Swine, but like to one of the Herd it
self, being forced to eat as they did, and yet still so pinched and straightened
that he found not enough to sill his Belly. A very true and lively Image of men
abandoned to vice and folly, who by indulgence to their lusts lose that very
ease and liberty, that satisfaction and pleasure of life, which they endeavor
to find in it.

But to leave this Parable at the present, and to proceed a step further, I
must not omit to put you in mind of the many remorses and regrets which always
attend the first beginnings, if not the entire course and progress of Apostasy
from the ways of Virtue. For God has been, and still is so faithful to us both
in the frame of our own natures, and the suggestions of his spirit, that both
these put many checks upon us in our first adventures upon evil: and although
men's consciences lose their edge, and the spirit of God withdraw from them,
after long continuance in their sins; yet is their condition much the worse for
these effects, though less uneasy at the present. For there is no man but
thinks it better to be readily capable of a cure, although by the very sharpest
remedies, than to die of a stupid and dull disease. Besides it must not be
omitted that the ease that is gained by being delivered from the rebukes and
reproofs of Conscience, is far overballanced by a loss, which cannot be divided
from it, namely, the loss of the joys of innocence, and of the sense of Gods
Favor, and hope of a blessed immortality: which howsoever undervalued, where
they are not felt nor well considered, are styled unspeakable and full of
glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

All this while I have said nothing of that effect of a vicious life, which of
all others is most dreadful, and most certain, if not prevented by repentance,
that is to say, eternal death; nor shall I venture my mean abilities to
represent so great a thing, but rather leave it to be considered in its
descriptions in the Scriptures, and more particularly in that we read, Mark.
36.37. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Now since the recollection of our selves, and serious reflection upon our ways
may first recall our sins to remembrance, and then suggest that all the evils
before mentioned have been the effects of sin in others, and that we our selves
have had the experience of some degrees of some of them; methinks the very same
thoughts that put us in mind of all these things, should powerfully move us to
retire out of all the ways of sin and vanity, and reduce us into the paths of
wisdom.

Sure I am, this is no more than what our Savior himself declares touching the
forementioned Prodigal; who having by a luxurious life reduced himself to the
utmost misery, at last returned unto himself, and, when he was come unto
himself, brake out into these expressions, Luke 15.17, 18, 19. How many hired
servants of my Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with
hunger? I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son, make me as one of thy hired servants: observe the condition of those
persons, who surrender themselves unto their lusts, and spend their days in
vicious courses. They are as men besides themselves, bereft of their reason and
understandings, so is this person represented. Observe further, that he no
sooner came to himself, as being now chastised and subdued by the miseries, his
sins had brought upon him, but he resolves to return again to his Fathers
house, to confess his sins, to implore pardon, to abase himself before his
Father, and to submit to the meanest offices, wherein he employed his hired
Servants. So much regret, and ingenuity, so much humility, and self-abasement
so much sorrow for former sins, such effectual purposes of reformation for time
to come, may the thoughts of our ways, by the grace of God, produce in us in,
consideration of the miseries which attend a vicious course of life.

Thirdly, Especially seeing the same thoughts may also mind us of the vanity
and emptiness of all those pleasures and enjoyments, in fond indulgence
whereunto we expose our selves to the dangers and miseries before mentioned,
which is the third of those particulars, which the thoughts of our ways may
suggest to us.

And here I shall not take the advantage either of repeating those miseries, or
of showing the meanness of such enjoyments (whether you call them profits, or
pleasures) which the generality of men attain, or can reasonably hope to attain
unto by all their wit, and power, and interest. I shall consider no allays,
wherewith the want of wealth and power, or bodily health may dash the pleasures
of this life; but I shall give them all the advantage that can be wished,
considering them nakedly on themselves, and showing that even thus considered
they are yet utterly insufficient to give satisfaction to our Souls.

And for the proof of this particular I shall not entangle your understandings
with subtle and curious speculations, but I shall exhibit it in a plain
instance made in the great and glorious Solomon, whose wisdom and splendor
were so great, that when our Savior would give an account of his own wisdom,
he found no fitter a way to do it than to prefer it before Solomon's, Matthew.
12.42. And when he would livelily represent the glory of the Lilies of the
Field, tells us that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these, Matthew. 6.29.

He was a Prince of infinite wealth, his Herds and Flocks were so numerous that
he offered twenty thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand Sheep, and
all these for Peace Offerings, beside what he spent in Burnt-offerings, at the
dedication of the Temple, 1 Kin. 8.63, 64.

The daily provision of his house were ten fat Oxen (namely such as were fed in
their Stalls) and twenty Oxen out of the Pastures, and an hundred Sheep,
besides Hearts, and Roe-bucks, and Fallow Deer, and fatted Fowl, 1 Kings 4.23.

The yearly income of his own Traffic, over and above what was imported by the
Merchants, was six hundred threescore and six Talents of Gold, 2 Chronicles. 9.14.
And as for Silver, he made it so plentiful in Jerusalem, that it was nothing
accounted of, ver. 20. of that Chapter, it was but as Stones in his days, as it
follows in the 29th Verse.

His magnificence was equal to his wealth; for his Throne was of Ivory, covered
with Gold, and its Footstool was of the same Metal, and so were all his
drinking Vessels, and all the Vessels of the house, that stood in the Forest of
Lebanon, and many of his very Shields and Targets, as you may see in the same
Chapter, 2 Chronicles. 9.

His wisdom I have already mentioned, He spoke three thousand Proverbs, and his
Songs were a thousand and five. He spoke of Trees from the Cedar-Tree that is
in Lebanon, even to the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall; he spoke also of
Beasts, and of Fowl, and of creeping things, and of Fishes, 1 Kings 4.33. His
oeconomical skill was such, that when the Arabian Queen beheld the state and
order of his Family, She was amazed and astonished at it, and had no spirit
left in her, 2 Chronicles. 9.4. From whence it appears, he had skill enough so to
apply and use his wealth, as to create the highest pleasures that any thing in
this World can afford, by extracting the finest spirit of it.

Nor had he only skill sufficient so to do, but he wholly applied himself to do
it. He sought in his heart, as himself tells us, to apply himself unto wine
(yet still acquainting his heart with wisdom) Eccl. 2.3. He made great works,
as it there follows, he builded Houses, planted Vineyards, made Gardens and
Orchards, and planted Trees in them of all kinds of Fruits, and made Pools of
Water to render them fruitful. He got him Men-Singers, and Women-Singers, and
the delights of the Sons of men, as musical Instruments, and that of all sorts,
Eccl. 2. And that you may see how liberal he was to other inclinations, he had
seven hundred Wives, Princesses, and beside them three hundred Concubines, who
were as Wives, excepting only that they were not solemnly espoused and endowed.
In short, he denied himself no pleasure that the World could possibly afford
unto him: So he professes of himself, Eccles. 2.10. Whatsoever mine eyes
desired, I hept not from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy. Thus
liberally did he indulge himself, and that in the very Flower of his Age, while
he had youth, and health, and strength, to taste and enjoy all the pleasures
that wealth and power could minister to him, and these attended with admirable
skill to use and employ them to that purpose.

All this while he had nothing to interrupt his pleasures, having perfect peace
at home and abroad; no seditions amongst his own Subjects, no wars with any
Neighboring Princes, no nor any thing of envy or animosity, nothing but honor
and admiration, and what might serve to increase his pleasures, For all the
Kings of the Earth sought his presence, to hear his wisdom that God had put in
his heart; and they brought every man his Present, Vessels of Silver, and
Vessels of Gold, and Raiment, Harness, and Spices, Horses and Mules, at a rate
year by year, 2 Chronicles. 9.23, 24.

Now what an account of the joys and pleasures of this World may we expect from
a glorious King, flowing with wealth, abounding in honor, enjoying all the
delights of the World, and that in the very flower of his time, and without any
outward interruptions?

Would it not seem extremely strange, if he should not find his soul at ease,
and in full content and satisfaction? Would it not seem much stranger still, if
he should express a dissatisfaction and discontent in the midst of all these
secular pleasures? Yet this very thing does he express upon a serious review of
them, for so he concludes his own relation of what he had done and enjoyed in
the World, Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on all
the labors that I had labored to do, and behold all was vanity and vexation
of spirit, Eccles. 2.11.

See here the account that the wise and great and glorious Solomon gives of the
glory of this World, which he pronounces to be no better than vanity and
vexation of spirit, and that upon long and great experience. And let the
consideration of this teach us the emptiness and insufficiency of all this
world can afford to us. And this we could not fail to learn, did we often
reflect upon our selves, and seriously meditate upon our ways, and consider how
little of satisfaction arises even from lawful pleasures, and how much less
from those of sin, which though they should not be imbittered, yet cannot but
be much abated by the very sin from whence they flow.

These thoughts would teach us to understand, That God has formed and designed
our souls for pleasures quite of another nature, for spiritual and immortal
joys. For certainly he that has been so liberal as to provide a proportionable
food for all the Creatures below them, for the Fowls of the Air, for the Beasts
of the Field, for all things creeping upon the Earth, and all things swimming
in the Sea, has not been so narrow to the souls of men, as not to provide such
joys for them as may give them plentiful satisfaction. Which leads me to the
fourth Particular, which the thoughts of our ways may suggest to us in order to
our reformation of them; which is,

Fourthly, The happiness of that state we enter upon when we cast off and
forsake our sins, and turn out feet to Gods testimonies. Then are our sins
remitted to us, wilful sins, as well as frailties; and sinful actions against
Gods Laws, as well as omissions and neglects; and blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not sin, Psalm 32.1, 2.

Then we become the Children of God, then we become the special concernment of
his Providence, then are we adopted into his Family, and to a title to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us: For if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ, Romans 8.17.

Then are we renewed in the Spirit of our minds, then born of God, and made
Partakers of the Divine Nature, then do we pass from darkness to light, from
bondage to liberty, from death to life. Then are we made meet to be Partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Then delivered by God from the power
of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son. These, and such
like, are the expressions whereby the Scriptures describe the repentance of a
Sinner, and the happy change which it makes in him, a change so happy in it
self, and of such concernment to him likewise, that it creates a joy in Heaven,
and makes the Angels themselves rejoice. For, says our Lord, there is joy in
the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10.
and before that at the 7th v. There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons, that need no
repentance, no habitual change of life.

Suppose we then that recollection of our selves, and the consideration of our
ways bring all the things, I have now mentioned, into our thoughts (and they
are really apt to do it) suppose them fixed upon our minds by the cooperation
of Gods Spirit (which he will not deny to them that ask it) might it not
reasonably be expected, that these thoughts thus fixed upon us, should touch
our Consciences, move our affections, and kindle good resolutions in us, and
provoke us to greater care and diligence in the future Government of our lives?
If we did fully convince our selves of the infinite hazards and inconveniences,
that attend a vicious course of life, of the vanity and emptiness of all those
things, for the sake whereof we expose our selves to all those hazards, of the
peace and happiness of that State, whereunto we enter by true repentance, I
persuade my self we could no more content our selves still to continue in our
sins, than willingly choose our own misery, which God has made an impossible
thing, and that out of very faithfulness to us. Nor could we answer it to our
selves to deny our selves the great advantages, that attend the conversion of a
sinner, did we represent them to our selves in serious thoughts and
meditations. These thoughts assisted by that grace, which suggests them to us,
would move us to choose immortal happiness, and the joys that attend the firm
and stable hopes of it, rather than the very highest pleasures, which the
wildest and most extravagant minds can possibly fancy to be in evil.

2. Having thus given a short account of several things, which the thoughts of
our ways may suggest to us in order to the reformation of them; which was the
former of the two generals before propounded. I shall now proceed unto the
second, where I am to show what the like thoughts may offer to us to persuade
us to do it without delay, as it appears they did in David, who having
seriously thought on his ways, delayed not to keep Gods Commandments.

Where in my way to more particular considerations, I cannot but note this in
general, that evil is a most indefensible thing, no sooner considered, and
understood, but presently rejected, and forsaken. I thought on my ways, says
the Psalmist here, and what then? and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, I
made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments. No sooner did he consider
his ways, and make a discovery of his sins, but he quickly retired and fled
from them as from the brow of a dangerous precipice, where he durst not stand a
moment longer. Sin will not abide a serious thought, it will not endure an
impartial trial: It is an imposture, it is a cheat, it is a lie, and so is
every temptation to it, confuted as soon as understood.

But the more particular meditations, which recommend a speedy repentance are
the consideration of Gods design in all his patience toward sinners; serious
reflection upon the uncertainty of our lives, in this so corruptible and frail
a State; and likewise due consideration of the several difficulties, and
inconveniences, that attend the delay of reformation.

1. Therefore let it be well considered, what is the end of Gods patience, and
whence it is that he does not pursue and follow our sins with speedy and
destructive punishments, but give us time and opportunity to recollect, and
reform our lives. The reason of this is not that the high and lofty one takes
no notice of things below, that he is indifferent to good and evil, and
unconcerned in the sons of men, and in what they do and suffer in the World. It
is not, as those scoffers imagined, who walking after their own lusts, cavilled
the delays of Gods judgments, and mocked that patience, whereby they lived,
saying, as St Peter has observed, 2 Ep. cap. 3. v. 4. Where is the promise of
his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation; but as it follows, v. 9. Because God is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, yea even those very persons themselves, that injure
his patience, and longsuffering.

In the mean time I cannot deny that there is some shadow of an objection
against Gods providence in the World to them that measure him by themselves,
and judge of him by their own model. For that he should readily pardon our
frailties, and long forbear our wilful sins; that he should continue those very
mercies which men abuse, and turn into weapons of unrighteousness, feed the
mouth that blasphemes his name, support the arm that works iniquity, preserve
that very life and strength, which is spent and wasted to his dishonor, and
patiently wait for a Sinners return, while the Sinner abuses that very patience
to an encouragement to impenitence, is such an example of long-suffering as is
no where found but in God only.

But I consider that Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our
ways, that one day, as St Peter affirms, is with the Lord as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day; that he has appointed and fixed a day,
wherein he will judge the World in righteousness, and therefore firmly still
believe, that his patience to Sinners in the mean time designs their repentance
and reformation, and that his mercies in Jesus Christ are so great, that he
will pardon the hearty Penitent after the greatest provocations.

And this is that which himself suggests Isai. 55.7, 8, 9. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the righteous wan his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. And lest we should disbelieve this, as a thing improbable for God to
do, because unusual amongst men, he presently adds in the following words: For
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the
Lord: for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. From whence I conclude, That it
is not indifferency to good and evil, nor want of concernment for mankind,
which causes God to delay punishment; but merely his patience and
long-suffering, waiting for the Sinners return to him.

And may not the consideration of this, when deeply fixed upon the mind, so
powerfully affect the hearts of Sinners, as to urge them to speedy reformation?
May it not produce a great indignation against themselves, to remember their
many misbehaviours, and also their long continuance in them, under all the
patience of God toward them? May not the thoughts of that patience (where
there is any ingenuity left) provoke the hearts of men to gratitude, and
gratitude unto speedy repentance? Could any man think it safe or reasonable
still to trespass against that patience, which he had already long abused, and
to provoke that very goodness which he had forfeited long ago, did he seriously
reflect upon these things?

I hope there are few so void of sense of their own concernments, and of love
and gratitude toward God, whom serious thoughts of their own evils under the
patience of God toward them, would not move to speedy reformation. Saint Paul,
I am sure, represents the contrary, as a despite to the mercies of God, and a
dangerous cruelty to our selves in that severe expostulation, Romans 2.4, 5.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? but after thy
hardness, and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God: which is so
clear a demonstration that the consideration of Gods patience, and of his ends
and designs in it, should persuade to speedy reformation, that it would be
needless to add any more to this Argument.

Secondly, Proceed we therefore to the second thing, which cannot easily escape
our thoughts, while we reflect upon our ways, and the effects and issues of
them, which is the uncertainty of our lives in this state of frailty and
mortality. Which is so clear and evident to us both from what we feel within
our selves, daily decays of natural strength, and from what we see in many
others, short life and sudden death, that there is nothing in all the world, no
not the denial of a God, nor the making of one of the Trunk of a Tree,
reproached in Scripture as a greater folly than a presumption of long life, and
of ease, and joy and pleasure in it.

Observe how this is represented in the Parable of a certain rich man, who
having had so plentiful and so large a Harvest, that he had not where to bestow
his fruits, thus deliberates with himself, Luke 12.17, 18, 19. Verses, What
shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This
will I do, I will pull down my Barns, and build greater, and there will I
bestow all my fruits, and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and he merry.
But what is the next thing he hears from God? Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee. The sharpness and bitterness of which rebuke, joined
with the sudden confutation of this man's promises made to himself, represents
the folly, sin, and danger of the like presumptions in other men.

Let us therefore, while we consider our ways, the number and nature of our
sins, with all their several aggravations, the ill effects that will attend
them, unless prevented by repentance, the absolute necessity of this Duty for
the prevention of those effects; let us, I say, together with these, consider
the frailty of our lives, and in the consideration hereof never defer a
necessary Duty to a time uncertain, to a day we may never live to see; and that
not only because long life is a thing uncertain in it self, but because the
expectation of it (especially being generally used as an encouragement to delay
repentance) may very justly provoke God to blast it with sudden disappointment.

God does not only hate the delay of reformation, grounded on presumption of
long life, as a neglect of duty to him, but reproaches the very folly of it,
styles him a fool who so presumed: which puts me in mind of that of Solomon,
Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whither
thou go.

Thirdly, But now because many men may purpose future amendment, although they
neglect it at the present, and will believe that these purposes shall take
effect, notwithstanding all that can be said to show the uncertainty of this
event, give me leave to add a third Particular, which the thoughts of our ways
may suggest to us; where I shall grant what men presume, that is, that they
will repent hereafter, and further yet, that all their sins shall be forgiven,
and they entitled to life eternal upon repentance. But I must not grant what
they imagine, that it is as well to retrieve a sin by true repentance for it,
as to prevent the sin it self, that it is no loss in the mean time to have
delayed their reformation.

It is a loss of precious time spent to the great dishonor of God, and no true
advantage to the Sinner.

It Is a loss of growth in wisdom and virtue, which might have improved to
higher measures, if they had been earlier applied unto.

It Is a loss of higher degrees of Glory, unless the time that has been misspent
be retrieved by a very singular diligence, and excellent improvement afterward.

It Is the loss, perhaps, of the souls of others, who may have been misled and
prejudiced by the worse part of a man's example, namely, by his sin and vanity,
but not amended by the better, that is to say, his reformation. For no man can
ever assure himself that the example of his repentance shall be as effectual to
reform, as that of his sin was to mislead and corrupt his Neighbor.

Besides all this, the delay of repentance and newness of life renders the Duty
far more irksome, and fills it with greater pangs and sorrows, and makes a man's
birth a new life, like that of a Child overgrown in the Womb, infinitely
grievous and full of trouble.

Moreover it gives very great occasion of such reflections, wherein a man's
guilt recoyls upon him in bitter remorses and regrets, even after repentance
and reformation.

It gives advantage to the Devil (and he is very apt to take it) to upbraid the
Conscience with sharp remembrances of former sins, although they be already
pardoned.

It gives him advantage to raise many scruples, fears and doubts of the
sincerity of a man's repentance, and of the acceptance it finds with God.

And, to say no more, late repentance is apt to leave the souls of men under
many weaknesses and distempers, just like a recovery from an obstinate, long
disease of Body, which though it be a recovery indeed, yet generally leaves it
ever after under many infirmities and decays.

All these things may the thoughts of our ways offer to us, and these
suggestions plainly show us, That to continue in sin at present, with purpose
to reform hereafter, is as if a man should wound himself out of presumption of
a cure, or break a limb with purpose to have it set again, or throw himself
into a sharp Fever with resolution to use the methods for a recovery
afterward.

Seeing then the prevention of farther sin by speedy amendment of our lives, is
by many degrees better for us, than to retract it by repentance, and that
although we were as certain we should repent, and amend hereafter, as we are
sure we now design it; let the serious consideration of this, and of all I have
said to the same purpose, dissuade the delay of reformation.

And because that frequent recollection is a thing so indispensably necessary
to render the motives to repentance effectual upon our hearts and lives, let us
often retire into our closets, and withdraw our selves from the noise and hurry
both of business and diversion, and then diligently apply our minds to the
consideration of our ways. Let us consider what they have been in former times,
as well as what they are at present; let us call to mind our many omissions and
neglects, our many frailties and infirmities, as well as chosen and wilful
sins; let us remember how much we have suffered, or yet may possibly suffer by
them for nothing of real satisfaction; let us weigh the differences of good and
evil, and their different issues and effects; let us remember that all these
things, and many other, call loudly upon us to amend what we find amiss in our
selves, and that the patience of God toward us, the uncertainty of our own
lives, the great disadvantage of delay in a work of such concernment to us,
press us to do it without delay.

And the God of all Grace and Mercy so assist our thoughts and Meditations by
the operation of his Spirit, that they may succeed to the reformation of our
sins, to the improvement of our Virtues, and to our eternal peace and happiness
in the great day of the Lord Jesus;

To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit be all Glory, Honor and Praise now
and for evermore.

The Seventeenth Sermon.
1 John. 3.7. Little children let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous.


THE Gospel had not been long preached unto the World, but there arose a sort
of persons, who though they professed the name of Christ, yet lived quite
contrary to his precepts. Such was the Sect of the Nicolaitans, who took
occasion from certain words of Nicolas the Deacon (the sense whereof they did
mistake) [see Grot. and Hammond ad Revel. 2.6.] to indulge themselves in
sensual lusts, and to live in filthiness and impurity; and hence it was, that
this reflection is made upon them in the words of Christ to the Church of
Ephesus. This thou have that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate, Rev. 2.6. Like unto these were those that are mentioned by St Peter,
2 Ep. 2.18. when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through
the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped
from them that live in error.

And by St Jude verse 8. of his Epistle, Likewise also these filthy dreamers
defile the flesh, despise dominion, and spak evil of dignities; and afterward
at the 10th v. what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves.

These were the Gnostics, a Sect of Libertines who, as Irenaeus tells us (lib.
I.) did practice all forbidden things without any modesty, shame or blushing,
as believing it lawful so to do, and thinking themselves, nothing less
acceptable unto God for so doing: which is the error which our Apostle
obliquely touches in these words, Little children let no man deceive you, he
that does righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous: Little children,
so he styles those persons who were less knowing, or less stable in the true
Doctrine of Christianity, so he styles them cap. 2.13. although he seems in
another place, namely, cap. 2.1. to give that title to all Christians; Little
children let no man deceive you, that is to say, suffer not your selves to be
deceived by them that tell you that you may be righteous in Gods account, and
grateful and acceptable to him, although you do not do righteousness, that is,
although your lives and actions be not habitually just and holy: for as Christ
himself was righteous in the eyes of God, because he was really so in himself;
so those only that do righteousness, that yield sincere and true obedience to
Christ's Laws, pass with God for righteous persons.

These things explained, I shall observe these two things from the words before
us.

1. That men may imagine themselves to be righteous persons in Gods eyes, to be
in grace and favor with him, though they live impure and unrighteous lives;
although they do not do righteousness, else this caution had been useless. So
it had been, had it been a caution against an error, that no man could have
fallen into. 2. That this Imagination is a very great and dangerous error; so
do the words themselves suggest: He that does righteousness, that is, he, and
be only that is righteous even as Christ is righteous: not that any man can be
so in the same degree with Christ himself, nor by his own desert and merit,
gain the favor and grace of God, but that there is no way to gain it without
being really just and righteous, as Christ was perfectly and fully so.
First. I begin with the first, which is, that men imagine themselves to be
righteous persons in Gods account, to be in grace and favor with him, though
they live in habitual disobedience to the Laws and precepts of the Gospel. In
the prosecution of which point,

1. I shall first prove that this may be so.

2. And then secondly give some account of the rise or occasions of this error.

3. And lastly reflect upon the whole by way of inference or application.

And for the first, that there may be such an error as this, which I have now
mentioned to you, plainly appears from matter of fact; and matter of fact
plainly appears,

1. From the open profession of some.

2. And secondly from the lives of others.

1. There are some, who openly profess that there is nothing required from us
to recommend us to Gods favor, no condition on our parts to gain acceptance
and grace with him.

They own no Covenant between God and us, but only one between God and Christ.
This, say they, Christ has performed, and so reconciled us unto God without
the performance of any condition on our parts [see Saltm. Flowings etc. p.
152.] wherein they palpably contradict the whole strain and tenor of the
Gospel, all its commands, threats, and promises, as well as the vow made in
Baptism, whereby we enter into a Covenant with God himself, and promise sincere
obedience to him.

These are they, who are commonly styled the Antinomians; which was a Sect once
very numerous in this Nation, but is now become either less numerous, or more
silent; and therefore I shall not at this time make any longer stay upon them:

2. But proceed to those, who though they do not in words profess, that men may
be in favor with God, and duly hope for life eternal, though they live in
habitual contradiction to the Laws and precepts of Christianity, yet live as
men who so believe, and consequently may be duly judged to cherish such a
belief as this; and of these there are diverse and several sorts.

1. Those who profess, or not deny the Christian faith, but have no care, no
concernment for Religion in any instance of their lives, live as though there
was no such thing, in all contradiction to its Laws. Such there were in St
Paul's days, as you may see, Phil. 3.18. Many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies to the croft of
Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is
their shame, who mind earthly things. Yet these very persons professed
themselves to be Christ's Disciples and to believe the Christian Faith.

As they did, so do many in our days: They profess to believe in Jesus Christ,
they profess the hope of life eternal declared and promised in the Gospel; and
yet they live in habitual and wilful disobedience to the holy precepts and
institutions, which the same Gospel has prescribed.

Now how can these things consist together? how can they possibly be
reconciled, unless these persons judge themselves in Gods favor, though they
live in such disobedience to him? could men neglect all the Laws, all the
precepts of the Gospel? could they promise themselves the remission of fin, and
eternal life, while they continue in this neglect, did they not judge that they
might gain remission of fin, and the favor of God, notwithstanding the
wickedness of their lives, or else at least not judge the contrary?

They do profess, as I said before, the hope of Salvation, Salvation promised
in the Gospel, they give no signs of doubt or fear of falling short of so great
a happiness, they pass their days in ease and pleasure, they enjoy the world,
they enjoy themselves in the midst of profaneness and impiety; which shows
they have, in their own thoughts, reconciled the hopes of future happiness,
with the present enjoyment of their sins.

2. Another fort there is, who though they seem to have some concernment for
Religion, yet wholly neglect the practice of it: They spend their time either
in speculation of things remote from life and practice, or in mere dispute
about the things that relate to practice; in the mean time their own lives are
little better than theirs who neglect all Religion. They are not more careful
of truth, and justice, of mercy and charity in their lives, than other persons;
the same temptations that sway the affections, and vitiate the lives of other
men, do also sway and vitiate theirs: they love the wealth, and power, and
honor, all the pleasures, all the advantages of the World, as much as they,
who love them most; nor do they forbear to use any of the same methods, the
same forbidden arts and ways to attain their ends, that are used by the common
sort of persons.

They please themselves in the speculation of useless notions, or spend their
zeal in mere disputes, or the censure of the lives of others, but take no care
to reform themselves; yet all this while believe extremely well of themselves:
assure themselves of Gods favor, and of his singular love to them, which shows
they presume upon his favor, though they continue in their sins.

3. There are some other persons, who proceed indeed a step further, but not so
far as a Christian life; who yet fully allure themselves of being righteous in
Gods account, and of eternal life and happiness. These are they who confess
their fins, and possibly with bitter lamentations, and with great accusations
of themselves, (as in truth we have ail reasons to do) but when they have done,
take no care to amend and reform those very sins, which they confess with so
much passion, and such invectives against themselves. Or if they proceed a
little further, it is but to some ineffectual purposes, faint resolutions of
reformation, which never come to effect or issue. They take the design for the
thing it self, the resolution of reformation for the very repentance God
requires. The former of these, namely, the resolution of reformation, they look
upon as a clear evidence that they have the Grace of God in them, and therefore
are in favor with him. But then the latter, namely, the breach of their
resolutions, and the continuance in their sins, they look upon as a humane
frailty, common to the Saints with other persons, common both to the good and
evil. But whatsoever men may judge in favor of their own corruptions, I am
obliged to put you in mind of that which I hope you know already, That it is
not the mere intent and purpose of the reformation of wilful sins, of an
habitual course in evil, but the true and real reformation of it, that
recommends us to Gods favor. So St Paul himself assures us, who having
mentioned the several sins that are common in the lives of men, concludes his
Discourse with these words, Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because
of these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 5.6.

4. To make one step further, Others there are who do indeed practice some real
parts of Religion, but then wholly neglect others. They hear, they pray, they
seem to be zealous in these things, and possibly in some others too; but yet
still live in such sins as are inconsistent with Christianity, and the solid
hopes of life eternal. They still live, some in impurity and sensuality, others
in injustice and iniquity, others in envy and ambition, others in pride and
scorn, and malice; so that no man's good name and reputation, no man's life how
blameless and innocent soever, is safe from their unrighteous censures; yet all
this while they are so far from thinking this to be any sin, that they make a
piece of Religion of it, and believe themselves to be so much better, by how
much they censure others.

5. Lastly, There are some other persons who make a commutation with God in
doing the things he has not required, instead of those which he has
commanded. They impose some penances upon themselves, or practice those imposed
by others instead of repentance and reformation; they live by Laws of their own
making, instead of those which God has made; or else they are most extremely
diligent in the constant practice of one Duty, to make some recompense and
satisfaction for the total omission of another; their temperance shall excuse
their injustice, or their justice their sensuality; their zeal shalf excuse
their animosity, their very profession of Religion shall excuse the neglect of
the practice of it; yet all this while they judge themselves in the favor of
God, and confidently hope for eternal happiness. From all which instances it
appears how apt men are to imagine themselves to be righteous in the eyes of
God to be grateful and acceptable to him; although they live in wilful and
habitual neglect of the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel.

2. Having thus dispatched the first general, proceed we now unto the second,
where I shall endeavor to give an account of the rise and occasion of this
error.

3. And first of all there is no doubt but that the inordinate love of the
World, and the sinful gains and pleasures of it, is an eminent and great cause
why men abuse and flatter themselves with the vain hopes of Gods favor, and of
the salvation promised by him, although they live and die in their sins.

This love it was, which did at first hinder the faith of Christianity,
obstruct the belief and reception of it: and so our Savior himself suggests,
John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Where he insinuates that those
persons Who were willing to obey the Gospel, provided they knew it be of God;
to live by the rules arid precepts of it, would easily yield belief unto it,
when it was duly propounded to them: add consequently that the great reason why
men would not yield their belief to it, was because they would not yield
obedience to the Laws therein prescribed unto them, because they would not
forsake those lusts which the Gospel commands us to forsake, the lusts of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. And as it was these
inordinate lusts, that hindered the progress of Christian Faith, when it was
first revealed and published; so did the very same lusts first bring corruption
and delusion into the Faith of those persons, that made profession of
Christianity, and still continues to lead them into misbelief.

They will not part with their beloved lusts and pleasures, they will not
forget their sinful gains, or what is easy, what is pleasing to flesh and
blood: the forgoing these is by our Lord expressed, by the plucking out of an
eye, and by cutting of a right hand, Matt. 5.29, 30. whereby he declares the
great unwillingness that is in men to deny their natural inclinations, though
never so sinful and inordinate. On the other hand, as they are unwilling to
deny their natural inclinations, to forgo their inordinate lusts and appetites;
so are they likewise very unwilling to despair of eternal happiness under them,
or of the favor of God to them, that is a black and stabbing thought, as the
other is troublesome and ungrateful.

Now what is the issue, what is the effect of these two things put together?
the issue is this, men presently study to find out arts how to reconcile the
hopes of happiness with the enjoyment of their lusts; and alas! there needs no
great art, for a man to deceive and cheat himself, where he is willing to be
deceived; he easily steps into this hope, that his sins, though wilful and
habitual, are nothing more than humane frailties, common to the good as well as
evil; that God will never impute them to him; that he may firmly hope to be
saved, though he never abandon and forsake them.

2. But then secondly, that which gives something of advantage to this error
in some persons, is the comparing of the difficulty of subduing of their lusts,
with the vast greatness of that loss which they suffer, who lose that glory and
immortality, which is promised to us in the Gospel. They will not imagine that
such a loss should attend the neglect or nonperformance of a thing so
extremely hard and difficult; which error, differing from the rest, which I
have before mentioned to you, seems to deserve some more notice, than what I
have taken of the rest.

1. And first of all, those who make use of this argument to promise themselves
eternal happiness, although they continue in their sins, ought to consider that
that happiness, which God has promised, being unspeakably great and glorious,
deserves our labor, merits our study to attain it upon any terms whatsoever
they be, howsoever difficult to flesh and blood, and to our natural
inclinations. The greater it is, the greater the care, the greater diligence,
the more of labor does the attainment of it merit: and so our Savior himself
suggests when he compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a pearl of such a price and
rate, as that the person who once saw it, sold all he had forth purchase of it
(Matt. 13.46.) esteeming nothing too dear or precious to obtain a thing of
infinite value, namely, the glory of Gods Kingdom.

2. Again it ought to be considered, that although the subduing of our lusts,
and opposing our sinful inclinations, be troublesome unto flesh and blood; yet
God has promised his Grace and Spirit, promised a supernatural power to enable
us to correct our natures. Hence that profession of St Paul Phil. 4.13. I can
do all things thorough Christ which strengthens me; hence that exhortation
also, Phil. 2.12, 13. work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it
is God, which works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. From
whence it appears, that God affords his assistance to us to enable us to attain
the end, and perform the duties, we cannot attain, cannot perform by the power
of nature.

3. Add hereunto, that being quickened, being assisted by the operation of Gods
Spirit, that self-denial and mortification, that temperance, holiness, and
humility, that resignation to Gods will, that mercy and charity unto men,
(which was before hard and difficult) irksome and troublesome to our natures,
is now made easy and pleasant unto us; that Yoke of Christ which we before
judged to be pressing and uneasy, is now made light, and easy to us; so that
the man, who found the duties, found the graces of the Gospel contrary to his
inclinations, now finds his affections and inclinations greatly reconciled unto
them, and cannot now please himself in any evil, but finds it contrary to his
nature, being altered by the grace of God: and this is that which St John
suggests, 1 Ep. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; but his
feed remains in him: and he cannot sin because he is born of God. These
things considered, it is no wonder, that so great a loss, as that of glory and
immortality, should attend the wilful violation of the duties prescribed in the
Gospel, though they be difficult to flesh and blood, For though they be so, yet
the reward promised to us is so great, that it deserves the undertakding of the
greatest difficulties to attain it, and God has promised his Spirit to us, to
assist and help us in those difficulties; and the assistance of his Spirit
makes our duties first possible, and afterward easy to us.

3. The last occasion which I shall mention, that some men take to judge
themselves to be righteous persons, to be in grace and favor with God,
although they be Servants to corruption, is a false notion they have received
of the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

They fancy that God looks upon them as having done what Christ did, and also
suffered what he suffered; that is to say, both obeyed the Law, and, made
satisfaction for their sins: which is a very great mistake, representing God as
judging of things otherwise than they are in themselves; as judging them to
have done and suffered, what they have neither done nor suffered: which is to
impute an error to him. The true notion of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, is that God is pleased in consideration of that righteousness to
pardon the sins, and accept the persons not of those that do not believe, or
not sincerely obey the Gospel; but of those only, who do believe, and so obey
it. God never intended that Christ's righteousness should quit and deliver from
our obligation to obedience, but that it should oblige us to it: For he bare
our sins in his own body upon the Tree, that we being dead unto sin should live
unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24.

3. And now to reflect upon what I have said to the last general before
propounded.

1. Hence we learn, that the reason why the Gospel of Christ has no greater
success and efficacy in the reformation of the lives of those that make
profession of it, is not any defect in it, but in those that make profession of
it: it is not any defect in the Gospel, but wilful mistakes in the minds of
men, that renders the Gospel unsuccessful in the reformation of their lives.
The Gospel gives no ground at all for any to think themselves righteous, or
hope for the pardon of their sins, who are not true and faithful penitents, who
do not forsake their vicious courses. If men shall promise themselves pardon,
while they continue in their sins, this is a promise of their own, it is no
promise of the Gospel. The Gospel menaces death eternal to the impenitent and
disobedient, and if men shall still believe the contrary, it is their error,
their wilful error so to do; nor is it the Gospel that deceives them, but they
deceive, and abuse themselves.

2. Lastly seeing it is so easy, for men to impose upon themselves, to judge
themselves in favor with God while they continue in their sins, it will very
much concern us all duly to examine our selves, and make reflection upon our
lives.

First let us very well consider, whether we do not indulge our selves in some
sin, yet flatter our selves with hopes of pardon, though we continue in such
indulgence thereunto, although we live and die in it. If we find our selves
guilty of this, we labor under a great imposture, an imposture which, if not
corrected, will rob us of our immortal Souls. It is hard for men of the truest
principles to subdue their inordinate inclinations, to enter in at that strait
gate which leads unto eternal happiness; but if the very principles of men, if
the mind it self be possessed with error, and with an error of this nature,
which promises life eternal to them, while they indulge themselves in evil;
there is no hope, no expectation of reformation, till the error it self be
quite removed.

Now therefore if thy life be vicious, if stained with any one sin, which thou
indulgest in thy self, awake, and excite and examine thy self, and see what it
is that gives encouragement to that indulgence: and if thou be serious with thy
self, and search the bottom of thine heart, thou will find, it is one of these
two things either a presumpti-of thy repentance and reformation sometimes
hereafter, or a belief that thou may be saved, although thou continuest in
thy sin without repentance, and amendment. The former of these is the greatest
folly, the greatest impudence in the world; the latter the most destructive
error: for certainly there is no such folly, no such imprudence in all the
world, as to defer a necessary duty to a time uncertain, a time thou may
never live to see; or if thou do, may use as ill as that which is already
past, that which is now present with thee. And then to believe a sin pardoned,
while it is indulged, is such an error as does not only open a gate to all
sin, but shut the door to all repentance and reformation. Consider what I say,
and the Lord give a right understanding in all things.

The Eighteenth Sermon.
1 John. 3.7. Little children let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous.


FROM these words I have observed these two things, 1. That men may imagine
themselves to be righteous in the eyes of God, to be in Grace and favor with
him, although they do not do righteousness, but live in habitual disobedience
to the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel. 2. That this imagination is a very
great and dangerous error. The former I have already finished, and shall now
speak unto the latter, that is to say, to the greatness and danger of the
error. Where I consider, That for God to judge unrighteous persons otherwise
than in truth they are, to accept their persons, and pardon their sins while
they abide and persist in them, is contrary,

1. To his own nature; and, 2. To the Gospel likewise.
1. This is contrary to Gods nature, that is to say, both,

First, To his wisdom; and,

Secondly, To his holiness.

First, It is contrary to his wisdom. So it is, to judge of men otherwise than
they are in themselves, to esteem them righteous, just and holy, while they are
unrighteous and impure. It is the nature of true wisdom to judge all things
according to truth; this is its nature as it is found even in men, much more as
it is found in God. He cannot err or be deceived, even in the deepest,
obscurest things, nothing is hidden from his eye, the night and the day, light
and darkness are alike unto it; he tries the reins, and searches the very
hearts of men, discerns whatsoever is in them, and judges according to truth.

Now he that judges according to truth, must judge of things just as they are;
and therefore seeing the judgment of God is always true, hence it appears, They
who are unjust and wicked, impure and unholy in themselves, are so in the
judgment of God likewise, so in his esteem and account.

Secondly, If it be said, That although it be very true indeed that God cannot
judge otherwise of men than according to what they are in themselves, not judge
the Sinner to be righteous, the wicked to be pure and holy; yet that he may
love and accept the wicked as much as if he were just and holy: the Answer is,
That this is contrary to God's holiness. This does as much thwart the purity,
contradict the holiness of his nature, as the other contradicts his wisdom, as
is often declared in the holy Scriptures. God is of purer eyes, says
Habbakkuk, than to behold, that is to say, to approve evil. He cannot look upon
iniquity, Hab. 1.13. So far is he from approving evil, or those that indulge
themselves in it, that their way is an abomination to him, Prove. 15.9. From
whence it follows, That they who judge themselves or others to be in grace and
favor with God, to be holy, just and righteous persons, who are not fully and
really so, ascribe and impute that to God which is quite contrary to his nature.

If it be said, That God is said to justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. The meaning
is, That he justifies those that have been so, not those that continue so to
be; that he justifies and accepts the ungodly when they forsake and leave their
sins, not while they still continue in them. And so we learn from the same
Apostle, who having given a large Catalogue of sins and Sinners, concludes his
Discourse with these words, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. First washed and sanctified by Gods
Spirit, and then justified and accepted.

2. But then secondly, as it is contrary to Gods nature to justify and accept
the wicked while they continue in their sins; so is it likewise greatly
contrary to the Gospel:

First, Expressly, to the plainest and and clearest parts of it. And,

Secondly, To the whole by evident consequence.

First, It is most expressly contrary to the plainest and clearest parts of it,
to its most positive Declarations; such as those words of St John are, which I
do now insist upon, Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that does
righteousness is righteous. He that is really and truly so, he is so, and he
only in God's account. Like unto these are those of St Paul, Ephesians. 5.6. where
having mentioned uncleanness, covetousness, and profaneness; he presently
adds this admonition, Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience.
Whereunto we may add his expostulations, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Can there be
plainer words than these? or can there be any thing more contradictory to the
Gospel than what contradicts the plainest words and expressions of it? or a
greater or more dangerous error than what so contradicts the Gospel?

The Gospel declares that the unclean shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, the
Gospel pronounces the Drunkard likewise, declares the covetous and extortioner,
while they continue in these sins, to be incapable of that Kingdom; this it
declares in as plain words as can be written or expressed, and will these
persons still presume of an interest in the favor of God, and of a title to
his Kingdom? If they will, it is their folly so to do; it is a folly of that
nature as does not only expose them to the greatest danger, but shut the door
to all possibility of escape, while they persist and continue in it. Such is
the presumption of God's favor, of being reconciled unto him, while a man
continues in his sins.

Secondly, And secondly, as this is expressly contrary to the clearest passages
in the Gospel, so to the whole by evident consequence: To its commands and
exhortations, to all the promises and threatenings of it; and what is more, to
the very design of Christ's death, the very thing which men abuse into an
indulgence to their sins.

To promise our selves the favor of God and acceptance with him while we
continue in our sins, it is a presumption expressly contrary,

First, To the Precepts of the Gospel. These require and strictly charge us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world, Tit. 2.12. These require that we put off concerning the
former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to deceitful
lusts, that we be renewed in the spirit of our minds, that we put on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.22. and following Verses. In a word, the Laws of Christ require us to love
God with all our hearts, and to love our neighbor as our selves. Now is God
serious in his Commands, or is he not? Is he in earnest, or does he only amuse
us with them? If he be not serious, if he not in good earnest with us in the
Laws which he has prescribed unto us, where is his wisdom? where his Majesty?
where the perfection of his nature? Does infinite wisdom trifle with us? does
he give us Laws without design that we should obey them? or accept of us
without obedience? If he be serious and in earnest, then has he given us his
holy Laws with real purpose and design that we should yield obedience to them;
nor can he choose but be displeased, when we wilfully violate or neglect them;
nor yet be reconciled unto us while he is so displeased with us, while we
continue in disobedience.

Now therefore for men to flatter themselves with hope of the favor and grace
of God, hope of the pardon of their sins, while they continue in those sins, is
nothing less by good consequence than to imagine that God has given us his
holy Laws without intending they should oblige us, that his wisdom does but
trifle with us; which is an evident contradiction both to his Laws and wisdom
also. Those are no Laws that do not oblige, nor is that wisdom which is not
serious.

Secondly, Add hereunto in the second place, That a presumption on Gods favor
in men continuing in their sins, is flatly contrary to all those pressing
exhortations whereby we find our selves invited, nay vehemently pressed, unto
obedience in numerous places of the Scriptures: such as that, Prove. 1.22, 23.
How long will ye simple ones love simplicity, and the scorner delight in
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof. Such is that Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. Cast away from you all your transgressions, and make you a new heart
and a new spirit. Such is that Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in
them that they would fear me and keep my Commandments always, that it might be
well with them. Such is that used by St Paul, 2 Cor. 5.20. God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray yon in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God.

Now what shall we say to these and many such exhortations, wherein the Writers
of the holy Scriptures, wherein God himself by them exhorts, invites and
mightily persuades unto repentance and reformation, unto obedience to Gods
Laws? Do not we see that they are most earnest, most serious applications to
us; and can we imagine he would apply himself unto us with so much vehemence of
address, so much strength and importunity, if he could be pleased and satisfied
with us; if he would pardon and accept us without reformation of wilful sins,
sins we cherish and indulge? Is all this importunity used to press and persuade
a needless thing? a thing which is not absolutely necessary to recommend us to
God's favor, to obtain grace and acceptance with him? Let no man have such
thoughts of God, as to believe him so importunate in pressing obedience to his
Laws, had he not decreed to remit and pardon no man's sins, and to accept of no
man's person, who lives in disobedience to them. The words, I have before cited,
plainly show he has so decreed. For when he has said, O that there were such
an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, that
it might be well with them; He clearly speaks his own Decree, namely, that it
shall be well with no man who does not fear him and keep his Precepts.

3. But then thirdly, What shall we say to the great promise of the Gospel,
namely, that of pardon of sin, and life eternal? Is not this made to those only
that believe and sincerely obey the Gospel? is it made to the wicked and
disobedient? is it made to the cruel and unjust? is it made to the sensual and
impure? is it made to any but those only who study obedience to our Lord, and
to the Laws by him prescribed? Read and observe the whole Gospel, turn it over
leaf by leaf, from the beginning unto the end, and see if you find any one
passage promising pardon and remission, promising grace and favor with God to
the impenitent and disobedient; and is it not then a great presumption for the
impenitent and disobedient to promise that to themselves which the Gospel has
no where promised to them?

And yet again, what is the reason why God has promised eternal life to them
who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and immortality, Romans
2.7. What is the reason why he has promised remission of sins upon repentance,
Luke 24.47. but that the assured expectation of these so great rewards and
mercies, might most effectually stir us up to the performance of our Duties?
and that we may clearly understand that there is no ground to hope the one
without performance of the other? Surely this is the reason of it; and yet it
were no reason at all, if the reward might be expected without the performance
of the Duty.

Now therefore although we could imagine that God was not in earnest with us in
the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel, nor in the pressing exhortations which are
annexed unto its Precepts (which yet would be an infinite folly;) yet the
express and clear promise of pardon of sins, and life eternal upon faith and
obedience to the Gospel, evidently shows how real and serious God is with us,
when he requires obedience from us. He would never have added so great a motive
as the promise of glory and immortality to persuade obedience to his Laws, had
it not been his real design that we should yield obedience to him, or forfeit
his grace and favor to us.

4. But to pass on to the fourth Particular, there is nothing so flatly, so
expressly contradicted by a presumption of Gods favor in men continuing in
their sins, as the threats and menaces of the Gospel. For what is the thing
these threats denounce? Nothing less than the wrath of God, nothing less than
eternal misery, as the sure effect of that wrath; and who are the persons upon
whom that wrath and this misery is denounced? are they not the impenitent and
disobedient? are they not those who live in habitual disobedience to the holy
Precepts of the Gospel? Hear the Apostle speak in the Case, Romans 2.8, 9. Unto
them who are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. And then that no disobedient
person may deceive himself, as judging himself exempt or quit from the common
doom of the disobedient, he further adds at the 11. verse: There is no respect
of persons with God. He judges of all men as they are, nor does admit of any
excuse of wilful sin in any condition, or rank of men, more than in any other.

Now being God so plainly threatens death eternal unto the impeitent and
disobedient, can there be any so great an error, as for these men to presume
of pardon, and to expect eternal life, while they continue so to be? The Gospel
denounces death upon them, they promise life unto themselves: and is not then
this promise of theirs expressly contrary to the Gospel? The Gospel tells them
that they must die, they say no, but we shall live, and do they not contradict
the Gospel? The Gospel says, that they are under Gods displeasure, but they
presume they are in his favor; and where do you think lies the truth? in the
Gospel, or in their presumptions? We must believe what the Gospel says,
whatsoever it be that they presume: and so the Apostle himself believed when he
put this truth upon record, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body
according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad; for what does he add
to these words? Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men; we
labor to instruct the ignorant, we labor to convince the obstinate, we labor
to awake the drowsy, we strive to stir up every person to escape from the wrath
which is to come, by timely repentance and reformation: we know the terror of
the Lord, we do not guess, but we are assured, that it will overtake the
impenitent, when he shall return to judge the World; and therefore use our
utmost power to persuade repentance and reformation.

5. And now because that impenitent persons, even those that abide in wilful
sin, are wont to ground their hopes of pardon and life eternal on the death of
Christ, and the satisfaction made by him; it will he sit in the last place to
show that his death and satisfaction is so far from giving any countenance to
this error, that it does utterly overthrow it: nor need we any further
argument to convince and persuade us that this is so, than that the death of
our blessed Lord is always used in the holy Scripture as a mighty motive to
obedience. For certainly that very same thing can be no motive unto obedience,
that gives any just and true encouragement for a man to continue in his sins;
yet so it is, the death of Christ is always represented in Scripture, as a
mighty motive to obedience, unto all obedience to the Gospel, and so designed
by Christ himself. He gave himself for us, says the Apostle, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works, Tit. 2.14. He bare our sins in his own body upon the tree that
we being dead to sin should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. He gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world,
that is, from the lusts and corruptions of it, Gal. 1.4. He gave himself for
his Church, or Body, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of
water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church not
having a spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25. etc. And that you may see that he was really
understood to design this in his dying for us, and that his death tends
effectually to this purpose with them that understand it aright, hear what the
Apostle himself speaks upon this point, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. The love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge: that if one died for all, then were all
dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. From whence
observe, that the death of Christ was so apprehended and understood by the
primitive followers of our Lord, that they took their very greatest motives,
their strongest arguments to obedience from it: so far was it from giving them
any grounds, or reasons to cherish and indulge their sins. If any man ask what
then has the death of Christ done for the remission of our sins? My answer is,
that the satisfaction thereby made, has gained the pardon of all those sins we
repent of, not of those whereof we do not repent. It operates to the remission
of sin, of all degrees and kinds of sin, when we abandon and forsake them; not
while we cherish and indulge them: and thus it becomes, not an encouragement to
live in them, but to abandon and cast them off.

3. Having thus showed, that for God to accept men in their sins, to pardon
them while they live in them, is flatly contrary to his nature, contrary to his
own decree declared and published in the Gospel, I may now very justly conclude
the thing, which I propounded at the first, that a presumption of his pardon,
while a man continues in his sins is a very great and dangerous error: for so
of necessity must that be, which is so manifest a mistake both of the nature
and will of God, and that in a matter of no less moment, than that of eternal
life and happiness.

Add hereunto, that this is an error, which makes men stupid and secure in the
midst of the very greatest dangers, lulls them asleep under Gods displeasures,
charms them with the hope of peace, while it is far removed from them. They
speak peace unto themselves, the Gospel speaks quite contrary; they judge
themselves in Gods favor, the Gospel pronounces that they are not so; they
promise themselves remission of sins, eternal happiness and Salvation, the
Gospel threatens death and judgment. In the mean time having reconciled the
hopes of Heaven to the fruition of their lusts, they enjoy themselves, they
enjoy their sins without any fear of danger from them; for such is the nature
of this error, that it infatuates the mind it self, removes the force and
power of Conscience, lets the corruptions of nature loose, leaves no restraint,
leaves no check at all upon them; and so exposes them to destruction, till it
be discovered and removed.

3. I have said enough of the propositions which are employed in the words
before us, namely, (1.) that men may presume of Gods favor while they continue
in their sins: (2) That this presumption of theirs is a very great and
dangerous error; and shall now conclude with what is expressed: He that does
righteousness is righteous; that is to say, he that is hearty and sincere in
the practice of all the several duties prescribed unto us in the Gospel, he is
acceptable unto God, he is in grace and favor with him; nor will God charge
him with the guilt of such lapses and inadvertencies as flow from the frailty
of humane nature. And what is the use we should make of this? It is to awake
and excite our selves to all diligence, to all sincerity in our duties. And
what are the motives, what the arguments to that diligence?

1. That which is mentioned in the Text, where we find, that this is the very
thing that recommends us to Gods acceptance; He that does righteousness is
righteous, that is, he is so in Gods account, as well as really so in himself:
for the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry, Psalm. 34.15. They are as the apple of his eye, he has a tender
kindness for them, he bears a singular regard unto them, and takes an especial
care of them. Righteousness is the Image of God, true goodness wheresoever it
is, is a beam derived from the fountain of light, which God does always love
and cherish, always bless with especial favor; whatever regard or disregard,
whatever favor or disfavour it finds with men, it never wants the favor of
God; it is a participation of his Image, and he loves it wheresoever it is, as
he loved it in his only Son: so the Apostle himself adds, He that does
righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous. And is not this a singular
motive to live in the constant practice of it? what is that that supports the
minds, what is that that cheers the hearts and spirits of wise, and good, and
holy men under all the troubles, all the calamities of the World, but the hope
and sense of Gods favor? where can we find a sure refuge, an assured shelter,
and security under thousands of fears and disappointments that attend us in the
present World, but under the shadow of Gods wings, the grace and favor of God
Almighty? which Grace is Almighty like himself, and will preserve to life
eternal, if we labor faithfully to retain it by true and diligent obedience to
him: let this therefore move us to obedience.

2. And lastly, because we have taken upon us the name and profession of Jesus
Christ, and because that Christ has strictly commanded that every one that
names his name, depart from iniquity, left he bring a scandal on that
profession; Let the honor of so dear a Master, the credit and service of his
Church, which he has purchased with his blood. persuade the obedience of the
Gospel, If these, with other considerations tending unto the same purpose, have
not this effect upon us, we shall bring a scandal upon the Gospel, we shall
open the mouth of scorn and clamor against the Religion we profess, we shall
give occasion for men to think, that we are under the great delusion, which the
Apostle here corrects, of thinking our selves righteous persons, although we do
not do righteousness. But in the diligent and careful practice of the holy Laws
that Christ has given us, we shall honor our Lord, adorn his Religion, edify
others, edify our selves, grow to an excellent habit of mind. What shall I say
more? In so doing we shall obtain all the blessings of the Gospel, and at last
arrive at eternal happiness.

The Nineteenth Sermon.
Luke 16.8. For the Children of this world are in their generation wiser than
the Children of light.


THESE words are a short reflection made upon the behavior of a certain
Steward (as it is represented in a Parable) who, having imbezeld his Masters
goods, is called to account for his miscariage, and thereupon to be displaced.
How is it says his Lord to him, that I hear this of thee! give an account of
thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward, v. 2. of this Chapter.
The Steward, surprised with the sudden notice of his removal from his place,
presently begins to bethink himself how he shall now provide for himself. He
said with himself, v. 3. what shall I do? for my Lord takes away from me the
Stewardship: I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. But long it was not before he
comes to a resolution, which was, to gratify his Masters debtors in the
abatement of their debts, that so when his Master had removed him, they might
receive and entertain him: so it follows v. 4. I am resolved what to do, that
when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may receive me into their houses:
accordingly calling them to reckon with him, he makes some abatement to every
debtor of what was owing to his Lord: To him that owed him an hundred measures
of Oil, he makes abatement of one half: saying unto him, take thy bill and sit
down quickly, and write fifty, v. 6. To him that owed an hundred measures of
wheat, he abated a fifth part of the debt: Take thy bill and write fourscore,
v. 7. So he obliged his Masters debtors to entertain him in their houses, when
he had lost his Stewards place; so he provided for himself. His Lord in the
mean time knowing this as well as his other misbehaviours, though he could not
approve the fraud and injustice of his Steward; yet commends the care he had of
himself, commends the wisdom of his Servant in making provision for the future:
so it follows, v. 8. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward because he had
done wisely; whereupon our Savior adds this following observation: For the
Children of this world, are in their generation wiser than the Children of
light.

1. The Children of this world are those that mind and study the present World;
that is, the concerns and profits of it, as the great and only valuable things,
and have no other end at all, but to attain to wealth and power, and what may
be useful in this life: for wheresoever the World is put for one particular
sort of men, it always signifies the worser sort; so in those words, John 17.9.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world: and afterward at the 16. v. they
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. From whence as from diverse
other places it has been truly and well observed, that although the World do
often signify all mankind, the good and evil both together, yet where it is
put for one part only, it always designs the worser part.

2. Now to go on, the Children of light are those that profess the faith and
hope of future Glory, and to make the attainment of that glory their chief
endeavor in the World: so is the same expression taken, John 6.36. While ye
have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the Children of the light;
and so the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. ye are all the Children of the light, and the
Children of the day: that is to say, ye all profess the faith of the Gospel,
which has brought us out of darkness into light; ye all profess the steadfast
hope of that Glory, which is promised in the Gospel to us, and to make the
pursuit of that Glory the chief design and end of life. These are the persons
whom the Scriptures style the Children of light, and this is the reason why
they are so styled.

3. And then further whereas it is said, that the Children of this World are in
their Generation wiser then the Children of light: the meaning is, that they
pursue those ends and interests which they propound unto themselves, the
advantages of this present World, with greater-prudence care and diligence,
than those that profess the faith and hope of a better World, study and
practice those means, that are proper for the gaining of it. This is the sense
of the words before us, and that which I shall insist upon, showing how those
that look no further than present things, are wiser in their affairs and
interests, than those that profess the Faith and Hope of future happiness are
in theirs. And this I shall show,

1. In some circumstances which relate to the several ends, which these two
different sorts of persons severally propound unto themselves.

2. And secondly in their different behavior, as to the means to their several
ends.

1. And for the former of these particulars.

1. Let it be considered in the first place, that they that are wise for the
present World, fix and settle a certain end, that is, the advantages of this
World, as a certain scope, a standing mark to direct and govern all their
actions. They firmly resolve upon their end, and resolve never to vary from it
upon any conditions whatsoever: Whereas now on the other hand, many of them
that profess the Gospel never come to any such resolution, in the end which
they ought to aim at in all their actions and endeavors; that is to say,
eternal happiness revealed, and promised in the Gospel.

Some there are that profess the Gospel, who never take this great end into any
degree of consideration; never enter upon any deliberations, any counsels at
all relating to it: but live by chance, live by occasion, choose and refuse as
occasion serves, never once taking into their thoughts any certain and stable
end of life, much less the greatest end of all; everlasting life in the World
to come.

Others there are, who do sometimes deliberate of the end of life, think with
themselves for a little while, what they should make their principal end; and
by these thoughts do in some measure incline themselves to prefer the future
before the present, future glory and immortality before the vanities of this
World: but never fix those inclinations upon their hearts, break off their
thoughts and deliberations, before they come to a certain issue, so as that
nothing shall divert them from it, not all the allurements of the World, nor
all the dreads and dangers of it: And this is the reason of the instability of
their lives, of their inconstancy in their actions, of their reeling and
staggering to and fro between these present and future things. They never fix
eternal glory as the principial end and design of life, as those that design
the present World, settle its profits and enjoyment, as the certain end and
design of theirs.

Add hereunto, what is very strange, that they that make the World their end,
are more regardful of the future, within their proper sphere and compass, than
some that profess the faith and hope of future Glory. And this indeed is the
very thing, which is commended in the Steward; that he considered what he
should do, how he should provide for time to come, being now to lose the place
he had. This is the instance wherein the Children of this World are said to be
wiser in their Generation than the Children of light: a great reproach to
infinite numbers, that profess the hopes of a blessed immortality, that they
should be much less solicitous for everlasting and endless ages, than others
for that little time (if any at all, for that is uncertain) which is future in
the present World.

2. The Children of this World having once fixed and settled their end,
concluded what the thing shall be, which they will make the main design and end
of life, do always keep that end in view, always preserve it in their thoughts,
live in the daily consideration, and constant contemplation of it. They have it
in view in all their Counsels, their Counsels are directed by it. It is that
Star they have in their eye in the whole progress and course of life, the
thoughts of it never depart from them; they rather forget to eat, or drink, or
take the rest which even nature itself requires, than that they have made the
end of life, the advantages of the present World.

But how do they (or most of them) behave themselves that profess the hopes of
eternal life? Is this life always in their thoughts? is future Glory and
Immortality always present to their minds? do they live in the constant view of
everlasting rest and happiness? Or do not the cares, do not pleasures, do not
the smallest trifles of the World drive out the thoughts of future happiness,
and turn them out of the way unto it? are they not (to use our Saviors words,
Luke 8.14.) choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life? are
they not so overwhelmed in them, as to forget God and themselves; and their
great end, who they are, what they have designed, what they have formerly fixed
upon, as the principal end and design of life? And how much then do wordly men
in their Generation, exceed the Children of light in wisdom: those keep their
end in constant view, and constantly govern themselves by it; these suffer the
thoughts of their chief end to vanish away from off their minds, suffer their
passions from within, suffer temptations from without, to chase away all the
thoughts of it.

2. Having thus compared the Children of this Wotld with the Children of light
in point of wisdom, as to some circumstances in their ends, and seen how much
the wisdom of the one exceeds the wisdom of the other; let us now proceed to
show the like from the different behavior severally used in the means to their
several ends.

1. And first of all, the Children of this present World, who make this World
their great end, do always duly and well consider what means are proper for
their ends, and use an especial heed and diligence, not to be cheated, and
deceived. The easiness of improbable means shall not recommend them to their
practice; the difficulty of those that are true and certain shall not hinder
the choice and use of them: They rather choose to use much pains to good
purpose, than never so little to none at all.

But they that profess the faith and hope of life eternal, do not so duly and
well consider, what are the surest means unto it; many do not consider at all
what these means and methods are, spend no thoughts at all upon them; but while
they profess a certain end, plainly contradict their own profession by an utter
neglect of all the means that should lead them to the attainment of it: nay
live just contrary to their end, and use no other means for heaven, than those
that lead them to destruction: so the Apostle, Philip. 2.18, 19. Many, walk, of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. And then
further many others study to find out easy ways to life eternal, and rather
choose to lose their end in the use of false and deceitful means, than to attain
it by those endeavors, that seem more difficult, although they be more certain
likewise.

If they can think of any method, whereby they may hope to gain a pardon, and
yet notwithstanding retain their sin; if they can find out any arts to
reconcile the hopes of heaven to the enjoyment of their lusts; if any such
method offer it self, as promises everlasting happiness, and yet permits them
in their sins, or admits a commutation for them, a penance instead of
reformation, this is the method which they will choose, this is a Religion they
will embrace: so they choose their own delusions, and study to cheat, and
deceive themselves. Our Lord has left this caution with us, as necessary for
our eternal Salvation, Matt. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it
out, and cast it from thee; if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast
it from thee, for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And who would
think but that such a caution should firmly settle this belief, that every
reigning, that is, every habitual lust excludes a man from the Kingdom of
Heaven? yet such is the folly of infinite numbers, who do profess the Gospel of
Christ, that they do both permit their lusts to reign in them, and hope to
attain to life eternal; they suffer themselves to be deluded with false and
deceitful arts and shifts, pretending to be the way to heaven: but so do not
they that make the World their great end, they choose the means that are true
and proper, although more difficult in Execution, than those that are not so
effectual.

2. Add hereunto in the second place, that they who make this World their end,
having once concluded of the means that are most proper, most effectual for
this purpose, use no delay in Execution. They sleep not over their
opportunities of serving their interest and advantage, they do not defer that
till the morrow, which had been better done to day; but carefully improve every
moment for the gaining of that they have designed. But Lord! what tedious
delays are used by many professing Christianity, before they will seriously
apply themselves to gain the end of that profession, or lead their lives
according to it? How many trifling arts are used to put of the practice of
their duties, to secure their darling beloved lusts? What mean excuses are
pretended to defend and justify their delays? How many resolutions are made,
and broken? how many times are set, and put off for this great work, this
necessary business of reformation? How many convictions must they suffer? How
often must Conscience be awakened? what pangs and regrets must it endure? what
flames must God kindle upon it, before they will seriously apply themselves to
consider their end, and the way unto it, shake of their lusts, and practice the
Duties of Christianity? See how our Lord represents this case, Luke 9. at the
latter end, where when he commands one to follow him, his answer is, Lord
suffer me first to go, and bury my Father. Another receiving the like command
presently returns a like answer: I will follow thee; but let me first go and
bid them farewell which are at home at my house. So we (even too too many of
us) being urged to mind our great end, to secure our everlasting happiness,
resolve indeed upon repentance, and reformation, but delay to practice our
resolutions; this men put off so often, so long, with such oppositions to their
own reason, such contradiction to their Conscience, till at last they utterly
lay aside the very design and purpose of it, and never think any more of it,
unless perhaps the arrest of sickness, or the sense of approaching near to
death, revive their former resolutions; and then the Minister is called for,
then the Sacrament, then Absolution is desired, with what success God only
knows, I will not undertake to say. However thus much I may pronounce, that the
weakest and most imprudent persons, do not manage the affairs of this life with
so little prudence and foresight, as these the concernments of life eternal.

3. As the Children of this World use no delays in the Execution of the means,
which they judge most proper for their ends; so they are not heedless and
incogitant, but strangely diligent in the execution: They do entirely give up
themselves to serve the end which they have chosen: They mind, they pursue this
one thing only; they do not halt between two opinions, but sacrifice every
other thing for the service of their main design. They will deny their ease,
and pleasure, they will deny their reputation, they will bridle their natural
lusts and passions, they will do any violence to themselves, to attain the end
they have propounded as the great design, and end of life. But how do they
(many of them) behave themselves, who profess the hope of life eternal, and the
attaining of that life to be their chief and principal end? do they submit all
ends to this? do they consecrate all their labors to it? do they entirely
yield themselves to the service of God, and their own Souls? do they not halt
between Christ and Belial? is it no part of their design to serve any other end
but one? do not God and Mamon divide their thoughts? has not Mamon a share
with God? is there no darling beloved lust that cools their affections, checks
their endeavors after heaven? how shall we answer these questions? alas they
are answered by our experience: experience shows how much the men that make
profession of the Gospel, and of the hope of life eternal, mind and endeavor
other ends, even more than that one needful thing, that chief principal end of
all, of attaining to eternal happiness. For these men, while they make
profession of serving this design only, in the mean time sacrifice to their
lusts, sacrifice to their ease and pleasure, sacrifice to their pride and
avarice, divide their hearts, and share their endeavors between the present
and future things; and do not so heartily seek for heaven, as the Children of
this present World seek the advantages of the World.

4. Lastly the Children of this World pursue their ends and interests in it
without cessation or interruption: nothing shall divert, nothing interrupt,
nothing break off their labors after it. They do not stand to gaze on trifles,
to please their eyes, to fill their ears with things, wherein they are not
concerned; but still persist and persevere in steady pursuit of their designs.
But they that seem, they that pretend to seek after the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, suffer themselves to be diverted from their course by every
little affair, or accident, that interposes in their way. They make a stand at
the appearance of the least danger, the smallest difficulty in their way: If
they must hazard the smallest part of an estate, or of reputation; if they must
deny their present ease, if they must forbear their present pleasure in the
pursuit of life eternal, all these difficulties must be removed, before they will
adventure to proceed: and if they be not removed at all, here they grow weary
of weldoing, here they forsake their former course, so their latter end is
worse than their beginning: for it had been better for them, says St Peter,
not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to
turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. And thus you see in how
many instances the Children of this present World are wiser than the Children
of light. They fix and settle a certain end, they always keep that end in view,
they duly consider what are the most effectual means in order to the gaining of
it; and having once concluded this, they neither delay the execution, nor
suffer any other ends to cool their endeavors in pursuit, or to divert or
interrupt them: wherein they show much more wisdom in their sphere, and in
order to their designed end, than they that profess much higher aims, do to
theirs.

And now for reflection upon this discourse, I have something to say to both
the parties here concerned, something to the Children of this World, and
something to the Children of light.

1. To the Children of this World: and that which I have to say to them, is, to
persuade them to change their end, and then to retain the same diligence in
their endeavors to attain it, which they formerly used to their former ends.

1. And were not the eyes of mortal men strangely blinded by their lusts, and
their ears infinitely dull of hearing; were not their hearts hard and stupid,
methinks it should be an easy thing to persuade them to judge eternal glory,
everlasting life in the world to come, a greater, a nobler, a higher end, an
end more necessary to be sought, than whatsoever they can attain, nay hope, or
propound in the present World: will they that pretend to be wise and prudent,
and really are so in their sphere, are so in their Generation, pretend there is
more content, and quiet, more peace, and safety, and satisfaction in the
pursuit of wealth, and power, or whatsoever else it be, which they have made
their chief end, than in the study of heavenly joys? or, if they will pretend
this, will they yet pretend that the joys or treasures of this World, are more
valuable than these of heaven? or will they pretend that they are equal in
themselves? that they are equal in duration? that the creature is as good as
God, or time as long as all eternity, a moment equal to infinite ages? If they
can so much as pretend this, let them retain their former end, and still make
the World their portion: but then if this cannot be pretended, let them change
their end, or lose their credit, and forfeit all pretense to wisdom, nay lose
their own immortal Souls.

2. But then having once changed their end, let them retain the same diligence,
the same prudence in the pursuits and labors for it, which they formerly used
to other ends.

You that would not formerly cheat your selves by easy and ineffectual means
in order to what you did design, you that would not delay any opportunity,
wherein you could possibly serve your selves, you that entirely gave up your
hearts, and freely sacrificed all endeavors to serve the end you had
propounded, you that would not suffer any lesser things, any charms, or
flatteries, or avocations, you that would not suffer your ease and quiet, your
rest or sleep, to interrupt you in your course, or to divert you from your
ends; be as true and faithful to your selves and to your better resolutions, as
you have been to the mean designs, which you had formerly for the World. Having
now made a better choice, be not less diligent in endeavor; having now greater
ends in view, greater designs upon your minds, think what folly now it were, to
be less in diligence than heretofore.

2. And then for you that profess your selves the Children of light, and to
have made the Kingdom of God, eternal glory your great end, let me persuade you
to persist in all adherence to your end, but to mend your pace, to use more
diligence in order to the attaining of it.

1. Your end is such as, that nothing possibly can be greater, nothing more
worthy to be chosen: it is a crown of life, a crown of glory, an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled reserved for you in the heaven, an inheritance
that never fades away.

2. And therefore fix it in your minds, live in the constant view of it, choose
the means that are proper for it, put them in speedy execution, lose no time,
spare no labor to attain it: Mind your own needful thing, give up your selves
entirely to it. Let not the charms, let not the dreads of this present World,
let no man's example, no man's frowns, let neither worldly hopes, nor fears
divert, or break your resolutions: you have chosen well, pursue your choice
against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. Be true to your selves, and God
will assist you by his Grace; he will enlighten you by his spirit, he will
strengthen you by his power, and tread down Satan under your feet. And the God
of peace make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

The Twentieth Sermon.
Matt. 6.21. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.


THF First thing, which every man is concerned to know, is, where he may find
true happiness. For seeing we all desire this, and this desire being the spring
of all our Counsels and endeavors, he that has chosen that for happiness,
which God intended so to be, in the very frame of humane nature, has by this
choice put himself into the ready way to gain it: For having made this judgment
of it, that this is his chief and supreme good, it will be frequently in his
thoughts, it will govern all his deliberate actions, it will be chief in all
his designs, he will especially serve this end in every instance of life and
action, and never wilfully vary from it.

This was the reason why our Lord takes care in the words immediately before
the Text, to teach us both where we should not, and where we should lay up
treasures for our selves. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth,
where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:
But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal. He knew, that
where we place our happiness, styled our treasure in these words, there should
we also place our hearts. For says he, where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.

Upon which words I shall discourse in this method.

1. I shall show in what manner, and in what degree men set their hearts upon
that which they judge their chief good; whether it be the wealth, and honors,
the ease. and pleasures of this World, or the Bliss, and Glory of the future.

2. And then secondly I shall consider the several consequences of the words,
and draw such conclusions from them, as deserve especial consideration.

1. And to begin with the former general.

1. The first application of men's souls to that which they judge their supreme
good, is a fixed and earnest desire of it.

2. The next to this is a firm design and resolution to apply themselves to the
gaining of it.

3. And both these, in the third place, in such degrees, that if ever any
competition arise between this end and any other, this is preferred, and still
pursued, the other neglected and laid aside.

1. The first application of men's Souls to that they judge their chief good, is
a fixed and earnest desire of it; which is so rooted in humane nature, that no
man can ever shake it off, wholly extinguish or remove it.

And the truth is, were it not so, that God had planted this desire in the very
frame of man's nature, the World would presently fall asleep, the minds of men
would drowze and slumber, having nothing to quicken and to awake them: the Soul
itself, as busy and active as it is, as full of various thoughts and passions,
would be as unactive in the body, as the very body without the Soul. Desire is
the principle of all action, and this desire of being happy, the spring of all
our other desires: this moves and quickens all within us, this puts life into
all our powers, excites our thoughts, forms our Counsels, lays our designs,
stirs up and animates all endeavors: This holds the eye of the mind open, this
keeps the Soul it self awake, and puts it into continual motion; for whatsoever
it be we do, it is done in the view and consideration, of what we believe to be
good for us, and some way tending to our happiness; remove this out of the eye
of a man, and the clearest reasons that you can urge, will never excite his
will to choice, much less engage him unto action. He cannot act, where he
cannot hope; nor can he hope where he sees nothing to be desired. Say you
whatsoever you can to move him, he will always have this to say for himself,
the thing you propound no way tends to any advantage, it does not serve any end
of mine, and therefore why should I undertake it? give me that which will do me
good, let me see how it tends unto my welfare, let me know what account I shall
find in it; prove that I shall be better for it, either in this, or another
World, and then you may persuade me to it.

Nor does this desire of a man's own happiness contradict or prejudice public
welfare; for every wise man understands, that his own particular and private
good is always involved in public welfare: and every good man makes it a part
of his own happiness to serve the advantage of other persons; and besides, he
knows that he shall be rewarded hereafter for it. And although we cannot all be
wise, yet every man may at least be good. But after all, both the good, and
evil, wise, and unwise always desire and choose that, which makes at least the
fairest appearance of contributing to their own felicity.

This is the reason why God himself applies himself to this desire in the whole
economy of his providence, in all his dealings with mankind.

When he prescribes his Laws to us, he urges obedience to these Laws by
promising happiness thereunto; which promise yet could have no effect upon us,
had we no desire of being happy: on the same account, he threatens misery to
the violation of his precepts; which yet would be to little purpose, could we
be contented to be miserable, or cease to desire our own felicity.

It Is the same method which he uses in all his other addresses to us; when he
rebukes, when he persuades, when he expostulates and reasons with us, he still
accommodates all these things to that desire of being happy, which he has
ingrafted in our natures, as the first mover in all our actions.

Sometimes indeed he applies himself unto the natural desire men have of peace
and safety in the world. And so he did to the Jewish Nation, Deuteronomy. 30.15. See,
says he, I have set before thee this day life, and good; death, and evil: and
after that at the 9. v. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore
choose life, that is to say, choose obedience, that both thou and thy seed may
live.

But the great applications made unto us in the Gospel are addressed to that
desire in man, which moves him both to desire to be, and to be happy to all
eternity. This is the promise, says St John, that he has promised us even
eternal life, 1 John 2.25. And so St Paul, Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9. where he tell us,
that God will render to every man according to his deeds to them, who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality;
eternal life: but unto them that are contentious and obey not the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation; tribulation and wrath, and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.

Thus he that made us, and knows our nature, and all the springs of motion in
us, in all his applications to us accommodates himself to that desire of being
happy, which he himself has planted in us; as knowing this to be the way to
gain a ready compliance from us.

On the same account the great deceiver of mankind paints his baits, covers his
snares, gilds his temptations, with an appearance of what is good: He knows it
would be a vain thing to attempt to press us unto the choice of what is evil,
what is destructive to our selves, should it appear in its own likeness; and
therefore he puts a disguise upon it. He boldly told the woman in paradise,
that if they would eat what God had forbidden, their eyes should be opened,
they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil: for if as Gods, then surely
wise, and blessed and happy. And thus the temptation found success, which first
brought sin into the World, and death, as the wages due unto it

Nor was it a much different method, whereby he applied himself to Christ, for
he took him, as the Gospel tells us, into an exceeding high mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said unto
him, all these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and worship me,
Matt. 4.8, 9. Observe what a scene he spreads before him, and how he varnishes
and paints it over: he shows him Kingdoms; glorious things! yea all the
Kingdoms of the World: he shows him the glory of these Kingdoms; not the cares,
not the solicitudes, not the labors, or dangers, that attend them, but only
the glory and splendour of them: and then offers them all unto him if he would
but do him homage for them. And though the temptation made no impression upon
him, whose Kingdom was not of this World; yet was it craftily laid and aimed,
seeing mankind are greatly prone to believe the glory of this World the
greatest happiness and felicity; and seeing also, that the first application of
men's Souls, to what they believe so to be, is a fixed and earnest desire of it.

2. The next to this is a firm design and resolution to apply themselves to the
gaining of it; from which they cannot be removed if they judge it possible to
attain it, and if, in truth, this be the thing, in which alone they place their
happiness.

These things allowed, the greatest difficulties, the hardest labors, the
sharpest resistance and oppositions, will scarcely discourage resolution, nor
hinder endeavors to obtain it.

If it be difficult for mankind to reduce their natural inclinations to a
compliance with Christ's precepts; to deny inordinate sensualities to sensual
appetites and desires; to deny unlawful gains and interests to the desire of
wealth and riches; to mortify pride, to subdue ambition, and all the spawn of
these vices, envy, malice, and animosity; to retain piety toward God in a
profane and wicked age, truth and justice toward men in a deceitful injurious
World: If it be difficult thus to do; yet he that has firmly fixed these
principles in his mind, that this is the only way to heaven, and heaven alone
the place of happiness, will attempt to make his way thither through these, or
any other difficulties, in the view of the glory set before him.

I dare not attempt to describe the reproaches and contradictions, to display
the injuries and affronts, that our Lord endured throughout his life, much less
the agonies of his death, or his incomparable patience in them. Only thus much
I shall observe, that what he had of man in him was still supported, and born
up by the steadfast view and consideration of that he had chosen for his
happiness: of that joy that was set before him; for this joy he endured the
cross, despising the shame; and so doing, is now set down at the right hand of
the throne of God, Heb. 12.2.

And what an account of the labors and sufferings of St Paul, is that we read,
2 Cor. 11.23. and the following verses. In labors more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have. I been in the
deep. In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by my own Countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city,
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
brethren, in weariness, in painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold, and nakedness, besides these things that
are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches?
What an accumulation of things is here! of things most grievous to flesh and
blood! heaps upon heaps of all the several troubles, and dangers, which the
life of man is exposed unto in the present World. But what impression did these
calamities make on him, who had designed eternal happiness? Did he leave the
way that leads unto it in consideration of these evils? did he turn his back
upon future glory, and quit the further pursuit of it, and retreat to the ease,
and peace, and safety, which he had enjoyed, while he was a Pharisee? No, so
far was he from so doing, that he reckoned the sufferings of this present World
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans
8.18. and doubtless, says he, I count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and count them but dung that I may win Christ -- that I may know
him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death, if by any means I may attain to the
resurrection of the dead, that is to a blessed immortality, Phil. 3.8, 10, 11,
12.

To this he pressed through all the dangers, all the sufferings that did
encumber the way unto it: This he believed to be his happiness, and therefore
resolved to be true to himself in the unwearied pursuit of it.

And although it may seem to be something strange, that they who employ all
their thoughts in the perishing things of the present World, that they who have
no design for Heaven, should yet design their own happiness; yet this is the
thing which even they design also.

It Is true indeed they have mistaken in their choice, they have suffered
themselves to be abused, either by the outward gloss and splendor that shines
on the face of wealth, and honor, or by the ease they find, or fancy in the
delights of the present World; and so they mistake a mere appearance, a show, a
shadow of felicity instead of the very thing it self. It is a vanity which they
follow, but a vanity under a show of happiness.

What so vain as popular fame? the breath of rude, and ignorant people? yet
fame is happiness, such as it is, unto the proud, and sensual pleasures unto
the sensual, and wealth and riches unto the Covetous; and therefore they who
have placed their desires upon these enjoyments, in hope that they shall be
happy in them, spare no labor, refuse no troubles to attain them. It is not
the distance of the thing, wherein they hope for satisfaction, nor the
sliperiness of the way unto it (though as hard to climb as a rock of Ice) it is
not the fear of sliding back, nor the difficulty of proceeding forward, that
can obstruct the pursuit of it: they will press on through the greatest
straits, and labor to climb the highest difficulties, if there be hope to
attain unto it; and as for those, that cannot hope for any advantage by a sin,
but what they find in the sin it self, they are so degenerate in their natures,
that they please themselves in doing evil, and this very pleasure they make
their happiness: and so they abandon themselves unto it, although it lead to
eternal misery. And so I proceed to the third particular which is,

3. That men do so desire, and so pursue the thing, wherein they place
felicity, that if ever a competition arise between that end, and any other;
that is preferred, and still pursued, the other neglected, and laid aside.

And certain it is, that although it be true and real happiness, though it be
the glory of Heaven it self, which we have propounded to our selves, as the
only thing that will make us happy; yet such is the vanity, such the frailty of
humane nature, such are the temptations of the World, such is the subtilty and
activity of the great deceiver of mankind, that we must expect to find
something of competition between this great and excellent end of serving God,
and our own happiness, and others of infinitely less importance.

We are compounded of flesh, and spirit; and the flesh lusts against the
spirit, as well as the spirit against the flesh. We are made up of body, and
mind; and the body will prompt the desire and study of bodily pleasure, and
ease, and safety, beyond allowed and lawful measures: sense will oppose it self
to reason, nay sense will combat Faith it self; especially where the way to
Heaven is beset with the troubles of this World, loss of favor, decay of
estate, eclipse of honor and reputation, and where the slipping a little aside
will not only serve to give security, but great accession to all the advantages
of this life. In this case, sense will paint a hideous representation of all
the sufferings and calamities, and give a glorious show and luster to the
advantages of this World, in the imaginations, and minds of men.

Add hereunto that we live in a throng of ill examples; such as may toss us to
and fro (like men in the midst of a moving crowd) without a vigorous
opposition. We are apt to believe, that if the liberties commonly used be not
expedient or lawful for us, neither c^uld they be so to other persons; but
seeing others plainly believe them so to them, we have reason to judge them so
to us. For as all men are of the same mold; so are they under the same Laws: so
that we have no more to lose than others, nor they any less to save than we.

Nor is the Devil a sleep or mindless, how he may divert our course to Heaven:
He walks about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. His
approaches to us are invisible, his insinuations quick and pressing, and then
especially applied and urged, when he finds us ruffled and discomposed by the
hopes and fears, and ill impressions that other temptations have made upon us.
And thus it sometimes comes to pass, that wise and good, and virtuous persons
do by surprise either make a stand, or a false step in the way to Heaven.

But here now is their great advantage, that having formerly fixed upon Heaven,
and the glory of it, as their only happiness; having deliberately chosen piety,
and sincere obedience to Christ's precepts, as the only means of arriving there,
this habit of mind, by the grace of God, soon recovers it self again,
recollects it self, finds its mistake, rescues it self from the surprise, and
returns to God and it self again, just as the needle to the Pole; and fixes,
where it was fixed before; and prefers the reward of future glory beyond
whatsoever this present world can bring into competition with it.

On the contrary, if a man has chosen the perishing vanities of this World, as
things wherein he hopes for happiness; he will pursue, and prefer these,
whenever a competition happens between this World, and that to come: perhaps
his conscience may smite him for it, perhaps his reason may for a while make
some resistance and opposition, he may possibly find some reluctancies within
himself, and waver and fluctuate for sometime between some contrary hopes, and
fears; hopes of the end, which he has propounded, and fear of loss in another
state. But if the thing, which he has designed, be that, wherein he places
happiness, his hopes will at length baffle his fears; either remove the
consideration, and exclude the thoughts of another World, or else shake the
belief of it, or teach him some deceitful arts of reconciling the hopes of
Heaven with the enjoyment of his lusts: for what men love and value most, that
will have the command of them in every contest and competition.

And this is the reason why our Lord takes such care to give us a true account
of things; to state their real value to us, to put us in mind, how much the
joys and treasures of heaven transcend the treasures that are on earth, seeing
moth and rust consume the latter, and that thieves may rob and spoil us of
them, while the former are not only durable, not only eternal in themselves,
but beyond the reach of theft, and rapine.

Thus does our Lord adjust and rate the worth of things, that we may learn to
choose aright, to esteem that most, which best deserves to be so esteemed; to
judge that best, which is the best: for having judged it so to be, we shall fix
our hearts and desires upon it, apply our selves to the gaining of it, and that
in such degree and manner, that when ever a competition happens between this
end, and any other, this will not fail to be preferred in all our deliberate
thoughts and actions.

2. Having thus showed in what manner and what degrees men set their hearts
upon their treasure, upon that which they make their chief good; I shall now
draw some such conclusions from the words, as deserve our especial
consideration.

1. And first of all if the heart will be where the treasure is, we may
conclude men's treasure is there, wherever it be that we find their hearts: for
these are inseparable each from other.

Whatsoever it is that men prefer in all their deliberate thoughts and
counsels, and so pursue in all their actions, that they will rather lose, or
hazard all other things, than miss of it, that most undoubtedly is their
treasure. If a man will defraud, or oppress his neighbor for the heaping up of
wealth and riches, this man has mammon his God, and from this Idol expects
felicity. If he will violate truth and justice, reproach, or flatter, or
dissemble to, advance himself to power, and honor; these are the things he
makes his happiness, and as for those that indulge their sensual inclinations
in contradiction to Christ's precepts, and the just hopes of a better life, they
describe themselves in the 2d chapter of the Book of Wisdom, v. 5, 6. etc. Our
time, say they, is a very shadow, that passes away, and after our end there is
no returning: for it is fast sealed, so that no man comes again. Come on
therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us speedily
use the Creatures like as in youth: Let us us fill our selves with costly wine
and ointments, and let no flower of the spring pass by us: Let us crown our
selves with rose-buds, before they be withered: Let none of us go without his
part of our voluptuousness: Let us leave tokens of our joyfullness in every
place: for this is our portion, and our lot is this. And true it is, whatsoever
it is that men pursue with preference unto all other things, that is the thing
they make their portion.

And what is the use of this discourse? that men may know, what it is they make
their chief Good; and to make it appear how much they often mistake themselves
in the choice thereof, when they are little aware of it. Who will believe so
ill of himself, as that he values the treasures on earth more than those of
Heaven it self? who will believe, he has chosen wealth or power, or honor, or
the perishing pleasures of this life, as his supreme and chief good? and yet if
none have so chosen, why do so many so pursue these very things? why so study
this present World, as to forget and neglect the other?

Men live by sight and not by Faith: they choose by sense, and not by reason:
and they are surprised into this choice by the early acquaintance which they
contract with what is pleasing unto sense, before they employ their
understandings; and when they arrive at the use of them, they make no other use
of reason, than for the gaining of that end, which they had formerly chose by
sense. Did they use faith, nay reason it self in the choice of the great end of
life, they would not choose, as now they do; Faith would fix upon that glory
which God has promised, although future and invisible: for faith is the
subsistence of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

Reason would make a reasonable choice, the mind would consult its own
advantage. That which is spiritual, and immortal, would choose immortal and
spiritual joys. Reason would never judge it reasonable to be a servant and
slave to sense: it would never believe that sensible things would give
satisfaction to a spirit, that things uncertain would give a stable and certain
happiness: that we can be happy after death by that which will leave us when we
die: that we can be blessed in any enjoyment of shorter duration than our
selves, that is, than our immortal souls: from whence it appears, that they who
have chosen the perishing things of this world, as the very best and chief
enjoyments, (which they have done, who pursue these things with greater care
than any other) have neither chosen by Faith, nor reason, and therefore have
cause to mend their choice.

2. For secondly, seeing the heart will be where the treasure is, this shows of
what importance it is to make a true and a right judgment of what is true and
lasting treasure; that is, to choose that for happiness which is in truth the
thing we seek, and will not deceive our expectations.

He that mistakes in this business, fails in the choice of that end, whereby
his whole life is governed; which therefore, upon this account, is nothing but
one continued error: he thinks indeed that he has pitched upon an excellent
and worthy thing: he fancies great content and pleasure in view of the thing
which he has designed: he imploys and busies all his thoughts, he contrive and
orders all his Counsels, bends all his labors to attain it; and though it cost
him many a thought, many a tedious and weary step, yet he makes no doubt, but
that it will answer all his hopes, that it will reward him for all his pains,
that it will prove worthy of all his cares. He verily believes that he should
be happy, if he could but once attain unto it.

Yet so it is, every step he makes toward it, sets him further from true
happiness: the further he goes, the further is he out of his way; his back is
upon the thing he seeks, and his face on a false appearance of it: It is a
vanity, it is a delusion, which he has chosen, he is under a very sad mistake:
and, to use the Prophet Isaiahs words, Isa. 44.20. A deceived heart has led
him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my
right hand?

And well it were, if it were only loss of labor for a man to pursue that as
his happiness, which is not really and truly so: but it is infinitely worse
than so, it is pernicious, and destructive. For he that chooses a false end, as
the scope of all his aims, and labors (as every man does, who does not choose
what God commands) is thereby led and hurried on to the greatest errors, the
greatest evils that offer themselves, if to make it his end he promote and
propagate a false means to gain it; if he seek his end in sensuality, no wonder
if he debauch himself by riot and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, by
making provision for the flesh for the fulfilling the lusts thereof. If he
believe, just contrary to our Saviors words, Luke 12.15. that a man's life does
consist in the abundance of the things, which he possesses, can we wonder if
he defraud, or oppress, if he lie, and dissemble to his neighbor, or if he
extort out of his hands, that he may more plentifully fill his own? He will not
believe he is true to himself, if he be not so to that he has made the end of
life: and therefore that will he still pursue, where ever he spies an
opportunity, and finds an advantage to attain it: He will not be startled at
oppositions, he will not boggle at any difficulties, he will not spare his own
pains, nor the greatest concernments of other persons, he will follow his end
where ever it leads, if he can but hope to overtake it: so fatal are the
effects and issues of seeking our happiness in those things, where our Creator
has not laid it.

On the other hand, to place it there where he has placed it, is an advantage
next to the very fruition of it. He that trusts God, cannot be deceived: he
that chooses that which he has promised, cannot be cheated or disappointed; the
thing will afford what he expects, and infinitely more than what he can
imagine: he shall not be flattered with vain hopes, puffed up and swelled for a
little while, and then emptied by disappointment, and vexed with the loss of
expectation. Time will discover the sad mistakes of other persons; age,
infirmities, and experience, or if not these, yet death at least will wear off
the gloss of every vanity, of every vain and perishing thing, howsoever it now
deludes the fancy, and commends it self to imagination. But time will still
more and more justify the choice, strengthen the hopes, and confirm the
purposes and resolutions of every wise and good man, and so conduct and lead
him on to a blessed eternity: for having deliberately chosen the glory which
God has promised, as the only thing that can make him happy, this will
effectually secure his innocence in all deliberate thoughts and actions. If any
temptation offer it self, and present an occasion and opportunity to abuse
himself, or injure others; if it yield a very fair advantage for secret fraud,
or open violence, to revenge himself, or oppress his neighbor; he will always
have this to say against it. This is just contrary to my end, this is directly
against my self, whatever advantage it seems to offer; it contradicts my main
design, it will not consist with my former choice. If I choose this, I must
unravel all I have wrought, I must undo all I have done, I must refuse what I
have chosen heretofore, and that by direction from God himself: and this I am
resolved I will not do. He that believes that that is his happiness which God
has expressly declared to be so, and that because he has declared it, will
never believe that he can attain it, if he wilfully venture on those evils,
which the same God threatens with death eternal.

Nor does the choice of future glory, as a man's supreme and chief good, secure
him only from all the wilful acts of sin, but effectually move and press him on
to all diligence in his duty: for he that believes that that alone is true
happiness which God has promised, will also believe that that diligence, which
God has prescribed is necessary to the attainment of it. And therefore
although it be something difficult to raise his natural inclinations to pursue
a supernatural end, to awaken his mind out of these flattering dreams and
slumbers, which the charms of sense have brought upon it, to keep his thoughts
constantly bent upon his end, and excite himself to the greatest labors to
attain it; yet he considers that it is his happiness he has in view, that it
is no less than eternal glory which he pursues; that to forsake the pursuit of
it, is to forsake his own bliss, and to surrender himself to misery: that it
will requite him for all his labors, and cannot be bought at too dear a rate.
Thus he makes good our Saviors words, Matt. 13.46. The Kingdom of heaven is
like to a merchant-man seeking goodly pearls; who when he had found one pearl
of great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it.*

Add hereunto the great support which the faith and hope of future glory
continually offers unto his mind in all the troubles and oppositions, which may
beset the way unto it. We are troubled, says the Apostle on every side, yet
not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.7, 8. For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
an eternal weight of glory. This, says he, it works for us, while we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the
things which are seen, are temporal; but the things, which are not seen, are
eternal.

And may the serious consideration of that eternal weight of glory, which God
has promised us in the Gospel, teach us to fix our hearts upon it, as the only
thing that can ease our labors, quiet our minds, cure our maladies, and remove
the burdens of mortality. This is the thing which God himself, who best knows
what is good for us, and has the sincerest love to us, always intended for our
happiness: this is the thing, which Christ our Lord came down from Heaven to
reveal unto us: this is the thing, which he chose for himself (and sure he
knows what is the best for humane nature, being God and man in the same person)
He lived in the constant view of it, he died to purchase it for his followers;
he rose again, he ascended to Heaven, and there abides, not only to enjoy it
himself, but to open a way for us unto it, and to prepare a place for us. This
is the thing which will supply all our wants, which will remove all
imperfections, which will fully satisfy all our desires: It is the fruition of
God himself, and will transform us into his image as well in point of
immortality, as of wisdom, righteousness, and perfect holiness: for now are we
the sons of God, says St John, and it does not yet appear what we shall be:
But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Which blessed vision he of his mercy grant unto us.

FINIS.
Page 21. lin. 4. dele to. p. 27. l. 19. read us such. p. 35. l. 12. r. thou
have. p. 41. l. 5. r. is concerned. p. 58. l. 10. for want r. war. p. 67. l. 5.
for others r. they. p. 71. l. ult. r. discharge. p. 72. l. 21. r. abused. p.
73. l. 5. r. was. p. 84. l. 20, 21. r. followers. p. 96. l. 12. for pine by r.
let slip. p. 100. l. 3. r. undertaken. p. 125. l. 21. r. keep unity. p. 133. l.
19. r. known. p. 144. l. 26. r. are as. p. 149. l. 3. r. this. l. 9. r. the
love. p. 161. l. 20. r. 60. l. 22. r. prayed. p. 176. l. 12. r. posts. p. 204.
l. 26. r. proselytes. p. 206. l. 10. d. with. p. 207. l. 22. for that r. it. p.
217. l. 13. r. their. p. 218. l. 20. r. were so notoriously and grossly so,
that. p. 241. l. 18. r. motives. p. 245. l. 22. r. their great. p. 263. l. 7.
d. eighteenth. p. 301. l. 27. r. discover. p. 308. l. 17. r. 2 These. 2. p. 340.
l. 12. r. in the fall of the. p. 368. l. 24. r. in. p. 381. l. 3. r.
unrighteous. p. 410. l. 9. r. imprudence. p. 417. l. 15. r. he be. p. 424. l.
7. r. be fit. p. 452. l. 3, 4. r. Mind this one. p. 459. l. 7. r. indignation
and wrath, tribulation. p. 476. l. 2, 3, 4. r. themselves as means to get it:
if he make it his end to promote and propagate a false; if.

Books Printed for and sold by Richard Chiswel.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr Cary's Chronological Account of
Ancient time. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, or History of Man. Sir Tho.
Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin and
English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Causin's Holy Court. Wilson's
Complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or Philosophical
Language. Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Judge Jones's
Reports in Common Law. Judge Vaughan's Reports in Common Law. Cave Tabulae
Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbes's Leviathan. Lord Bacon's Advancement of
Learning. Sir W. Dugdale's Baronage of Engl. in 2 Vol.
QUARTO.
DR Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and Engl. Bish. Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. The Complete Clerk: Precedents of all sorts. History or the late
Wars of New England. Dr Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from
Popery. Garissolius de Chr. Mediatore. Spanhemii Dubia Evangclica, 2 Vol. Dr
Gibb's Sermons. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. History of the future State of
Europe. Dr Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunnyan,
1 s. Dr Sherlock's Visitation-Serm. at Warrington. Dr West's Assize-Sermon at
Dorchester, 1671. Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain
French Gentlemen charged with a Robbery, 1671. 6 d. The Magistrates Authority
asserted, in a Sermon by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the Eng. Service. Burnet's Vindication of the
Ordination of the Church of England. Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion.
Hardcastle's Christ. Geography and Arithm. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and
Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the
House of Peers in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisd. of the H. of Peers in case of
Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions. -- Let.
about the Bish. Votes in Capit. Cases. Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca. Grew's
Idea of Philological History continued on Roots. Spaniards Conspir. against the
State of Venice. Several Tracts of Mr Hales of Eaton. Bishop Sanderson's Life.
Dr Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Dr Simpson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire
Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains. --
His Hydrological Essays, with an Account of the Allum-works at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice, 1 s. 6 d. Dr Cox's Discourse of the Interest
of the Patient in reference to Physic and Physicians. Organon Salutis: Or an
Instrument to cleanse the Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of
Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Henry Blunt. Dr Cave's Prim.
Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse of the Nature, Ends and Difference of
the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness,
1672. 1 s. 6 d. A Free Conference touching the Present State of England at home
and abroad, in order to the designs of France, 1673. 1 s. Bishop Tailor of
Confirmation, 1 s. 6 d. Mystery of Jesuitism, 3d and 4th Parts. 2 s 6 d. Dr
Samway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists, 1 s. 6 d. Record of Urines, 1 s. Dr
Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Persecution, 1674. 1 s.
DUODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations.
VICESIMO QUARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately Printed.
GVillim's Display of Herauldry, with large Additions. Dr Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, Fol. in 2 Vol. Dr Burlace's History
of the Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia. Grae. Lat. Fol. Cole's Latin and
English Dictionary, with large Additions, 1679. William's Sermon before the
Lord Mayor, October. 12. 1679. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the
Five Jesuits Executed for Treason. Fol. Dr Burnet's Relation of the Massacre of
the Protestants in France. Trials of the Regicides, Octavo. Mr James Brome's
Two Fast Sermons. Dr Jane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11.
1679. Dr Burnet's Letter written upon the Discovery of the late Plot, 4o.
Decree made at Rome, March 2. 1679. condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and
other Casuists. Published by Dr Burnet, 4o. Mr J. James' Visitation Sermon. April
9.71. 4o. Mr John Cave's Fast Sermon. on Jan. 30.79. 4o. -- His Assize Sermon. at
Leicest. July 31.79. 4o. -- His Gospel preached to the Romans, 8o. Certain
Genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with
a large Account of all his works, by Dr Tho. Tennison, 8o. Dr Puller's
Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England, 8o. The Original of all
the Plots in Christendom; with the Danger and Remedy of Schism: By Dr William
Sawel, Master of Jesus College Cambridge, 8o. A Discourse of Supreme Power and
Common Right: By Sir John Munson, Bar. 8o. Dr Edw. Bagshaw's Discourses upon
Select Texts against the Papists and Socinians, 8o. Mr Rushworth's Historical
Collections: The Second Part. Fol. in 2 Volumes. -- His large and exact Account
of the Trial of the E. of Straf. with all the Cicumstances preliminary to,
concomitant with, and subsequent upon the same to his Death, Fol. Remarques
relating to the state of the Church of the 3 first Centuries, written by A.
Seller. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter, 4o. The Country-mans
Physician. For the use of such as live far from Cities, or Market Towns, 8o. Dr
Burnet's Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire. 1680. 4o. --
Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan, a Person of Quality of the Jewish
Religion, lately Baptized a Christian, 4o. -- His Account of the Life and Death
of the late Earl of Rochester, Octavo. -- His Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, December. 22. 1680. -- His Sermon on the 30th of Jan. 1680/1. -- His
Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor of London, 1681. New England Psalms,
Twelves. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. Written by M. Clifford Esquire
Twelves. The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
Recusants, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments
and Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by William
Cawley Esquire Fol. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons. Fowlis his History of Romish
Conspiracies, Treasons and Usurpations, Fol. Markham's Perfect Horseman,
Octavo. Dr Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature
and the Christian Religion, Quarto. Dr Sherlock's Practical Discourse of
Religious Assemblies, Octavo. A Defense of. Dr Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness
of Separation, Octavo. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the
Duchess of York, Octavo. Dalton's Office and Authority of Sheriffs, Fol.
Keeble's Collection of Statutes, Fol. An Historical Relation of the Island of
CEYLON in the East Indies: together with an account of the detaining in
Captivity the Author and diverse other Englishmen now living there, and of the
Authors miraculous Escape: Illustrated with 15 Copper Figures, and an exact Map
of the Island. By Captain Robert Knox a Captive there near Twenty Years, Fol.
Mr Hook's New Philosophical Collections, Quarto.
FINIS.

