OVERTURES FOR Correcting and Amending the LAWS. Humbly Presented to his Grace
the Duke of Queensberry, His Majesty's high Commissioner, And the Honorable
Court of PARLIAMENT.

By a Well-wisher to his Country.

Printed in the Year 1700.

Dedication.
May it please your Grace, etc.
ALbeit our neighboring Nations be surfeited, yet it is the Misfortune of this
to be starved, through want of Municipal Laws, for securing the Subjects in
their Rights, by known and fixed Statutes, and not leaving and exposing the
same to the arbitrary Sentiments of Judges. And though for several Centuries
ago, and even to this time, there have been reiterated Commissions appointed
for revising of the Laws, which are made, and Correcting thereof, or enacting
what new Laws were necessar and expedient for the Good of the Leidges, yet the
same have never hitherto taken effect, being neglected by these who were
appointed, having no suitable Encouragement for their Pains upon that account:
Likeas, Parliaments being only called for Emergencies, requiring speedy
dispatch, through the Weight of these Affairs, had not the convenience to call
for an Account of what was done by these commissionat, as said is. And it being
the Custom, Interest and Prudence of Princes, to gra^^fie their Subjects with
such Laws at the opening of Parliaments, as may ease them of severe and penal
Rigidities, imposed more by exorbitant Custom than by clear and positive Law,
or material Justice and Equity, such as Escheats, Recognitions, Wards and
Marriages, and the like, which belong to His Majesty, which little or nothing
augment the Thesaury, and yet great Hardship upon the Subjects, by gifting to
Donatars, who have screwed the same far beyond their due Limits, which are so
(...), that there is no need of Instances, and which have much prejudged and
vexed these who suffered thereby, and irritat them not only to Clamor against
the same, but also the Government it self: For remeed whereof (in part) these
following Overtures are offered to your Grace, and the Honorable Court of
Parliament, which Natively center at you, not only in respect of your present
Character, but also of your Interest and Quality, the first being equal to what
ye can desire, and the last to what is here attainable, so that nothing remains
for your Grace and the Honorable House, but to secure your selves by just and
inviolable Laws, which is now the proper Season, the Nation being in full and
tranquil Peace; And in this you have for your Pattern, the great Emperor
Justinian, who compiled the whole Roman Laws now extant, after he had made an
end of Fighting, and subjugated the World to his Scepter, and by doing whereof,
ye w^ll cure (at the least,) ease the Nation of some of its present Maladies
under which it labors. I doubt not but others may address your Grace with
Overtures, which may be both more necessar and material; And therefore I leave
these to such as are more fit than I, Seeing none omnibus unum est.

Quod placet hic spinas colligit ille rosas.

OVERTURS Anent LAWS to be made.
And first, Anent Husbands and Wives Interests and Rights to the Estates of
each others.
Seeing by Our Law, where the Husbands Estate consists only of Bonds bearing
Annualrent; The Wife when Relict has neither Third of the same, nor Terce of
the Annualrents. That therefore it be Statute she have one of them.

2. That the Husbands Jus Mariti extend no ways to the Wifes Heretable Estate,
but only the Annualrents thereof accreuing before, and during the Marriage: And
that he nor his Creditors nor Successors have no farther Interest in her
Moveable Debts or Goods, except there be express Provision made by her thereof;
And if the Husband has not exerced his Jus Mariti in his own time, as to the
uplifting of these Annualrents, The Right thereof shall cease and remain with
her and her Representatives, but with the burden of what Debts he has paid
for her.

3. That the Husband shall not be liable for the Wifes heretable Debt, nor yet
for her Moveable due before the Marriage, nor contracted during the same,
except where it is necessar* and for the behove of the Husband, and that the
Quantity and Contracting shall be probable by the Wifes Oath, and he liable,
unless he can give his Oath of Calumny that he has reason to believe she will
depone to his prejudice, of design to burden him with an unjust Debt.

4. The Marriage being Solemnized and the parties once Beded, all the
Obligations thereanent to be valid and effectual as to all effects, though it
last not Year and Day.

5. That Wives personal Obligments during the Marriage be null, as also
Renounciations of their Joyntures or any part thereof, without consent of their
Parents (if Living,) or two of their nearest Relations (if their Parents be
Dead) except it be Remunerated by giving the equivalent both as to Security and
Quantity.

Anent Parents and Children.
1. That it shall be leisum for Parents on Deathbed to provide their Daughters
and younger Children by Bond or Legacies, and which shall affect their Executers
and Heirs, The samen not to exceed (...) years Rent of their Estate, And that
the said Estate be free, and if it be not, that the Provisions shall only be
sustained in so far as they and the Debt shall extend to six years purchase
thereof.

2. That the Parents be obliged to Aliment and Educat their Children, except
they can give a reasonable Cause to the contrair; And Children to maintain
their poor Parents, according to the Quality of the Parents, and the condition
of the Childrens Estate.

3. That for the public good it shall be leisum for Children to leave their
Parents, and go to any Trade or Employment after they have attained to 14 years
of Age, if the Parents cannot Educat therein, Or some other that may be as much
to their Credit and Profit.

4. That it shall be leisum to take the poor Children within ten years, and to
retain them as Servants until they be 30 years old.

Anent Tutors, Curators and their Pupills.
1. That Tutors of Law be cognosced to be not only of the Age and Relation
requisite, but also that they are reputed fit to manage, and of good Fame and
Reputation.

2. Where Tutors are named, whether with or without a Quorum, or sine quibus
non, if any one of these named accept, he shall seclude the Tutor of Law,
unless he also have been named one of the Tutors by the Defunct; and that these
who act and behave as Tutors and are not legally entered and admitted to the
Office, shall not only be liable as Tutors or Curators, but shall have no
allowance of their Charges and Expenses that they have laid out either upon the
Pupil or his Affairs.

3. That Tutors and Curators shall be obliged to lend out for Interest their
Pupils Money, whether principal Sums, Annualrents or Rents of Lands, and pay
interest therefore, from the next Term at which it came in their hands, except
they have emitted public Edicts that the same is in their hands, and was ready
to be lent upon Security.

4. That Tutors Testamentars are not to be liable for Omissions, and that it
shall be leisum for Tutors and Curators to accept with that Quality, and that
the Judge admit the same, unless the nearest of Kin or some other person
interested offer themselves or others to undertake the office simply without
any such Qualification.

5. That where there are more Tutors and Curators than one, and if any one of
them act or intromet, he is first to be conveened and discust before the rest
be liable, but so as if he be not sound solvent, The Pupil shall have recourse
against the rest for the Expenses he has been at in pursuing and discussing the
said insolvent person.

6. That all Curators named, Depon, that they have not used any means, or made
any desire or motion to the Pupil or any other for their being elected, and if
they refuse to Depone, That they be rejected.

7. That Minors be not allowed to make Testaments without consent of their
Curators, But that Legacies left by them (expressing the Cause) be allowed
according as the same shall be found just by the Judge Ordinar.

8. That there be no Action sustained whither Petitory or Possessory against a
Minor as to Lands or Heretable Rights, wherein his Father was by virtue of
legal Titles in possession uninterrupted Year and Day.

9. That no Interdictions be sustained, but such as are after Cognition of the
Cause thereof taken by the Judge Ordinar, and that it shall be leisum for any
near Relation or persons interested in the Preservation of any persons Estate,
To apply to the Lords of Session for cognoscing the Defender to be Prodigus,
and to be interdicted accordingly, and that the same shall not be taken off,
but by the sentence of a Judge and causa cognita.

Anent Obligations and Contracts.
10. That where by Contracts betwixt two parties, there is sometimes Clauses
conceived in favors of third parties, That it shall be in the power of the
parties Contracters, to nullify or discharge these Clauses without consent of
that third party, unless the Contract be in his hand.

2. That no Verbal Conditions, Promises or Pactions shall be Probable by
Witnesses, being liable to Mistake, and uncertain as to the design and meaning
of the Promiser.

3. That the Depositation of Writs, or the Conditions of granting thereof,
shall not be Probable by Witnesses, or the Oath of the Depositar or Haver, but
only by Writ or Oath of the Granter, because that is in effect to evacuat Writs
by Witnesses, or to make up the same thereby, which is to make Witnesses as
valid and effectual a mean of Probation as Writ.

4. That albeit by our Law, Interest be not due for Money, without Paction,
until the Debtor be charged and denunced, which is needless Trouble, and very
Expensive, and may tend to the Prejudice of Creditors, if he should happen to
be denunced; that therefore after simple requisition of the Money due by a
liquid Bond, Ticket, Subscribed Account, or the like, Annualrent shall be due
even as if there were an express Paction for Payment thereof, seeing by the
Requisition the Debtor is in mora.

Anent Infeftments and Real Rights of Lands.
1. That where any Person stands Infeft in Lands, as having purchased the same
himself, or as Heir to some of his Predecessors, there shall be no more
requisite for establishing the Right thereof in the person of his Heir who is
to succeed him in the said Lands, but only a general Service before the
Sheriff of the Shire where the Lands ly, cognoscing the Pursuer of the Brieve
to be General Heir, and of Line* or such an Heir as is mentioned in the Brieve;
and this being Registrat and Retoured, shall be a sufficient Right to the
person served, without any further Progress or Solemnity in Law, conform to the
Law of France, and many other Nations.

2. That where there is Infeftment taken in name of the persons first
institute, and to these nominatim substitute, that these substitute shall not
be put to further trouble for stating the Rights in their persons, failing
these who are institute or substitute before them but only cognosced by an
Inquest, that these persons are failied, and that he is next substitute, and
that the same being cognosced, shall be a valid Right without any farther.

Anent Superiorities and the Casualities thereof.
1. That the King receive all singular Successors gratis, seeing the ground of
Law for paying Compositions, is, that the Superior receives a Stranger in place
of his Vassal and that there is no Subject can be repute a Stranger to the
King, and so there ought nothing to be exacted for his Entry, and the exacting
thereof is a Novelty, not being so from the beginning.

2. Seeing the Superior gets all his Duties and Casualities from the Vassal, or
his Fee, as well when not Entered as when he is; that therefore there be no
Nonentry esteemed in Law, unless the Vassal be contumacious and convicted of
Contempt against his Superior, and that from and after a Decree of Nonentry to
be recovered against him, he always being Major.

3. That the Value of Vassals Marriages be only estimat and proportional to the
Value of the Fee held by them in Ward, and wherein no regard is to be had to
their other Estate Personal or Real.

4. Or rather that the Wards be turned into Feu, and an estimat put on the
Marriage, by which the captious way of catching Vassals, by making offers of
Matches to them, will be remeeded; and this Estimat put upon their Marriages,
to be either according to their Charter extant, or according to the present
Valuation of their Land, which may be either done by Taxing the Marriage, or
making the Feu-duty more, in lieu of all.

5. That no Escheats (Liferent or Movable) fall, or be gifted, to the prejudice
of lawful Creditors, and that they have no place until all the Rebels Debts be
paid seeing by the Law of all other Nations it is a received Maxim, that Ita
bona debent transire ad fiscum qualia fuerunt apud delinquentem and cum omnibus
oneribus and debitis.

Anent Fiars and Liferenters of Lands and Sum, and the Courtesy due to
Husbands.
1. That the last Termination being of the Heirs of any who are institute,
infer that person to be the Fiar.

2. That the Terce extend to Lands and Teinds, and all that is Heretable, and
Bonds bearing Annualrent, seeing the Relicts have no Third thereof, and
therefore ought to have a Liferent-Terce, where there is no Contract of
Marriage.

3. That Superiors receive Liferenters gratis, without any Composition, seeing
there is no change of Vassals, and that they ought not to be put to the Trouble
and Expense of Adjudging upon the Obligment in the Contract of Marriage.

4. That Tochers and Joyntures be both due, though the Marriage subsists not Year
and Day, if it be Consummat by going to Bed; and that the Husband have the
Courtesy of all Lands wherein the Wife either was or might have been Infeft,
if the Marriage be Consummat as said is.

Of Teinds.
Teinds being Jewish, and a part of the Levitical Law, and of no Divine Right
now under the Gospel, that therefore they be Consolidat with the Stock, and the
Proprietar or Tacks-man put to pursue for the Price that shall be appointed to
be paid therefore, and that the Price of the Teinds be first applied for
buying a Maintenance for the Minister, whether of Land or Annualrent, out of
the Property, which in all possible Events may be a Competency; and if in after
times it shall be necessar to augment the same, that it be done by a personal
Pole of all within the Paroch, to be casten upon them yearly.

Of Tacks.
1. That Tacks set at the usual and ordinary Avail of Lands in that place, or
at which these were formerly set, shall be valid against Wards, Escheats,
Nonentries, Forfaultures, and all other Casualities of Superiority.

2. That Tacks set be inviolably observed, that Tennents may be thereby
encouraged to Plant and Enclose, Meliorat and Cultivat the Land, and that they
Enjoy the same peaceably during all the years thereof; providing always, that
if the Master (for his own necessary use and utility) shall think fit, either
to Labor or Enclose the same himself, either in whole or in part, that it
shall be leisum for him to do the same, notwithstanding of the said Tack, he
always refounding to the said Tennent, what Grassum or other Gratification he
has got for making the said Tack, proportionally and effeiring to the Grassum
and number of Years he was to enjoy the same; or if there was no Grassum, the
Master paying the Damnages that shall be found the Tennent has sustained through
his being removed from his Possession as said is.

Of Transmission of Rights, and also of the Extinction thereof.
1. That Superiors be bound to accept of Resignations in favorem, and that an
Instrument of Refusal, shall be as to all intents equivalent to an Charter and
Seasin by the said Superior, unless at the taking of the said Instrument he
give the Reason of his Resusal, and instruct the same before the Judge Ordinar
within Year and Day, to whom it is remitted to judge both the Relevancy and
Verity thereof.

2. That Recognitions be abrogat, at least as to the King's Vassals, seeing all
Subjects are alike as to him, and it imports not which of his Majesty's
Subjects be his Vassals in any particular Fee.

3. That there be no Recognition in Taxt-Ward, providing the Feu-duty payable
out thereof, be effeir^nd to the Taxt-duty and Marriage, if the whole be feued,
and proportionally if a part; In which ca^e the Superior can pretend no Damnage
or Loss.

Anent Prescription and Interruption.
1. That there be a difference made as to the Prescription of Moveable and
Heretable Rights and that the same be shortened in both.

2. Seeing the first registrat Seasin is repute a public Infeftment, that
therefore there be no longer any defense sustained upon the benefit of a
Possessory Judgment, the first registrat Seasin being equal to a public
Infeftment since the Date of that Act.

3. ^eing in Prescriptions both Titulus, and bona fides, are requisite, that
therefore one of the Parties private knowledge of the Right of another, albeit
not complete, is, that he had a Disposition, but no Infeftment put him in mala
fide.

4. That all legal Interruptions should be against the persons themselves, and
not Co-debitors; And that Diligence against one Co-obligant, should not
preclude the other of the defense of Prescription.

5. That albeit Inhibitions be only negative Rights, yet the extent of them is
become so exorbitant, that they are of far more Force and Effect nor an
positive Right by Disposition; And also in respect it is yet dubious from what
time Inhibitions take effect, whether from the Date of the Execution against
the Party, or at the Market Cross of the Jurisdictions where the persons dwell,
or the Lands ly, or that it shall only take effect from the Date of the
Registration, which seems to be more just, seeing the Leidges are there only
certiorat, the executing at Crosses being now a mere Formality, passing without
the nottice of any, so that the only mean of knowing who is Inhibite, is by
searching the Registers:) Therefore, that it be enacted, that in all time
coming Inhibitions being raised and execute against the Party personally, and
registrat either in the general Register, or Books of the Jurisdiction wherein
he dwells, within 48 Hours thereafter, shall be valid from the Date of the said
Registration, without any further Solemnity.

The reason why the Re^istration may be within such short time, is, because the
Execution is only to be against the Party personally, without any further
Execution at Mercat-Crosses where the Debitors Lands might ly, so that it took
a considerable time before it could be done, but here where there is nothing
requisite but a personal Execution, it may be within 24 Hours carried to the
Register, or Jurisdiction where the person inhibite dwells, and insert in his
Register or Minut-Book thereof.

6. Item, That Inhibitions run from the Date of the Registration thereof, and
not from the date of the Deed that is done contrair thereto.

7. That Libels for House-Mails, Merchants-Accompts, Servants-Fees, and the
like, shall not be relevant, unless they also bear that they are resting,
owing, and that the same be only probable scripto, if the Debtor be dead and
scripto vel juramento if living, and that therefore Merchants take Writ for
what they furnish bearing the Quantity and Price thereof.

Of Voluntar Assignations and Legal Arrestments.
1. That where an Assignation is purchased for Money, or other good Deed from a
person, that is not of Relation, or such a person as would be thought not to
have gifted the same, in such a case (according to the common Law) the Assigney
shall recover no more from the Debtor than he truly paid, or his Fact or Deed
done by him can be estimat worth by the Judge Ordinar, and this to preveen and
discourage the taking and buying unnecessarly the Debts resting by others.

2. That where the principal Writ assigned is delivered at the time, it shall
be preferred to any other Assignation, though first intimat, the said Writ being
probable, and Possession completing the Right.

3. That neither Inhibitions nor Arrestments pass of course, but by a special
Deliverance of the Lords in presence, or upon a Report, and upon instructing
sufficiently, grounds for founding thereof, and that the Inhibition being only
a personal Inhibition, that the Debtor put not his Estate in a worse condition
than it is at the time of the serving thereof: That therefore it subsist and
stand good only for such a Number of years as the User may have time to
constitute his Debt, and when constitute, or if it be liquid before, that he
may have a competent time within which he may do legal Diligence by
Adjudication, and that no Inhibition upon a dependence last longer than three
years, unless real Diligence follow upon the Debt, which was the ground
thereof, and that the Inhibiter consent to the Sale, upon payment or
Consignation of the Price, or lending the same, so as it may bear Interest,
which is more for the Inhibiters advantage.

4. That all Arrestments within year and day come in parip ssu, or within a
competent time, seeing Adjudications and Apprysings which are the parallel
Diligence as to heretable Rights, come in so; And the same Parity of Reason is
in the arresting of Movables, that is, in the adjudging of Heretables, which
is, that the Creditors may be absent, and not know of the Debitors Estate and
Condition, nor of his Movables and Money, nor that he is vergens ad pauperi^m,
and ubi paratio eadem debet esse Lex.

Of voluntar Dispositions and legal Conveyances by Apprysing and Adjudication.
1. That the first person who purchasses Lands, being infeft therein, and his
Seasin registrat, there shall be nothing requisite for establishing the Right
thereof in the person of his Heir, to whom by the Infeftment the same is
provided, whether Heirs of Line, or Male, but only an Service cognoscing the
Pursuer of the Brieve to be the person to whom by the Conception of the
Infeftments the Fee does belong, and this being retoured, shall be a sufficient
Right to all succeeding Heirs, who are in like manner to be served Heirs to the
last retoured, which shall also be to them a complete Right to the said Lands,
and a valid Title for all effects.

2. That where Lands are not affected with Rights or Encumbrances, it shall not
be leisume to Appryse or Adjudge the same, but that the old Brieve of Distress
shall be revived, direct to the Sheriff, who shall Adjudge as much Land to the
Pursuer, to be valued by an Inquest, as will satisfy the Debts; and if the
Lands be indivisible, and worth more, that the Creditor pay it in, otherways
the same to be null.

Of Confiscations, Escheats, Forfaultures, and the like.
1. That Denunciations for not payment of Debts, the effect thereof shall only
be for obtaining Caption and Payment of the Debt before others who have done no
Diligence, and that the Escheat extend only to the Debt in the Horning.

2. That no Escheat shall fall upon any Denunciation, except the Charge was
given Personally, or that Access was refused; seeing by our Law Contumacy cannot
be inferred without a Personal Citation, so far less ought it in this case,
where the Certification is of so great an Import.

3. That Charging Personally, and Denuncing at the Market Cross of Edinburgh be
sufficient, and Registration also there, which is sufficient to certiorat all
the Liedges thereof.

4. That Denunciations shall not prejudge any Party who bona fide get
Obligations for onerous Causes from the Rebel, or receives Payment of Debts
resting to him by the Rebel, at what ever time the same be contracted, seeing if
it were otherways, it would extremely mar the freedom of Traffic and Commerce.

Anent Succession.
1. That where an Heretor of Lands and Baronies, or Country-Tennents dies
leaving only Daughters, that the eldest should Succeed pro indiviso, and that
Women shall Succeed as if they were Males after the same manner, but with this
Provision, that it shall be leisum for the Father etiam in articulo mortis, to
grant Bonds of Provision to other Daughters, not exceeding (...) Years Rent of
his Land, and which shall affect the same, in so far as there is not sufficient
Movables for doing thereof.

2. That in regard many die without making timely Provisions for their
Children, it shall be leisum for any man who is not a Baron, having his Lands
erected in a Barony, to Dispose of these Lands in favors of his Children etiam
in articulo mortis.

Anent Heirs of all kinds.
1. That where an Estate is devolved upon an Heir by the death of his
Predecessor, so that it is either his neglect and fault, or fraud that he does
not Enter, especially since (in the mean time) he acts as Heretor, or Intromets
with the Rents, at least might do the same; that therefore all Debts
contracted, or De^eds done by him, shall affect the said Estate, as if he were
actually Infeft therein.

2. That Liferenters shall only be liable for Alimenting these Heirs who have
no Competency left them, and descended of themselves or their Husbands; but no
ways to be extended to Collateral Heirs, or these of Tailzie, not being
descended as said is, who are to be repute tanquam extranei

3. That the immediate younger Brother Succeed to the elder, whether in Conquest
or Heretage, and though of different Marriages, unless the said elder Brother
have full Brethren and Sisters, in which case they are to be preferred to the
Succession as before.

4. That where an Estate is devolved by the Death of a Predecessor upon the
Apparent Heir, that he shall be personally liable for the Predecessors Debt,
unless he give an ample Renunciation to be Heir, and Record it either in the
General Register, or of the Shire where he dwells; and that there be no more
libelled against him, but that he has not recorded the Renunciation within the
Year, to infer the Passive Titles against him: And by this the great and
unnecessar Trouble given to all the Defuncts Creditors of raising and executing
Charges to enter Heir, is cut off.

5. That it shall be leisum to any Creditor of a Defunct, to use summarly
Adjudication of his Estate and that instantly for payment of the Defunct his
own Debt, without any further, but calling the Appearand Heir as Defender: And
this will only be equivalent to the Confirming Executor-Creditor to him in his
Movables.

Of Behaving as Heir and Lucrative Successor.
1. That in regard by the 24 Act, Sess. 5. of this current Parliament, Heirs
are allowed to Enter cum beneficio inventarii, to be made up within the Year
and Day of Deliberating; and in regard the said Act does not take under
Considera^ion the cases of Apparent Heirs, who neither entered nor behaved as
Heirs, prior to the date of the said Act: For remeed whereof, that it be yet
Statute and Ordained, that where Heirs are unentered to the Estates devolved
upon them, and to which they are Apparent Heirs, prior to the date of the said
Act, that it shall be leisum for them yet to enter Heirs to their Predecessors
cum beneficio inventarii, in the Terms of the said Act, and that within Year
and Day after the Promulgation of the Act to be made hereanent.

2. That an Apparent Heirs receiving a Disposition from his Father or
Predecessor to whom he is to Succeed, shall not infer an universal Passive
Title, but make him only liable pro valor; and if it be granted for an onerous
Cause, such as in an Contract of Marriage or the like, it shall only be
reduceable upon the head of Fraud, and being granted to the Prejudice of his
lawful Creditors, to an conjunct person.

Of Testaments, Confirmations thereof, and others relating thereto.
1. That seeing the ground and reason of Law for confirming of Testaments, is,
Vt bona sint salva pupillis and creditoribus, that therefore, where the nearest
of Kin are Majors, there shall be no necessity for them to confirm, nor any
Dative made in that case; and that Creditors may Confirm, and Pursue to give up
Inventar, or to make Payment, as vicious Intrometters, at their pleasure.

2. That the Husband shall not be obliged to Confirm the Wifes Testament, nor
give up Inventar thereof, seeing he was and is Dominus, and may alienat and
dispose of his Movables during his life, and the Wifes-Right is only by virtue
of the Division that falls between the Husbands nearest of Kin and the Wife, in
case that she survive him.

3. That the eldest Son or Daughter shall have a double Portion of the Movables
where there is not an Heir, so that she or he Succeed not as such.

4. That Daughters married in the Fathers Life shall have no right of
Succession or Interest in his Estate, but what is expressly provided in case
there be more Children, and if there be none, she is to succeed as accords.

Anent the Foru^ of Processes and payment of Advocats and Clerks, etc.
1. That the Act of Sederunt be ratified, appointing two Lords to come each
Forenoon to a place erected for that end, and there per Vices to call and
finally discuss and determine what Causes ly before them undiscust, whereby the
intolerable trouble and pains both Lords, Advocats, Clerks and Clients are put
to in attending the whole Afternoon for getting such Causes called will be
prevented.

2. That the Act of Regulations made in anno 1672, anent the modifying
Sallaries to Advocats, Clerks and others be totally rescinded, and all
Renovations, Ratifications thereof and others preceding the date hereof
relative thereto, as being burdensome and impracticable both to them and
Clients, and that they be paid as before that Act at the Discretion of the
Clients.

3. That where Interloquitor or Sentence is pronounced, and Bills one or more
given in reclaiming against the some, and which is refused by the Lords, that
neither the same nor no other Bill be insert in the Act or Decree, but such as
he in whose favors the same is, shall desire and think fit to have insert
therein, and that the said Regulations and all sub^equent stand in their full
force as to all the other Articles thereof, except what is hereby altered as
said is.

Anent the Sale of Bankrupts Lands.
1. That in regard by the Act of Parliament the (...) day of September 1681,
Anent the Sale of Bankrupts Lands, There is no warrant or appointment for
citeing the Creditors to hear Probation led of the Rental and Value of the
Bankrupts Estate, which being in absence as to the Creditors, may tend to their
loss and prejudice. Therefore it be Statute, that the real Creditors who are in
actual possession of such Estates by Laboring the same or setting Tacks
thereof, be cited to the leading of the Probation of the Rental and Value of
the Lands to be Rouped, and that there shall be no other Citation or intimation
req^isit to be made to the said Creditors or Bankrupt in any subsequent st^p
of the Process, but that it shall be sufficient that they be cited thereto apud
acta, and in special as to the time and place of the Roup; And farther to
declare, that in all time coming there shall be no necessity on the Pursuer of
the Roup of using intimations at the Paroch Churches and Market Crosses
mentioned in the said Act, but that it shall be a sufficient Intimation to the
Creditors that they be cited thereto apud acta only as said is, and if the
Creditors or Bankrupt think fit, that it shall be leisum for them to raise
Letters in the Pursuers name to intimate the said Roup, the time and place
thereof, at whatever Mercat-Crosses, Kirk-Doors or other places whatsomever
they shall think fit, and wherever they conceive or apprehend Merchants or
Buyers of the said Lands may be found, but that the Pursuer shall not be
oblidged to do the same, notwithstanding of that Clause in the said Act of
parliament, which is in so far hereby dispensed with. Lakeas that it be further
declared, That where Decreets of Sale are pronounced and extracted, That they
shall not be quarrellable upon any ground or nullity by any of the said
Creditors, cited as said is, but that the same shad be as valid and sufficient
a Security to the Buyer, as if the said Creditors had disponed or consented
thereto under their hands, and that the samen shall also be unquarrellable at
the instance of any other person, whether Creditor or Author to the Bankrupt or
any way may pretend to have Right or Interest to the said Lands, whether by
Rights following from the Bankrupt or any other his predecessors or Authors
whatsomever: And farther, that it be declared, that in regard great Obstructions
are made in the buying of Lands at Roups throw the purchasers not getting the
price taken off his hand, occasioned by the Jangling and Competitions that
falls out amongst the Creditors anent the same. For Remeid whereof, That it be
Statute, that it shall be leisum for the Buyer after the elapsing of year and
day to consign the said price either in specie or Assignations to sufficient
Bonds or Debts in the Clerks of the Process hands, and that due Intimation be
made to the Creditors cited as said is, that the Buyer is to do the same by a
Nottar and Instrument, and that the said price being so consigned or
Assignations to Debts as said is, That the said Clerk shall intimat the same to
the Lords, and thereupon they are to ordain an Act to be made, declaring that
he has consigned the price or Assignations as said is; And therefore
discharging the Buyer of the Price of the said Lands, and that the same shall
be als valid and effectual for freeing and acquitting him therefrae at the
hands of all persons whatsomever in all time coming, as if the samen had been
granted by the whole Creditors themselves; As also, that in regard when
Debitors break, they abstract or carry away with them the Rights and Securities
of their Lands, so that it is not possible to get or make up a sufficient
Progress to the said Lands, That therefore it be Statute and ordained, that if
the Debtor was infeft in the said Lands or had a Real Right there to, either
by expyred Apprising or voluntar Disposition, and by virtue thereof has been in
Possession for the space of -- years; That then and in that case the Production
of the s^id Seasin, or Real Rights foresaid, whereupon no Infeftment has
followed, shall be held and repute a sufficient and valid Right in the person
of the Debtor, without any farther necessity for the Creditors to give or the
Buyers of the said Lands to crave any other Title or Progress to the said
Lands for stateing the Right thereof in the Debitors person, but only as said
is, and that the said Seasin or Real Right foresaid, whereupon no Infeftment
has followed shall be held and repute in Law a sufficient Right to the said
Lands to the Buyer thereof, at the Roup without any farther Progress.


