SOUND ADVICE TO Roman Catholics: Especially, The Residue of Poor, Seduced,
and Deluded Papists in England, who obstinately shut both Eyes and Ears,
against the clearest Light of the Gospel of Christ, and surest Evidences of
Scripture and Reason.

To which is added, A Word to the People called QUAKERS.

By T. O.

Luke 22.67. If I tell you, you will not believe. LONDON, Printed, and sold by
Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Court, in Paternoster Row. 1689.

Licensed,

Jan. 25. 1688/9.
SOUND ADVICE TO Roman Catholics, etc.
THough there be none in this Nation, who (upon the account of Merit) owes
less kindness to your Tribe, yet (as one well acquainted with the Intrigues of
both Churches) upon the account of Brotherly Love and Charity, I humbly present
you with my Christian and best Advice, earnestly desiring you, seriously to
consider the sandy Foundation of your Romish Church, and no more pin your Faith
and confidence of Salvation, to the implicit assertions of a pretended
Authority, and usurped Supremacy; to believe every Contradiction of Nonsense,
which is, or can be affirmed by the Spiritual Apostates, of so abominable an
Harlot, whom (with the Ephesians, Act. 19.28.) you term your Great Diana, and
unspotted Mother Church, and therefore ought to be believed without any further
enquiry; though the Turks may, on as good grounds, persuade the World to
embrace their Religion, and their chief Mufti as well claim Christ's Vicarage,
upon the account of John of Constantinople, as the Pope of Rome can on the
Succession of Peter; their Principles being neither more ridiculous, nor
contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, and Apostolic Christian Faith, than the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome is at this present time.

Indeed, I my self was lulled asleep, by the allurements of the Popish Syrenes,
and the bewitching Sorceries of the Man of Sin (as by the impetuous current of
Babel's streams) driven headlong to the brink and shore of the Sea of Romish
Abominations: But as Joseph was sold to Egypt, for the Preservation of his
Brethren, so was I laid aside, by the permission of Divine Providence, for the
safety both of my King and Country. Therefore (with the Apostle Paul, who was
once a Persecuter) knowing the terror of the Lord, and the danger of Popish
Apostasy, I persuade all men to renounce the Doctrine of Devils, and embrace
the Christian Faith, freely offered to us in the Gospel. And because I would
gain ground on the meanest Capacities, and discover the nakedness of the Roman
Harlot, in puris, or (rather) nudis naturalibus, I shall (for the benefit of
those who have not money to buy, nor time to read, great Controversies) set
down in this small Treatise, some obvious and abominable Errors of the Romish
Church, in such capital and legible Characters, that they who run may read
MYSTERY BABYLON, etc. on the face of that impudent Harlot; and (unless they
shut their Eyes, Ears, and all their Senses, the Gates of their understanding)
be ready to cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved?

The first blow that I intend to strike, is at the Pope's Supremacy and
Infallibility, the two great Pillars whereon the Church of Rome (or rather
Fabric of Antichrist) leans. The first, God has as evidently prohibited,
Mark 10.42. as he has Murder and Adultery in the sixth and seventh
Commandments; and since Papists unanimously acknowledge that all the Apostles
received the gift of the Holy Ghost, and Peter only the Keys, the Orders and
Badge of his Supremacy, before they prove his Superiority and Dignity above the
rest of the Apostles, they must prove that those Keys were a thing better and
more precious than the rest received; yea, than the Holy Ghost, or God himself,
which none but Antichrist and his Members dare to affirm. Peter, indeed, being
a forward Man, Self-confident and Audacious, first answered our Savior's
Question, Matthew. 16.16. and our Savior (very gently) continued his discourse
to him, not excluding the rest: But were I to give the Supremacy to any
Apostle, I would rather give it to James the Lords Brother, or to Paul or
Barnabas, to whom Peter himself gave the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9. or
to John, who could be more intimate with Jesus than any of the rest, as is
clear from Joh. 13.23. and was termed the Disciple whom Jesus loved, Joh.
21.20. Yet what Fool will from thence conclude, that he hated all the rest?
though the Papists foolishly affirm, that because Christ gave the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven to Peter, he gave them to none else: He was pleased to
wheedle over the rest with smaller enduements, privileges, and pre-eminence;
though they received both the Father and the Son. Thus did Peter (according to
the Canon of the Church of Rome) receive a more noble Gift; and was inspired
with a greater Spirit than God himself; though our Savior says, Joh. 10.29.
My Father is greater than all. Yet, for all these Keys were so precious, that
bloody Sodomite, Pope Julius the Second, threw them in the River Tiber, as he
was marching before his Army, the number whereof was as the sand of the Sea:
Whence Bibliander does conclude, that Pope Julius did resign all his pretended
Right and Power, of shutting and opening Heaven and Hell, to the River Tiber,
or the Fishes or other Creatures therein. For casting away the Keys, the
Testimony of his Authority, he did deprive and spoil himself, and all his
Successors, of Peter's Inheritance.

But (to approach a little nearer to this glorious Mitre, whose dazzling
brightness darkneth all the Crowns in Christendom) I would gladly know how the
Pope of Rome came to be Peter's Successor, and if he came honestly by his
Popedom: If Peter was Crucified at Rome, his Succession must be by Usurpation,
and his Right to the Holy Chair, but a mere Robbery. But it is acknowledged by
all, that the Titles of Pope of Rome, Universal Bishop, Peter's Successor,
Christ's Vicar, and God upon Earth, were not known till (about 600 years after
our Savior.) The Patriarchs of Constantinople and Rome, did both by Letters
and Legates solicit the Emperor Mauritius for the Title of Bishop of Bishops,
instead of Servus Servorum. But Gregory the First (abhorring that Blasphemous
Name, and calling it the Mark and Badge of Antichrist) Lib. 4 Epist. 27. wrote
to the Emperor thus: Exclamare compellor, ac dicere, O tempora, O mores! Ecce
cuncta in Europae Partibus Barbarorum juri sunt tradita. Destructae ^^bes,
eversa Castra, depopulatae provinciae, nullus terram Cultor inhabitat, and
tamen Sacerdotes qui in pavimento, and cinere flentes jacere debuerunt,
vanitatis sibi nomina experiunt, and novis ac prophanis vocabulis gloriantur.
That is to say, I am compelled to cry out, O Times! O Manners! Behold in all
the parts of Europe, all things live under the reverence of barbarous people:
Towns are destroyed, Castles are over-thrown, Provinces are spoiled: No
Labourer inhabiteth the Land; notwithstanding, the Priests (who should lie in
ashes, upon the ground weeping) are seeking unto themselves Names of Vanity,
and Glory in Profane Titles. Thus Anti-christ's Title was blasted in the bud,
and forced to linger in the birth, till Bonifacius the Third (finding
opportunity by the disliking which the Emperor Phocas had of the Patriarch of
Constantinople) insinuated himself in the Emperor's favor, and obtained at
his hands, that the Church of Rome should be called the Supreme Head of all
other Churches, and himself Supreme and Universal Bishop of all Bishops. Then
Boniface (as Platina writes) proud of his Vain, Glorious, New Title (which he
had snatched from the hand of an Usurper) called a Council at Rome, consisting
of seventy two Bishops, thirty Presbyters, and three Deacons; wherein, the
privilege of Supremacy, given by Phocas to the Roman Church, was published.
Thus he who had murdered an Emperor could make a Bishop, and add luster to his
ambitious Holiness; and against the Nature both of Reason and Philosophy, give
that which in himself he had not.

Thus was this proud swelling Title Midwif'd to the World, by a Tyrant who had
Murdered his Master, the good Emperor Mauritius, with his Brother, Wife and
Children. And as Bibliander observes, the Eagles three Heads, with their
bloody Bills, awaked all at once, viz. Boniface, Phocas, and Mahumet the
Arabian. Now considering these things, and that the Bishop of Rome owes his
Greatness and Supremacy to the Emperor, what Master of Ingratitude is he, to
Curse, Excommunicate, Depose and tread him under his Feet? Cause him to hold
his Stirrup Crown him with his Feet, force him to stand barefoot, begging at
his Gates, Poison him, and make him lie rotting above ground without a Grave to
lie in.

Neither can the Pope deduce his Infallibility from Peter's constancy and
stedfastness of Faith; for he (after he had received the Keys) both could, and
did fall, and was by our Savior, Matthew. 16.23. not called His Holiness, but
Satan: whence I might (after the manner of Popish Argumentation) infer that the
Church of Rome is built upon Satan, who denied his Savior, and was ignorant,
Gal. 2.13, 14. whether it was lawful to eat with the Gentiles, till Paul
informed and confirmed him in the true Faith. Yea, all Papists foolishly
conclude and affirm, that, during the time of Christ's Crucifixion, none upon
Earth, no not the Apostles themselves, had true Faith, or believed in the Son
of God, but only the B. Virgin: whence it will follow (according to the
Principles of Popery) that the Church was built upon an Unbeliever, and that
the Devils, the Gates of Hell did prevail against it.

Now then, if Peter was neither Supreme nor Infallible, why does the Pope of
Rome father his Popperies of Supremacy and Infallibility on him? as by a Gospel
Line, and Spiritual Deic^^; he could prove his Right to the Holy Chair, and
throw down, all his Brats of Abomination, at the Blessed Apostle's Door. But if
I can, by demonstration, prove the Pope of Rome, his pretended Holiness, an
Infidel in Faith, and an Atheist in Life and Conversation, I hope all ingenious
Papists will acknowledge him Fallible; for, ab actu ad potentiam been valet
consequentia.

The first proof I shall bring is a short History, taken out of the best Popish
Writers, which is this; Formosus the first Reigned six Years, and died anno
896. after he had made many Decretals, Acts and Church-Canons, which Steven the
6th spitefully annulled and cancelled, as wicked and abominable, because he had
prevented him in the Popedom, and would not allow him Concubines to his mind:
Yea (to revenge his undeserved quarrel against him) summoning a Council, he
caused his dead rotten Carcass to be dug out of the Grave, and decked with
Gorgeous Pontificals, and pulling off all again, to be arrayed in Laymens
habit. Thus the dead Body being degraded and divested of all Ecclesiastic
Dignity, like a superstitious Fool, he cut off the two Fingers of his right
hand (wherewith he used to hold the Sacrament) and threw them in the River
Tyber, and afterward commanded his Body to be buried among Laymen. But
Romanus the first, succeeding Steven, allowed and confirmed the Acts and
Decrees of Formosus, annulling and condemning the Canons, Acts and Decretals of
Steven, as wicked and abominable. Then after the Death of Romanus, Pope John
the tenth being a Favorite of Formosus, made a General Collection of all the
Writs and Processes against the dead Body of Formosus, and condemned the Pope
Steven his Council, and all their Writings. Till Sergius the third (who had
before, by the Roman Clergy, been elected Pope with Formosus, but suppressed by
Faction) dug up the dead rotten Body of Formosus the second time; which had
been in the Grave about ten Years, set it in St. Peter's Chair, drew it thence
by the Heels to a block, and struck off its head: And chopping off the three
fingers, which Steven had lest, he caused the rotten, stinking Massacred Body
to be thrown into the River Tyber: And lastly, defaced, anulled and condemned
all his Acts and Decrees, which before had been allowed, denied, confirmed and
condemned by several thwarting and contradicting Popes. Till in the Reign of
Pope Anastatius the third, about the year 913, some Fishermen found the Body of
Formosus in the River Tyber; which was by his Holiness buried sumptuously; the
very Images (if you can believe the famous Popish Writers) welcoming, nodding
and saluting the dead Body when it was brought into the Church. Now of
necessity some of these contradicting Popes were erroneous in their Judgments;
yea, both faulty and Heretical, and did fall in their Faith, and sacrifice
their Conscience to their spleen: For, contradicting one another, they could
not all be in the right, nor affirm that which was true and Orthodox. For it is
an undeniable maxim, that Duo contradictoria nequiunt esse simul vera. But,
whatever was their Faith, I am sure their Charity was threadbare, and their
Holinesses destitute of all mercy, vindictively pursuing their holy Father
beyond the Gates of Death, and revenging their quarrel in the very Grave.
Neither was this all, for it is observed by Popish Writers, and all others
since, that after the Death of Formosus, the Popes of Rome poisoned and
dispatched one another so fast, that there were eleven Popes within nine year
space.

The next proof of the Pope's Fallibility in Faith, is, that John the 23d was
proved an Heretic in the Council of Constance, by these words; Pope John said,
and stubbornly believed, that the Soul of Man dies together with the Body, and
is consumed to nothing, like the Souls of Bruit Beasts. And because Thomas
Walleis, an Englishman, was Imprisoned by the Pope for reproving his Heresy,
the King of France summoned a Council into his Palace, in Viciana Sylva, where
the whole Assembly subscribed against the Pope's Heresy: And the King wrote to
John to reform it, and set the Prisoner at liberty. The last he did to prevent
threatening dangers; but of his Heresy, he never would purge himself.

My third proof shall be from Pope Gregory the VII. This man was an Adulterer,
a great Sorcerer and Necromancer; and (as Beno the Cardinal writes) when he
was in his merry Fits, would cast off his Sleeves, and skip and dance like a
Bear, in form of sparkles and flames of fire: With which, and many such
Miracles (or rather lying Wonders) he deceived and persuaded ignorant people,
to believe that he was a Lamp of pure Holiness. As also, he kept a Brazen-Head
in his Closet, wherein dwelt a Spirit, wherewith (in any danger) he consulted,
to know the result of his undertakings. But on a certain time (as he was
preparing to War against the Emperor) his Domestic God gave him such an
ambiguous Answer, that he could make no sense of it: therefore took the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (his supposed Deity) and setting it on a Table,
Conjured it with the same Words that he had his Brazen-Head, a little before;
but the Sacrament giving him no Answer, His Holiness, in a great passion, threw
it in the fire, with these Words, There Is a God indeed: Could the Idol-Gods of
the Heathens give them Answer in their Success, and can thou give me none?
The Cardinals then present, were much displeased that Hildebrand should have
burned the God which they had made to be eaten: Therefore John Bishop of Portua
(of the Popes Privy Council) made his Apology in a Sermon in St. Peter's
Church, the next Lord's Day, thus: What meaned HILDEBRAND and We to do these
things, for which We all deserve to be burned alive? From whence I infer, that
Pope Gregory was an Heretic, and did not believe the real Presence, and that
the Sacrament was a True God. Yet this Gregory, alias Hildebrand, or Hell-brand
(as some term him) for all he Poisoned seven Popes, to make way for himself to
the Popedom, dyed at Salerne in great Misery, Anno 1086.

My fourth proof is by consequence, from the Words of Pope Gelasius, concerning
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; who, against the Eutychians, speaks thus:
Biblioth. patr. Tom. 4. Surely the Sacraments which we receive, of the Body and
Blood of our Lord, are a Divine thing, so that by them we are made partakers of
a Divine Nature, and yet it cease not to be the Substance or Nature of Bread
and Wine, and certainly, the Image and Resemblance of Christ's Body and Blood
are Celebrated in the Action of the Mystery. Whence it will undoubtedly follow,
that he was a Heretic, according to the Canon of the second Council of
Lateran, which confirmed the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or else that all
the Popes since have been Heretics, who have maintained Christ's real presence,
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

My fifth and last proof shall be of Pope Leo the X. who (when Cardinal Bembus
moved a Question out of the Gospel) very contemptuously Answered, All Ages can
testify enough, how profitable that Fable of Christ has been to us, and our
Company. Who then dare be so impudent to affirm him Infallible in Faith, who
denies the very foundation thereof, and him by whom only Salvation can be
obtained? Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, etc.
Jer. 2.12.

Now if this be the Fountain of the Romish Faith, and the Creed of his
unspotted Holiness, what mud and dirt is in Babel's streams? What Atheism and
Infidelity must there be among the Crew of the Romish Clergy? And Rabble of
Brutish Priests, Monks and Friars! Est petri Seeds (says Bellarm. in praefat:
ante lib. de Pontif. Rom.) Lapis probatus, angularis, pretiosus, in fundamento
fundatus. St. Peter's Chair is an approved Corner Stone, precious, and laid in
the foundation. And again ( lib. 2. de pont. Romans cap. 31.) The Pope of Rome is
the foundation of the Church. And Stapleton (Relect. princip. Doctr. in praef.)
Alii nunc a Christo eorumve Doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti apud
me locum habebunt. That is others (now beside Christ) and their Doctrine,
Preaching, and Determination, shall be esteemed of me as a Foundation. The
Begging Friars in the time of William de sanct. amore (as the Doctors of Paris
in lib. de peric. novis. temp. relate) collected all their Dreams, Fancies, and
vain Traditions, into one Volume, calling it the Eternal Gospel, and Preached
The Gospel of Christ shall cease, and our Eternal Gospel shall be Preached and
received to the end of the World. The Pope with great reluctance, did at last
condemn this blasphemous Book of Abominations, and lying Wonders, at the
earnest Request of the Doctors of Paris, against whom his Holiness conceived
such implacable hatred, that he could never after be reconciled to them, and
favored the Friars so much, that he both preferred them, and enlarged their
Privileges.

Now if any of the Romish Clergy persuade a Layman to believe as the Church
believes, he must tell him what is the Church. For if he believe what the
Church of Rome preached formerly, then he must not believe the Doctrine of
Popery now. Yea, if he believe Pope Gelasius (whom I have Quoted) he must not
believe the present Church of Rome; or else if he will believe the Doctrine of
Rome now, he must acknowledge that Pope Gelasius was a cursed Heretic, which
will overturn the Doctrine of the Popes Infallillility, which hangs betwixt a
Possibility and an Impossibility.

Now to prove the Pope Fallible, in respect of evil Works, Sin and Wickedness,
his godless and brutish life is enough to declare him both a Beast and an
Atheist. And I really believe, that as soon as ever he sits down in the old
rotten Stool, which they call St. Peter's Chair (as from an old enchanted
Oracle) he is possessed with the spirit of Delusion and Error; which drives
him headlong to all Abominations and Uncleanness. And, as an evil spirit from
God, troubled Saul; so suffers he the wicked one to take possession of this
Prince of Pride, that they who follow and wander after him and term him His
Holiness, may be inexcusable in the day of their accounts; in reputing him a
Terrestial God, whom they see an Infernal Devil. And son further satisfaction,
I shall here insert some Popish Pranks, and Wicked Villainies, committed by the
Popes of Rome; which the Reader may judge, whether or not they can consist with
Infallibility and unspotted Holiness.

Pope (or rather Popess) Joan was a Fornicatrix, and died in Labor, bringing
forth a Bastard.

Pope John XIII, lay with his own Sisters, forced his Fathers Concubines,
played at Dice, drank the Devils good Health, prayed to him for good luck, and
put out the Eyes of Benedict his Ghostly Father.

Gregory VII. caused a fellow to put great stones, right over the place where
the Emperor Henry used to pray, in St. Marys Church, to knock him on the Head,
by an ingenious contrivance; whilst he was at his Devotion he Cursed, and
Excommunicated him, without occasion, and took his Crown from him, without any
just cause.

Paschal II. stirred up Henry the V. to Rebel against his good Old Father, who
at last (by his assistance) beat him from the Empire, and brought him to beg
his Bread; so that he lived and died miserable, and was caused to lie rotting
above ground, without burying, five years, at the Pope's special command.

Innocent IV. called Henry III. King, of England his Vassal, Slave and Page,
whom he could imprison, and put to open shame, at his pleasure.

Hadrian IV. fell out with the Emperor of Germany, for holding his wrong
Stirrup.

Innocent III. took from John, King of England, both his Crown and Kingdom, and
gave it to Lewis, the French Kings Son, without any just cause.

Celestine III. Crowned the Emperor and Empress of Germany with his Feet, and
(throwing off the Crowns again with his Toe) said, Th^ve power both to make and
unmake Kings and Emperors.

Nicolas III. begot a Bastard Son, that had Claws and Hair like a Bear.

Boniface VIII. because Philip King of France would not suffer the Revenues of
his Kingdom to be transported to Foreign Countries, Cursed both him and his, to
the fourth Generation. He likewise gave Authority to Ecclesiastic Persons in
England, to deliver the people to Satan twice a year. This man came by the
Popedom after a most devilish and treacherous manner, for finding his Master,
Pope Celestine the Fifth, a simple doting Man, he hired one of his Bedchamber
to make a Ghostly noise, in a long Reed, through a hole which he had caused to
be made privately, in the Wall of his Holiness's Chamber, crying, CELESTINE,
CELESTINE, give over thy Charge, for it is above thy strength and ability. The
Old Man (thinking the Infernal noise had been the Voice of an Angel, sent from
Heaven) in spite of all opposers, gave over the Popedom on St. Luke's Eve, and
went to a Desert to lead an Eremit's life, (as Massaeus writes.) But the
Impostor Boniface (who had thus cheated the simple man, and gotten to be his
Successor, fearing that the people would follow him as Pope) apprehended Old
Celestine, and put him in close Prison, where he lay till the day of his Death:
But Boniface himself, did not escape the just Judgment of God, for he dyed in a
miserable condition, with a guilty Conscience. This is he, of whom it was said,
He entered like a FOX, he reigned like a LION, and dyed like a DOG.

Clement the V. caused his Hangman to take Francis Dandalus, a Venetian Duke,
and bind him with Chains, and throw him at his Feet under his Table, where (for
very hunger) he gnawed bones like a Dog.

Clement VI. caused to Poison the Emperor Lewis, without any cause but Pride,
Covetousness, and desire of Superiority.

Urban VI. drowned seven Cardinals, because he suspected that they had
conspired against him with Charles King of Naples, and Clement his Competitor,
an Antipope. This Urban (whom some termed Turban, for his wicked and
troublesome life) as he was in haste riding from Naples, with his Spiritual
Court of Rogues, and Sodomites, caused one of his Cutthroats to kill the
Bishop of Aquilo his Prisoner, leaving his dead mangled body on the way;
because (after his racking and tormenting) he could not ride so fast as His
Holiness.

Pope Sixtus IV. gave liberty to several Families of the Clergy, to defile
their bodies with all manner of filthiness and brutish uncleanness, for the
three hot months, June, July, and August.

Innocent VIII. begat sixteen Children, on sixteen several Women, and was so
brutish every way, that after his Death this Epitaph was made upon him:

Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas,
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
Spuricies, Gula, avaritia atque ignavia, Deses,
Hoc, octave jacent, quo tegeris tumulo.
Benedict the XII. bought with a large sum of money, the Sister of Francis
Petrarch, a very beautiful Woman, to satisfy his Carnal desire.

Alexander the VI. lay with his own Daughter, on whom after her death this
Epitaph was made:

Hic jacet in tumulo, Lucretia nomine; sed re
Thais; Alexandri filia, sponsa, nuras.
Paul III. in disguise, lay with a young Gentlewoman, under pretense of Wooing
her, by whom he had a Son called Peter Aloysius, the express Image of such a
Father: For being General of his Father's Army, he caused his Soldiers
violently to hold the Godly Old Bishop of Fane, till he in spite of the poor
Old Man's heart, committed that abomination with him, that is neither proper to
be Written, nor spoken of; the Bishop afterward dying for very grief. This
Pope Paul had a Daughter named Constantia, whose Husband he poisoned, to enjoy
her person with greater convenience, and with her, to wallow in uncleanness.
With whom also, her Brother Peter Aloysius, in imitation of his Father, made
bold to commit Incest. This Pope also kept a List of 45000 Harlots about Rome,
which paid him a monthly Tribute for Liberty of Whoring.

These are Demonstrations of the Pope's Fallibility, and the fruits of his
manifest Wickedness. These are the doings of the Son of Perdition, and the
wicked Works of the Romish Man of Sin, which (to number up all, or as many of
them as have been published in Popish Historians) would make a book larger than
twenty Church Bibles: But ex ungue Leonem, We may know by this little what the
whole Volume would be, and what metal the Mystery of Iniquity is made of. Are
these the Works of him that has the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of
Antichrist? Tell me ingenuously Reader, how you relish this drop of the Cup of
Romish Abominations, and if you can digest a whole Draught of it, without
Poisoning your Conscience? Does it surfeit your Soul to a future forbearance,
and force you to cry out, O Man of God, Death is in the Cup?

The second thing that I object, against the Church of Rome, is the keeping the
Laity from reading the Holy Scriptures. It is life eternal to know God, Joh.
17.3. but how to know the God of Truth without the knowledge of the Scriptures
of Truth, I never could yet find out, they being the right way, and appointed
guide, to lead us unto Christ himself. Our Savior says, Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures. And it was the commendation of the Noble Bereaus, Act. 17.11. that
they tried the truth of Paul's Doctrine, by the Touchstone and Scriptures of
Truth: For the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. All the
Apostles wrote to the Saints in general, and Paul desired the Colossians to
read his Epistle publicly, in the Churches, and charged the Thessalonians, by
the Lord, to read his Epistle unto all the holy brethren. Now shall I conclude
that there are no Saints but great ones, and learned Doctors: No Church or
Congregation but what consists of Learned Rabbis and Clergymen: No Brethren
but Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Monks and Friars, etc: God forbid! For as
Augustine says, Conf. lib. 3. cap. 8. Men unlearned earnestly contend for
Heaven, whilst learned Men, without understanding, wallow in flesh and blood.
And although Paul wrote many things hard to be understood, which the unlearned
and unstable wrest, yet did not Peter (who gives an Item of it, in his second
Epistle, 3.16.) desire his Writings to be taken from them. Meat and Drink must
not be rejected, because of Drunkards and Gluttons. Better some men be
Debauched, than all the World Starved. Better there be a possibility of some's
wresting the Scripture, than that all the World should lie in Ignorance. Since
Heresies must be, that they who are approved may be made manifest, as good they
be, by this means as other ways. Yet Chrysostom says, Scripturarum ignoratio
haereses peperit. And again, Barathrum est Scripturarum ignoratio. Whence I may
rationally infer, that the Pope of Rome shuts the Kingdom of Heaven against
men, and sends all the Rabble of vulgar Papists (who dare not read nor know
the Scriptures) in a broad way to Hell.

Certainly it is the just condemnation of the World that men love to walk in
Darkness, when they may walk in Light. And although the Scriptures be but a
Riddle and Sealed Book to the Wicked, yet are the secrets of the Lord with
those that fear him. They are a Sun, which show themselves with their own Rays,
if within our Horizon, giving light to the humble, dazzling the cutious eye, and
striking the ambitious spirits blind: A River, wherein an Elephant may swim,
and an Insect wade and drink: A Feast, affording Milk for ^a^es; and strong
Meat for Men of understanding: They are an inexhaustible Treasure, to which God
has promised his immediate and continual presence, Isah. 59.21. The
everlasting Gospel is conveyed with an Angel, Rev. 14.6. This is that Light and
Sun which the Man of Sin has put under the Bushel of prohibition; and (as it
is Prophesied, Rev. 16.10.) made the Kingdom of the Beast full of darkness.

Now it is the earnest desire of my Soul, that the Church of Rome grant to all
her Children the privilege of reading the Holy Scriptures, and show her self
the true Mother, by feeding, and not the Stepmother, by starving her Children;
lest her Flock go astray, and perish in Ignorance, and their blood be required
at the Clergy-men's hands: For if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. 4.3.

My third Objection shall be against the Doctrine of Venial Sins; for though
some sins be more heinous in the sight of God than others, yet is no sin small
or venial. The Law of God is a fiery Law, every spark burns. The wages of Sin
(without exception) is Death. God's Wrath and Curse hangs over the head of
every sin, Gal. 3.10. But since all conclude, that every sin, by Nature, is
evil, let us abstain from all filthiness both of the flesh and of the Spirit.

My fourth Objection shall be against the Doctrine of Purgatory, which Papists
term a Place, or Pit of fire, Ordained by God, for purging the Souls of Men
after Death, from Venial Sins. But this Doctrine nititur facto supposito; for
if there be no Venial Sins, then is there no Purgatory. But (in few words)
there can be no unsanctify'd Saints, God does not pardon by halfs; he forgiveth
all thine Iniquities, he heals all thy Diseases, Psalm. 103.3. The blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin. It were a ridiculous piece of Nonsense, for a
King to pardon a Malefactor of his Murder, and yet cause him to be whipped at
the Cart for his provoking Language, God does not forgive great heinous Sins,
and retain small ones, he takes away (as says the Prophet) all our
iniquities, heals all our backslidings, forgiveth us freely, loves us
freely, makes us pure and clean, whiter than the Snow, and preserves us
spotless, till we appear before him. They that continue in sin, in expectation
of a Purgatory, may be mistaken, and fall in the lake which burns with for
and brimstone; which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8.

My fifth Objection shall be against the Popish Limb^^ Infantum, an imaginary
place, where the Roman Clergy bar up all unbaptized Infants, eternally, from
the presence of God. This is an uncharitable Opinion, and cannot consist with
the goodness, mercy, wisdom, and foreknowledge of God, who has found out and
ordained a sufficient Remedy for lost man, which under some circumstances
cannot be administered; for, frustranea est illa potentia quae nequit reduci in
actum. Now, I hope, the Papists will not deny that some Children are sanctified
in the Mothers Womb, Jer. 1.5. and if such a Child should dye without Baptism,
who dares to affirm that he is separated from the presence of that God, who
has promised to be both the God of the faithful and of their seed?

My sixth Objection shall be against Popish Baptism: For, what a brutish thing
is it to adulterate the Water and Element of this Holy Sacrament with Oil, Salt
and Spittle. Is sensual man wiser than the Omnipotent God? If he Work, who can
let? And who can say unto the King of Kings, what do thou? Every thing ought
to be done in decency and order, but this nasty and brutish trick is the shame
of Sacraments, the blush of Babylon, the impudence of Popery, and the absurdity
of abominations. Will it not satisfy you to eat up the good Pastures, but
(with the Idol-shepherds in old) to tread down the residue with your feet. Will
it not satisfy you to eat God's Body, Cancel the Scriptures, and debar the
people from the Word of God, but must you also spit on his Sacrament,
Homologating the deeds of Judas and Pilate, and of those Wicked Jews who served
him so when they Crucified him? Will it not satisfy you to drink all the Wine
at his Supper, unless you spit in this Element of Water, because it does not
answer your drunken Appetites? O wretched Hypocrites! How can ye escape the
Damnation of Hell.

And what a ridiculous wicked thing is it to Baptize Bells, Churches, and other
Ecclesiastical Necessaries, in the Name of Christ: Whether is it, to mock or
spite the Christian Religion? Did he ever Dye for Metal, Stones, and Wood? Were
these the posterity of Adam? Have Stocks and Stones, Wood and Metal, Immortal
Souls? And has Christ commanded some Stones (such as are in Church-Walls) and
such Metal as is molded in Bells, and such Wood as is converted to Roods, and
wherewith we Roof Churches, to be Baptized, and not every Pot and Pan, Stick
and Stone, we meet with? If they have right to the Sacraments, why not to the
Word? And why do you not Preach to them? Why do you not Administer to them the
Lord's Supper, since he can eat and drink with the Priest's mouth as well as
other Laics?

My seventh Objection shall be against the Popish Eucharist, wherein they
pretend both to make and eat God, as is affirmed by Innocencius, in his
Mysteries of the Mass, lib. 4. cap. 19. Panis in Cristum transubstantiatur and
ita in Creatorem; sic ergo Creatura quotidie fit Creator. And Bonner, in praise
of the Priesthood, says, The Priests are Creators of their Maker. Truly it is
most certain, that at the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament, Christ in a
Mystery is more particularly present, than at other times: But to say that
Christ, at his last Supper, did eat up all and whole Christ; and that the eater
and the eaten were the same; and that the Apostles were Canibals, and did eat
Christ alive; when he was dead in his Grave; and that the B. Virgin did cruelly
tear in pieces, and eat up her own Son, every bit and crum; and that God in
Christ (who made Men Rational, and is the Author of Order and not Confusion)
did confound the World both in Sense and Reason; and that in this Sacrament
there is Form without Substance, and Substance without Form, and yet no Forma
Substantialis; and that Christ's Body is in Heaven, Earth, France, Spain,
Italy, and all the World over at once; without Bilocation or Ubiquity: Or, (in
few Words) to affirm that a Wicked Debauched Priest, can make that which was
never unmade, viz. The Eternal ever-living holy God, and then eat up the
invisible Deity; is such a piece of ridiculous, impudent, absurd, brazen-faced,
blasphemous, self-contradicting Nonsense, as drives the Turks, Pagans, and
Heathens, to astonishment; staineth Christianity, and confirms all ungodly
Wretches in Atheism and Idolatry, and ought not to be named among Christians.
For as Vigil. lib. 4. contra. Eutych. (speaking of Christ's Body) says, When it
was on Earth, surely it was not in Heaven: And now because it is in Heaven,
certainly it is not on earth.

My eighth Objection shall be against the Church of Rome's depriving her Laity
of the Communion-Cup: For if our Savior was so liberal of his Body and Blood,
as to give both to unlearned Fishermen, yea to Judas, (whom he knew to be both
a Thief and a Traitor) I think the Romish Clergy may do the same to the vulgar,
after Confession, without fear of the falling of drops of blood, or mammocks of
flesh; for it was no less disparagement to Christ's Body and Blood, to be in
the Self-murdering Son of Perdition's Belly, than to lie in a Church floor.

My ninth Objection shall be against the Doctrine of Popish Merit; For if Man,
in his best estate, be but Vanity, all his righteousness and best performances
but filthy rags, and the best of men but unprofitable Servants: What can
foolish men merit at the hand of God? Or what reward can he expect for his
empty performances? Yet are the deluded Papists so simple, as to affirm that
many of their supposed Saints did live so holily, that they left in bank a
superplus stock of good Works, more than merited Heaven to themselves, and
Wicked Kinsmen, which now his Holiness of Rome has laid up in bank as
Spiritual Revenues, to be sold to ungodly rich sinners for ready Money, to buy
their Salvation, and redeem their deceased Friends out of Purgatory. But this
principle is so evidently abominable, that there is no need to refute it to a
Rational Man; for there can be no greater absurdity thrown at it, than its own
impudence and filthiness. For if Christ's Merits be infinite, and his Raiment
(which he proffereth freely) be white as snow, what necessity is there to lay
out our money for that which does not profit, and buy filthy rags which cannot
cover our nakedness?

My tenth Objection shall be against the Adoration of Images. For
notwithstanding that the changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into an
Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds and Four-footed Beasts, and
creeping things, was the abomination of the Gentiles, whom (being vain in their
Imaginations) God gave up to vile Affections; yet are not Papists ashamed to
build the Sepulchers of their Fathers, painting the Immortal Deity, in
similitudes of their own Invention. O Fools! Does not God fill Heaven and
Earth? Are not all Nations, before him, less than Nothing and Vanity? To whom
then will ye liken him? Or, Who shall be his equal? It would be reputed a
spiteful piece of Misdemeanour, if not High Treason, in any Subject to take the
Picture of a Hog, Dog, or Bear, and set it up in his Chamber, and call it the
Picture of his King. Yet there is greater disparity betwixt God and the best of
Creatures, than betwixt a King and a Bear. And what an impudent deluded thing
is it in them, to pray to the Images of supposed Saints, Statues, Stocks and
Stones, Gods of their own making, and not acknowledge themselves Idolaters: For
(say they) We Worship not the Image or Statue, but its Representative. But, O
deluded Wretches! What Fool will conclude that the Israelites, when they
Worshipped their Molten Calf, did believe that it was their real God, (which
had smitten Egypt with Plagues, and divided the Red Sea before them) but only
his Representative? Yet, for their Idolatry, how many thousands fell in one
day? Neither is it less sin, to pray to Angels and Saints, than to Idols of
Stone, Wood and Clay; for if there be but one Omnipotent, Omnipresent God, who
is only able and willing, at all times, to hear and help us. How dare you
slight him, (who inviteth us freely,) to embrace those, who are neither able to
hear nor help? For Papists cannot deny that they pray, Holy Michael, defend us
in Battle, that we perish not in the fearful Judgment. And to the Blessed
Virgin, O Glorious Saint, in whom I put my trust, the Mother of Grace; The Port
of Salvation, my Confidence, my Refuge, and my only hope, etc. And to another,
thus: Let me obtain Heaven by the Blood of St. Thomas Becket; as if the blood
of a Traitor were more efficacious and propitiatory, before God, than the blood
of Christ. Moreover, what an abominable thing is it to pray to St. Nicholas, to
protect Mariners, St. Luke Painters, St. Crispin Shooe-makers, St. Gal Geese,
and Antony Pigs, etc. as if God, whose Providence reaches the Sparrows, were
not the Confidence of all the ends of the Earth, and of those who are afar off,
upon the Seas. Moreover, it is ridiculous to pray to that which can neither
hear nor help, and say, O Holy Cross help me. And again, ange piis justitiam,
reisque dona veniam, Increase Righteousness in the Godly, and grant Pardon to
Sinners. And to an old rag to say, O Sancte Sudari! Ora pro nobis, O Holy
Napkin pray for us. These are the Works of Delusion, yea, the Mystery of the
Man of Sin, which I earnestly desire and request all Papists to forsake, and
pray only to God in Christ, the only Mediator and Advocate betwixt God and Man,
as Jerome in an Epistle to Riparius Writes; Christians, neither adore nor
Worship Martyrs, nor Sun, nor Moon, nor Angels, lest they should therein rather
serve Creatures than the Creator.

My eleventh Objection, against Papists, shall be their praying in an unknown
Tongue; for as Paul says, 1 Cor. 14.9. Except ye utter by the tongue, words
easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken, for ye shall
speak unto the Air? Yea, in this same Chapter, verse. 23. he compares those who
are guilty of this foolery, to Barbarians and Madmen; and tells, that
tongues are for a sign to them that believe not, but Nonsense to them that
believe. Moreover, to be spoke to with stammering lips, and Men of another
tongue, was a Curse from God upon Israel, as it is now on the obstinate Romans
this day, Isa. 28.11.

My twelfth and last Objection, shall be against their Doctrine of Adultery, or
their Clergies single life; wherein they condemn their Sacrament of Marriage as
an unholy thing, and a stumbling block, in the way to Heaven. God appointed it
from the beginning, Christ countenanced it, and the Apostle recommended it as
honorable to all Men. What then are they, who give the lie both to God and
Man, terming it unholy and unclean, whilst God has affirmed the contrary, in
as direct and plain terms as any man, yea, beyond what the Wisest Orator can
express? But (since this is so plain an, absurdity in it self) I shall not
spend Pen and Ink, in proving that which no rational man will deny; only suffer
me at last now to treat, or rather surfeit your Eyes and Ears, with one
abominable Story, which is this: Hudericus, Bishop of Augusta, in an Epistle,
Writes to Pope Nicholas I. that Gregory the Great bound the Clergy to a single
Life; but on a certain time, a Woman catching small fishes (which this
superstitious Monk thought only lawful to be eaten) found 6000 Heads of
Infants, which had been therein drowned; which Monk Gregory perceiving to be
the effect of the Clergies single Life, with sighing and sorrowing, he revoked
the Canon. Yea, it is reported by the foresaid Bishop, that the Clergy did so
burn in Lust, that they not only kept Company with Married Women, and their own
Kindred, but with Mankind, and the very Beasts in the Field. Another Story, the
Parallel whereof you may read in several Popish Historians, is this: Leander
and Tritemius report, that about the year of our Lord 1470, Alanus de Rupe, a
Dominican, after he had seen several Visions, contrived his Work called
Rosarium, out of our Ladies Psalter, and Preached it instead of the Gospel;
which Pope Sixtus IV. confirmed, with Bulls and Indulgences: Whereupon a
certain Book was published, in the beginning whereof is Written, that the B.
Virgin came into the Cell of the said Alan, it being shut, and made him a Ring
of her own Hair, and betrothed her self to the Monk, kissing him, and giving
him leave to handle her Breasts; and finally, to be as intimate as Man and
Wife. This is he from whom sprang the Order of Alanites, and whose Miracles the
Popish Clergy so zealously defend.

I thought to have spoken something of several other Popish Opinions,
especially of Penance, Pardons and Indulgences, but lest I weary you, I shall
only refer you to a little Pamphlet, sold by the Booksellers of London,
Entitled, Sodom Fair, which discovers the Nakedness and Abominations of the
Romish Harlot to the Life, or rather Death; from which I pray God may deliver
us all.

I resolved once, as I have said, to have given you a taste of all the
poisonous and counterfeit Merchandise, that is exposed in the Market of the Man
of Sin, and a touch of all his Hocus Tricks, and Popish Pranks: But he who
reads with an Impartial Eye considers with an Unprejudiced Understanding,
and receives what I have here written in an honest Heart, will be ready to
turn his back on Babylon, and his face Zion ward, and enquire after the good
old way, which is set before us, in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

Therefore it is my humble and hearty Advice, that all people be terrified at
the Name of Popery, and that all Roman Catholics open their obstinate Eyes and
Ears, to see and hear the Word of Truth, and with the Noble Bereans,, search
the Scriptures, the Writings of the Fathers; yea, and their own Legends and
Historians, to see whether what the Christian Protestant Churches affirm, be
conform to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles or not: Then if Baal be God
follow him; if the Pope or his Creature the Host, his imaginary Deity be God,
follow him: But if there be no God but one, allsufficient, eternal, invisible,
and incomprehensible, follow him, according to his own Will, and the Rule which
he has in his Word prescribed to us; but if you will neither hear, nor believe
the Word of God, and Scriptures of Truth, nor the Writings of the Fathers, and
of your own Historians, then if one should come from the Dead, you will neither
hear nor believe him: For they that shut both Eyes and Ears, and resolve to be
filthy, will be filthy still. And none can do more, but with the Prophet Jer.
51.8. Wail over you, and cry out We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed. But remember what the Lord says by the Prophet Isa. 50.11. Behold all
ye that kindle a Fire, that compass your selves about with sparks: Walk in the
light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have
of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

A WORD To the People called QUAKERS.
Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth.
I Intended to have spoken of your Opinions and Principles, but (considering
that you all pretend to an Inspiration, of the Infalllble Spirit of Truth, and
need no outward teachers) I shall only humbly advise you to square your
profession, and try your Spirits, by the Scriptures of Truth; for the Spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: And if you walk not after that
Rule, which God has set down, in his Written Word and holy Will, it is,
because there is no light in you.

Next, I cordially request you to consider, that all ages, since our Savior's
days, did repute them Heretics, who denied the sanctified use, and benefit of
the Sacraments, which God, in Christ, has appointed, as Seals of the New
Covenant; to be an Evidence before the World, that (as we really believe in our
hearts before God) we are not ashamed, before men, to own him, for a Redeemer,
whose body was broken, and whose blood was shed, for the Remission of our Sins,
and Salvation of our Souls. And tho you repute them foolish and ridiculous, God
by the foolishness of Sacraments, yea, of Baby-sprinkling, Bread-eating, and
Wine-drinking, has oft-times conveyed Grace, Comfort and Strength, to weary,
fainting Souls. Neither can you wipe off what I affirm, by saying they were but
beggarly Rudiments, for young beginners, to endure but for a short season. For
our Savior, in his last Will, recommended them to his Apostles, as a Christian
performance, to endure till the end of the World. Baptism he did Matthew. 28.19.
Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World. Now
(since Baptism is one among these all things which Christ has commanded; to
the peformance of which, he has promised his assisting presence, to the Worlds
end) it cannot be a transient Necessarium secundum quid, a thing that may be
done or flighted; and that, but for a short space, for the Words are baptizing
them, viz. all Nations. Now when there are no Nations, there will be no
Baptism; but as long as there is any Nation, or one Man of a Nation, Baptism
will never be an useless Rudiment of humane Institution, or that which may be
thrown away as a ridiculous Tradition. And, as for the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, our Savior said, Matthew. 23.19. This do in Remembrance of me. Now if
the time be expired, wherein we should not remember our Redeemer, and the time
come wherein we should forget him, then may we lawfully lay by his Sacrament.
Sed falsum prius ergo, etc.

The next advice, that I would give Quakers, is negative, concerning matters of
Fact; and that is, that they neither lie, cheat, nor covet: For he that says
that he is Religious, taught, and led by the Spirit of Truth, and does such
things, his show of Religion is vain; he is yet blind, and not purged from the
Old Man: Love not the World (then) neither the things that are in the World. If
any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. The Prophet Micah
advises us to a good Religion, Chap 6.8. To do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God. Which if all would study, before they fall by the
ears in controversy, for the tithes of Mint and Rue, there would be more
sincere knowledge in Religion, more inward Peace and outward Content, and
greater practice of true piety. For the Lord says, by his prophet David,,
Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God. Now to this God, only Wise, be ascribed all Glory, Honor and
Praise, with Dominion, Majesty and Might; World without end. Amen.

FINIS.

