CHRIST Set forth in several Sermons UPON The 7th Chapter to the HEBREWS.

By Mr. Robert Ottee, Late Pastor to a Congregation in Beckles in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
1690.

To the READER.
THese Sermons are put out after the Authors death; they were taken in
Shorthand from the Preacher, and every wise and candid Reader will easily
think, that every thing is not so Exact and Perfect, as if the Author had
Viewed and Corrected things himself; but however, it is much desired by those
that had sat long under his Ministry, that these Sermons might be Published,
because they treat of such an excellent Subject, setting forth our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, our great High Priest and Mediator, in a plain and
Spiritual manner, holding forth Christ as an object of Faith, that those who
are yet unbelievers may be encouraged to look to him and be saved, that they
may know the way of coming to God by him; and that those that have believed
through Grace, may learn to make more constant use of the Lord Jesus Christ for
Sanctification and Consolation all their days, seeing we do receive all
Spiritual blessings through him. The chief design of these Sermons is to extol
Christ, of whose Person, and of the Worth of our Redemption by him, when
Ministers have said all they can, the half is not told of him, yea, it may be
said, How little a portion is known of him?

It seems those that heard these Sermons Preached were much affected with them;
and it is hoped the Lord will please to put in by his Spirit to bless them to
those that shall read them.

Martin Finch.

To the Congregation lately pertaining unto the Care and Oversight of Mr.
Robert Ottee, Preacher of the Gospel at Beckles in Suffolk.
Dear Brethren,
YOu have here presented to your view those profitable Sermons, which sounded
sweetly in your Ears. He Preached on this Chapter, as for your Edification and
Consolation, so (as he told me) for his own, for he had many Warnings of
putting off his Tabernacle. They were Preached on the former part of the Lords
day, for he Preached on the afternoon from other Scriptures, more suitable to
the greater part of his Auditors. These were his last Sermons.

We read of the great Prophet Elijah, that he left his Mantle, when he was
caught up to Heaven, 2 King. 2. 13. by which great Wonders were effected. And
by the blessing of God, who gives the increase, great things may be wrought by
a spiritual, though not miraculous operation, in the reading of these Sermons.

By these we may understand what a great blessing you enjoyed in such a
Minister for above Thirty years, who was abundant in Labors. And likewise how
great your Loss is under which you yet mourn!

He was (as is well known) an Interpreter one of a Thousand, Job 33. 23. An
Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 24.

Though you are in want of a good Shepherd to feed the Flock, yet you must say
as Abraham (of old) to his Son Isaac, God will provide.

I intend brevity, and only add a word or two more to you that were his Flock;
Remember how you have received and heard, and hold fast and repent, Rev. 3. 3.
Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

I remain, Your willing Servant for Jesus sake, WILL. BIDBACK.

Christ set forth.
SERMON I.
Hebrews 7. and 1, 2, 3 verses. For this Melchisedeck King of Salem, Priest of
the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings,
and blessed him: To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: First being by
interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which
is, King of Peace. Without Father, without Mother, without descent, having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God,
abides a Priest continually.
HAving lately spoken many things of drawing near to God; as it is the duty of
all men to do, and of true Believers especially: And that there is no drawing
near to God, but by our great High Priest, our Lord Jesus Christ: And the Lord
having sworn that this Christ is a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeck: It will be very necessary, through Gods assistance, to open and
apply this Melchisedeck, as he was a type of Jesus Christ. I know that there
are many in this Congregation, that are but Babes in Christianity, and have
need of Milk rather than strong meat; plain Preaching, and that which is easy
for them to understand: But there are several other able Christians here
amongst us, that have had their sense of the things of God, of many years
standing, that may be able to digest stronger meat; and for their sakes I
would, according to my measure of ability, open this Mystery of Christ's
Everlasting Priesthood, under this type of Melchisedeck, that so we may grow
more perfect in our knowledge. There are many great and profitable Mysteries
couched in Melchisedeck's Name and Office: And so great a Mystery it is, as the
Apostle spends a great part of this Chapter in opening of that Mystery; How
Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck; and then makes application
of the whole in the latter part of the Chapter; and therefore I intend (God
willing) to go through this Chapter briefly in the former part of the day. For
besides the Gospel Mysteries, that are held out in this Melchisedeck, here are
diverse practical Truths to be handled, as we go along, which are of daily use
to us.

Now the Apostle having in the last words of the foregoing chapter, said,
Christ is made a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, he comes now
to describe Melchisedeck to them -- First by his Name and Office, and then by
his pious action, in going out to meet Abraham. As for his Name, we shall not
need to stand upon that, because the Apostle interprets it in the following
words -- His Offices were both King and Priest: King of Salem, and Priest of
the most high God.

Secondly, By the work that he did, which was, that he met Abraham returning
from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him -- That is the sum of the first
verse -- In the 2d verse we have set down what Abraham did for Melchisedeck --
Abraham gave the tenth part of all the spoil that he took from the four Kings
after his Conquest. And he did not give this unto Melchisedeck, as to an
ordinary man, but to him who was by interpretation, the King of Righteousness,
and King of Salem -- that is, King of Peace.

In the 3d. verse, the Apostle shows the resemblance between Melchisedeck, and
Jesus Christ. Melchisedeck was without Father, and without Mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto
the Son of God, abides a Priest of God continually -- Here lies the Mystery.

We begin with the first verse -- This Melchisedeck (says the Apostle) was
King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God -- Here is his Office -- It is
much disputed amongst many, who this Melchisedeck was. Some have thought him to
be an Angel; because it is said, he was without Father, and without Mother, and
without descent. But that is clearly answered, and confuted by the Apostle in
the 5th chapter and the 1st and 2d verses -- For every High Priest was to be
taken from among men; not from among Angels, but from among men. And therefore
Melchisedeck was a man, and not an Angel. And whereas it is said, that he was
without Father, without Mother, without descent -- which leads to that Opinion,
that he was no man -- That is spoken of him as to his Genealogy. For it was the
Custom of the Jews to keep Genealogies and Records of their Parentage in the
Church, that they might read them in their Church-Book. But Melchisedeck had
not this Record.

But he was a man, and the most received Opinion is, that this Melchisedeck was
Shem the Son of Noah -- For you know that Noah had three Sons, Shem, Ham, and
Japheth: These three Sons replenished the whole Earth, after the Flood, as you
may read in Genesis 9. 18, 19. And that this Melchisedeck was Shem, and had his
Name given him afterward Melchisedeck, from his Kingdom and Goodness; and the
reasons for it are these:

First of all, Shem lived Six hundred years; he lived a Hundred years before
the Flood, and Five hundred years after the Flood, as you may see in the 11 of
Genesis the 10, and 11. verses: He was One hundred years before the Flood, and
Five hundred years after it, when the World was planted again; and this is
given as a reason why his Genealogy could not be found, for the Flood destroyed
all Persons, but a few, and their Records and Genealogies might be lost.

The Second reason given, for Shems being this Melchisedeck is, That he was the
Person that in the 9th. of Genesis God styled him self the Lord God of Shem the
26. verse.

Thirdly, Shem the Son of Noah had the Promise made to him, as you may read in
that 9th. of Genesis he had the Promise of Propagating the Church of God; and
therefore it is said, God shall persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem,
and Shem was great Grand-sire to Abraham, for Abraham's stock did spring out of
this root of Shem.

Fourthly, Another reason is this, that of this Son of Noah, of his stock came
Christ according to the Flesh; that you have in the Third of Luke, speaking of
the Genealogy of Christ, according to the Flesh, the 36th. verse; Which was the
Son of Shem, which was the Son Noah; so that Christ's Genealogy, according to
the Flesh, is reckoned from Shem; and for these Reasons it is most generally
believed, that this Melchisedeck was Shem the Son of Noah; -- but whether that
be so or no, he was a Man, for he could not be an Angel, because he was a great
and honorable Person in the World, in whom the Propagation of the Church
consisted.

Now we must not only consider his Person, but his Place, KING OF SALEM; What
is that Country Salem? It was a Country that bordered upon the Land of Canaan,
where Abraham Sojourned; and this Country of Salem bordered upon Canaan; and in
this place was the Temple built afterward, and the City of Jerusalem: For you
must know, Jerusalem is a word compounded of two words, Jeru and Salem; Salem
is the latter part of the word Jerusalem; Jeru signifies God will provide: It
is the same word which Abraham said to his Son, when he was Offering him up for
a Sacrifice, he said, God will provide; and Salem signifies Peace, as you may
see in the 76 Psalm. in the 1, and 2. ver. In Judah God is known, in Salem is
his Tabernacle, i. e. in Jerusalem.

Now of this Place Melchisedeck was King, -- He was King of that Country that
bordered upon Canaan, and he was Priest of the most High God. Here he Governed
as King, and here he Governed as a Magistrate, and here he kept up the Word of
God, as a Minister: Hence you may observe, That God would never in any Age of
the World, let his true Worship fall in the World, but there should be some to
keep it up. Here you have a Melchisedeck that was King of Salem, that kept up
the true Worship in the Land of Canaan; he kept up the Name of the most high
and great God, -- So that we may comfort our selves with this, that God will
never let his Worship fall to the ground. This Melchisedeck was King of Salem,
and Priest of the most High God. -- King of Salem. -- There is a Mystery, in
that it is said, he was Priest of the most high God, and for this reason, good
Abraham showed him that respect he did, as to give him the Tenths of all the
Spoils. If Mechisedeck had been a Priest of Baal, or of an Idol God, Abraham
would have turned his back upon him; for it is the property of Godly men, to
bear their Testimonies against Idol-priests; and from hence we may briefly take
notice of this from Abraham's practice, to show our respects to the Ministers of
God, who faithfully labor in the Word and Doctrine: But that which I would
chiefly take notice of in this branch of the Text, is this, He is styled Priest
of the most high God; that is one of the glorious Titles of our Lord Jesus
Christ: -- The Scripture speaks much of God, as the most high, in the 113.
Psalm. 2, 3, 4. Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth, and for
evermore; from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, the
Lords Name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all Nations, etc. [The most
high God] This should teach us to use the Name of God, always with a holy,
awful Reverence; not to speak of God as you do of Man: You know Men look for
their Titles when they come into place of greatness and honor; they will be
called your Highness, and your Majesty, and the like. Shall we speak so to Man?
And shall we not speak to the most high God, with an awful Reverence and Fear?
Our Lord Jesus Christ, (though he was the Son of God, and equal with God, yet
taking upon him our nature) when he comes to speak to God the Father, he speaks
with a holy Reverence [Holy Father] Our Lord Jesus Christ remembered the
greatness of God the Father; I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
Matt. 11. 25. So when he spoke to his Disciples about Prayer, says he, Pray to
your Father in Heaven; -- all this is to show how we must use the holy Name of
God with Reverence. There is a passage in Malachi, where the Lord rebuked his
People that carried it irreverently under his service; For I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen: How is
that? Why you know how dreadful it was to Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar. -- My
name is dreadful among the Heathen; and shall my People serve me unworthily and
irreverently? And so much for Melchisedecks Name and Title; King of Salem, and
Priest of the most high God.

Here are two Offices met in one Person, by which he was a special Type of
Christ. -- There was never any Person in the World, but this Melchisedeck, that
did hold these two Offices rightfully. Indeed we read of two of the Kings of
Judah and Israel, that undertook the Priests Office, and his Work; but they did
bear the dreadful mark of Gods Judgment for joining the Priestly Office with
that of the King; in the 2 Chronicles. 26. 17, 18, 19. We read that Uzziah attempted
to burn Incense upon the Altar: He went into the Temple of the Lord, to burn
Incense upon the Altar of Incense, but Azariah the Priest went in after him,
and with him Fourscore Priests of the Lord, that were valiant men, and they
withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him, it pertains not unto thee,
Uzziah, to burn Incense to the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that
are Consecrated to burn Incense; go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have
transgressed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God: Then
Uzziah was wroth, and had a Censer in his hand to burn Incense; and while he
was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy even rose up in his Forehead, before
the Priests in the House of the Lord; and Uzziah the King was a Leper unto the
day of his death; thus the Lord smote Uzziah with Leprosy, for joining the
Priestly Office with his Kingly Office. Another King you read of was Jeroboam,
1 Kings 13. and the beginning, the Lord sent a Prophet to him, to Prophecy ruin
to him, and upon his Prophesying against the Altar in Bethel, The King put
forth his hand from the Altar, saying, Lay hold on him; and his hand which he
stretched forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to
him: God will never bear it to have these two Offices joined together, but in
Melchisedeck and Jesus Christ; and therein was Melchisedeck a Type of Christ,
who is all in all to his Church and People; for he is our King, our Priest, and
our Prophet. This therefore by our Protestant Writers is looked upon to be one
mark of Antichrist the Pope, who makes himself a Temporal Lord, and joins the
same to his Priesthood; falsely applying that place to himself, in Luke 22. 38.
And they said unto him, Lord, here are two Swords; and he said unto them, It is
enough. But Melchisedeck was a type of Christ, being both King and Priest. Now
from hence we may have this comfortable Observation for all Believers, That the
Lord Jesus Christ is both our King and Priest. This is of great use for the
comfort of Believers. He is a King, he is a mighty King to defend his Church
and People: He is the King that reigns in Righteousness: He is a King that
governs us by his own Righteous Laws; he protects us. There is no King on Earth
can ever spiritually and eternally destroy Christ's Subjects, or wholly root out
the remembrance of Christ's name in the World; for he is mighty to save,
according to that in Psalm. 72. 11. Kings shall fall down before him, and all
Nations shall serve him, for he shall deliver the needy when he cries, the
poor also, and him that has no helper. This is our King, our great
Melchisedeck, [King of Salem.] He is our Priest; he offered up himself as a
Sacrifice for our sins; by him we have an Atonement. There may be some good
Kings in the World, but where is he that can be a Priest for us, but our Lord
Jesus Christ? And therefore look into Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come unto God by him, because he ever lives to make
Intercession for us. Our Lord Jesus Christ, being the true King and Priest o^
the most high God; this makes him an Object of our Faith and Love, that we may
go to him as our King and our Priest.

But now we come to the second Branch of the ^ext, the action of this
Melchisedeck (...) and Priest of the most high God] He went out and met
Abraham, when Abraham returned from the slaughter of the Kings of the Country,
and blessed him.

Now these words relate to what we read in Genesis 14. there you will see how
Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, at v. 18. and so on -- And Melchisedeck King of
Salem, brought forth Bread and Wine: And he was the Priest of the most high
God; and he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God,
Possessor of Heaven and Earth: And blessed be the most high God, which has
delivered thine Enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all. You see
here that Melchisedeck met him, and blessed him, and carried to him a Royal
Entertainment, for he carried Bread and Wine to Abraham, to refresh him and his
Army after he had been fighting with the Kings.

This Abraham's Warfare was thus -- Abraham hearing that Lot his Brothers Son
was taken captive, and the people and goods of Sodom carried away; you read
that Abraham Armed his trained Servants, born in his house, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued them to Dan: And he and his Servants by night, and smote
them, and pursued them to Hobah. And he brought all the goods, and also brought
again his Brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people. Thus
did Abraham by a small force overcome four Kings, four great Kings. This is
Abraham, that righteous man, whom God called to fight his Battle: And he
subdued Kings, and made his Enemies as stubble to his Bow. It was not Abraham's
force that did it. He was one that went out in Faith, and returns in Faith; and
Melchisedeck the Priest of the most high God, met him, and blessed him.

Here are three things to be observed in Abraham's Warfare.

1. Abraham returns from the slaughter of the Kings -- Hence you may observe --
That Wars are good and lawful when there is a just cause for it. For Abraham he
had not done well in going out to fight and make war with those Kings, if there
had been no just cause for it; nor would Melchisedeck the Priest of the most
high God come out to bless him. I mention this to confute that error and
mistake of those, who say it is not lawful to fight with carnal weapons. But,

2. From this action of Abraham's, we may learn this special duty; That when our
Brethren, Kindred or Relations are in distress, we ought to venture our selves
for their relief, as far as lawfully we may. For the Apostle tells us, we ought
to lay down our lives for the Brethren. So Abraham hearing that Lot his
Brothers Son, his person and family were taken and carried away captive, he
armed his three hundred and eighteen Servants, and goes and ventures his life
for their Rescue; so that when Kindred, and Relations, and Friends, are in any
eminent danger or distress, we are to venture far for their Rescue or
Deliverance.

3. That when people fall into distress and streights, we ought to forget all
former injuries, unkindnesses and affronts, and appear for their help and
assistance: For so did Abraham, who appeared for the deliverance of Lot, from
whom he had formerly received affronts. As you may see in Genesis 13. 7. and so
on. And there was a strife between the Herd-men of Abraham's Cattle, and the
Herd-men of Lots Cattle; and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in
the Land. And Abraham said, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, and between my Herd-men and thy Herdmen; for we are Brethren. See how
calmly Abraham expostulates with Lot; their Herd-men being at strife -- But
Abraham, a holy man, said to Lot, Is not the whole Land before thee? separate
thy self, I pray thee, from me; if thou will take the left hand, then I will go
to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.
He bid him choose, and take which side he would -- And Lot in a carnal manner
looked not so much to the manners of the people, as to convenience, and
situation of the place. He beheld the Plains of Jordan, and that it was well
watered, every where; and chose that way; like many here amongst us, who do not
so much regard the people where they live; or whether the Means of Grace be
there, as they do their carnal Interest and Profit. But Abraham he gives him
his choice; and after these affronts offered to him, went out to his Rescue
when he was in distress. And this we ought to do, in the course of our lives,
if differences happen among Friends and Neighbors, not to retain prejudices,
but be ready to help them in the time of their streights and necessities.

SERMON II.
Hebrews 7. 1, 2, 3. For this Melchisedeck King of Salem, Priest of the most
high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and
blessed him: To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: First being by
interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also, King of Salem, which
is, King of Peace. Without Father, without Mother, without descent, having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God,
abides a Priest continually.
YOU have already heard of this Melchisedeck King of Salem, Priest of the most
high God: How he met Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and
blessed him, etc.

Precious Mysteries are hidden under this name Melchisedeck, King of Salem,
King of Peace, which are here applied by our Apostle to Jesus Christ, our great
King and high Priest -- Something has already been spoken about the person of
Melchisedck. As for his name, it is interpreted in the 6th and 7th verses, who
he was; and of his being King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God -- How
in this respect he was so great a type of Christ -- Something also has been
spoken of his meeting of Abraham, when he returned from the slaughter of the
Kings -- Abraham was a Believer, and one of those that the Apostle speaks of
(in Heb. 11.) who by Faith waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens -- And something has been spoken of a just War -- And about the
helping and succouring our Friends and Relations, that are in distress -- And
doing good to them that did wrong or injury to us; as Abraham did to Lot, who
had injured him.

There is one passage more in this verse, that must be opened and applied --
And that is; Melchisedeck's blessing of Abraham -- This Priest of the most high
God met Abraham, as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed
him -- And how he blessed him -- How he blessed Abraham: It is set down at
large in Genesis 19. It Is said there, that he came and met him in a Princely
manner; brought Abraham Bread and Wine to refresh him, and his men, of their
hard Warfare and Labor; and blessed him in the name of the most high God.

There is a Mystery contained in this Melchisedecks blessing of Abraham, which
at present we are to consider, the reason why Melchisedeck met Abraham, and
blessed him, after lie had returned from the slaughter of the Kings.

There are several Reasons, which may be profitable for us to consider.

1. That Melchisedeck was neighbor unto Abraham; for he was King in Salem,
which bordered upon the Canaanites, where Abraham dwelt, and went forth, out of
that Country, to war with the Kings: And Melchisedeck as a Neighbor met him,
to congratulate good Abraham in his success. For indeed Christian Nations are
to rejoice, when a common Enemy is cast down. (But that is not all.)

2. Melchisedeck and Abraham were men of the same Religion; they both
worshipped the same God: though the Country round about them were Heathens, yet
Abraham was the Servant of the most high God -- And Melchisedeck was the Priest
of the most high God: And always good men, of the same Religion, rejoice at the
good success of each other -- Melchisedeck was not a man of an envious spirit,
at Abraham's good success, in his undertaking, but he could rejoice with him. He
did rejoice (as the Apostle has it, in Romans 12. v. 15.) with them that did
rejoice. It is a hard and difficult thing to a corrupt nature, to rejoice at
the good success of our Neighbors, or Brethren. The spirit that dwells in us,
lusts to envy, if men have any great good success. Men of corrupt Natures, they
are afraid they should outshine them, and go beyond them, and therefore there
is a bad spirit among men, which cannot rejoice at others good, at the success
of other men, if they have it not themselves. But Melchisedeck being a gracious
man, and a Servant of God, he did not envy Abraham's good success; he did not
fear Abraham's greatness, but he goes out and meets him, and blessed him.

3. The Third and most special reason, why Melchisedeck goes out to bless
Abraham, was, because that Melchisedeck was the Priest of the most high God,
and Abraham was a Believer, a great Believer in the true God. Abraham was the
man with whom God had made a Covenant; and therefore (in the 7th. ver. of this
chap.) it is said, that Melchisedeck blessed him that had the promise: How had
Abraham received the Promise? Why God singles him out of his Fathers Country,
and brings him into a strange Place, and makes a Covenant with him, and gives
him a promise of a Seed, in which all the Nations of the Earth shall be
blessed. Now that Abraham's Faith might be firm in believing Gods promises; it
is said in the 6th. of the Heb. 13. For when God made promise to Abraham,
because he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself: Now we may conceive,
Melchisedeck knew all this; and he went forth to meet him, and blessed him that
had received the Promise; for he knew by the Spirit of God, that Abraham was
the Father of the Faithful, and that in his Seed, all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed; and therefore he went out to bless him.

Now this is useful to us, to all the Faithful, for their comfort, that are of
the Seed of Abraham, that they are under the blessing of the Priest of the most
high God, who was a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ, and they shall be blessed.
Melchisedeck he did but act the part of our Lord Jesus Christ, in blessing of a
Believer; for they are blessed by Christ, and blessed with all Spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus; therefore in the 24. of Luke, you read that when
Christ was ready to Ascend to Heaven (in the 50. ver.) He led them as far as
Bethany, and laid his hands upon them, and blessed them: Here you have the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was Typified by this Melchisedeck; he is blessing his own
Disciples before his Ascension, and after his Ascension he sent down his
blessing, which you read of in the 4. of the Ephesians, He gave gifts unto men;
and all for the perfecting and edifying of the body of Christ. Now the blessing
of Christ (both in the Type and in the Antitype) is of great Use to all
Believers, against the Curse of profane men; for these whom our great
Melchisedeck blesses, shall never receive a curse. It is the way of the World
to Curse the People of God, and to imprecate all evil upon them; and no doubt
but there will be found a sort of men at this day that Curse the people of God.
But our great high Priest will preserve them, the blessing of our Lord Jesus is
with them, and goes along with them, Numb. 23. 23. There is no Enchantment
against Jacob, nor no Divination against Israel; therefore Moses tells the
Children of God, in the 23. Duteronomy and the beginning, You shall remember
how Balak the King of Moab hired Balaam to Curse you; nevertheless the Lord thy
God would not hearken to Balaam. When you hear of Idolaters and Profane men
Cursing the People of God, and Cursing of them that keep close to God; you may
know this, that those people are under the blessing of our great Melchisedeck.

This you may observe from Melchisedeck's blessing of Abraham.

Come we now to the Second verse, to consider Melchisedecks Place and Office:
(Now says the Apostle in the 2d. verse) to whom also Abraham gave a Tenth of
all; First being by interpretation, King of Righteousness, and after that also
King of Salem; which is King of Peace.

1. We have here, what Abraham did for Melchisedeck.

And then we have the Mystery brought in, i. e. in Melchisedecks Name and Title.

1. What Abraham did, He gave him a Tenth part of all the spoil of the Four
Kings, that had Plundered the Country round about; and this he gave to him, as
he was the Priest of the most high God, and as one that was in that Sacred
Office.

And here I might take occasion to show and observe; That the Ministers of God
ought to have maintenance, allowed means; For so Abraham did, he allowed this
great Minister a Tenth part. Before the Law of Moses, you shall find that Jacob
Vowed a Vow to God, that he would give the Tenths of all his increase to him,
Genesis 28. and the last verse. How is that? He would not give it to God himself;
no, but the meaning is, he would give it to those that belonged to God. I know
it has been a long dispute, whether Tenths or Tithes ought to be continued any
longer, or any more than Altars and Sacrifices, in a Reformed Christian Church:
I shall not determine that, but this we may all be assured of, that if Tithes
or Tenths be of the Ceremonial Law, and so are abolished; yet the moral equity,
is to abide to the end of the World. That those that Minister at Gods Altar,
should have honorable and comfortable maintenance. I confess, I never
delighted to insist upon such Doctrine as this is, nor shall I at this time; but
because it lies in my way, let me give you a few hints: If you lay aside the
Old Testament in this matter, there is nothing more frequently urged in the New
Testament; the Epistle to the Galatians the 6 and the 6. Let him that is taught
in the Word, communicate to him that teaches, in all good things; so did
Abraham he gave Tithes of all, i. e. of all sorts of things that he took from
the Kings after his Conquest. And the Apostle (in the 1 to the Corinthians the
9. and the 13. ver.) says, Do you not know, that they which Minister about
Holy things, live of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? And the Apostle gives a special charge to
Timothy (who was a Minister) in the 1st. Epistle to Timothy 4. 13. To give
attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them; not to Farming, Buying, Selling, and Trading; but
give thy self to these things; spend thy time in these things.

But some will say, Paul wrought with his hand. It Is true, but it was upon a
particular occasion: And (says he) I have power to forbear working. And he
tells the people of Corinth, I have taken Wages of other Churches: He calls his
Maintenance, Wages, because it was for Work done. And though there be a sort of
Men that are ready to call these men hirelings, that take allowance for their
Labor; you may see what our Savior says to his Disciples, in the 10th. of
Luke and the 7th. ver. says he, The Labourer is worthy of his Hire; and if so,
they may call the Disciples of Christ Hirelings. There is a sort of men that
looks upon Ministers maintenance to be a matter of Liberty and Charity; and if
they be poor they should consider them, because of their Poverty sake, and not
for their Work sake; but this is to abase the Doctrine of the Gospel: God is my
Witness, I speak not these things from a greedy covetous disposition, to
increase my own maintenance, but I speak it for your profit.

But there is one thing to be Observed in Abraham's giving the Tenths to
Melchisedeck; which is of special Use to us all:

That is, he gave the Tithes of all to Melchisedeck, and took nothing for
himself; for if you read in the 14. of Genesis when the King of Sodom offered him
to take of the spoil, in the 22. ver. said Abraham; I will not take from a
Thread, even to a Shoe-latchet; I will not take any thing that is thine, lest
thou should say; I have made Abraham rich.

Here you may observe Abraham's Piety and Justice; he would give unto God his
due, but would take nothing for himself. Why so? Is it not Lawful for a man to
enrich himself by War, as well as by Trade? Why did not Abraham take a Reward
for his great Adventure? The reason is plain; for it shall not be said, that
Abraham is made rich by the spoils of the King of Sodoms Country. The King of
Sodom was a Heathen, and an Enemy to Abraham's Religion; and Abraham would not
bring a scandal upon his Religion, by his gettings in the World. A Godly,
Gracious Man, is very tender in his ways and dealings, that he may not raise a
scandal to Religion, in his Worldly gettings. Indeed men of the World, they
care not how they get Riches, because the World is their God; but Men
professing Godliness (as Abraham did) they ought to be careful, that they do
not bring a scandal to Religion, in their Worldly gettings. For thus it was
with Abraham, he was very tender of the name of God; he would not enrich
himself in these ways.

Here we may learn, both Justice, Piety, and Self-denial: Here was Piety
toward God; he gave to God his due: And here was Self-denial also; he took
nothing for himself, nor for his Servants, who were born in his House, and such
as he was bound to provide for: And this should teach us, that in all our
actions of a public nature; we must take heed that we do not make private
Interest our aim and end. And so much for these words of Abraham's, giving the
Tenth of the spoil to Melchisedeck.

Now the Apostle comes to bring in the Mystery of these things; in the
following words [being by interpretation, King of Righteousness, and afterward
King of Salem] the Apostle found out the Mystery of the Son of God, in
Melchisedecks Name and Place; by way of Interpretation. How? Why Melchisedeck
is a Hebrew name which signifies, a King of Righteousness: Some Writers say, it
was given him upon his Righteous Government [King of Righteousness:] And then
the providence of God so ordered it, that he was King of a Place that was
called Salem, which signifies Peace; and so the Apostle says by
Interpretation, this Melchisedeck was King of Righteousness, and afterward
King of Salem. Why does the Apostle bring it in by way of Interpretation?
Because Melchisedeck and Salem were Hebrew words; and the Apostle Writing to
the people in Greek (which Language they understood better than Hebrew)
therefore he Interprets the Hebrew words to them.

And here by the way, we may briefly take notice, That Learning, Study, and
Reading is a necessary quality in a Minister of the Gospel. For, though
Learning without Grace, or the Spirit of God, is an empty and insignificant
thing; yet if men are sanctified, it is of great use to the Church of God.

But where is the Mystery contained in Melchisedecks name and place?

It lies in this, that our Lord Jesus the Son of God, is the King of
Righteousness and Peace -- He is our King -- He is our Melchisedeck -- He is
our King of Righteousness, and our Peace. The Scripture does so assert Christ
to be. See Isa. 3. 2. 1, 2. It Is a Prophecy of Christ; Behold a King shall
Reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in Judgment. A man shall be an
hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the Tempest: As Rivers of Water
in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Here is a
glorious Promise of Jesus Christ -- A King shall Reign in Righteousness, he
shall be a hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the Tempest, when he
sets up his Kingdom. You commonly say in the Prayer of our Lord, Thy Kingdom
come -- but how few do understand it? The Prophet tells us, that a King shall
Reign in Righteousness -- He shall be a hiding place from the Wind, and from
the Tempest -- When storms and winds shall come upon his Church and People; he
will be as a hiding place, and will be a comfort and refreshment to them -- He
will be as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. If you look into Psalm.
45. penned to set forth the Government of Christ, of whom Solomon was a type,
says he, v. 7. Thou love Righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore
God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Why? because thy Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness -- for thou hate
wickedness; therefore God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows. But then Melchisedeck, as a further type of Christ; as he
was King of Righteousness; so also he was King of Salem, King of Peace. So if
you look into Isa. 9 6. For to us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given* and
the Government shall be upon his shoulders: his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. To us,
that is, to the Church, a Child is born; and what shall his name be called? His
name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor -- For Christ is the greatest wonder
of any thing in the World -- For the Son of God to be made flesh. Now you see
little of Christ; he is little set up in the Nation. But in time the Zeal of
the Lord of Hosts will lift up his Son Jesus Christ, as the King of
Righteousness, and as the King of Peace. As soon as Christ came into the World,
the heavenly Host came down and sang praise to the most High, Luke 2. 14. Glory
to God on the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

But how is Christ called the Prince of Peace? why, in two respects.

1. As he has made Peace between God and Man. And, 2. As he makes Peace among
men.

1. As he makes Peace between God and Man: For upon man's sin, there was a
dreadful enmity and hatred between the holy God, and sinful man; man hated God,
and God hated sinful man; till Christ, this Prince of Peace came. Yea the holy
Angels, that stand close to God, they hated man, and men hate one another, upon
that account: For there is such a variance in the corrupt Nature of man, that
men are commonly Tigers, Wolves, Lions; yea Devils one to another. But Christ,
he has satisfied Divine Justice, by the death of the Cross, and slain the
Enmity between God and Man, and so we are at peace with him. For Christ has
reconciled us to God. Hence you have that in Col. 3. He has made peace between
Jew and Gentile; and Ephesians. 2. 14. says the Apostle there, For he is our peace,
who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition
between us. There was abundance of strife and variance between the Jew and
Gentile -- Before Christ, the Gentiles scorned the Jews, for their
Circumcision; and the Jews scorned the Gentiles, and called them Dogs. But
Christ has taken away all this variance and enmity: This Prince of Peace will
remove all offenses that stand in his way -- so that, upon this account, he is
called the Prince of Peace.

Object. But some may say, Does not our Lord Jesus Christ himself tell us, that
he came not to send peace on the earth, but a sword, and to set men at
variance? (Mat. 10. 34, 35.) how then is he the Prince of Peace?

Ans. Know, there is a worldly peace, which lies in agreement in all that which
is evil: Christ did not come to send that peace. Christ did not come to make
peace between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent. The Church of
God would want her trials, if there were not enmity between the two seeds.

But why does he say, that he came not to send peace, but a sword?

The meaning is this; It is by way of consequence; for where the Gospel comes,
it is a Gospel of peace in it self: But when Jesus Christ calls any to his
Kingdom, by the Gospel, the World is then at enmity with them, and quarrels
with them. The Scripture is full of Instances of this. But I shall wind up this
with a brief Application.

Is our Lord Jesus Christ King of Righteousness, and Prince of Peace? then what
great reason have all men, that hear of Jesus Christ, to pay their homage unto
him, and to submit to his Sovereignty? Jesus Christ, he did not set up himself
in opposition to Magistrates; but he is the Head of all Magistracy. By me Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice. But the meaning is, we must make him our
Spiritual King, and submit to his Rule and Laws. Proud men of the World will
not submit to the Rule and Laws of Christ; therefore, if we would be wise to
Salvation, we should subject our selves to his Word, for he is our King, and
blessed are they that are in Covenant with him, and can make Christ their King,
and obey him in all his commands: Though you be despised in the eyes of the
World. If you look into 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14, 15. I give thee charge, in the sight
of God, who quickens all things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius
Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this Commandment without
spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in time
he shall show, who is the blessed and only King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It
may be, while we speak of this Authority of Jesus Christ, you see few men
regard it. But I give thee charge before God and Jesus Christ, as thou will
answer it at the day of Judgment; that thou keep the command of Christ -- which
in time shall be the only Potentate -- And therefore beloved, let us subject
our selves to Jesus Christ, in all his ways, in all his commands. He is the
King of Righteousness -- He is the Prince of Peace -- He will keep us in the
ways of Righteousness. He will keep us in inward peace, in the worst of times.
And therefore, if you desire Righteousness, and to live in peace, subject your
selves to the Lord Jesus Christ.

SERMON III.
Hebrews 7. from verse 4. to 8. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom
even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of his spoils. And verily they that
are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood, have a
Commandment to receive Tithes of the people, according to the Law, that is, of
their Brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham. But he whose
Descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of Abraham, and blessed him
that had the Promises. And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of
the better.
GOD the Father having promised to his Son Jesus Christ, and confirmed it to
him by an Oath, that he should be a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck: Upon this Promise and Oath, much of the Faith and Comfort of the
Church of God springs -- Therefore the Apostle is so large here in this
chapter, to set forth the Privileges, Prerogatives and Dignities of
Melchisedeck [of whose order Christ is a Priest for ever.]

Last day the three verses were opened, where Melchisedeck is said to be
without Father, without Mother, without Descent, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life; made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest
continually. I have not time now to repeat what was said then.

We showed in what sense Melchisedeck is said to be without Father, without
Mother, without Descent, without beginning of days, or end of life -- And how
in all these things he was made like unto the Son of God.

I proceed now to the words I have read; and the scope of the Apostle in them,
is still to amplify, and set out to us, the greatness of this Melchisedeck,
who was the forerunner of the Son of God; and in his days did represent to the
Church the Son of God. -- Now the greatness of this Melchisedeck, the Apostle
proves three ways, in the words which I have read.

1. In that this great man [Abraham] the Patriarch, gave him the Tenths of all
the spoils, verse 4.

2. He proves Melchisedecks greatness by this, that he blessed him that had
received the Promise. And,

The third proof of his greatness, is this, that while Levi dies, Melchisedeck
lives -- These are the three main points the Apostle insists upon, in these
words I have read.

The first proof that the Apostle brings of Melchisedeck's greatness, is v. 4.
Consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the
Tenths of the spoil -- He calls Abraham the Patriarch, for this reason, because
he was the first Father of all the Jewish people; they all proceeded out of his
Loins, in that promised seed Isaac -- Now consider (says the Apostle) how
great this Melchisedeck was, in that the Patriarch, the first Father of the
Church of God, gave to him the tenth of the spoil -- when Abraham returned from
the slaughter -- that was spoken of before -- And here the Apostle brings it
over again, for a great proof of Melchisedecks greatness.

But now here the Question will be, How this can be a proof of his greatness,
while he received from Abraham the tenths of the spoil? for according to the
account that men have of things, the Receiver is inferior to the Giver: He
that gives seems to be greater than he that receives: And our Savior says, It
is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive? How is this then a proof of
Melchisedecks greatness?

I Answer to that; The Giver is greater than the Receiver, where the giving and
receiving is in a way of Alms; that is our Saviors meaning: It is a more
blessed thing to give than to receive, in a way of Alms; but this was not the
case between Abraham and Melchisedeck -- For mind it -- Melchisedeck did not
receive of the Patriarch [Abraham] the Tenths of the Spoils as an act of
Abraham's kindness, but as Tribute that Abraham paid to God, and to
Melchisedeck, who was the Priest of the most high God. Abraham gave to
Melchisedeck the Tenths of the Spoil, as due to God. It is a very false and
fantastical notion of people; that if they are able to give to the Ministers,
they think themselves as great as the Minister. Whereas, all those gifts are
but as Tributes, Prove. 3. 10. Honor the Lord with all thy Substance, and with
the first Fruits of all thy Increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty,
and thy Press burst forth with new Wine. Thus Abraham, he had got a great Spoil
from the Enemies -- He honored God with the substance he had got, and he
carried it to Melchisedeck and gives it him, as Tribute due to God, and
expected a blessing thereupon. Many people complain of their streights and
losses, when they come to render God his due. But here is the promise -- Honor
the Lord with thy Substance, so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy
Press burst forth with new Wine. The more you take from the heap, the more you
add to the blessing of of what you have: I will but read that passage in Mal.
3. 8, 9, 10. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me; but ye say, Wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are Cursed with a Curse, for
ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye all the Tithes into the
Storehouse, that there may be Meat in mine House, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of Hosts; if I will not open to you the Windows of Heaven, and
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.
Commonly blessings fall upon such Families as make Conscience of these things.
Abraham the Patriarch, gave unto Melchisedeck the Tenths of the Spoils.

This is the First thing to show Mechisedeck's greatness; that he received Gods
Tribute.

In the next place, the Apostle goes on and compares this Melchisedeck with the
Tribe of Levi -- Now (says he in the 5. ver.) they that are of the Sons of
Levi -- Who are they? Why, Levi was one of the Sons of Jacob, and the third Son
that he had by his Wife Leah. Of this House God raised the Priesthood of Aaron.
God set that Tribe apart for his holy Service, and appointed them their
maintenance; for though they had as good a right to the Land of Canaan, as any
of the other Tribes had; yet when God comes to share the Land among the Twelve
Tribes, he would give no part of it to the Tribe of Levi: But he would be their
portion; in the 18. Numb. 20. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, Thou shall have no
Inheritance in their Land, neither shall thou have any part among them; I am
thy part, and thy Inheritance among the Children of Israel. Why would not God
give them a part of the Land? Because God would have them to attend upon the
Service of the Tabernacle; and the Commandment was, that they should have the
Tenths. They should not follow secular Callings and Employments, as other
people did, but they should spend their days in the Service of the Tabernacle.
The moral equity whereof, still abides, though the Ceremonies be abolished.

But then it is said, that this Melchisedeck that received Tithes from Abraham,
his descent was not to be accounted from them, that is, from Abraham, or from
the Tribe of Levi -- he was without descent -- We know not certainly what
Parentage he was of -- Only God had a mind to set up another Priesthood than
that of Levi; which our Lord Jesus Christ shall keep up, which shall not be in
that Line, that was to die, but this shall live for ever. He whose descent was
not from them, blessed him that had the promises; and without all controversy,
the lesser is blessed of the greater, who had the promises: Why, the Patriarch
Abraham, he is the Person here meant -- He is singled out to be the Father of
the Church: For Abraham was set up of God, above all men then living in the
World, to be the Head and Father of the visible Church of the Jews that was to
come; that was a people separated from all the World besides, for many Ages and
Generations: And Abraham was not only made the Father and Head of them, (the
visible Church of the Jews) but of the invisible of Believers, to the end of
the World; they are all to be planted in, and by the Faith that was in Abraham,
according to the promise (Romans 4. 11.) He received the sign of Circumcision, a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith which he had, yet being Uncircumcised, that
he might be the Father of all them that Believe, though they be not
Circumcised, that Righteousness might be imputed to them also. Hence you have
it, that when the Saints die, in Scripture, they are said to go to Abraham's
Bosom; Lazarus died and was carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom -- And (says
our savior) They shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Abraham was the
Father of all Believers; all Believers take hold of that Covenant, and are
United with Abraham in that Glory that follows Faith: Therefore Melchisedeck
was a great man to receive Gods Tribute, and to bless him that had the Promise.
It was a great dignity to Abraham and his Seed, to have the promise. If a man
have not an interest in Gods promises, he is nothing, though he seems to have
all. Let Worldly men boast of their Honors, Wealth, and Dignities, yet if they
have not a right to Gods promises, they are never the better. This was Abraham's
dignity, that he had the blessing for himself, and for his Posterity, and for
all that should Believe in Jesus Christ. It Is a great mercy to have Gods
promises -- For this should teach Three things;

The First is, To take up all our mercies in a way of promise. Godliness has
the promise of this Life that now is, and of that which is to come (says the
Apostle:) Observe this, he that takes up his mercies only in a way of common
Providence, has a common Heart in the Use of them; but he that takes up his
mercies by Faith, in the way of Gods promises, has a Spiritual Heart in the
Use of them. This was Abraham's blessing, that what he received was in the way
of promise: It was this that made the Children of Isaac so blessed, when the
Son of Ishmael was not, because the Son Isaac was the Son of the promise.

Secondly, If Believers have the promise, This teaches them contentment under
streights and present wants of Temporal things, for the Grave will soon bury
all those things, but the promises for the Soul live for ever; bless God
therefore for promises: And

Thirdly, This teaches us to live upon Gods promises, and to plead them, as
our afflictions and streights are upon us.

I say, to live upon promises, and to plead promises; for we have no other hold
upon the holy God, but by his promises. Some Christians do wait in their
afflictions, for the in-comings of a promise; I speak not against the
in-comings of a promise, for there is many times comfort in it. But we are not
to live upon in-comings of promises, but we are to go out to all the promises
of God, by Faith in Christ; For (mind what the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 1. 20.)
all the promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen. [all the promises]
therefore thou may take up with any promise that is suitable to thy wants,
that is suitable to thy condition; thou may plead it with the Lord -- As for
example; Do thou want inward peace? Thou may plead over the promise of
peace -- The Lord has promised to keep him in peace, whose mind is set upon
him -- Again, Do you want outward supplies? Are you streightened in Food and
Raiment? Be diligent in your Calling, and plead that promise -- He will give
Bread to them that fear him, in the 34. Psalm. they that fear the Lord shall not
want any good thing: Plead this promise, let hunger and wants drive you to the
promise -- Again, Do you want light, and counsel, and direction in your ways?
Plead that promise in Isaiah, The Lord shall guide thee continually -- And that
in the 25. Psalm. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, him will the Lord
direct in his ways -- Oh ye that have Abraham's Faith, cleave to the promises,
hang upon the promises! all the promises in Christ are yea, and in him Amen.
They are ratified in Christ -- And that promise of our Lord Jesus Christ
abides -- Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you -- Ask according to the promise, seek according to the promise.
Plead the promises of God when you fall into any Darkness, and trouble of mind
-- I say, plead promises, for God he gives you all the promises to live upon;
and let not any poor Christian be troubled or discouraged about receiving
mercy, for his own weakness, or the meanness of his condition; for you must
know, that every Believer is an Heir of the promise, though a poor weak, frail,
Creature, yet an Heir of the Promise: This we ought to live upon in times of
trouble.

But then there is another thing concerning Melchisedecks blessing Abraham,
that had received the promise.

The Question here may be, What need was there of Melchisedecks blessing of
Abraham, who had Gods promise; for Abraham was happy enough in the promise, if
he had not met Melchisedeck to have blessed him?

For Answer hereunto there are two Reasons given for it:

First of all, It was Melchisedecks Place and Office, (for he was Priest of the
most high God) to bless them that did belong to God; for you read of Three
sorts of Persons in Scripture blessing others; Parents blessing their Children,
Kings blessing their Subjects, and Ministers blessing their People; as you have
it in Numb. 6. 23. Speak unto Aaron and to his Sons, saying, On this wise shall
you bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them, the Lord bless thee, the
Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift
up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Now that this was not a
Ceremony of the old Law, that Ministers and Priests should bless the People,
appears by the New Testament; because the Apostles of Jesus Christ, in their
Epistles did use to conclude their Epistles with Benedictions. But this is not
all here intended; and therefore,

2. This blessing of Abraham, it was a blessing of Ratification, to confirm
Abraham's in the Promise. That was the principal reason of Melchisedecks
blessing of Abraham, that he might be ratified and confirmed in his Faith
concerning the Promise.

From whence we may observe, That the strongest Faith had need of strengthening.
The Faith of the Saints does need confirmation. It is said of Abraham in Romans
4. that being not weak in Faith, he staggered not at the promise; verse 20. yet
if you look into another Scripture, you will find Abraham sometimes staggering
at the promise of God, through unbelief. For if you look into Genesis 15. 1. The
Lord said unto him, Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and exceeding great
reward. Then said Abraham, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childless, and the Steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus? Abraham had
the promise of a seed before, in chap. 12. But he sometimes staggered at the
promise. Abraham was at first weak in Faith, but after God had confirmed his
Faith by this means, then Abraham believed the Lord. -- So Abraham was once
weak in Faith, but now he was strong in Faith.

Again, Abraham also grew strong in Faith by a higher confirming means; and
that was the Oath of God, Heb. 6. 14. Surely in blessing I will bless thee. So
that Abraham, that was commended for the strength of his Faith; he was once
weak in Faith, till God had confirmed his Faith this way. And this was the
cause of Melchisedecks blessing him. And also the Lord, for the strengthening of
his Faith carries him abroad, and bid him look now toward the Heaven, and tell
the Stars, if thou be able to number them -- And he said unto him, so shall thy
seed be -- And then he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for
Righteousness.

Now the Reasons of weakness in Faith are these:

1. Here we know but in part, and therefore believe but in part.

2. The flesh is weak in all Believers -- Christ said, The spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak.

3. Those that have most Faith, are commonly most assaulted by Satan; and
therefore have need of the most confirming means. When our Savior saw Peter
firm in his profession of Faith [saith Christ] Satan has desired to winnow
thee like Wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Ahraham,
though he had the promise, yet he wanted a Melchisedeck to bless him.

Now the third thing is, Melchisedeck's being without beginning of days, or end
of life -- Aarons Sons, and all the Priests of the Levitical Priesthood, they
die; but Melchisedeck, he lives; he lives in his order, in the order of his
his Priesthood: for Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever after Melchisedeck's
order. But here men receive their Priesthood, that die (says the Apostle) so
leave their work: But Christ Jesus, he lives for ever, who was here prefigured
by Melchisedeck. But the Sons of Levi, they must die; for it is appointed for
all men once to die, and after that comes Judgment. Your Prophets, do they live
for ever? Many of the Fathers of the Old World, lived a great while: But Kings,
Priests and Prophets must die: Great and holy men must die.

I should enlarge upon this; but I shall improve it these three or four ways.

1. This should teach us to walk humbly as poor mortal creatures; such as death
will strip of all our glory, all our beauty. Oh! what is it that makes men
proud and haughty, and lifts up their spirits? It is because they think more of
living than of dying. You have a strange instance of this in Scripture: Good
Hezekiah, when a Messenger came to him, to bid him set his house in order, for
he must die; how humble he was, and how lowly he was: But when a Messenger came
and said, he should live yet fifteen years; and (the Scripture says) he
recovered of his sickness: His heart was lifted up, and he did not render unto
the Lord the thanks that was due to him, 2 Chronicles. 32. 24, 25. When he was
restored, he forgot his mortality; his heart was lifted up. -- You see then the
vanity of humane nature; therefore if you would be humble, think more of dying
than of living.

2. If all men must die, it should teach all to improve our lives; to do all
the good we can whilst we live. Says Solomon, Eccles. 9. Whatever thine hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might. We have read and heard of some good
Christians, that have improved their lives, and have stood much upon the
considerations of their going to Eternity: Oh that we might all do so!

3. Seeing we must die, as well as the Sons of Levi, it should teach us
contentment under all our troubles; for death swallows all; death buries all
the sorrows and griefs of the Children of God. If you have read the Martyrology
of the Church of God, you will see what strong consolation they have had at
their deaths, upon this account, they knew, that being in Christ, death would
set them free from all their sins and sorrows.

4. If death be common to all, and all must die, then what cause have we to
bless God for the promise of the glorious Resurrection, for the hopes of
Eternal Life for the Soul at death, and the Resurrection of the Body to glory,
at the last day, for those that are in Christ! Oh how this should raise and
comfort our spirits! Says the Apostle, It is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in honor; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body. The consideration of this should raise our spirits. I remember
I have read of a speech of a dying Roman, being asked where he would be buried,
he answered, I care not where you bury me; for my stench, when I am dead, will
cause you to bury me. Ah! but a true Christian can speak in a better Language,
as Job 19. 25, 26. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. You that are in Christ, comfort your
selves and one another with these words.

SERMON IV.
Hebrews 7. from verse 9, to 12. And, as I may so say, Levi also, who received
Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham. For he was yet in the loins of his Father when
Melchisedeck met him. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood
(for under it the people received the Law) what further need was there, that
another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedeck, and not be called
after the order of Aaron? For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a change also of the Law.
SEveral things have already been spoken of Jesus Christ, as he was prefigured
by Melchisedeck, called the Priest of the most high God. The last time I spoke
to you from this Scripture, we went to v. 9. of this chapter; and I shall not
repeat what has been spoken, but shall proceed this morning to open these
verses which I have now read at this time.

These words of the Apostle are brought in still to prove, that the order of
Melchisedeck (according to which Christ is a Priest for ever) is greater than
the order of Aaron or Levi. And he proves it thus, because Levi, who received
Tithes of the people of Israel, paid Tithes to Melchisedeck in the loins of
Abraham. Here is a Mystery, and a very profitable Truth, that lies couched in
these words. Levi is said to be in the loins of Abraham: How is that? why Levi
was the third Son of Jacob, by his wife Leah, Genesis 49. 34. This Levi had a
Family and a Tribe, out of which, in process of time, God chose the Priesthood:
And it was a great honor to that Tribe, above all the Tribes of Israel, that
God should raise out of them a people to serve him in the holy things, in the
Sanctuary, and to be nearer to him than all the Tribes besides. Now this Levi,
or Posterity, or Family of Levi, are said to be in the loins of Abraham, when
Abraham gave to Melchisedeck the Tenths of the spoils. How in his loins? Levi
(as I said before) was the Son of Jacob, and Jacob was but the Grandson of
Abraham; for Abraham, you know, had Isaac, and Isaac had Jacob, and Jacob had
this Son Levi, who was the head of that Tribe, of which the Priesthood was: So
that Abraham was the great Grandfather of Levi, and of all his posterity; and
yet they are said to be in the loins of Abraham. The Holy Ghost brings in this,
that Levi was in the loins of Abraham, to teach us two things.

First, That Children are in the common condition with their Parents and
Progenitors. And,

Secondly, The actions of Children are included in the actions of their
Fathers, as Levi paid Tithes in Abraham.

1. Children are in the common condition with their Parents and Stock they come
of. It Is true, God made a difference sometimes by his Providence, and sometimes
by his special Grace. Though sometimes God, in the way of his Providence,
advances Children above their Parents in this World. So Saul and David were
advanced to be Kings, when their Fathers were not. So many in the World, that
have been born of mean Parents, and of Parents that have had no repute in the
World, are by the providence of God advanced to some repute and condition in
the World: This is by providence, not by nature.

2. Some advanced by special Grace, to a far better condition than their
Parents: And so where Children are godly, that come of wicked Parents, this is
an advancement of Grace. Hezekiah and Josiah were advanced by special Grace
above their Fathers. But though God by his Providence and special Grace, does
sometimes, and often advance Children above the condition of their Parents; yet
they are in the common condition with them; we are all such as inherit our
Fathers sins, and our Fathers infirmities. Who can bring a clean thing out of
that which is unclean? Job 14. 4. Fathers unclean, and Children unclean; and
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Job 25. 6. Having
spoken of Man; How much less Man that is a Worm, and the Son of Man, which is a
Worm? A Worm is a poor weak Creature; as our Fathers were so are we: And
therefore says the Prophet Elijah, when he was weary of the World, and
requested of God that he might die, he uses this argument, 1 Kings 19. 4. For
I am not better than my Fathers; my Fathers were mortal men, and they are dead,
and why should I live? I am not better than my Fathers; he longed to be
gathered to his Fathers -- Now to apply this;

If Children, be in the common condition with their Fathers by nature; Then
this should,

First, Teach us Humility -- Our Fathers where are they? Their Bodies are
rotting in the Grave, whilst our Bodies and Carkases are alive. We should
consider, that as our Fathers were, so are we; we should always consider our
state and condition; our Fathers are rotting in their Graves, and we are going
to our Fathers; we should not therefore pride our selves in our Parts, our
Riches, or Apparel, for we are all as our Fathers were.

Secondly, If we be in the common condition as our Fathers, then let us humbly
bless God, if he has raised us to Temporal and Spiritual blessings, above what
our Fathers were. How many are there in the World, that are as their Fathers
were, as to Poverty, from one Generation to another? Has God raised thee, or
any of you to any Credit and Fullness in the World? This is the Lords doing. For
some may say, if they had been bound down in so short and low condition as
their Fathers were, they must have been poor, and needy, and hungry. How many
Children are there, that inherit their Fathers Diseases, Sicknesses,
Weaknesses, and infirm Bodies? and you have many Children that inherit nothing
but their Fathers Vices and Wickedness; for as Gods Covenant does many times
run in a Blood, and there is a Seed to serve God, from one Generation to
another, in some Families, so on the other side, the Devils Covenant runs in a
Blood, with many Fathers, and Forefathers, Grandfathers Fathers, and
Grandchildren, all of a wicked Spirit, that runs in the Family; and therefore
it is God that makes the difference in your Temporal and Spiritual condition.

But the Second and more special Point from this, that Levi paid Tithes in the
Loins of Abraham; That Children are included in the actions of their Parents:
For God of his Eternal Counsel has so ordered it, that of such a Stock and
such Persons, from one Generation to another, proceeding one out of another,
that the actions of the Fathers include the Childrens; for Levi paid Tithes in
Abraham; and for this cause it was that the Curse of God came upon Mankind,
because we all ate of the forbidden Fruit, in the Loins of our Father Adam.
Adams actions brought the guilt upon his Posterity, as you may see in Romans 5.
12. Wherefore, as by one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and
so Death passed upon all men, for that all have Sinned. And in the 18. ver.
Therefore, as by the offense of one Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation.
By the offense of one! How is that? Why all Mankind were in the Loins of Adam;
for God did not make a Covenant with every man particularly, but in his Father
Adam. Now as Levi did, in the Loins of his Father Abraham, testify his homage
and service to God, by giving Melchisedeck the Tenths of the Spoil; so we, in
the Loins of our Father Adam, did show our homage and service to the Devil,
when Adam did eat of the forbidden Fruit, and so by Nature are become the
Children of Wrath, being in the Loins of our Father Abraham; and so what Adam
did, we are accounted to do, because we are in the Loins of Adam; as what
Abraham did, Levi was accounted to do, because he was in the Loins of Abraham
-- This is the word of God.

This speaks therefore Three things to us.

First, To vindicate the Justice of God, in imputing of Adams Transgression to
all Mankind; for all Mankind were in the Loins of Adam. God does not Create Man
now, but Propagates Man through the Loins of their Parents. There is but one
work of Creation; God himself Created but one Man, but he put forth a Creating
power, in Propagating Mankind. Through that one Man, and by one Man's offense,
many are made Sinners: This seems hard, but if you consider, you are in the
Loins of Adam; herein is the Justice of God cleared: But observe this
difference between our first Father Adam and other Fathers, that it is but
Temporal punishment that comes upon Children for their Fathers Sins, except
they walk in their steps, but there is Eternal punishment come upon us by our
first Father Adams sin; but all that repent and fly to Christ, have that sin
of Adam and all their actual sins forgiven, through Christ the second Adam.

Secondly, If this be so, that we are included in the actions of our sinful
Parents by Nature? This loudly calls upon us to seek after a second Birth, a
new Birth, that we may stand upon a new Foot, and be upon a new Account in the
sight of God, for we are all sinners, and laden with sin and guilt, as we are
the Children of the first Man Adam; but being born again, we become the
Children of God; and therefore says the Apostle in the forementioned place,
Romans 5. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one man, Judgment came upon all men
to Condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto Justification of Life, that is, all men that Believe. If thou have
but the first Birth, all the Curses of the Law come upon thee; but if thou have
a part in the second Birth, all the blessings of the Gospel come upon thee. It
is Recorded of a great Man that had his Nativity (as you call it) cast by an
Astrologer, and the Astrologer told him, I find by your Nativity, that you are
to be a man of sorrows in your Life; to which he Answered, But I am born again
since I was born of my Mother, and therefore I reckon my Nativity from that
Birth: And indeed he spoke true, for if he had reckoned from his first Birth,
he might have been a man of Eternal sorrows; but reckoning his Nativity from
his second Birth, there was a change made.

Thirdly, That if Children naturally, as they are in the Loins of their
Parents, are said to do that which their Parent did; then it concerns all
Parents for the love they have to their Children, to take heed of intailing a
Curse upon their Posterity, a Curse upon their Children. Parents have so much
love for their Children, that they commonly strive to make them great in the
World, yea greater than themselves; but commonly they strive so hard for it, as
to bring a Curse with it; see the 2. Kings and the 5. you read there of Gehazi,
that his thoughts were Covetous, he runs after Naaman the Syrian, to receive
the Money, the Talents of Silver, and the Raiment; but what was the fruit of it?
see the 27. verse, The Lerosie therefore of Naaman shall cleave to thee, and
unto thy seed for ever; and he went out from his presence a Leper as white as
snow. You know the Prophet cured Naaman of a Leprosy, and it was transferred
to the Prophets Servant, and to his Seed for ever; so that Gehazi's Children
were all Lepers, and his Grandchildren all Lepers; so that these poor Children
and Grandchildren they might rise up and curse the base Spirit of Covetousness
of their Father and Grandfather, that brought this curse upon them. So you
have many a poor wretched Father and Mother given to Drunkenness, and the poor
Children they follow the same: You know how it is with the Law of Nations; If a
man be a Traitor to the same, his Blood is tainted, his Children are tainted.
You know how it was with poor Covetous Achan, that he and all his Family
suffered for it; so Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for envying Moses and Aaron,
they and their whole Posterity perished, and suffered for their Fathers sin.
Levi paid Tithes in the Loins of Abraham, and it was his mercy that he paid
homage to God in the Loins of his Fore-father.

Now to proceed to open the following words; Levi that received Tithes, paid
Tithes in Abraham; If therefore perfection were in the Levitical Priesthood,
etc. Now here we come to the particular scope of the Apostle; that Levi paid
Tithes in the Loins of Abraham: And tho the Priesthood of Levi was holy, yet
it was not so holy as Melchisedecks -- So that here are three Points to be
considered.

The First is, That the Church and People of God of old, received the Law under
a Priesthood.

Secondly, The Law that they received under the Levitical Priesthood, was not
perfect.

Thirdly, There is a necessity of the change of the Law and the Priesthood.

To the First of these, That the Church and People of God of old, that had the
Laws and Ordinances of God, they received them under a Priesthood: For the
holy God never dealt with man immediately in a way of grace since the fall, but
by some middle person, that stood between God and Man. Therefore before God
gave a Law, Melchisedeck was set up a Priest and Head, to be a Typical Mediator
between God and Man, between God and his People, of which Jesus Christ was
afterward to come in the Flesh, and show himself the real Melchisedeck, Heb.
5. 1. For every high Priest, taken from among men, was ordained for men in
things pertaining to God. Men may in things pertaining to man, go without a
Priest, but in things pertaining to God, they must have a Priesthood; for God
is a holy God: There is a vast disproportion between a holy God and sinful Man;
and considering his Greatness, his Holiness, and Righteousness; the people
receive the things of the Law under a Priesthood.

Quest. But you will say, There was no Levitical Priesthood for many hundred
years after Man's fall; for this Levitical Priesthood was not till the Children
of Israel came out of Egypt.

I Answ. Not so, for then (before the Levitical Priesthood) was every
Firstborn of the Family, the Priest of the Family, as you may see in Numb. 3.
12. And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the Children of Israel,
instead of all the Firstborn: I have taken the Levites instead of the
Firstborn, that was the Priest of the Family. This was the Law before the
Levitical Priesthood, that the firstborn of the Family was the Priest of the
Family, to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. And in allusion to this, Jesus Christ,
our great High Priest, is called the firstborn of many Brethren, Romans 8. 29.
And therefore this should teach us this duty, That as God gives his Law and
Ordinances, first typical, and then real; That we should never go to God, but
by our great High Priest: We ought always to have such a holy Reverence of the
great God, that we should never draw near to God without our great High Priest,
the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Though God did give the Levitical Law of old, to his Church; yet this Law
did not make any thing perfect. They were blessed Means and Ordinances of God,
and were of great use themselves; but they did not make the comers thereto
perfect. All the Priesthood of the Law could not effectually cleanse sin away:
No, and if he did come with his Sacrifice, yet it could not justify him,
neither could it truly sanctify him.

But you will say, If this Sacrifice did not take away sin, to what end then
served the Law?

I answer; First, to keep the Church in obedience, till the fullness of time
came, that Christ should come in the flesh: For if the Lord had not given them
his Laws and Ordinances, there would have been no distinction between the
Church of God, and the Heathen World: Yea, they would have run into all kind of
Will Worship with the Heathen-world, if they had not had his Laws and
Ordinances.

2. Though they could not make the comers to them perfect, yet they were led by
them to Jesus Christ, where their perfection was. Their Sacrifices led them to
Jesus Christ. This was the great end of all the Jewish Laws and Ceremonies, to
lead them to Jesus Christ. For Gods Elect in those days, did feed upon Jesus
Christ; as you may see in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 10. They did all eat of
the same spiritual meat; and they did all drink of the same spiritual drink:
The same that we eat, and the same that we drink. Those that had Faith in
Christ, did live under a dark dispensation; yet they did eat the same spiritual
bread that we do. So that the Law you see, was of use, though it did not make
the comers to it perfect. This is the second thing.

3. The Law being imperfect, and not making any person or things perfect;
therefore, says the Apostle, there was a necessity of the change of the Law,
of the Priesthood -- This he proves thus -- If this Levitical Law and
Priesthood could have made the Church and People of God happy, God would never
have spoken of another Priesthood after Melchisedeck; and God would never have
set up another Priest made by his Oath: And therefore there was a necessity of
another Law, and another Priesthood; a necessity of a change. And here you may
take special notice of a change of the Priesthood.

But what is to be understood by the change of the Law?

I answer; By changing of the Law, we are to understand an Abolition or
Abrogation of the Levitical Law, and all settled in a more clear manner on the
Priesthood of Jesus Christ; so that we now receive the Law by Christ, in the
room of the Ceremonial Law. And it is a blessed change for us; and it should
abundantly raise our hearts, in that now we have another Priesthood, and
another Law. Why? because the old Priesthood and the old Law, could not make
the comers to them perfect. And it was a burdensome Priesthood, and a burdensome
Law. See I pray you Acts 15. 10. you will find there, that the old Law, the
Ceremonial Law, is called a Yoke. And there were some so fond of this old Yoke,
as that they would have imposed it upon those that had received the Christian
Faith. Now, says the Apostle, Now therefore, why tempt ye God, to put a Yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to
bear? Yet they were forced to bear it, till God removed it. And in Gal. 5. 1.
Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. -- 'Twas a Yoke of Bondage -- How
a Yoke of Bondage? -- The Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, they were painful
and burdensome, chargeable and burdensome to all the people, to have all their
Male-children circumcised, which was to have their Foreskin pulled off, which
was painful. To have the first of their Flocks given to the Priests for
Sacrifices. To go three times a year to Jerusalem, to appear in the City of
Jerusalem. In a word, the Ceremonial Law was so painful and burdensome, that the
carnal people of that Church did complain of it, Mal. 1. 7, 8. Ye offer
polluted bread upon mine Altar, and the blind, and the lame, and the sick. And
in v. 13. Ye said, Behold, what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it,
says the Lord; and ye brought that which is torn, and the lame, and the sick.
Thus you see the Law was so burdensome, as they snuffed at it. -- They were
called upon for Sacrifices, and they would bring the lame, and the torn, and
the weak: They were loath to bring to best of their Flocks, when God required
it. But our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by his coming, the Priesthood and Law
is abrogated. And says Christ, My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. --
Why? for he has taken the burden upon himself. Our dear Lord Jesus, instead of
calling for the best of our flocks to be offered for Sacrifice, he offered
himself a Sacrifice for sins for ever, and he accepts of our lame and weak
performances, that are done with a humble sincere heart, relying upon his
perfect Righteousness. He has offered up himself, his blessed self, for a
Sacrifice for sin. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Yea our Lord Jesus
Christ, by the change of the Priesthood, does not impose upon us, a going three
times a year to a certain place at a great distance to worship; but he left us
to our liberty to worship him in spirit and truth in any place. As Christ said
to the woman of Samaria, in John 4. 21. The hour comes, when ye shall neither
in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. This is the sum of
Christ's Law, that you should come to him by Faith, and receive the Gospel, and
repent of your sins, and to be holy as he is holy. The Law of Christ calls for
Faith, calls for Repentance: It also gives power to believe. -- A true
Believer, he knows that he does not only command a duty, but he gives power
also to perform it in some measure to his people.

The Apostle here gives you the reasons of the change of the Priesthood, and of
the Law; and we are bound to bless the Lord for his new Law, and this his new
Priesthood; and therefore they do very ill that do mingle the Worship of God
with the Jewish Ceremonies, when the Lord Jesus Christ has abrogated them.

SERMON V.
Hebrews 7. 13, 14, 15, 16. For he of whom these things are spoken pertains
to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Altar. For it is
evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda; of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing
concerning Priesthood. And it is yet far more evident; for that after the
similitude of Melchisedeck, there arises another Priest, Who is made not after
the Law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life.
HAving undertaken, through the Lords assistance, briefly to go through this
chapter: Last day we concluded the 12th. verse of this chapter -- The change of
the Priesthood, and so of the Law.

Now in these words which I have read, we have that great point proved, namely,
That Jesus Christ and his Priesthood is of another kind, differing from the
Levitical Priesthood. And the Apostle proves it thus:

The Priesthood under the Law was of the Tribe of Levi: But Jesus Christ and
his Priesthood sprang out of the Tribe of Judah: Two different Tribes,
therefore two different Priesthoods. The Priesthood of Aaron was after the Law
of a carnal commandment; the Priesthood of Christ after the power of an endless
life. It is of great concern to all our Souls, to have a right apprehension of
the Priesthood of Jesus Christ; for therein lies our Salvation.

To begin with the 13th. verse; For he of whom these things are spoken,
pertained to another Tribe. [These things are spoken] That is, the things
spoken of before, in this chapter. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who was prefigured by
Melchisedeck, who was the Priest of the most high God, without beginning of
days, or end of life, without Descent; he of whom those great and excellent
things are spoken. This Jesus Christ he pertained to another Tribe; not to the
Tribe of Levi; what is that? A Tribe in Scripture signifies all those that
spring out of one Stock -- Jacob had twelve Sons, and the people that came of
them, were called twelve Tribes, distinguishing one from another. The Tribe of
Levi, and the Tribe of Judah, etc. Now Jesus Christ, of whom these things are
spoken, pertained to another Tribe than that of Levi.

Whence first, observe, The great condescension of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
associating himself with the Children of men. That he that is the Eternal Son
of God, was willing to be reckoned among men; amongst the Tribes of men. For
you read of him, Prove. 8. That he was with the Father from Eternity -- Yet he
rejoiced in the habitable parts of the Earth, and his delight was with the Sons
of men, in v. 31. That the Eternal Son of God should so far abase himself, to
be reckoned among the Tribes of men -- This is great condescension! But. says
the Apostle, It is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, i. e. that he
took his Humanity out of that Family, which did belong to the Tribe of Judah,
it is evident. And how is it evident, that Jesus Christ, according to flesh,
came out of the Tribe of Judah? It is evident in the Genealogy, in Matthew. 1.
There you may read that Jesus Christ, came out of the Tribe of Judah. That
chapter and other such chapters in the Scripture, may seem to be unprofitable
places of Scripture, to them that do not understand the scope of them: But such
Scriptures are as necessary as any thing in the Bible, to prove by the
Genealogy, that Jesus Christ, the second person of the sacred Trinity, did come
out of the Tribe of Judah: And for this he is called, The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, having power to defend his Church. In Genesis 49. there you have old Jacob
blessing of the Tribe of Judah, and Prophesying that Christ should come out of
that Tribe; The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his Feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall be the gathering of the
People. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah; that is, the Kingly power and
Government. That Tribe did hold it till Christ came in the Flesh, and then
Herod Reigned, who was not of the Tribe of Judah -- This was old Jacobs
Prophecy, that our Lord Jesus Christ should come out of Judah: And why so? This
makes him not only a Priest, but a Royal Prophet; and this was according to the
promise made to David; Thy House and thy Kingdom shall be established for ever
before me: Thy Throne shall be established for ever, i. e. in his Son, that is
Christ, who came of the Seed of David; so that he is a King and a Prophet, in
that he came of the Seed of David.

Come we now to the Observations, that are plain from this Verse which I have
read -- The 13. ver. says the Apostle -- For he of whom these things are
spoken, pertains to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
Altar; not one man of the Tribe of Judah did Minister at Gods Altar.

Hence we are First to observe, That according to that order which God has set
among men; no man is to intermeddle with business out of his place: For the
Tribe of Judah having no part of the Levitical Office, no man of them might
presume to give attendance at the Altar. Solomon tells us, That it is the
wisdom of the prudent to understand his way; but every fool will be meddling: It
is the wisdom of a Man to understand his way, i. e. to know what God calls him
to, and to mind his own work, and his proper business, in his calling and
place. The Apostle gives this direction to the Church of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. Study to be quiet, and to do your own business: It is a great
point of Godly wisdom to give attendance to what God calls them to, and not to
meddle with that which God has not called them to.

There are some that are reproved from this first observation.

Such as have given attendance to public Work, and to Preaching, and also to
Trading to; as if the work of the Gospel were not sufficient for one man. There
is nothing more plain in Scripture than this, that those whom God has set to
the work of the Ministry, are exempted from other Worldly Trades and Callings.
It has been an abuse in this Nation, to think that men may Trade, and Buy and
Sell, and run into all Worldly business, and yet undertake the Preaching of the
Gospel: Yea, some that are called the regular Clergy, yet give themselves too
much to Farming, Buying and Selling, and Secular Employments; this does come
short of their Calling, for mind what the Apostle says to Timothy, in 1 Timothy
4. 13. Till I come, give thy self to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine.

So that you see it is the wisdom of a man, to understand what they are Called
to. No man gave attendance to the work of the Altar, but they that were of the
Altar. And let me tell you this, God has often had a special respect to them
whom he found in their Callings, and has chosen them to more eminent Services.
You read, when Moses was keeping his Fathers Sheep, (being in his Calling) the
Lord appeared to him in the Bush: And when God set up another Prophet in the
room of Elijah, he takes another Prophet, who was in his Calling; he was
Ploughing in the Field -- So in Zechariah, when the Angel appeared to him, he
was found in his Calling: God has always delighted to own men in their
Callings, and to find them therein.

And why did not the Tribe of Judah give attendance unto the Work of the Altar?

The Apostle gives the reason in the 14. ver. because Moses spoke nothing
concerning that Priesthood. How Moses! Moses was the man by whom God revealed
his mind in the Old Testament, and there was no other Prophet for the leading
of the Church in that matter. Now Moses when he comes to reveal the mind and
will of God, concerning the Tabernacle and Priesthood, Moses said nothing of
the Tribe of Judah.

Whence observe, Secondly, That we must not meddle with any thing in the
Worship of God, without a Divine Warrant from him: we must have a Warrant for
what we do in the Worship of God. The Tribe of Judah would not meddle with any
thing in the Worship of God, because they had no Warrant from God for it.

This therefore is to be observed, That those that bring in Popish and
Superstitious Inventions; we may say of them -- Moses, nor any of the Prophets
in Scripture, speak any thing concerning these things; and therefore we look
upon the Papists, as to their Superstitions, to be of an Unscriptural Religion:
For what Apostle, or what Prophet said any thing, for the Worshipping of
Images? Or what Apostle, or what Prophet said any thing to warrant the Praying
in an unknown Tongue? What Prophet, or Apostle, or Penman of Scripture, has
said any thing concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass, for the Living and the
Dead? Oh filthy trash! What Prophet, or Apostle, or Penman of the Scripture,
has said any thing concerning Praying Souls out of Purgatory, or to have Mass
read for them? What Prophet, or Apostle, or Christ himself said any thing of
Purgatory, or Crossing themselves, or their Childish Crosses and Beads? Of
these Popish Superstitions, as it is here said, so we may say of that, God has
said nothing in all his Word, for these Superstitious things: And therefore the
people of God must never meddle with these things; and if you be tempted, or
solicited to any Ceremony, ask the Question, Have Moses, or the Prophets, or
Christ or his Apostles, said any thing to this matter that you are so Zealous
for? Oh search the Scripture, and what you find there, you are to practice, in
Faith and in the fear of God. Isaiah 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

The Third thing observable in this Text, is the Title that is given to our
Savior Jesus Christ, in the 14. ver. It is evident that our Lord sprang out of
Judah [our Lord] Why does he say our Lord? To teach us, that we must never
speak of Jesus Christ, or think of him without an awful fear and reverence; for
he is our Lord, our great Lord: He is so by reason of his Deity, and because of
the Fathers Ordination; for he has set his Son upon his holy Hill (Zion) as
King, Psalm. 2. and in Ephesians. 1. 22. the Apostle tells us, he is made the Head
over all things to his Church; surely then he is a great Lord.

And from this Lordship of Christ, we are to take up three practical Duties,
which I shall but name, and so go on.

1. If our Jesus Christ be our great Lord, our King; Then it is our Duty to
study Obedience to his Laws and Commands; not to take him only for a Savior,
but our Lord: For mind it, Earthly Lords require Honor and Obedience; and
shall we call Christ our Lord and Master, and not do the thing that he
Commands, or have no regard to his Word, or to his Commands? See I pray John
14. 21. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me.
You pretend love to Christ, show it then in keeping his Commands; and in the
23. ver. If any man love me, he will keep my word; so the 15. ver. If ye love
me keep my Commandments, and you shall abide in my love; Christ puts all upon
love. Though he be a great Lord, and might exact all service, in a way of fear
and dread, yet he will have all in Love. When you are tempted to any sin, say,
My Lord forbids me, and I must obey his Commands -- He has told us, if we love
him, we shall keep his Words.

2. If Jesus Christ be our great Lord, then we ought with confidence to rest
upon him for protection, for preservation, for he is a great Lord -- For pray
mind it -- Though Jesus Christ makes but little noise in the World, and other
Lords seem to carry a great name, yet Jesus Christ is the Lord of Lords, and
the King of Kings; and as he is the Fathers Vicegerent, he overrules all the
Kings and Kingdoms in the World; and therefore you may rest in him as the great
Lord; and as the Apostle writes to Timothy, the 1. and the 6. and 15. which in
time he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; then let us rest upon him for Protection.

3. If Jesus Christ be our Lord, then are we not only to walk according to his
Commands, but after his Example, in Meekness and Humility; see John 13. 13.
says Christ to his Disciples, Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for
so I am; If I then your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, you ought also
to wash one another. Be not proud then; but say, has my Lord and Master
condescended so to his Disciples? And shall I slight them and cast them off? I
have given you an example (says Christ;) labor then to honor Jesus Christ.

Now in the next place; Here you find that the Apostle uses one word in the
Text [mind that] it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah; and in the
15. ver. it is far more evident.

Why does the Apostle so insist upon it?

I Answer, It is to teach us Ministers that Preach the Gospel, to make things
evident to the Peoples understandings: Plain and evident to their
understanding. It is a great part of their Ministerial work, to inform their
Judgments; and therefore pray that you may have a plain Gospel-Minister, 1 Cor.
2. 5. that in every thing you are enriched by him in all utterance and in all
knowledge; men may make a great noise in Preaching, but little to Edification.

But then here is the Question, What is it that the Apostle will make evident?
That is the main Point in the Text.

Why, he makes evident, that Jesus Christ our great High Priest, was not a
Priest after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but by the power of an endless
Life. And these are the words I shall briefly open and apply:

That Jesus Christ our great High Priest, was not made a Priest after the Law
of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless Life. Here are two
things to be observed;

First, The Apostles removing the Priesthood of Christ, from the Levitical
Priesthood; that it was not made after the Law of a carnal Commandment.

Secondly, He gives a description of the true Nature of the Priesthood of
Christ; [That it is a Priesthood of power, and of an endless Life.]

First of all (says the Apostle) He was not made a Priest after the Law of a
carnal Commandment. What is that? Why it is a carnal Commandment that made all
subject to the Ceremonial Law. You will say, Was the Ceremonial Law Carnal? Did
not God Command it? how was it then Carnal? Why, it was a Command that
respected Carnal things.

[Carnal] in Scripture is taken two ways.

First, [Carnal] is taken for that which is sinful; and in this sense the Law
of Moses was not made by a Carnal Commandment.

Sometimes [Carnal] is set in opposition to Spiritual things; and so it is put
for things concerning the Body, and not for the Soul: If we have sown unto you
Spiritual things; Is it a great thing if we shall reap your Carnal things. And
in this sense the Ceremonies of the Law were called Carnal things, because they
did only reach to the Body; they were but shadows of Heavenly things, and
therefore the Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians, called them Worldly
rudiments, Col. 2. 20. Why so? Because all those Ceremonial Laws were not of an
heavenly nature, as the things of the Spirit are; but they only concerned
outward things. [Mind this] The Jews they doted much upon their Ceremonial
Rites, before Christ came, and after Christ came, they did stick much to their
carnal and worldly Ceremonies. And therefore the Apostle Paul in a holy anger,
speaks to the Galatians; O foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the Truth? to turn aside from Christ the substance, to carnal
things, to worldly things, which are but shadows. And this is to be observed,
and oh that we could observe it more! that in the corrupt nature of man, there
is a carnal disposition, that leads him out to worship God in a carnal way: And
that is the scope of the Apostle here. Look upon the Worship and Religion of
the Papists, and you will see it is but a carnal Religion: They have their
curious Images and Pictures. -- What does this avail a Soul, to have a rich
pompous Altar, a rich Garment for the Priest; to have pompous Processions, and
curious Music? What are these to the Soul? And as for us, that have the
Reformed Religion; how many amongst us delight to worship God after the Law of
a carnal Commandment? Are there not too many amongst us, which are more for old
Abrogated Ceremonies, than they are for a Gospel Worship? Bewail and lament the
Apostasy of this Generation.

These Ceremonies of the Old Testament, though they were carnal and low things in
themselves, yet they had a spiritual signification put upon them by God, and so
had a great excellency in them, whilst God was pleased to continue them. But
now that God has abolished them, Paul calls them carnal things: And so we may
call all Mediums of Worship, that are not of Gods appointment.

Now for the second, which is the description of the Priesthood of Christ: [It
is a Priesthood of power, and of an endless life.] Here are three things to be
observed.

First, Christ's Priesthood is a Priesthood of power; able to bring that to pass
it was appointed for. Pray look into Heb. 7. 18. There you will find, that
there was a disannulling of the Commandment, going before, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof, to work upon the Soul of man. But this of our Lord
Jesus Christ, is a Priesthood of power; for what he did for us, he did
perfectly. He cleanses us from our sins, and he does reconcile us to God. He
does justify us, and he does save us. Thus Christ's Priesthood is a Priesthood
of power.

2. It is not only a Priesthood of power, but of an endless life. How is that?
why, it brings all Believers into a state of life. Hence our life is said to be
hid with Christ in God: And when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall we appear with him in glory. And then,

3. It is a Priesthood of an endless life -- How is that? All men die in this
World, sooner or later -- And the Priesthood of Aaron, that is dead -- They
could not continue, by reason of death. -- But Jesus Christ [he ever liveth] he
is a Priest for ever, and abides our Intercessor -- and he has brought
everlasting life to us. Hence you have those words of his, in John 11. 26.
Whosoever believes on me, shall never die -- He shall have an endless life.
How! never die? he shall be changed, but not die in some sense. Though there is a
separation of Soul and Body, yet that is a Believers gain, and not his loss.
There is a change of a mortal life, for an immortal life: He shall lay down
this earthly Tabernacle of the Body, for a spiritual, for an endless life. And
this is useful to us, to quiet our minds, and to make us patient under all
afflictions and changes, we find or meet with. This may be comfort against
approaching death, to Believers. For if there be an endless life, we may
triumph with the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death! where is thy sting! O
grave! where is thy victory?

Thus you have heard, that our Lord Jesus Christ has a Priesthood of power,
and of an endless life.

SERMON VI.
Hebrews 7. 17, 18, 19. For he Testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck. For there is verily a disannulling of the Commandment
going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. For the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; by the which we draw
nigh unto God.
THE last time I spoke to you from this chapter, I concluded with v. 16. where
it is said, that Jesus Christ is made a Priest after the power of an endless
life. These were the last words spoken to.

Now the Apostle, to prove this, he goes on to demonstrate it in these three
verses which I have read unto you, and to be opened this morning, as God shall
assist.

Christ Jesus was made a Priest after the power of an endless life; our Apostle
proves it,

First, In v. 17. in these words (for he testified) Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck. Is made a Priest after the power of an endless
life -- But Jesus Christ is made a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck.

And to prove this still more evidently, he tells us in v. 18. That there is a
disannulling of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof. God disannulled the Commandment going before: He
disannulled the old Priesthood, to set up the Priesthood of Jesus Christ for
ever: And the reason why God disannulled the Commandment going before, is given
in the latter end of verse 18. Because of the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof.

And this he further amplifies in verse 19. For (says he) the Law made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did -- These particulars to be
opened in the three verses.

To begin with verse 17. For he testifies thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck [he testified] why, who testified? why, David testified;
or the Spirit of God by David testified. In Psalm. 110. 4. there is the
testimony. The Lord he swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedeck. Mind it; when David testified this, the
Levitical Priesthood was then in its greatest glory: For David lived in a time
when the service of God was performed according to the order of Aaron, and the
Levitical Priesthood; yet David testified of another Priesthood. David was in
his day a Prophet in the Church of God, and a great Prophet; and he was
inspired by the Holy Ghost, to testify this, many hundred years before it
came, to be fully accomplished: To testify that Jesus Christ was the
everlasting High Priest according to the order of Melchisedeck.

I shall not stand much upon this verse, at this time, because you have the
same thing repeated again in verse 21. of this chapter: There it is brought in
as a repetition of the Oath of God; The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck. Here you have it twice
together; I shall therefore leave the more full handling of this till I come to
the 21th. verse.

In the words of v. 17. you may observe the Apostles scope in them, why he
mentions it here in v. 17.

His scope is this; to show the excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, above
that of Aaron, in two respects.

First, That Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.
The Apostle would have us to understand, that Christ is not made Priest by the
Law of a carnal Commandment (which I spoke of in the verse before.) The
Levitical Priesthood was made by the Law of a carnal Commandment. I opened that
the last day. There was nothing in the service of that Priesthood, but was
merely outward and bodily: But Jesus Christ being a Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck, he is not a Priest after the Law of a carnal Commandment, an
outward and bodily Worship; but the Worship of Christ is a spiritual Worship.
And this is the first branch of the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, above
that of Levi.

2. The Apostles scope also, is, to prove that Christ is a Priest for ever
after the order of an endless life; because he is a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck. So that now we do not depend upon a dying Priesthood; or
upon such Ordinances and Ceremonies, that are to be abolished, before the time
of the consummation of all Worship in this World. But we are to worship God
under such an High Priest as abides for ever: And we come to one, who is able
to save to the uttermost, all those that come unto God by him.

He testified, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.]
From whence we may learn this Lesson from the words; That we must always keep
close to Scripture-testimony, to take up that which is the matter of our Faith.
We must take it up on Scripture-testimony, and not by the will of man. And so I
come to the 18th. verse.

For there is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before. [A
Disannulling.] And then he shows the reason of it, and that is, for the
weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

First, (says he) Verily there is a Command going before: What Command was
that? why, the Command of the Levitical-way of Worship, which did go before
Christ's coming in the flesh. That is the meaning. For the Law, as to the
Administration of it, it was before the Gospel; it was before Christ came to be
our spiritual High Priest and Sacrifice, though he was promised before, yet it
was before Christ came in the flesh, and all those things were but types and
shadows of heavenly things, of things which were to come. As the shadow
sometimes goes before the body; so did the Law come before Christ -- The
Levitical Priesthood goes before the Evangelical Priesthood of Jesus Christ.
But (says the Apostle) there is a disannulling of the Command going before;
[disannulling] what is that? why, it is an abrogating and making void, so as no
man is bound to this Command, to that kind of Worship that was under the Law.
He is not bound to offer those Sacrifices; the command of those Sacrifices is
disannulled: He is not bound to observe those Rites, those manifold Ceremonies,
for the command is disannulled and made void, by the coming of Jesus Christ in
the flesh. Pray attend to those things, for it may be of use to them that are
studious to know the mind of God in the Scripture.

The Apostle gives the reason why there is a disannulling of the Command, and
Law of the old way of Worship. What Reason? Why (says he) Because of the
weakness and unprofitableness of it. The weakness and unprofitableness of all
the Levitical Priesthood and Service, is the reason why God removed it.
Weakness and unprofitableness, that is, if a Man did spend all his days in that
kind of Worship and Service, without looking beyond it, it profited nothing; it
was not able to effect the great things the Soul stood in need of, and
therefore in Gal. 4. 9. the Apostle calls them, weak and beggarly Elements; you
see what he calls those things, that were once the Ordinances of God: But he so
calls them in respect of Gospel dispensations [so here they are weak and
unprofitable.]

There are several things in Scripture that are said not to profit us.

As First, the knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, see John 6. 13. It is the
Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing; he spoke it in reference
to his Doctrine. The Flesh] that is, the Fleshly knowledge of Christ. As those
people (the Papists) who count themselves the only wise people; it profits
nothing to know Christ after the Flesh, tho if they were certain they could lie
in the manger where Christ lay, and Kiss the Cross, and go to the Sepulcher of
Christ, it is only filthy knowledge, and profits nothing.

So again, the Scripture tells us that Bodily Exercise profits little, 1 Timothy
4. 8. For Bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable unto
all things having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come. Bodily Exercise profits nothing: Some have no other Religion but what
lies in Bodily Exercise.

Thirdly, The Scripture tells us, that meats profit nothing, see Heb. 13. 9. It
is a good thing to have the Heart established with Grace, and not with Meats,
which have not profited them, that have been occupied therein. The Jews of old
made a great distinction about Meats; so the Papists now, hold it a great sin
to eat Meat in Lent, and to eat Flesh on Wednesdays and Fridays; but (says the
Apostle) this profits nothing: This distinction of Meats profits nothing to
the Soul. Now (says the Apostle here in the Text) the Commandment is
disannulled, for the weakness and unprofitableness of it. How is that? Why, if
Men went no further in the Law, than bringing a Lamb or a Bullock for a
Sacrifice, go up to Jerusalem to Worship, and be very strict in observing all
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law of Moses; these things profited nothing.
The Lord disannuled the Commandment concerning all the Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies, for the weakness and unprofitableness in them.

But then you will say, Why did God appoint them, seeing they were weak and
unprofitable?

I Answer, Though they were weak and unprofitable (as to reach the main end of
Man's Salvation) yet God had other holy ends in appointing of them.

First of all, to keep his Children and People under obedience, until the
fullness of time did come, that Christ was to be manifested in the Flesh; for
this is to be observed, that all Mankind are addicted to Worship a Deity, some
God or other, or something that they made their God. All the Heathen
Worshippers are for Worshipping some God or other; and if God had left this
people without Divine Rites and Ceremonies, they would have run into the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Idolatrous Heathens, which were worse. God did by his
Children in the time of the Law, as Parents do with their Children; they set
them about things that are little worth, or of little effect, to keep them from
doing worse; So God left his People the Divine Rites and Ceremonies, to keep
them from running into Heathenish Idolatry.

Secondly, God had still a further end, and that is, Tho they were not perfect
of themselves, yet by this they were directed to look unto Jesus Christ, and
his Priesthood, and his Sacrifice; and tho they were no more perfected by them,
than the body is by the shadow, yet the shadow shows that there is a Body; so
those things were weak and unprofitable in themselves, but they led to Christ
the substance; so they were of holy use to all the Faithful and Elect of God.

But to come to the application of this Point, and so to pass on:

If this be so that all the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, were weak and
imperfect, and God for that reason abolished them, because they could not reach
the main end of Man's happiness: Then here you may see the folly of those Men,
that set up these Rites and Ceremonies and humane Inventions, in part of their
Worship. If Gods own Institutions were weak and unprofitable, what are Men's
Inventions? Are their Priestly Vestments profitable? Their Crossings and
Cringings profitable? What profit is there in bowing the Knee at the word
Jesus? What profit is there in these things? And yet many Men Glory in these
things, and magnify them above the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Some say these things are Edifying: I remember a dispute between a Martyr and
a Popish Priest; the Martyr objected that he could not comply with that kind of
Worship, because of their many Ceremonies; said the Priest, it is true those
Ceremonies are not necessary to Salvation, but they may be used to Edification;
the Martyr replied again, Give me the Salvation, and give me the Edification;
to be sure there is an unprofitableness in all these things.

But some will say, these are Ornaments of the Church of God. To that I Answer,
So is a painted Glass an Ornament to the House, yet it shuts out the Light more
than a plain Glass; the Light does not shine out so clear through a painted
Glass: These painted and carnal Ceremonies do shut out the Light of the Gospel;
for the Light of the Gospel shines out more pure and clear, in the plain
Administration of the Gospel; and therefore all those things that carnal Men so
magnify are unprofitable.

Now I proceed to the 19. ver. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw nigh to God. This is still
to demonstrate the point in hand [The weakness and unprofitableness of the
Law:] The Law made nothing perfect, i. e the Levitical and Ceremonial Law could
not Cleanse the Conscience, neither Justified the Person; it never could reach
the main end, which is the happiness of Men. But God brings in another thing, a
higher thing (for that see Heb. 10. 1.) For the Law having a shadow of things
to come, and not the very Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices,
which they offered Year by Year continually, make the comers thereto perfect.
They could never make the comers to them perfect; and still they had dark
apprehensions of God. It Is true, the Elect could see Christ, but they that went
no further than these Ceremonies and Levitical Worship, tho they were very
strict in them, yet these were very short in cleansing them from sin. [It made
not the comers to them perfect.] When the People of God of old had offered a
Sacrifice, and performed all their Sacrifice according to the Law, yet they
were to look to a higher Priesthood, and a higher Sacrifice, for the cleansing
of their sins, Heb. 9. 9. Which was a figure for the time then present; in
which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did
the service Perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience: It could not cleanse him
from the guilt of sin which lay upon his Conscience. This is done by the
bringing in of a better hope, by the which we draw nigh to God. These are the
Words which I shall spend the remaining part of my time in.

But the bringing in of a better hope, by the which we draw nigh to God.] Here
the Question is, What is meant by this hope?

1. For the word hope; here it is to be taken for the thing hoped for; [That is
the hope here] the coming of the Messiah, the Salvation by Christ, the
Priesthood of Christ, and the blessings that attend it. And this is called hope
in a twofold respect.

1. In respect of the time, when David did testify this of Christ's coming: So
it was a blessing to come, and a thing to be hoped for, by the Fathers of old.
For this is to be observed, that all the time the Church lived under the
Levitical Priesthood, they lived in the hopes of the coming of Christ, and of
the Messiah; which was the great thing hoped for, and looked for. And
therefore, when Jesus Christ was born, and the Angels came to give intimation
of his Birth; see how Zechariah) who was one of the Levitical Priesthood)
expresses himself in his Song, Luke 1. 72, 73. To perform the mercy promised to
our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear to our
Father Abraham. This was the great promise, [The coming of Jesus Christ the
Messiah] that should do what the Law could not do. The Law made nothing
perfect; but Jesus Christ the Messiah made all things perfect. This was the
hope the Father had; therefore if you look into Luke 2. you shall find, that
good and just man old Simeon, who waited for the consolation of Israel [which
was the Lord Jesus Christ.] At ver. 29. Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Oh this was a joyful
thing to him! When he came into the Temple, he took the Child in his arms, and
said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation. This was the hope of them of old.

2. Christ in his Priesthood, Death and Suffering, is styled [our hope also.
For (says the Apostle) we are saved by hope; and where is our hope, but in the
Death and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ? [all our hope is in him.]

But then he is styled here [a better hope:] How is it a better hope? In two
respects, than all the Jewish Sacrifices, and Levitical Priesthood could give:
for that Priesthood gave hope only of temporal blessings clearly, but very
darkly of spiritual blessings. We can scarcely read one word of the Kingdom of
Heaven, under the Mosaical dispensation. See I pray Lev. 26. 2. and so on. Ye
shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary; I am the Lord -- If ye walk
in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them; then will I give you
Rain in due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the Trees of the
field shall yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the Vintage,
and the Vintage shall reach unto the sowing-time, and ye shall eat your bread
to the full, and dwell in your Land safely. These are all promises and
blessings, and encouragements to serve God, according to the command of God.
But not a word of Heaven here -- This was the tenor of the first Covenant;
they had hopes of Legal Privileges, and Temporal Blessings. These are the
great things the Law of Moses runs upon: But now we have a better hope, Jesus
Christ our High Priest -- If any man will follow me, he shall have the light of
life -- The New Testament runs all upon heavenly things. But,

2. Better hope] in respect of the manner of revealing of it: For this must not
be denied, but that all the true Saints and Believers, under the Old Testament,
had their [hope] of Heaven, as we have, but very poorly and darkly: They had
their hopes of Grace, and heavenly things; and therefore it is said of Abraham,
(in Heb. 11. 10.) He looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God. They had all these things in sight, but darkly. And while
Moses was read amongst them, they had a Veil upon their face: But we with open
face behold the glory of God, and are changed into the same Image, from glory
to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

But then the next is [By which we draw nigh to God.] The bringing in of a
better hope, by which we draw nigh to God How is that? You must know, that God
and sinful man are at a great distance, though near in respect of his
Omnisciency. You know how it is among men, though they live in the same Town, or
near to one another, in respect of Neighborhood; yet, if there be enmity and
strife between them, you will say, they are at a distance: So God, in respect
of his Omnisciency, is not far from any of us: For it is through him we live,
move and breathe, and have our being. But in respect of Love, Peace and Union,
God and sinful man is at a great distance. It Is said, God is angry with the
wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. He is an offended God -- He is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity. He is at a distance from us: and if men were but
sensible of this, they would never presume upon his mercy, in a day of
affliction, Isa. 1. 15. And when you shall spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. When
people come into affliction and distress, they are ready to cry unto God for
mercy. But (says the Lord) I will hide mine eyes from you. There is a vast and
infinite distance between God and a poor sinful creature: But by the Priesthood
of Jesus Christ, he offering himself as a Sacrifice for sin, and ever lives to
make intercession for us. And by virtue of this, every Believer may come to
God, by the Lord Jesus Christ, as Mediator, to pray to him. It is not
believing, or repentance will bring us to God, if we had not an High Priest.
See Heb. 10. 19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness, to enter into the
Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us, through the Veil, that is to say, his flesh. Boldness, to
enter into the Holy of Holies. If you go into the Presence Chamber of a King,
with your Petition; if you know the King has respect and favor for you; and
the Son at his right hand to pacify his Father, and you come in the way
appointed, with a full assurance to have your Petition granted: So (says the
Apostle) you may have full assurance to go to God, in the new and living way:
And therefore say, Lord, I draw night to thee; but it is by the new and living
way, that Jesus Christ has consecrated, by his blood: I draw nigh for mercy,
but it is because thy Son is the great High Priest, whom thou have set over
thine own house. Let us therefore (says the Apostle) come in full assurance of
Faith.

Happily some poor doubting Soul may say, How can I draw nigh to God, to a-holy
God; I that have so much sin and guilt upon me? were I holy and innocent, I
should go with more boldness.

To that, I answer; If thou wast holy and innocent, thou should not need an
High Priest: If thou had no sin nor guilt upon thee, thou should not need
to go to God in the new and living way. But though we have sin and much guilt
upon us, yet the Lord Jesus Christ, he is our High Priest. It was sin that was
the occasion of making the Lord Jesus Christ the great High Priest. Oh bless
God for Jesus Christ! and for bringing so great a good, and so great an evil so
near together! No greater evil than sinning against a holy God! But this
occasioned God to consecrate his Son by an Oath, to be a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedeck.

There are but two ways by which a creature can draw nigh to God, a holy God;
and that is, either in the way of his own worthiness, or goodness, or in the
way of Christ's worthiness and goodness: But for our own goodness, or
worthiness, that is lost: Go to God in that way, our sins will block up our
way, that way is stopped: But go to God in the way of his Sons worthiness, and
you will have acceptance with him. Come to God, and say, Lord, In the name and
worthiness of thine own Son, I draw nigh to thee: How draw nigh to God? why,
the Scripture makes this difference, between drawing nigh to God, under the old
Priesthood, and under the Priesthood of Jesus Christ. In the time of the old
Priesthood, there were none of the people to go into the most holy place; the
High Priest was only to go, and that but once a year, Lev. 16. 2. Aaron was
commanded not to go into the holy place at all times. Now compare this with
Heb. 9. 7. there he speaks that the High Priest was to go into the holy place
but once a year. Now (says the Apostle) we have boldness to enter into the
holy place. Let us come into the holy place -- Our Lord Jesus Christ, having
made us Kings and Priests, we may come nigh to God -- Christ has brought us so
nigh to God, as we may come to him, as a Child comes to its Father. The Lord
has provided better things for us, that we might be made perfect: Therefore
let us mind these things.

You see here the sum of these words: How God has disannulled and abrogated
all the Levitical Service, and Worship, and Rites, for their weakness and
unprofitableness: That he might bring in a better hope, by the which we draw
nigh to God.

SERMON VII.
Hebrews 7. 20, 21, 22. And in as much as not without an Oath he was made
Priest. (For those Priests were made without an Oath; but this with an Oath, by
him that said unto him, The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.) By so much was Jesus Christ made a
Surely of a better Testament.
THE last day I concluded with v. 19. of this chapter, where the Apostle tells
us, that by Jesus Christ, there was brought in a better hope, by which we draw
nigh to God. And that was his argument in that place, to prove the excellency
of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ above that of the old.

Now in these words which I have read, you have another argument and
demonstration about the Priesthood of Christ; to show that it does far
transcend that of the Levitical Priesthood. Why? for the Levitical Priesthood
was made without an Oath, this with an Oath: So the Argument man be thus framed:

That Priesthood which is solemnly confirmed and established by an Oath, is
more excellent, and precious, and profitable to the Church, than that which was
made without an Oath: But the Priesthood of Jesus Christ was confirmed with an
Oath, and therefore more excellent than that which was without an Oath.

So that the Argument is taken from the more solemn Institution of Christ's
Priesthood. [The Lord did swear, and would not repent, that his Son Jesus
Christ, should be a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck.] This is
the point, the Apostle now insists upon the solemn Institution of Jesus Christ,
in this office [of Priesthood] by which he is made a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck.

Now here are two Questions to be opened.

The first is about Gods Oath [The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck.] These words are taken out of
Psalm. 110. 4. Now for an Oath, we must consider there are two sorts of Oaths;
vain and profane Oaths, and sacred Oaths. As for vain and profane Oaths,
which men use in their common talk, are especially forbidden in the third
Commandment: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. To swear lightly
and vainly, by the name of God, or by their Faith and Troth, these are great
provocations to the Lord. As you may see in Jer. 23. 10. For the Land is full
of Adulterers, for because of swearing the Land mourns: the pleasant places
of the wilderness are dried up. Profane swearing, and false swearing (which is
a common thing among your bad people) causes the Land to mourn.

But then, as there is a profane, and vain, and common swearing, (which brings
a Curse along with it) so there is a sacred swearing; and that is, when men are
lawfully called thereto, to confirm a testimony. An Oath for confirmation, is
the end of all strife, (says the Apostle.) Now this holy and sacred swearing,
is here attributed to God the Father concerning the Priesthood of his Son Jesus
Christ. And you may observe in Scripture, that God is said to swear two ways.

1. Sometimes he swears in his wrath, to confirm his threatenings; and often in
his mercy, to confirm his promise.

1. Sometimes God is said to swear in his wrath, to confirm his threatenings. As
you may see, Heb. 3. 11. In v. 10. (says he) I was grieved with that
generation, they do always err in their hearts: So I swear in my wrath, they
shall not enter into my rest. [Mind it.] The people were now in the wilderness,
and they were going into the Land of Canaan, the Land of Rest, the Land of
Promise; but they grew so bad, and so provoking to God, whilst they lived upon
his mercy, in the wilderness, that at last God swear, they should not enter
into his Rest, the Land of Canaan. God confirmed by an Oath: why by an Oath? to
drive them to the more terror, to take them off from their presumption. God
threatened they should not enter into his Rest; and he confirms it by an Oath;
that they may have no hopes of entering into his Rest. But,

2. Often in Scripture, God is said to swear in mercy, for the confirming of
his promise, that his people might have stronger consolation. Not, but that
Gods promise of it self is sure: But he condescends to our weakness, that we
might have stronger consolation. See Heb. 6. 17, 18. Wherein God more
abundantly, to show unto the Heirs of Promise, the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath; That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation. You see here, the
Apostle declares the end of Gods adding an Oath to his Promise: That Believers
might have more comfort, that their hearts might be strengthened; and their
patience might be strengthened, till the promise was accomplished. He swear by
himself; because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself. Mind that:
When men swear to confirm a thing, they swear by the Great God, who knows their
ways and thoughts: And so they are said to swear by a greater. But, because God
could not swear by a greater (says the Apostle) he swear by himself. For this
was one of the titles of God, [the Great God.] When the poor Heathens, that had
not the Scriptures, they by the light of Nature swear by God, who made Heaven
and Earth. Under the title of [Optimus Maximus] that was the term they gave the
great God, the best of the great Gods. Now because God could not swear by a
greater, he swear by himself, that he would bless Abraham, and all the
faithful. And here in the Text, when he is setting up his Son (the Lord Jesus
Christ) as our great High Priest (that we might have greater consolation) it is
said, The Lord swear, and will not repent. We know God cannot repent; both
words are true; for the Lord is not as man, that he should repent.

Why does David, and the Apostle after him, take up these words? [The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent.]

I answer, there is a special Emphasis in it.

First of all; God speaks thus of himself, after the manner of men, that we
might be put out of all doubt of his truth and faithfulness. For, though he is
most unchangeable in his words, in his promises, and in his purposes, as the
Apostle James has it, James 1. 17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift,
comes down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning. God is immutable. But he speaks thus after the manner of
men, that we might be put out of all doubt, that he will not repent.

Secondly; There is still a higher intendment of the Holy Ghost, in these words
[The Lord has sworn, and he will not repent,] i. e. He will never abrogate, or
disannul the Priestly Office of Christ, as he did that of Aaron. For (so you
read in the words before which were spoken to the last day.) God did abrogate,
and did make void the Covenant concerning the Levitical Priesthood. But now he
will never revoke this, or disannul this. [He has sworn, and will never
repent.] Though God be unchangeable, yet we find in Scripture, that he
sometimes revokes his threatenings, and calls them back again. As for example,
God threatened (by Jonah) that Nineveh should be destroyed in forty days: But
God revoked it, because there was a tacit condition in the threatening;
therefore he revoked it. So when God sent Hezekiah the Message concerning his
death; he sent his Prophet to him, to bid him set his house in order: For
(says he, in the name of the Lord) thou shall die, and not live: Yet upon
Hezekiahs humbling himself by prayer, the Lord called back that word again, and
added to Hezekiahs life fifteen years. In this sense the Prophet Joel is to be
understood. You find in chap. 2. in the last part of it, that the Lord
threatens dreadful Judgments to the people. Now in verse 12, 13. (says the
Prophet) Wherefore also, now, thus says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all
your hearts, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent
your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him
of the evil -- Who knows if he will repent and return, and leave a blessing
behind. As if he should say, The threatening is gone forth for your destruction,
but if ye will return unto God, who knows but that he will repent, and leave a
blessing behind: That is, he may call in his Threatenings, and alter his
Dispensation. So that when God is said to revoke a Threatening, or disannul a
Law, he is then said [after the manner of men] to repent.

But concerning the Priesthood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is so settled,
not only by Promise but by Oath, to take us off from all doubting, and
hesitation about this matter [the Lord has Sworn and will not Repent]
concerning his Son Jesus Christ; but he has solemnly Justified him to be a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck; which Law cannot be Abrogated.

Now here the Question is, Upon what account is it, that the Priesthood of
Jesus Christ, (by which we draw nigh to God) has such a solemn Justification
above the Levitical Presthood? Why Jesus Christ is made a Priest with an Oath,
when other Priests are made without an Oath?

There are many Grounds and Reasons of that, which may be a great help to our
Faith.

First of all, God has a greater honor for his Son, that for all the Children
of Men. He is nearer to the Father, and dearer to the Father, and therefore
whatever he bestows upon his Son, shall never be taken away from him. God set
up the posterity of the Tribe of Levi for the Priesthood; but he only set them
up as Servants for a time, for (says our Lord) a Servant abides not in the
House for ever, but a Son abides for ever. Levi and his posterity, they were
but Servants, and God turns them out, but he sets up his Son for ever: The
Father Loves the Son, and gives all things to him; he honors his Son, he
will have all his holy Angels to bow down to his Son, in Heb. 1. 3, 5. the
Apostle speaking of Christ's purging us from sin, says he in the 5 ver. To
which of the Angels said he, at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? and again, Let all the Angels Worship him. The Angels of God are
much better than Men, in respect of the excellency of their being. One Angel
has more strength than thousands of Men; but they must all Worship the Son,
and he that is set down at the right hand of God the Father, the Father has
given his Oath he shall never be removed, but abide for ever.

Secondly, The Priesthood of Jesus Christ has this solemn Institution, to be
confirmed by a Divine Oath; Because he is alsufficient to go through that great
work. God raised up the Priesthood of Old to do Service, but not such Service
as our great High Priest. He never said unto the People, believe in the High
Priest; but he said, believe in my Son Jesus; believe in him, because he is
able to save. The other High Priests were not able to Save; the High Priests of
old could never give their lives for a Sacrifice for the Peoples lives; they
were only to offer up Bulls, and Goats, and Heifers, and such kind of
Offerings; but our great High Priest, he is appointed of the Father to give
himself a Sacrifice for his people, and therefore has a higher Priesthood than
the Levitical Priesthood, John 10. 17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life, that I might take it again; no man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again: This Commandment have I received of my Father. God never put
so hard a service upon those High Priests of old, but he put this upon his own
Son, and his Son was willing to bear his Command: I am willing to receive this
Command from my Father. God has sworn, and he will not repent, that his Son
should be a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck; because that none
were ever able to carry on that work but he.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is thus solemnly justified, and made a Priest by Oath,
in the Church of God, because the Church is his own Body and his own People.
The Priesthood of old, God set them up for his Service, and he will reward them
for it; for they had the Tenths of the People (which was then great) but still
the Church was not their People, nor their Body, but Jesus Christ, he is as a
Son over his own House, Heb. 3. 6. Christ is as a Son over his own House. It is
a great blessing to have such a High Priest, as has an interest in the whole
People, to whom he is a Savior; for he is the head of that People, and a
Savior of the Body. If the Lord Jesus Christ his Priesthood were disannulled,
the Church would be lost, they could not be brought to Salvation [Thine they
were, and thou gave them me.] The Church is given to Christ, to be his
Mystical Body, and he is their Priest for ever, to sanctify and cleanse it,
that he may present it to himself a Glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle:
But then,

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is made a Priest by Oath for ever, because unto him
shall be the gathering in of all Gods Elect, of all nations in the World, and
they are all to come to his Priesthood; it is of a large extent. When the
Levitical Priesthood was confined to the Jews only, they could not offer a
Sacrifice for the Heathens, or another People; but Jesus Christ he is an
Offering for all People in all Nations, of those that Believe in his Name: And
this is according to Jacobs Prophecy (in Genesis 49. 10.) That when Shilo shall
come, unto him shall be the gathering of the People; compare this with Isa. 49.
and there you will see the thing further illustrated, in the 6 ver. And he
said, It is a light thing, that thou should be my Servant, to raise up the
Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the ends of
the Earth. Observe it, the Father said unto the Son, It is but a light thing
for thee, to be a Priest only for Jacob and Israel; I will give thee for a
light to the Gentiles. It was but a light thing for Christ to be a Savior to
Israel, in the Land of Judea. But Jesus Christ shall be a Savior to all the
Earth; [I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles.]

Fifthly, He is made a Priest for ever, and confirmed therein by an Oath,
Because of his transcendent Wisdom, Mercifulness, Faithfulness, and Holiness,
above all the Priests of old. He is a High Priest to appear for Man in things
appertaining to God, and had need of Wisdom; And (says the Apostle) in him are
hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. And for mercy, it was a
necessary qualification in the High Priests of old, that he might be a Man of
compassion and pity, to succor the poor, and tempted, and afflicted in the
Church. And our Lord Jesus Christ, he is transcendently Merciful. He will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; he will have compassion on
all: He is called a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation; [He is merciful and faithful:] Pray observe, that
the High Priests under the Law, tho they were good men, and godly men, yet they
fell short much in point of faithfulness to God and his People; as for Example,
Aaron was a good Man, yet he was not faithful in his Office, for you know he
turned aside with the People, and made a Golden Calf; here Aaron showed his
wickedness and unfaithfulness: So old Eli, he was a Godly man, yet he failed of
his faithfulness; he suffered his Children to make themselves vile, and
restrained them not, and so brought Judgment upon his House; and therefore,
says the Apostle, the Law made Priests of men, that had infirmities. Aaron was
a man that had infirmities, and his Sons had infirmities, that they were
destroyed by Fire before the Lord. Eli had his infirmity; but our Lord Jesus
Christ, he is without infirmity, he is holy and harmless, and therefore he had
his Priesthood put upon him. [The Lord has sworn, and will never repent, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.] But to proceed to the
next verse.

Christ being thus solemnly Instituted in his office, never to be changed
(says the Apostle in the next words) By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a
better Covenant: By so much that he was made a Priest by the Oath of God, by so
much he was made a Priest of a better Covenant, of a better Testament. Now for
that we must consider, what the Office of a Surety is; and then, why Christ is
said to be Surety of a better Covenant; as he is the Priest of God, and
confirmed by his Oath.

First, For the Surety, you know he is a person that engages himself for
another, Prove. 6. 1. My Son, if thou be Surety for a Friend, if thou have
stricken hands with a stranger, etc. How is that? It may be a stranger, he
comes and challenges a debt of your Friend, and your Friend he carries it very
friendly with you, to have you engage with the stranger for his debt, and
strike hands with him, and to become Surety for your Friend. In this sense
Christ is called our Surety; because it is the Office of the Priest to stand
between God and Man, and to offer up satisfaction, by way of Sacrifice, either
typical, or real. Thus our Lord Jesus Christ, in this respect, is called our
Surety: Why? because he undertakes for us to God, and for God to us again: He
undertakes to satisfy the will of God: And what is the will of God? Why, the
will of God is to fulfill all Righteousness; that is the will of God. Jesus
Christ, as our Surety, has fulfilled all Righteousness, Romans 5. 19. For as by
one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous. So 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made himself to be sin for
us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him.
And thus, as our Surety, he has fulfilled all Righteousness for us. And then
as the Surety of the Covenant; so he does confirm all the Promises of God, in
the Covenant to us: He engages for the Promises. Hence you have that, in 2 Cor.
1. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. So that we
look to our Surety, to fulfill all things for us: And we look to our Surety,
that we have the Covenant and Promises made good to us. [For all the Promises
are in him Yea, and in him Amen.] But, says the Apostle, he is made a Surety
of a better Covenant, or a better Testament. For the word is rendered both ways:
Sometimes a Covenant, sometimes a Testament. But how is Christ Surety of a
better Covenant? I answer, not better in respect of the matter of it, or the
substance of it. For God in that Covenant, did make himself over to his people,
to be their God. And all Believers were saved by Faith, as we are. It was not
better in respect of the matter of it: But better in a threefold respect.

1. Better in respect of a clearer and fuller manifestation to God, in the
Covenant. The Covenant before us, was under a Veil; therefore (says the
Apostle) Ephesians. 3. 4, 5. Whereby when ye read, ye may understand the knowledge of
the Mystery of Christ, which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of
men, as it is now revealed.

2. Better in respect of the confirmation of it, Heb. 9. 15, 16. For this cause
(speaking of Christ) he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
death, for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of Eternal
Inheritance. So that now the Covenant is confirmed by the death of Christ,
which is a better confirmation than that of the old Law, with the Sacrifices of
Beasts.

3. A better Covenant, in respect of the fullness of the Spirit that goes along
with the Gospel; and so is made a Surety of a better Covenant than the
Levitical Priesthood.

To come to some Application: If this be so, that our Lord Jesus Christ is made
Surety of a better Testament; then stand here and see the great and endless
love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. The greatness of his Love. For, you know, that it is a good evidence of a
man's love and kindness, when he will be a Surety for one that he thinks can pay
the debt. But if a man will be Surety for one that is in debt, and knows that
he must pay the debt, if he be Surety; this is still greater love. But yet
farther; if a man will be Surety for a man, that is condemned to die, and
engage his life for him; this is love beyond all love. This is the case of our
Lord Jesus Christ; to take Man's Nature, suffer himself to be under the Curse,
and suffer himself to be put to death. Oh the great Mercy, and unspeakable Love
and Grace of Christ! Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down
his life for his friend.

But then secondly; Here you may see his endless love, because he undertakes to
be our Surety for ever. You have many a man, in a sit of love or kindness, will
be drawn in to be a Surety; but will repent of it, and will get out of it, as
soon as he can; and will never come into it again. But our Lord Jesus Christ,
he engages to be an Everlasting Surety for us; what then remains, but that
every one that understands these things, should look to Jesus Christ? Here is a
special prop for our Faith: As you have it in the verse before. Christ brings
in a better hope than was before -- He is a Surety of a better Covenant:
Therefore when fears arise in you, about your sin, remember, that you have a
High Priest, who has undertaken to fulfill all Righteousness for us, and
undertakes as a Surety for us.

SERMON VIII.
Hebrews 7. 23, 24. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not
suffered to continue, by reason of death. But this man, because he continues
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.
BEing in our course of going through this Chapter; the last day, in the
Morning Exercise, we concluded with v. 22. where Jesus is said to be made a
Surety of a better Covenant.

The scope of the Apostle in all this Chapter, is to magnify the Priesthood of
Christ, above the Levitical Priesthood. His Argument that we insisted upon the
last day, was taken from his solemn Institution, in his Office. [He was made a
Priest with an Oath, and by virtue of that he became a Surety of a better
Testament. These things have been opened.

Now these two verses which I have read, for our consideration and instruction,
this morning, contain another Argument that the Apostle uses, to prove that
the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, does far excel all the Priesthoods under the
Law. And the Argument is drawn from the mortality of the Levitical Priests, and
the immortality of Jesus Christ the Son of God: That Priesthood that was
mortal, was never so excellent, as that which was immortal. The Priests of Levi
were mortal, but the Priesthood of Jesus Christ is immortal, and unchangeable;
and therefore a more excellent Priesthood.

We begin with v. 23. For they truly were many Priests, because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death. [They truly were many Priests.] These
words are two ways to be expounded. First, They were many together: And then
they were many successively.

1. They were many together: For though there was but one High Priest to the
Jewish Church, yet there were many Priests to offer Sacrifices under him: For
he was not able; one man was not able to offer Sacrifices for all; therefore
there were many Priests. But Jesus our High Priest, had the assistance of no
creature, he is alone. There is but one God, and one Mediator, the Man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus [no other.] And this is brought in ordinarily, to confute
that Error of the Papists, who offer up Expiatory Sacrifices. They have their
Priestly Office, to offer up Expiatory Sacrifices, for the living and the dead.
And (as our Protestant Divines say) If they had no other Error, it would
justify our separation from them, because they derogate from the Office of
Jesus Christ, and set up a Priestly Office in Gospel-days, to offer an
Expiatory Sacrifice. But we have but one High Priest, and one Savior, which is
sufficient for the Salvation of our Souls. But then,

This word, [many Priests] is also to be expounded many successively: That is,
there were many Priests (says the Apostle) because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of death. There were many Priests under the Law, but they
could not continue by reason of death; therefore their Office passed from one
to another: One takes up the Priestly Office, and then dies, and then another
succeeds him. But Jesus Christ, he has an Office that does not pass from one
to another: There is none can succeed our Lord Jesus Christ in his Priestly
Office: There is none can finish that work which he begun.

But the two general points that lie before us in this Text, to be considered
of this morning, are,

1. The Mortality of the Levitical Priesthood, which concerns us all. And then,

2. The Immortality of our High Priest, the Son of God: He is our Priest for
ever.

1. The Mortality of the Priests of old; (says the Apostle in the Text) They
were not suffered to continue by reason of death. [That word death] concerns
all Mankind. How many of the Children of Adam, Sons and Daughters of Adam,
since the beginning of the World? They are all dead. But this present
Generation, and a little time will bury all of us. That Doom which God
denounced against Adam, in Genesis 3. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the death; that reaches all that come out of the Loins of Adam. We
bring sin into the World with us, and sin brings death; as you have it in Romans
5. That death came in by sin. By one man sin entered into the World, and death
by sin; and so death passed upon all men. Every one that is born into the
World, is born in sin: Every one that is born into the World, by ordinary
generation; and so cannot continue long in the World, by reason of death.
Indeed there are, and ever have been, many of the Children of Men, that have
had great privileges and dignities, above others: But none ever were exempted
from death, except some few, as Enoch and Elijah. Some have been Kings and
great men of the Earth; some have been made honorable Prophets, some Apostles,
some Ministers have in their days been burning and shining Lights: But all are
dead; they were not suffered to continue, any of them, by reason of death. All
are gone: The Prophets, do they live for ever? and your Fathers, where are
they? Kings, Lords and Potentates of the Earth, and mighty men, death has
Lorded it over them all; they were not suffered to continue by reason of death:
Therefore it should teach us while we live, to spend our days well, to do what
good we can, to honor God what we can; and to say to our own Souls, Let me not
lose my time, for I cannot continue long by reason of death. Solomon tells us,
in Eccl. 9. 10. (which every one should well observe) Whatever thine hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might, because there is no work in the grave
whither thou art going But while men are on Earth, God has appointed every one
to do something, for his honor and glory. For [mind it] the Levitical Priests,
though they were not suffered to continue, because of death; because they were
mortal; yet this did not exempt them from the service of God; though they were
chosen from among men, and so subject to death, yet they were to attend the
service of God while they lived. There is a sort of people (and I mention it
for their sakes:) There are a sort of people, I say, that because life is
short, therefore they will give up themselves to ease, sloth and pleasure, and
make as much as they can of a short life,. These were the people in Isa. 22.
13, 14. And behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating
Flesh, and drinking Wine; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And
this thing was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you, till ye die -- Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die -- Thus says many a poor creature, that has no conscience
of duty to God or Man: He will take all the pleasure he can in this short life.
But a life of ease, sloth and pleasure, is a bad preparation for death. It Is
true, God does allow Rest to the Aged, where the body is abated in strength,
where the mind is grown dull and heavy through infirmity of Age, God allows
that: But where people are in their full strength, full of life and vigor; for
these to give themselves up to sloth and idleness, and not doing the work of
their day; this is an iniquity that shall not go unpunished, says the Lord of
Hosts. And this is further to be observed, for encouragement; That as God
appoints every one their work for their day; so if they be faithful, he will
spirit them for the work of the day; If they give not themselves up to a life
of ease, sloth and pleasure, he will spirit them to what he calls them to, in
that day. As you read of Saul, when God called him to be King; it is said, God
gave him another heart, a public heart. So you also read in Numbers, that when
God appointed seventy Elders, to bear part of the Government with Moses; it is
said, Numb. 11. v. 25. The Lord came down in a Cloud, and gave of the spirit of
Moses unto the seventy Elders, and it rested upon them, and they prophesied.
God called them to service, and he gave them of Moses his spirit: So when he
laid aside the Ministration of Moses, and sent forth Apostles for the
Ministration of his Spirit. Read what the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are
not sufficient of our selves -- All our sufficiency is of God. Who has made us
able Ministers of the New Testament. So that God was never wanting in affording
his holy Spirit to mortal men, for that which he called them to; which is great
encouragement, to be doing the work of God in our day.

Moses and Aaron were two great blessings to the people in their day, though they
could not continue long, by reason of death: And if we would have Magistrates
and Ministers to be blessings, we are to pray for them, that God would spirit
them for the work he has called them to.

But then there is another thing to be observed in the Priesthoods Mortality;
and that is their succession, [They could not continue by reason of death:] yet
they had their succession one after another: And we ought to pray that there
may never want a succession of men to carry on the work of God: And this ought
to be our care also, as far as in us lies, that there may be a Generation
brought up for the service of God, when another goes away. When Abraham died,
his Son Isaac succeeded him: When Aaron died, Eleazar succeeded his Father, and
took up the work of God, that his Father had laid down. So it would be the
happiness of Families, and a happiness to Children, that Children would take up
the work that their Fathers have laid down, by reason of death. We live in an
Age, wherein there is a great decay of godly Ministers: The old Generation
wearing off, and many gone to the dust, and but few come in, that have the same
Spirit, the same Grace, and shine with the same Light, as their Fathers did,
who are dead and gone. We ought all of us to pray (as our Savior says) that
as the Harvest is great, the Lord would send forth Laborers into his Harvest.
A good succession speaks a great favor of God, to Families, Churches and
Nations. See how careful Moses was in that: When God had told him that he must
die, in Numb. 27. 16. Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a
man over the Congregation. These were the words of Moses, when God told him
that he must die, and be gathered to his Fathers. And truly, so should all
godly Parents, and godly Ministers say, Let the God of the spirits of all
flesh, bring in some to my Family, that may go out and in before my Family: And
let the God of the spirits of all flesh, bring in some to his Church, to guide
them, and to teach them. But now God, he answered Moses's prayer; as you may
see in the following words. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua, the
Son of Nun, a man on whom is the Spirit; Lay thine hand upon him. And thus much
for the Mortality of the Levitical Priesthood.

Come we now to the second Point, and general Observation: And that is, The
Immortality of our great High priest, our Lord Jesus Christ. Here our chief
comfort lies; that though all Mankind die, and are not suffered to continue by
reason of death: But this man, because he ever lives, has an unchangeable
Priesthood.

Now what is spoken of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his abiding for ever; it must
be understood and applied to him, as Man, as he is Man, God-Man, and Mediator
between God and Man; as he is taken from among men, to stand for Man in things
pertaining to God. And so he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: He
continues for ever. And says our Lord Jesus Christ, The Son abides in the
house for ever, John 8. 37. The Servant abides not in the house, but the Son
abides for ever. The house of God has the Son of God always there, as their
High Priest, he is set over them. The very Adversaries of Christ acknowledge
this, Joh. 12. 35. The people answered him; We have heard out of the Law, that
Christ abides for ever. It was a stumbling to them: And therefore here lies
the Objection.

How is it said, that Christ abides for ever, and lives for ever, when it is
certain that he died? We read in Matthew. 2. 50. that he gave up the Ghost. [He
died and gave up the Ghost.] How is it then said, that he abides for ever, and
lives for ever, as our High Priest?

I answer; To that we must consider four things, to clear that Objection.

First of all, Though Christ did die for a time, yet his death was not such a
forced death, as man's is, but a voluntary death: He laid it down, and took it
up again of himself. So you have it in John 10 17, 18. Therefore does the
Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again. Here you see, our Lord Jesus Christ did not
die, as we die, by a forced death; he laid it down, and he took it up again,
when he pleased.

2. Though our Lord Jesus Christ, as to his Humanity, was in the state of death;
yet it was impossible that he should be holden of death, or the grave, Acts 2.
24. Why not possible? You see that men are holden of death, thousands of years,
and they are not risen to this day. Why not possible that he should be holden
of death? Why? because the Divine Nature was Hypostatically United to the
Humane Nature, God and Man; and therefore it was impossible for him to be
holden of death.

Thirdly, Christ's death was but to do the great part of his Priestly Office;
and so there was no intermission of his Priestly Office. The Apostle tells us,
that he being a Priest, he must offer something as other Priests had done: Now
he offered himself as the great Sacrifice for our sins, to the Justice of God;
so that in his death, his Priestly Office was so far accomplished; and
therefore he is said to abide for ever, and to have an unchangeable Priesthood.

Fourthly and Lastly, Jesus Christ is Risen again, and Dies no more; and
therefore he is said to live for ever, Romans 6. 8, 9. Now if we be dead with
Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him; knowing that Christ being
raised from the Dead, Dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him;
hence you read in Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore: This he spoke when he appeared to John walking in the
midst of the Golden Candlesticks, in his Priestly attire; I am he that lives,
and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Death has no more dominion
over Jesus Christ; therefore he is said to continue for ever: And (says the
Apostle) be continuing for ever, he has an unchangeable Priesthood, i. e. he
has a Priesthood that can never be separated from his Person, to pass from one
to another; so the word signifies; and therefore our Translators put it so in
your Margent. He has a Priesthood that passes not from one person to another.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, his great High-Priest-hood passes not from one to
another; and there are these three Reasons for it:

First, Because he is all-sufficient to finish the work of our Redemption: He
is Almighty, and therefore in Psalm 89. which is a Prophecy of Christ under
David, as his Type, in the 19. ver. Then thou spakest in Vision to the holy
one, and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one
chosen out of the people: So Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a
Son is given; and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. There is none ever able to
take up the work of Christ, if he should lay it down; but our Redeemer he is
mighty and alsufficient to finish the work of our Redemption. And then,

Secondly, As he is Mighty and All-sufficient in his Person, as God-man, so
also his death has a perpetual virtue in it, and therefore it is said, he
offered up himself once for all, Heb. 7. 27 the latter part of the Verse; for
This he did once, when he offered up himself; he took away sin when he offered
up himself.

Thirdly, Christ has an Everlasting Priesthood, an unexchangeable Priesthood;
For he is admitted to sit at the Lords right hand for ever, Heb. 10. 12. So
that you may see he has an unexchangeable Priesthood. And thus much for the
opening and explanation of this Verse. For application these things are diverse
ways useful.

First, For the Comfort, the unspeakable Comfort of them that truly believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ. Here we have an unexchangeable Priesthood; to rest upon
Christ for our hope: The Apostle tells us, that he is our hope of Glory. And
Oh, what a mercy and blessing it is, that our hope is not in Man, whose Breath
is in his Nostrils, but in the Eternal Son of God! In him who continues for
ever. Look into the World, and there you will find abundance that live in their
Worldly hope; but where are their hopes built, but commonly upon Men whose
Breath is in their Nostrils? When their Friends die, their hopes die: But here
we have an Immortal Savior to build our hopes upon, one that continues for
ever: And this was Jobs comfort in the midst of his affliction, as you may see
in Job 19. 25. He knew his Redeemer lived; his Children were all dead and gone,
but his Redeemer lived, and that was his comfort; his estate was gone, but
still his Redeemer lived, and that was his comfort; his Friends had left him,
still his Redeemer lived, and he knew himself must die, and Worms consume his
Body, yet still his Redeemer lived. Oh Soul, rest thou in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and take comfort of Gospel Truth! [That Jesus Christ lives for
ever.]

As Jesus Christ lives for ever; So he lives for the good of all Believers:
He lives for our good, if we Believe in him; and therefore says the Apostle,
he is able to save to the uttermost, all those that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us.

Our Lord Jesus Christ does live everlastingly for our good; our life is bound
up in the Everlasting life of Christ, says the Apostle in Col. 3. and the
beginning, Our life is hid with Christ; that is, the life of our Souls: And
when he shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory. I remember
the words (in 1 Samuel 25.) when that wise Woman Abigail came to David to appease
his wrath against her Husband and Family, she used this expression, in ver. 29.
But the Soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy
God: I allude to it; that the Lord Jesus Christ is the bundle of life for all
the Saints; the Eternal life of every Believer is bound up in him; he is the
great bundle of life: for (says he) because I live, ye shall live also -- And
again, This is the Record which God has given; that he has given Eternal
life; and this life is in his Son. Oh make Faith of this! or else all the
Preaching of Christ will not be profitable to you, if you cannot make Faith of
it.

And as this does speak comfort, so it also speaks duty; And what is that? Why
that we live to him that lives for ever; remember that Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.
14. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge; that if one
died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which died for
them and rose again. As Christ did die for us [for our Sins] so he did rise
again for our Justification. Oh shall we not then live to him! Many are apt to
forget their dead Friends and Relations, tho they have done much for them, and
they know it not; as Solomon speaks in Eccles. 9. 5. for the living know that
they shall die, but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a
reward; for the memory of them is forgotten, and they know it not; and if their
Sons come to honor they know it not, and if they be brought low they perceive
it not: But our Living Redeemer, he knows all; he knows all the Souls that
are put upon his work of Salvation; and therefore we should live to his Glory.
Our dear Lord may say to us, I live for ever; I know all things: Why then do
you slight my Work, and slight my Ordinances, and slight my People? Why do you
not live more to my Glory. And then,

Lastly, This should be a strong motive for Men to come to Christ. Ye trust in
dying Friends, dying comforts, dying Relations, and fix your hope upon things
that crumble away to dust; When Peter made his confession of Christ, Joh. 6.
68. To whom should we go? thou have the words of Eternal Life. Go from Christ,
and you go to death and Damnation: Go to him, and you come to Life, and to
Everlasting Salvation: For he ever lives an High Priest, to make Intercession
for us.

Now the Inference follows in the next words.

SERMON IX.
Hebrews 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.
THese words of the Apostle contain the Inference which he makes of all that he
had said before, of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ: He comes to this
conclusion. Wherefore Christ is able to save to the uttermost all those that
come unto God by him.

This Illative [or word] wherefore, has a reference to what was spoken before:
And also to what follows after; For the Apostle having said before: that Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is made a Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck; that
he was not made a Priest by the Law of a Carnal Command, but by the power of an
endless Life; That Christ was made a Priest by a solemn Oath, [The Lord has
Sworn and will not Repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedeck.] That Jesus Christ is made a surety of a better Testament: That
he endures, and has an unchangeable Priesthood.

Wherefore, (says he) he is able to save to the uttermost.

The Argument may be thus framed: He that is the Eternal Son of God: He that is
a Priest for ever, and made a Priest by the Oath of God: He that has an
unchangeable Priesthood: He that is the surety of a better Covenant; He is able
to save to the uttermost -- But all this is Jesus Christ: Wherefore he is able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto him: But then,

The words have also a reference to what follows, in the last clause of this
Verse. [Seeing he ever lives to makes Intercession for them:] Wherefore he is
able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make Intercession for them.

And the Argument may also be framed: He that ever lives to make Intercession
for them; He is able to save all that come unto God by him. So that both these
conclusions are proved: That Jesus Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all
that come unto God by him.

We begin with the first branch of this Text: [He is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him.] These are the words, I shall open and
apply this Morning, (if God permit.)

To save a Soul is a great work, a great and glorious work. All the powers of
Heaven and Earth, short of God, cannot save a Soul. The Devil can destroy
Souls, by the Righteous and Just Judgment of God: And therefore has that name
given him, which is opposite to Christ: He is called Abaddon and Apollyon,
which signifies to destroy, in Rev. 9. 11. The Devil I say can destroy Souls,
but he cannot save any, he cannot save himself. It Is a great and glorious work
to save a poor Soul: This is only Christ's work; And therefore he is called the
Author of Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect, he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation, to all them that obey him, [the Author of Eternal
Salvation.] There have been Temporal Saviors; Men that God has raised up in
several Ages and Generations, to deliver his People from the power of their
Enemies; when his People were in distress, God did raise them up Saviors: And
it was accounted a very great Mercy, to have a Temporal Savior: To have a Man
of Faith and Courage; as Sampson, and Gideon, and Barack, and others, that
would appear for the Church in times of streights. There is a Prophecy in Mic.
5. 5. speaking of Christ. And this Man shall be the Peace, when the Assyrian
shall come into the Land; and when he shall tread in our Palaces, then shall we
raise against him seven Shepherds, and eight Principal Men that are worthy
Instruments; that shall rise up to oppose the Assyrians power. The Assyrians
power is made a Type of the Antichristian power. God has his principal Men,
and his principal Instruments, to save his People. These are under Christ: But
he only is the Author of Eternal Salvation. And this Salvation, this Eternal
Salvation, that Jesus Christ brings, is an unspeakable mercy: The very thoughts
of it gives abundance of comfort. If we do but consider what he saves us from,
and what he saves us to.

First, What he saves us from.] He saves a poor sinner from his sin, and from
all the misery that comes along with it. His name shall be called Jesus, for he
shall save his people from their sins, says the Angel in Matthew. 1. 24. He
shall save his people from their sins, i. e. from all those miseries that their
sins bring upon them or would bring upon them. [For sin is the cause of all
misery*] And to be saved from sin, is to be saved from all misery. What would
the Devils in Hell give to be saved from their misery, that their sin has
brought upon them? What would the Rich Glutton in the Gospel give to be saved
from his misery? We are not aware what he saves us from.

Then, if we consider, what he saves us to, or brings us to, by this
Salvation.] Christ brings us into his favor and grace; brings us into that
blessed state in Heaven, where there is all safety, and security, and blessing;
where the Devil, nor his Instruments can never break in upon us, to intercept
our peace, Rev. 21. 9. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any
more pain. To be brought into Communion with God, with the holy Angels, and
with the glorified Saints, and with Jesus Christ the Head of the Church: An
Everlasting Communion. Oh the Salvation that our Lord Jesus Christ brings us
to! There is no solitude in Heaven! Here we complain of a solitude, and a
solitary life: We want company, we want converse in the World: But there will
be an everlasting converse with the great God, so far as our Natures are
capable of coming near to him: An everlasting converse with our Redeemer, with
the holy Angels, and with the glorified Saints. Who is able to express the
Salvation our Lord Jesus Christ brings us to! This is the Hope and Faith of the
Gospel. But I do but touch upon these things by the by.

Now, says the Apostle, he is able to save to the uttermost -- He carries it
through. Now, to do a thing to the uttermost, is to do all that can or ought to
be added to that thing. For there is nothing to be added to that work which is
wrought to the uttermost: So our Lord Jesus Christ, in this Salvation work, he
carries it through to the uttermost; to the uttermost. There is nothing to be
added to our Salvation. And therefore our Protestant Divines stand much upon
this Scripture, against all Popish Adorations. If Jesus Christ be able to save
to the uttermost; then there is no need of Merit; Meritorious works; no need of
Priests, Oblations, Popish Pardons and Indulgences. And if our Lord Jesus
Christ is able to save to the uttermost; then away with all Merits, and all
Priests for Oblations; and all things that the ignorant Souls of men rest in.
He is able (says the Apostle) to save to the uttermost [Able to save] that is
a word of great emphasis. Christ is able to carry through the great work of
Salvation. That is the point we are to insist upon.

The work of Salvation is a great work. It Is a greater work than the work of
Creation. For, mind it, the works of the great God, some are greater than
others; and this work of Salvation is the greatest of all his works. The work
of Creation is a great work, and Gods Wisdom, his Omnipotence and his Goodness,
is much to be adored in the works of Creation. For the work, in two respects.

1. As it is a work that all the three persons in the Sacred Trinity, in the
Godhead, did cooperate and work together in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
created the World. For, though we say [God the Father is Maker] God the Father
has that work Attributed to him; not that he did it without his Son, and
without the Holy Ghost, Heb. 1. 2. It is said, by Jesus Christ God made the
World. The Son wrought with the Father. And you read in Genesis, That the Holy
Ghost also moved upon the face of the Deep. So that the work of Creation is the
work of the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. A great work.

Then again,

2. If you consider the work it self. The work of Creation is a great and
wonderful work. [For, mind it.] The Great God, to make all things out of
nothing. This is a work, that none but God could do. For God to make Heaven and
Earth, Angels and Men, and all living Creatures, and all out of nothing; it is
a work of an Infinite God. [For, mind it.] The wisest, and the strongest man in
the World, cannot make a House, or a poor Cottage, out of nothing: He must have
matter to work upon. Man can make nothing out of nothing. And therefore the
Philosopher took up this Maxim, [Nothing produces nothing.] You cannot make a
thing out of nothing. Man cannot make one drop of Water to drink out of
nothing; he must go somewhere for that Water. But for the Great God to raise
Heaven and Earth out of nothing, is to be adored. And therefore (says the
Psalmist) When I consider the Heavens, the work of thy hands, the Sun, Moon and
Stars, I said, What is man, Lord, that thou should be so mindful of him? The
work of Creation is a great and glorious work, beyond all the power of Men and
Angels: But still the work of Salvation is greater than that: For God is
pleased to magnify that work, and to be at more cost about that work, than he
was about the work of Creation: And in two respects, the work of Salvation is
greater than the work of Creation.

First, Because in the work of Creation, there was nothing to resist God in
that work; there were no Devils then in Being, to Rebel against that work of
God: There was no wicked reprobate Person to resist God in the work of
Creation: But in the work of Salvation, Men and Devils oppose the Wisdom of
God, and the Power of God, and the Grace of God: But he carries it through all
opposition.

Secondly, Though the work of Creation was a great work of God; Yet there was
no need that the Son of God should be made manifest in the Flesh for that work:
The work of Creation could be carried on without the Incarnation of the Son of
God. God did but say, Let there be Light, and there was Light, Gods word did
all there. By Faith we understand, the World was made by the Word of God, Heb.
11. 3. But when God comes to work Salvation for mankind, there is a great train
of Work: The Son of God must be made Man, and suffer Death for poor Man, and he
must rise again: So that the work of Salvation, is greater than the work of
Creation.

But how is Christ said to be able to save, and to carry on this work?

First, As he is God [the Almighty God] so nothing can stand before him, to
hinder the accomplishment of that which he has undertaken, to save a Soul from
Death: Where Christ undertakes for that, all the powers of Hell cannot hinder
it. If he had been but a mere Man, he had been stopped in this work: Men and
Devils would have hindered him in this work: I say Reprobate Men and Devils,
would have hindered him in this work: But being God, he Triumphs over
Principalities and Powers, as you have it in Col. 2. 15. He spoiled
Principalities and Powers. These Principalities and Powers are the Devils,
which Reign in their Kingdom, as Princes and Potentates do here on Earth: But
the Devils themselves dread our Lord Jesus Christ, as you may see, Mat. 8. 29.
they cried out, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? Art thou
come to Torment us before the time? They knew him to be the Son of God, and
they begged leave of him, to go into the Herd of Swine. Thus you see our Lord
Jesus Christ, as he is God, has power to overcome all the Devils in Hell:
Therefore he is able to save them; for the Devils dreaded Christ, and said, Art
thou come to torment us before the time? They knew Christ would come to Judge
them one day, and they were unwilling to come to Judgment before their time.
Now as he is the mighty God; and as all the Powers of Hell are under him, so he
is able to save to the uttermost: none can stand before him, to hinder his
accomplishing the work of Salvation.

Secondly, He is able to save, as he is our great High Priest over the house of
God: That the Apostle would have us to keep our eye upon, as he is the Priest
of God. All the Priests before him were not able to save them that came to God,
by them; though they did good service, and were useful in offering Gifts and
Sacrifices for the People, yet they could not save them. But our Lord Jesus
Christ, as he is the Priest of God, as he is the Surety of a better Covenant,
as he offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, he is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come unto God by him.

And so we come to this: Where we have a Limitation, in respect of the
blessings of Christ's Death. [It is for all that come unto God by him] Not but
that Christ is able to save all Mankind. The dignity of his person [God-Man]
The Merit of his Suffering, [sufficient to save all Mankind.] But this
Limitation shows, That none had benefit by Christ, but those that come unto God
by him. It is one thing to be able to save, and another thing for people to
have the benefit of that Salvation. Suppose a man be able to save all the poor
in the Town; yet none have the benefit of it, but those that come to him for
their relief. There is a great deal of difference between Ability and Benefit.
So our Lord Jesus Christ is able to save to the uttermost; but it is them that
come unto God by him that are saved. Not that there is any Merit in our coming
to God: For what Merit is there in Beggars coming for an Alms? We come to God
by Christ, as Beggars for an Alms. But still we must come, and we must come by
Jesus Christ, if we will have any benefit by his Salvation. There are
multitudes of people in the World, whose case is very deplorable. Jews, Turks
and Heathens, they all have their Devotions grounded upon something The Jews
come to God according to the Jewish way. The Turks have their coming to God,
for the great Article of their Faith. We believe there is is one only true God.
And the Heathens have their way of coming to God. But because none of these
have their coming to God, by Jesus Christ, therefore they have no benefit by
Jesus Christ. The Papists, who prove the Christian Faith, do run a great hazard
of their Salvation, by coming to God, by other Mediators, than by Jesus Christ.
For the blessed Saints, and the Virgin Mary, are not able to save, and be a
Mediator for them, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is but one God, and one Mediator
between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. So that here you have the Limitation
of that Salvation, which is by Christ. [He is able to save all to the uttermost
that come unto God by him.]

But then you will say, What are we to understand by the phrase of coming to
God by Jesus Christ? What is meant by [coming?]

I answer; [Coming] is a metaphorical word, translated from the Body to the
Soul. As thus, the Body has its motion, you know it goes and comes, this or
that way: So the Soul of Man has its motion, it goes or comes; it goes to God,
or comes from God. Now coming, in Scripture, when it is applied to God, and
Christ, it always imports a believing, a trusting in; a resting upon God in
Jesus Christ. For Faith is the foot of a Soul, by which the Soul is coming unto
God: It brings the Soul to Christ, to take up with him. It is the same with
coming unto the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly to the Throne
of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need; i.
e. Let our Souls go out to Gods Grace, in Christ, and there Rest. As Unbelief
is called a departing from the Living God, Heb. 3. and the latter end. Now, you
know what it is to depart from God: It is, when you cast off all hope, and
trusting in him: When your hearts run out to sin, and grow dead toward God;
when you have no delight in keeping up Communion with him, this is a departing
from him. So coming to him, is an act of the Soul, whereby the Soul goes out to
him, in the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Sacrifice for sin. The Soul goes out to
him by Faith, and rests upon him, by such a Faith, as does purify the heart,
and reform the life.

Many that are called Christians, they have a notion, by which they greatly
deceive themselves: And that is this; They think and say, that God is merciful;
that Jesus Christ died for sinners; and therefore, though they be strangers to
the life of Faith, and have lived in much Ignorance, yet they say, they doubt
not of their Salvation; for God is merciful; and Christ died for sinners.

As it is true, that God is merciful, beyond all our apprehensions: And it is
also true, that Jesus Christ died for sinners; Yet the Scripture must be
believed. It is only for such sinners as have a Coming-faith to him; such a
Faith as may unite their Souls to him. For [mind it] You read in Luke 14. where
our Savior compares the Grace of God, in the Salvation of poor sinners, to a
man that made a great Supper for his Guests, and invited them; but when they
all refused to come, read v. 24. I say unto you, None of them that were bidden
shall taste of my Supper. Why shall they not taste of it? Why? because they
refused to come upon his Invitation; and therefore none of them which were
bidden shall taste of my Supper. This is to shadow out Gods way, with poor
slighty sinners. That Soul that is taken up with his Farm and Oxen, the Lord
says, he shall not taste of his Supper. You must not therefore rest in general
notions: For, as it is one of the greatest miseries in the World to want a
coming-heart to Christ; so on the other hand, it is one of the greatest mercies
that we can enjoy, in this life, to have a coming-heart to Jesus Christ; to
have a heart going out to Jesus Christ. It is very observable, what our Lord
Jesus Christ spoke, in Matthew. 7. He tells us, In the last days, there will be
many come to seek admittance into his Kingdom, for what they had done. In v.
22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many
wonderful works? Then will I profess to them, I never knew you, depart from me,
ye that work iniquity. Christ will say, I never knew them. How is this to be
understood? Pray consider: Christ knew all men: He did know the persons of
these men, that did come and plead thus with him: But when he said, he never
knew them; his meaning is, he never had any Communion with him; and they did
never come to him, and act Faith in him. Our Lord will say at the great day,
You talk of Gifts, and Parts, and Service; but I never had your hearts. And
therefore it is a great mercy to have a heart to come to Jesus Christ; to live
that life we live in the flesh, in the Faith of the Son of God.

Come we now to some Application, and that is of Direction, to poor sinners
that are strangers to coming to God by Christ. It may be you come to hear the
Word of God, and you do well. Sometimes you come to pray, to pray for mercy in
affliction; you do well. But there is another coming to Christ, which is by
Faith; and therefore never rest in any thing of hearing, and praying, until you
have brought up your hearts to come to Christ, by Faith rest upon him -- And,
says Christ, No man comes to me, except my Father draw him.

I know that a Natural Conscience will put a man upon coming to God in Prayer:
But no Natural Conscience will put a man to come unto God by Christ.

A second Use is, to those that act Faith, and come to God by Christ. Remember,
that he is able to save to the uttermost. Rest upon the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ. I remember when God did set up Saul to be King over Israel; it is said
in 1 Samuel 10. There you may read, that many of the people despised him, and
said, How can this man save us? They looked upon him as a weakling. But the
Lord Jesus Christ, he is able to save to the uttermost, by his Almighty Power.
You may believe he is our great High Priest. You find there in the first Book
of Sam. chap. 17. that the Philistines trusted in their Champion Goliath, who
was but a man. But our Lord Jesus Christ, he is the great Goliath; he
encountered with Devils, with Hell, and with the World, and overcame all of
them. He has satisfied the Law, and Justice; and ever lives to make
Intercession to God, for all those that come unto God by him. But of that
afterward.

SERMON X.
Hebrews 7. 25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.
THE last day I handled the first Branch of this Text: It tells us that Christ
is able to save to the uttermost, them that come unto God by him.

To save a Soul from Death and Misery, is a work that none can accomplish, but
he that is [Mighty to Save.] The work of Salvation is so great, as we cannot
possibly comprehend it in this Life. But as our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God (who was made Flesh) has undertaken this great work; so he is able to
carry it on [Able to save all that come unto God by him.] These words have been
opened and applied, and I shall not look back, but come to a second Branch of
this Text, where a reason is given, Why our Lord Christ, is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them.

Now these words carry a great deal of comfort for them that believe the Word:
But they require some care and diligence in the opening of them; and giving the
right sense of them, lest we should be led away with gross and dull
apprehensions of this Spiritual Mystery.

First therefore, for the right understanding of this phrase here in the Text:
Whereas it is said [that Christ ever lives to make Intercession for us] this
is not to be understood, as if the Intercession of Christ should never have an
end: For the Intercession of Christ, is a work that belongs to his
Mediatory-Kingdom, and that shall have an end. When all Gods Elect shall be
gathered to him; and the whole mystery of our Redemption finished; then shall
all be given up to God, for he shall be [All in All,] In 1 Cor. 15. 24.
speaking of Christ then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father: When he shall have put down all Rule, and all
Authority and Power: For he must Reign, till he has put all Enemies under his
Feet: The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death: For he has put all
things under his Feet: And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him,
that God may be all in all. Here the Apostle is treating of Christ's
Mediatory-Kingdom: And when all the Elect shall be gathered together: When the
World shall come to an end: Then the last Enemy that is to be destroyed is
Death: And there shall be no more die in the Church: All shall be swallowed up
in the Eternal Godhead: And God shall be all in all. Then there will be no
need of his Intercession, or of a Mediator: But still remember the blessed
effects of Christ's Death and Resurrection, and Intercession, are to Eternity:
Therefore when the Apostle here in the Text says, Christ ever lives to make
Intercession for us: This is to be considered two ways.

First, In opposition to the Levitical Priesthood, who are dead and gone, and
the Church of God has no present help from them; but all their help is from
Jesus Christ: They were not suffered to continue by reason of Death; but Christ
ever lives our great High Priest, when all others are dead and gone. But,

Secondly and specially, When it is said, that he ever lives to make
Intercession for us.] this [Ever] is to be taken for every Age and Generation
to the end of the World; for at the end of the World, there shall be an end of
those things, as you have heard; he ever lives to all Ages and Generations.

For this must be observed, that the Church of Christ (which is his Mystical
Body,) are not all born in one Age of the World. But one Generation passes
away, and another comes: But Christ he ever lives in all Ages a Priest of
God, for all those that come to God by him, [he ever liveth] we have not a new
Priest to rise up with a new Generation, but we have the same Jesus, who was
yesterday, to day, and for ever the same: He lives in all Ages and Generations
to the end of the World. I say, a new Age does not bring forth a new Savior,
nor a new Priest, but he is the same, [He ever lives,] and we of this Age and
Generation, have the same benefit by Jesus Christ's Priesthood and
Intercession, that the old and primitive Saints, had thousands of years ago:
For he abides for ever, till the whole work of Man's Redemption is fulfilled:
And this is the true and proper meaning of this Phrase [He ever lives to make
Intercession] that is, he ever lives in all Ages and Generations: He is the
same yesterday, to day and for ever: He is to be our High Priest to the end of
the World.

In the Second place we are to consider what is meant by Christ's making
Intercession for us in Heaven. Now for that, you must first consider, the
Speech as Metaphorical, and borrowed from Advocates, that plead in Kings
Courts: Or from Counselors that stand up for a Client, to procure the Sentence
on their side. Hence the Apostle John has that expression, in 1 John 2. 1. If
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous,
who is a propitiation for our Sins. We have an Advocate, that is, we have one
that stands up for us in our stead, and appears on our side: Also it has
reference to a Favorite of the Kings Court, that is often in the Kings presence,
and ready to speak for his Friend. So Joseph was an Intercessor for his Father
and Brethren unto King Pharaoh, when they came into the Land of Egypt, Genesis 47.
Joseph was a Favorite of the King of Egypt: And he appeared in the presence of
the King, for his Father and Brethren: You shall find the Prophet Elijah offers
to make himself an Intercessor to the King, for the Shunamitish Woman, 2 King.
4. 13. Would thou be spoken for to the King? In this sense Jesus Christ is
said to be our Intecessor: He is said to appear in the (...) of God for us,
Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entered (...) the Holy places, which are the
figures of the true (...) into Heaven it self: Now to appear in the presence of
God for us, and to make Intercession for us: This is not to be understood, as
if Jesus Christ in Heaven, did pros^rate himself to the Father for us, and make
actual prayers for us. It is not so to be understood. In the days of his Flesh,
he sent up strong cries to God, in his state of Humiliation, Heb. 5. 7. but it
is not agreeable to his state of Glory, that Jesus Christ should now send up
Prayers and Supplications to God for us: But when it is said that he appears in
the presence of God for us, and makes Intercession for us, the meaning is this:
That he does present himself in Heaven, as our Surety, and as our Sacrifice,
and as one that has made satisfaction to all the demands of the Law, and also
manifesting his Will: That all that come unto God by him, should have the
benefit of his Death. He does appear before God as the Sacrifice for our sins,
that the benefit may come to every Soul, that come unto God by him; that is the
meaning: Therefore it is said Heb. 12. 24. The Apostle tells them, they are
come to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things than that of Abel. Abels blood did speak; when Abel
said nothing, his blood did speak and cry: And so the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ speaks: his Death speaks: His Suffering speaks: That is always
before the Holy God for an expiatory Sacrifice for sin, to them that believe on
him. [An Expiatory Sacrifice.] And this was typified of old, by the
Highpriests carrying the Blood of the Sacrifice, into the most Holy place:
sprinkling that Blood upon the Mercy-seat; see Levit. 16. 15. Then shall he
kill the Goat of the Sin-offering, that is for the People, and bring his Blood
within the Vail, and do with that Blood as he did with the Blood of the
Bullock, and sprinkle it upon the Mercy-seat. When the Priests of old did kill
the Offering, whether it was a Goat, or whether it was a Bullock, he was to
take of the Blood of the Beast, and carry it within the Vail: What is that? You
must know that in the Temple, there were three parts; there was the outward
Court, which the Gentiles might come into as well as the Jews; then there was
the Temple, where the people generally went to Pray, and where the Sacrifices
were slain; and then there was the third place, which was called the most Holy
place, the Sanctum Sanctorum, and that was separated by the Vail; the Vail was
drawn before it, and when the Priest had Offered the Blood of the Sacrifice, he
was to go within the Vail, where was the Mercy-seat, and where God did give his
Answers to his Peoples Requests; and this Blood of the Sacrifice was to be
sprinkled upon the Mercy-seat: Why so? Why to signify that God would show
Mercy unto his People by way of Atonement and Sacrifice; that he would show
them Mercy that way, because of the uncleanness of the Children of Men,
therefore God would have no Communion with them, but by the Blood of Atonement.

And this was a Type of Heaven it self; Christ (says the Apostle) is gone into
the most Holy place, to Heaven it self, there to appear in the presence of God
for us: And as the High Priest of old did carry the Blood of the Sacrifice into
the most Holy place on Earth; so our Lord Jesus Christ did carry his Blood into
Heaven, which is the most Holy place of all; which speaks better things than
the Blood of Abel, which cries for vengeance; but the Blood of Jesus Christ
calls for mercy, for every one that comes to God by him: This is the meaning of
his making intercession for us.

But now in the Third place, Why does the Apostle say in the Text, that Christ
is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them? Why is Christ's ability to save us, put
upon his ever living to make intercession? The Scripture (mind it) does lay a
great stress here, and the weight and burden of our Salvation is laid in this;
upon Christ's ever living to plead and maintain the great end of his death and
suffering for poor sinners, [he ever lives,] and the Reasons are these:

First, If Jesus had died and never rose again, our hopes of Salvation by him
had perished with him, and been buried in his Crave. If Christ had died and
never rose again, our hopes of Salvation by him, had died also, and been buried
in the Grave with him. Mind what the Apostle speaks to this purpose, 1 Cor. 15.
14. If Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching in vain, and your Faith is
also vain. If Christ be not risen, our Preaching is in vain: How is that? Our
preaching Salvation by Jesus Christ, is in vain; it is to no purpose; if he be
a dead man still; and your Faith is vain, your Believing in him is vain, if he
be in the state of death still. Why so? Because in the Grave there is no work,
nor no knowledge; the dead know nothing, the dead can do nothing; therefore if
Jesus Christ were in the state of Death, if he were in the Grave, and not risen
again, it is in vain for us to preach Salvation by Jesus Christ; and your
believing in him for Salvation is vain: But in as much as he ever lives, and
is come out of the state of Death, he is able to save to the uttermost, all
those that come unto God by him. You may observe in Scripture, that that time,
that our Savior Christ died and was laid in the Grave, his Disciples and
Followers on Earth, their hopes died with him; as you may read (in Luke 24.) of
the two Disciples going to Emmaus, what a sad discourse they had together, when
Christ asked them, what communication they had together; they said unto him,
Concerning one Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet mighty in deed and word,
before God and all the People; and how the Chief-priests and Rulers delivered
him to be condemned to Death, and have Crucified him; and we trusted it had
been he that should have Redeemed Israel; and besides all this, to day is the
Third day since these things were done. When Christ was in the state of Death,
their hopes were dead; but says the Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, which according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. As if he should say, we were as dead men in our hopes, but when
we saw his Resurrection, our hopes began to revive again; and therefore he
says, Blessed be God, who has begotten us to a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. The Resurrection of Christ,
declares him to be a sufficient Savior; and therefore in Romans 8. When the
Apostle Paul fell a triumphing in that Salvation, we have by Christ; and what
does he lay as a ground for it? in ver. 34. says he, Who shall condemn us? It
is Christ that died; yea rather rose again, and is set at the right hand of
God, and makes intercession for us; yea rather is risen again. Why does he make
more of the Resurrection of Christ, than of the Death of Christ? Because if
Christ had Died, and not Risen again, and Ascended to the Father, we had not
had such ground for our hope: [But rather is Risen again.] For alas, if our
hopes of Salvation did hang upon a Dead Man, it would have been a dead hope;
but our hope is upon a living Savior. For this end, says the Apostle, Romans
14. 9. For this end Christ both died, and rose again, that he might be the
Lord, both of the dead and the living. If he had not revived again and risen
again, he could not have been the Lord of the dead and the living. The Apostle
has a remarkable passage to this purpose; further in 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18. If
Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins; then they
also that are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. If Christ be still in the
state of Death and the Grave, then they that are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. Those Believers that did die in the Faith of Jesus Christ, they are
perished; if he be not still alive, and at the right hand of God, they are
perished, and ye are yet in your sins: So that you see what a great stress the
Scriptures put upon Christ's Rising again: Therefore says John in the
Revelation I am he that lives, and I live for evermore. Amen. Why Amen? He
puts Amen to it, that our Faith may be fixed on him, as able to save those that
come unto God by him.

Secondly, Our Lord Jesus Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all that
come unto God by him, and that because he ever lives to make intercession.]
Because there can be no Accusation or Condemnation, take place against any
Soul, where there is such an intercessor. If Christ were out of Heaven, where
all Men's hearts and ways are seen and known, all the sins of our Life and
Conversation would rise up against us, and Condemn us, and Accuse us: But
(says the Apostle) who shall Condemn? Who shall lay any thing to our charge?
It is Christ that has Died, yea rather that is Risen again, and sits at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. No Accusation from Satan and
our Sins, can stand before the intercession of Christ; for though our sins be
such as deserve everlasting Damnation, yet there is more worth, and virtue, and
preciousness, in the Death and Resurrection, and Intercession of our Lord Jesus
Christ, than there is vileness in all our sins; for his Intercession, is the
presenting of his suffering for us; and of all the satisfaction he has made
for Sin, and the manifesting his Will; that those that come unto God by him,
may have the benefit of his Sufferings.

Thirdly, He is the great Favorite. Our Lord Jesus Christ, he is one that
brings us into favor with God: He came and made peace on Earth, and has
purchased peace in Heaven. If a Man should undertake to interceed for a poor
Rebel, that had been a Rebel himself, they would never regard him, or give any
regard to his Intercession; but if a Man will interceed for a poor Rebel at
Court, that was always a Favorite of the King, that never Rebelled or provoked
him, you will say, this Man will carry it: Now says the Scripture, We have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; not Jesus Christ the
Unrighteous, but Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is our Advocate, that kept
himself always in the Favor of God, and in his Fathers Love. Such an
High Priest does become us, who is Holy, Harmless, Separate from Sinners, and
made higher than the Heavens. We need one, that is Jesus Christ the Righteous;
and therefore he ever lives, and is able to save those that come unto God by
him. He ever lives to make Intercession, that was always in the favor of the
Father. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; showing, that he was
well pleased with his Suffering, and Intercession, and sets on his Right hand
on high. Upon all these accounts it is, that Christ ever lives to make
Intercession for us. And upon these reasons he is able to save all that come
unto God by him.

I shall wind up all with a word or two of Application.

First then, here we see, That our Salvation is out of our selves; and that it
rests solely, and alone, in our Lord Jesus Christ. For the best works that ever
any of the Children of God did, are not able to save them; because no man's
works are perfect before God. The best works that we can do, are not able to
save us, in any measure. But our Lord Jesus Christ is able to save to the
uttermost. We are very apt to rest in our own doings and duties; especially, if
any thing be done by us in a right manner. We are very apt to take up our Rest
too much therein. We are apt to draw too much comfort for our selves, for what
we do, rather than from what Christ has done for us. But it is for want of
lively Faith in Christ. But, if you will be safe, and have true comfort, you
must come from works. See how the Apostle sets Works and Grace in opposition,
in the matter of Election, and so it holds as to Justification, Romans 11. 6. And
if by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace; but
if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise works is no more works.
What is the meaning of this? The meaning is this; That if we rest upon our
works, for our Salvation, and Acceptance with God, then the Grace of God, by
which we are saved, signifies nothing to us: For if it be of works, it is not
of grace.

But on the other hand; If we be saved by grace, then not by works: Works is no
more works. See therefore, look that you live wholly and solely upon the grace
of God in Jesus Christ: And that you do your work, not from your self, and not
for your self. As for example; If a man do receive an Estate, or an Inheritance
of his Father, as a free gift; then he pays nothing for it. If a man says he
deserved it, or that he wrought for it; this takes away the freeness of the
gift. If it be of gift, it is not of duty: If it be of duty, it is not of gift:
So, if it be of grace, it is not of works; and therefore cease from your work in
the matter of your Justification; that is, stand clear from resting on your
works: Look at free Grace in Christ for all; for he ever lives to make
Intercession for us. It Is when we are saved by Grace, that we are able to work;
and God does graciously accept of our work. But how? as we are united to him,
by his Son Jesus Christ, our great Intercessor. Hence you have that, Col. 3.
17. And whatsoever you do in word, or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; giving thanks unto God, and the Father, by him. How? when you pray, pray
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus for
acceptance; and when you praise the Lord, praise him in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; and trust in him for acceptance. Do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus:
because he is the great Intercessor for our Souls: And he takes away the
iniquity of our holy things, that they may be accepted. And he offers up his
own Intercession, with the prayers of the Saints; and therefore, whatever you
do, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus. This is the Spiritual Lesson that we
are to learn from this Doctrine or Truth, that we are now upon:

That if Jesus Christ be able to save to the uttermost, all those that come
unto God by him; then rest upon him with full and entire Faith, and cease from
your own works, and rest wholly and alone upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Here is great encouragement and comfort for them that believe in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Such are our sins, and we have so much of guilt upon
us, and defilements in us, as we know not how, with any face, to make our
appearance before a holy God. And many Christians, upon occasions, are ready to
despair of finding mercy with God. It Is true, if there were not a Mediator, an
Intercessor for us, there were reason to despair indeed. But God has put a
great Office upon his Son, that he shall make Intercession for Transgressors,
Isa. 53. 12. The Father there speaking of his Son, with which I shall conclude;
He has poured out his Soul unto death: And he was numbered with the
Transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made Intercession for the
Transgressors. These expressions show, that God the Father loved his Son,
because he bare our sins, and made Intercession for the Transgressors;
therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong; because he made his Soul an offering for sin, and bare
the sin of many. Let this be comfort and encouragement to every poor Believer:
And say thus; Well, I have many sins, and many infirmities; but thanks be to
God, the League is broken, I do not love them; but I hate them -- I am one that
hangs upon Jesus Christ: And seeing I have heard that he is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for all those that come unto God by him; I will come unto God by
him.

SERMON XI.
Hebrews 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens.
I Have, through Divine Assistance, gone thus far through this Chapter, where
the Apostle treats so largely of Jesus Christ, and of his Priestly-office. As
we are to live by Faith, and to be saved by Faith; so it is of great moment, to
every one rightly to understand, and to be instructed by Jesus Christ, and his
Priestly-office. For as we are sinners, there is no coming to a holy God, but
by him. By him we are said to draw nigh to God; in verse 19. as has been
showed. And he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him;
in verse 25. which was the last thing was handled, [He is able to save to the
uttermost, them that come unto God by him.] So that the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and Faith in him, is that Knowledge that is absolutely necessary to
Salvation: Therefore the Apostle does so much enlarge upon it, in this
Scripture, and in other Scriptures.

Now, in these words which I have read, for our present meditation, we have a
further Argument and Demonstration given by the Apostle, to prove that Jesus
Christ, our great High Priest, is far more excellent than the Highpriests
under the Law. And the Argument is drawn from his purity, and their sinfulness:
His purity being holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners: Whereas the
Priests under the Law, they were guilty of sin, and therefore they did offer
Sacrifices, first, for their own sins, in verse 17. But our Lord Jesus Christ,
is one separated from sinners; so that the Argument lies thus; That Priest,
that High Priest, pure and undefiled, and has no sin in him, must needs be
more excellent, than they that had sin, and did offer Sacrifice for their own
sins.

I begin now with verse 26. For such an High Priest became us, who was
harmless, i. e. such an High Priest was needful for us: and suitable for us in
our state and condition; for if we have had an High Priest that was not Holy
and Harmless, how should he carry on the work of an High Priest? How should he
save us from our sins? How, should he bring us from Misery, if he had not been
Holy and Harmless? But such an High Priest became us, who was Holy: If any
other had undertaken to appear in the presence of God for us, he could never
have brought this work about: Therefore it became us to have such an
High Priest: It was not for a sinner to appear in the presence of a Holy God,
if we had not such an High Priest, we could not have had acceptance with God,
if we had not a Holy Advocate: You know what old Eli said to his Sons; said he,
If one man sin against another the Judge shall Judge him, (1 Samuel 2. 25.) But
if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? There is no man fit
to treat with a Holy God, that sins against the Lord.

But you will object and say, Did not God appoint Job to pray for his Friends,
and interceed for his Friends? And did not Abraham pray for Sodom? And they
were sinners, and yet they were injoined to pray for them.

For that we must distinguish between the Prayer of the Saints, and the
Intercession of a Mediator. By the Intercession of Jesus Christ, the Prayers of
the Saints are accepted of God; why? Because they come to him as a reconciled
God, by Jesus Christ: And their Prayers are made at the Throne of Grace: But
the Intercession of Jesus Christ, is not to a reconciled God without Christ:
but to reconcile God by Christ, by his Death and Suffering: Christ he appears
in the presence of God for us, to present his Blood as the means of our
reconciliation. Jobs Prayer was not to make reconciliation between God and his
Friends by his Merits: But it was to draw out that Mercy, he was willing to
bestow upon them: It became Jesus Christ to be Righteous, to be our Advocate;
says the Apostle, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous, who is a Propitiation for our sins. It was suitable to
our condition, that he that should appear in the presence of God for us, should
be perfectly Righteous.

But then, here we have the purity of Christ set forth in four Branches.

1. He is said to be Holy. 2. Harmless. 3. Undefiled. And 4. Separate from
Sinners. And then we have his Exaltation, follows in these words [made higher
than the Heavens.]

These things we shall briefly explicate, as God shall assist; and then come to
some Application

First, (says the Text) He was Holy] It became us to have such an High Priest
who was Holy. Now, Holiness as it here stands, in distinction from
Undefilement, it signifies that Holy Consecration, which Christ was under in
his Priestly Office. For the Apostle has reference in this word [Holy] unto
the Holiness of the High Priest, which was his dedication and consecration to
God. And therefore if you look into the 106. Psalm v. 16. You find there, that
Aaron is called the Saint of the Lord, or the Holy one of God. How is that?
Moses was as much the Saint of the Lord in respect of Spiritual Grace, as Aaron
was. But this is not spoken in reference to their Graces, but in reference to
their Office. Aaron was the Saint of the Lord, the Holy one of God by
Consecration: For God took him out of Israel, and set him apart for his Holy
Service: and as he was to approach to God, he was to have Holiness written upon
his Breast Plate, as you may see Exodus 28. 36. Thou shall make a Breast Plate
of pure Gold, and Grave upon it with the Engraveings of a Signet, HOLINESS TO
THE LORD: This was to be Graven on the Breast Plate [Holiness to the Lord]
because he was to go into the Holy of Holies, where God manifested himself: and
God will be Sanctified by all those that draw near to him -- And therefore he
must have a Breast Plate upon him, with this Engraving upon it [Holiness to the
Lord.] Why? Because he was Consecrated to appear before the Holy God. So when
Christ is said to be Holy: He is the person that is Sanctified, and set apart
to appear in the presence of God for us. Therefore you have those words of our
Savior, Joh. 17. 19. And for their sakes I Sanctify my self, that they also
might be Sanctified through thy Truth. What is the meaning of this? Christ was
Sanctified from the Womb, by the Holy Spirit: But (says he) for their sakes I
Sanctify my self, i. e. I do set my self apart for their service, and do give
up my self for their sakes, to appear in the presence of God for them: And such
an High Priest became us who is Holy, to appear in the presence of God for us.

Secondly, The Text says, he is Harmless.] Every one of these four words, have
their particular signification: All drives to this, to set out the Lord Jesus
Christ, in his personal excellencies [He is Harmless] the word signifies one
that never did any wrong: and therefore in another place, it is translated
Innocent: one that did no wrong, either in thought, word, or deed: And says
the Apostle, He knew no sin, 1 Cor. 5. and the latter end; and says the
Apostle Peter, there was no guile found in his Mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 24. he was
harmless: He was one that could never be charged with wrong done to the Name of
God, or to the good of Mankind, he was Innocent, and therefore when the
Scribes that were his bitter Enemies, and always Quarreling with him, says he
(in way of challenge he made against them) which of you convinces me of Sin? As
if he should say, you make great opposition against me of this and that, but
which of you convinces me, of sin? Joh. 8: 46. and Joh. 14. 30. For the Prince
of this World comes, and has nothing in me. If the Devil could have found any
thing in Christ but Innocence, he would have taken the advantage of him.

This is the second Branch of the purity of Christ [He was Holy and Harmless.]

Thirdly, Vndefiled] He was undefiled, i. e. his Humane Nature was never
polluted with Original Sin, and Corruption never took hold on the Person of
Jesus Christ, so he is said to be undefiled. We are unclean, and we come into
the World unclean: But our Lord Jesus Christ, though he took our Nature upon him,
yet he did not take the sinfulness of our Nature: He was undefiled in respect
of all Original Sin and Corruption: there you read in the first of Luke, when
the Angel came to Mary, to bring her the first Tidings of Christ's conception
and Birth, he said to her (in the 35 Verse) The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the highest shall over-shadow thee: Therefore the Holy
thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. He was Holy,
Pure and Undefiled in his Conception. David confessed, in his Penitential
Psalm: That he was conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, as all men
are, but our Lord Jesus Christ, he was conceived by the power of the Holy
Ghost: And he is Holy and Undefiled: He has nothing of the Corruption of Man's
Nature upon him. -- And that is his third excellency. And then,

Fourthly, It is said, he is separate from Sinners.] This is still to hint out
to us, that he came not of the sinful Race of Mankind. He came of the Race of
Mankind, but not of the sinful Race: For God separated him from the sinful Race
of Mankind. The Man Christ Jesus, separated from sinners, i. e. from all
sinners, that came out of Adams Loins: That though he was a Man, he was separated
from Man, as a sinner [separated from sinners.]

But here it may be objected; How can it be said that Christ was separated from
sinners, when he converst so much with sinners, when he was here on Earth; so
that the Pharisees said, he was a Wine-bibber, and a friend of Publicans and
sinners?

The Answer is thus: Our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was here on Earth, did
converse with sinners, for the saving of their Souls, but never converst with
them in their sin: And so he is said to be separated from sinners. Christ could
have no more communion with their sins, than Light with Darkness: Yet he
converst with sinners, as he came to save and to seek them that were lost. He
came to save them, not to mingle with them in their sins: Therefore you may
observe in Luke 19. when he goes to Zacheus his house, some of the people
murmured, and said, He is gone to be a Guest, to a man that is a sinner, in
verse 7. But what says Christ in verse 10. The Son of Man is come to seek and
to save those that were lost; Therefore he was to go to be a Guest to a sinner;
to save those that were lost. It was easy with Christ to keep, and converse
with sinners, and yet keep himself from the defilement of their sins. As it is
with a Physician; he can go into the house of a sick person, and yet keep
himself free from the Contagion of the Disease. The Adversaries of Christ could
never charge him with any defilements of sin; and herein the purity of our Lord
Jesus Christ is set out to us [And it became us to have such an High Priest.]

But then, here is the next thing, which is, his Exaltation [Made higher than
the Heavens.] That is an expression that carries much in it. Here we have the
Exaltation of our great High Priest. He is made higher than the Heavens:
[Heavens in the Plural number.] The Scripture mentions three Heavens. First,
The Lowest Heaven is the Airy Heaven, where the Fowls of the Air fly. And of
this you read in Genesis 1. about the 8th verse. God called the Firmament Heaven,
when he had separated the Earth from the Heaven.

The second or middlemost Heaven, is the Starry Heaven, which God showed to
Abraham, in Genesis 15. where the Sun, Moon and Stars are contained. But then,

There is a Third Heaven, which is the place of the blessed, where God does
manifest himself in his Glory; and that Third Heaven the Apostle speaks of, in
2 Cor. 12. 2. he tells us that he was caught up into the Third Heaven, that is,
the place where the blessed are -- This is that which Solomon calls the Heaven
of Heavens, in that passage of his, in 2 Chronicles. 2. 6. But who is able to build
him an House, seeing the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him?
that is, God. Now (says the Apostle here in my Text) Jesus Christ our
High Priest, is made higher than the Heavens; he is made higher than the
Terrestrial Heaven, higher than the Starry Heaven; and I pray mind what an
Emphasis the Scripture puts upon this; compare the words of the Text with
Ephesians. 4. 10. the Apostle says, That he Ascended far above all Heavens, that
he might fill all things. The Apostle in the Text says, that he is made higher
than the Heavens, and here he says, he is Ascended far above all Heavens: Why?
Because in his exalted state of Glory, he is taken up above, to Gods right
hand, which is above all the Created Glory in Heaven. For though the great God
made a Heaven for the holy Angels, and for the glorified Saints, and does there
manifest his Glory, so far as they are capable of receiving it, yet still God
is above all; the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him (says Solomon:) How?
God is a Heaven in himself. You know the Prophet tells us, that he inhabits in
Eternity, and lives in Eternity: Now this Eternity, was in God himself, before
the Heavens were made; and tho he manifests himself in his Glory, among the
Saints and Angels, yet he is above all; and so the Glory of Christ is far above
all the Glory of the Saints and Angels; for the Glory of Christ is to sit at
Gods right hand, as the Apostle says, Heb. 1. 13. He gives us Glory in Heaven,
and his Angels have Glory in Heaven, but Jesus Christ has higher Glory than
all these, for he is at the Fathers right hand, and he dwells in God himself,
and inheriteth Eternity; see Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. when the Apostle, who is
speaking of raising up Christ from the dead, he says, He set him on his own
right hand in Heavenly places, far above all Principalities and Powers, and
Might and Dominions. Mind how high the Apostle goes with this; when he raised
up Christ from the dead, he set him on his own Right hand, far above all
Principalities, and Powers, and Dominions. What Principalities and Powers are
these? Why the holy Angels, for Heaven is a Kingdom, and there is a Government
and an Order in Heaven. There is Principalities and Powers, there is Angels and
Arch angels: But when God raised Jesus Christ from the dead, he raised him
above the Angels, he set him far above the Glory of the Saints. And tho he
prayed that the Saints might be where he is, it is not meet that we should be
received in that height of Glory, where he is; but we are to have the Glory of
Christ communicated to us, so far as we are capable to receive him, as he is
the second Person of the Trinity. The Saints cannot reach to that Glory he is
in, but they shall have it so far as they are capable to receive him, Phil. 2.
9, 10. Wherefore God has highly Exalted him, and given him a Name which is
above every Name; That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, of things in Earth, of things under the Earth. All the holy Angels and
Saints in Heaven, do bow unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and do homage to him in
our Nature: Why? Because the Father has made him higher than the Heavens;
above all the Glory of Heaven. He is not only holy, harmless, separate from
sinners, but made higher than the Heavens. And such an High Priest became us.

Now for Application.
This Doctrine is Four ways Useful to us:

First, This shows the Riches of Gods Goodness and Mercy to poor sinful Man,
that he should appoint such a High Priest to interceed for us; such a one as is
not to be found among all the Children of Men. God had the whole Creation
before him, Angels and Men; but there was no Person could be found, that did
become us, that was fit to be our High Priest, but he that is higher than the
Heavens, the Son of God. Oh the great goodness of God! It will take up an
Eternity to adore God for his goodness in our Salvation by Jesus Christ. God
has done much for us, in our Creation; he has made us rational Creatures out
of nothing, he has made a World for us to inhabit, and given us Dominion over
the works of his hand -- has made us but a little lower than the Angels; which
made the Psalmist cry out, Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him?
But what is this work of Creation, to the work of Redemption, by our Lord Jesus
Christ? when he took the Son of his love, that is higher than the Heavens, and
had Glory with him before the World began; when there was no Heaven, no Earth,
to take his Son, and to call him to this work, to appear in the presence of
God, that we might be accepted by him. Oh what infinite goodness is this! Oh
how should we get our Hearts affected with this! He did not so with the Angels;
let us therefore labor to admire the riches and goodness of God the Father,
who has called his Son to this Office, and has given him an Oath, that he
should be a Priest for ever.

Secondly, As this Doctrine shows the great Love and Mercy of God, so also, The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. For if he that had a Glory with the Father,
before the World began, would not have become Man, would not have taken this
Office, we had all perished; but that he who is higher than the Heavens, should
condescend so low, as to take up the cause of poor sinners, wretched sinners.
Do we know what we are? Have we any sense of what we are by Nature? Do we not
find our selves Proud sinners, Carnal sinners, Unbelieving sinners, vain and
empty Creatures? And for him that is above the Heavens, to undertake for these
poor Creatures: Oh what infinite free Grace is this! You know how it is among
Men; if you have a bad Man, and he has a bad Cause, you will say there is not
a man will undertake his Cause: Our Lord Jesus Christ, he has to deal with bad
Men, and bad Women; he undertakes for them, to justify them before God. Oh the
riches of the Grace of Christ in undertaking for such poor wretched sinners!
You may apply that in Romans 5. 7, 8. Scarcely for a righteous man will one die;
yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die: But God commends
his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

Thirdly, This Doctrine is A special ground of comfort, for finding acceptance
with God, to every believing Soul, to every one that comes to God by Christ, by
a true and unfeigned Faith. You may come to God, having such an High Priest. If
you mind the Scripture you will find the Scripture does not only commend Faith
in the Children of God, but confidence (which is the highest degree of Faith;)
in Heb. 3. the Apostle speaking of Christ being set as a Son over his own
House, in v. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own House, whose House we are, if
we hold fast the confidence, and rejoicing of the hope, firm unto the end. If
we hold fast confidence: What is this confidence? Why confidence is when we go
about a business without fear, doubtings, distrust, jealousies, when we go
freely and boldly about; so says the Apostle, Let us go bodly to the Throne of
Grace: Why? For we have such an Highpriest that interceeds for us. You know
that a Man will bear and rely with confidence upon his Friend at Court; and
shall not we bear upon Christ, when we draw nigh to God by Jesus Christ: We may
then draw nigh to God with a holy confidence, not doubting. For it is a
dishonor to our Lord Jesus to want confidence in him; labor therefore to
strengthen your Faith by these things, that ye may serve the Lord with a holy,
yet a humble confidence.

Lastly, If such an High Priest became us, who was holy, harmless, undefiled,
and separate from sinners; Then surely such a People does become this great
High Priest, which are holy, harmless, and such do mortify their sin, and do
cast off the pollutions of the World. As it becomes us to have such an
High Priest, so it becomes us to be holy as he is holy; to be pure as he is
pure I shall give you but one or two instances, and so conclude; in Philip. 4.
8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. The Apostle gives this as a general
rule; if there be any thing that is good, true, and holy, that to the Glory of
God, think on these things: So in the Epistle to the Ephesians 4. 1. I beseech
you therefore, that you walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called;
that is, that ye walk becomingly, that you walk up to it. I shall name but one
Scripture more, which the Apostle there writes for the instruction of Christian
Women, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. In like manner also, that Women adorn themselves in
modest Apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety; not with Broidered Hair, or
Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but which becomes Women, professing
Godliness. There is a Dress becoming Women professing Godliness; and there is
the Dress of a Harlot. There is not a Woman in the Congregation, but would be
counted a Professor of Godliness: Then look to your Attire, wear those things
that carry Sobriety, Modesty, and Shamefastness, and such a Dress as becomes
Godliness. And since we have such an High Priest as becomes us, who is holy,
harmless, and undefiled; how does it become us to live to the glory of God, and
the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapter of the Canticles. Thirteen Sermons upon several useful
Subjects: All published by John Collins D. D. of Norwich. The Way of the Spirit
in bringing Souls to Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth, with the necessity
of Faith, in several Sermons: both by M^* Thomas Allen, late Pastor of a Church
at Norwich. Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christian's Gain: by Mr.
Timothy Armitage, late Minister at Norwich. A Discourse of the preciousness of
Christ, and of the preciousness of Faith. Precious Promises the Portion of
Overcomers. Sermons on five several useful Subjects; all by Mr. John Longher,
Minister in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer, by Mr. Francis English, late Minister
in Norwich. Directions to spell English right. The History of the Protestant
Reformation, as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saint speaking; being a Sermon
preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcomb of Dedham in Essex. The English
Presbyterian. The Miracles of Christ. The ordinary matter of Prayer, drawn into
Questions and Answers. Two Treatises, the first, Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in
all Cases and Conditions: The second, Of a Christian's Hope in Heaven, and
Freedom from Condemnation by Christ: both by Mr. Robert Asty, late Minister of
Jesus Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates, recommended in a Sermon
preached September the 9th, 1683. being the Thansgiving Day for his Majesty's
Deliverance: by Jonathan Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk. A Present
for Youth, and an Example for the Aged; Two Discourses, one of Spiritual
Blessings; the other, That God has an high account of the least Grace in the
Saints: by Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in Norwich.
Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment: by Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister of the
Gospel in Sudbury in Suffolk. Of the Conversion of Sinners to God in Christ,
the necessity, nature, means, and signs of it, with a concluding Speech to the
Unconverted: by Martin Finch, a Servant of Christ in the Work of the Gospel, in
the City of Norwich. Sincerity, or the upright Man's Walk to Heaven, delivered
in several Sermons in the Parish Church of St. Michael, in Long-stratten, in
Norfolk: by James Oldfield, late Minister there. Alexipharmacon Spirituale.
Being a Defensative against the Poison and Sting of Death. Or, The great
expedient how to make the Bed of the Grave so easy, that we may lie down in
Peace, and take our Rest. By Samuel Snowden, Minister of the Gospel at Newton
in Norfolk. Christ set forth, in several Sermons, upon the seventh Chapter of
the Hebrews, by Mr. Robert Ottee, late Pastor to a Congregation in Beckles in
Suffolk. Sacramental Discourses on several Select Subjects, to which is added,
a Discourse of the Life of Faith, by Christopher Amiraell Minister of the
Gospel in Norfolk.

