AN Outcry of POETS;
OR, A CATALOGUE of Wits to be Sold by Inch of Candle, or otherways. Tuesday in
the Piazza in Covent Garden, about Nine of the Clock in the Morning, and will
last till seven at Night.
1. AN Excellent Stuttering Poet, fraught with Great Learning, Good Notions,
Quick Conceptions, and N^at Comedy, being an exquisite little Fellow at a
Melancholy Dirge, of a Merry Roundelay, and will be Swopt with any Bookseller
for Waste Paper. 2. Two Modern Parablists, highly Skilled in the estimable Art
of Puzzling, having an extraordinary Faculty of Metamorphising M a into
Cuckoes, whales, Bears, Bulls, or Dragons, etc. and are great Abh^^rers of that
Monstrous Prodigallity, Topknots: will be Sold for little or nothing. 3. A
Brawny Fat Poet, very nimble of Tongue, quick of Apprehension, High slown in
Tragedy, and a most Dexterous Fellow at a Bartholomew-pair Droll; but being
under the Distemper of a C(...)s Apetitus, will be Sold so much the Cheaper. 4.
A Gentleman of a VVeak Stomach, and of Danish Complexion, Profoundly Read in
all Arts and Sciences, having a curious Method of Epitomizing; being the Author
of a^ Hundred Bound Books, c^mmo^ly displayed, upon the Railes in Moor Fields,
where they may be Read at any hour in the day, for your further Instruction of
his Genius ^^sides, Nature having bestowed her Secret Blessings very
plentifully upon him, makes him Covet to be Sold to some Rich Widow, who if
^^e please to Lay out her Money upon such a Commodity, may be furnished upon a
good Consideration. 5. Two of the Athenian Respondents, having broke their
Brains, in studying to Answer, which is the upper part of the Globe, are
willing to be Sold to the Booksellers in Pye-Corner, to Regain the Lost Credit
of the Ancient and Renowned Art of Ballad Making. 6. An Illaborate News-Monger,
well Read in the Gazette, and in Feltham's Observation on the Low Countries,
being now Servant in Ordinary to the Sham Master General, and Chief Leader of
the Lying pamphleteers, is now ready to Resign his Commission, and will be Sold
to any other Printer that has furthor Occasion. 7. Mr. Multum in Parvo, A
Gentleman of Low Stature, but of High Learning, whose Guts lying too near his
Brains, by reason of his Deformity, are apt to throw up Excrementitious Vapors
into the transparent Current of Conception, that his Good Thoughts can seldom
(...) seen for his Ill Managements but for this Fault we shall make Abatement;
He will be Sold by the Pound, that we may have a Price according to his; Bulk.


If we find these go off well, our next Auction shall furnish you with more
Variety.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for J. Harlow, 1691.


