A TREATISE Concerning the CAUSES OF THE Present Corruption OF CHRISTIANS, And
the Remedies thereof.

PART I.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul*s
Churchyard. 1700.

To the Right Reverend GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM, Chancellor of the Most
Noble Order of the Garter.
My Lord,
THE Treatise I now Humbly offer to Your Lordship in English, has met with a
very great and general Applause in French. A Second Edition of it was desired
in less than two Months after the first, and it is already Translated into more
Languages than one: But that which ought to weigh more than any other
Commendation, is the high value Your Lordship sets upon this Book; for if the
most Accomplished Writers are the best Judges of other Men's Works, there lies
no Appeal from Your Lordship's Judgment concerning the worth of this. I have
heard Your Lordship deliver Your Opinion of this Performance in a very
particular manner, and reckon it among the best Books that this Age has
produced, and that in all respects, both for Piety and Learning, good Sense and
true Judgment.

Your Lorship thought fit that so valuable a Work should be put into English.
You were pleased, My Lord, to commit this Translation to my care, and I could
wish I had been as well qualified for that Office, as I was desirous to
discharge it to Your Lordship's Satisfaction. But I am Conscious of my want of
Abilities in this as well as in all other things, and I fear the Work of the
Reverend and Worthy Author, who honors me with some share in his Friendship,
has lost several Beauties and Graces by passing through my Hands. However, My
Lord, I have rendered his Sense as faithfully as I could, and that is all I
would be accountable for to the Reader; for if among that Variety of nice and
Tender Subjects which are touched here, the Author mixes any thing which does
not suit with every Bodies Notions* it is his Province and not mine to defend
it. He lives in one of the remotest Countries in which the Protestant Religion
is received, and in what he writes, he had his own Neighborhood chiefly in
View; so that his main design was to corect things within his reach, to which
the State of that Church, which is now in eminent danger, led him. But I leave
to your Lordship to judge, whether that which he thought proper for his own
Church, may not be likewise of good use to others.

And now my Lord, I do gladly embrace this opportunity to make a public
Acknowledgment of the extraordinary Obligations your Lordship has laid upon me.
A Post in the service of the Church is not the greatest Favor I have received
at your Hands: I reckon my self much more beholden to your Lordship for the
benefit of your Example and Instructions, which I have enjoyed several Years in
your Family. But here I must make a full stop, and how much soever I am
inclined to say a great deal upon the subject, yet I know your Lordship too
well, to venture on it; for whatever I may think I know I must say nothing.

The best return I can make for the large experience I have had of your
Lordship's Kindness and Generosity, is to put up my most hearty Prayers for the
long Continuance of your Lordship's Life and Happiness, and for the lasting
Prosperity of your Family; this I do my Lord as truly as I profess my self,
with all possible Respect.

Your Lordship's most Humble, most Dutiful and most Obliged Servant, Charles
Mutel.

THE Authors PREFACE.
WE have reason to wonder at the great Corruptions that at present are to be
found among Christians. The Religion they profess, does chiefly tend to
Sanctify Men, and to Purge the World from Corruption and Vice; and one would
think it should produce that Effect, since it affords such a clear Light, such
powerful Motives, and such effectual Helps to Holiness. Notwithstanding all
this, Whoever enquires into the Notions and Manners of Christians, must have no
great share of Sincerity or Judgment; if he does not acknowledge, that Religion
has but littil influence upon their Minds, and that there is an amazing
Contradiction between their Lives and the Rules of Christianity. This
Corruption is so evident and so generally Confessed, that I need not stand to
prove it.

Taking it then for granted, that Christians live in a great neglect of their
Duties; It is natural to enquire into the Causes of this Corruption, and to
consider what Remedies should be applied to it. This is what I intend to do in
this Treatise, in hopes that such an Enquiry will not be altogether unuseful.

For First, it may Contribute to Maintain the Honor, and the Truth of the
Christian Religion, and to Confute Infidels and Libertines, who are apt to
despise it, because it is Precepts are little practiced. If Religion, say they,
be true and divine, How comes it to pass, that it has so little efficacy, and
that there appears so much Disorder, and Licentiousness among the Professors of
it? To undeceive such Men, and to infuse into them a greater respect for
Religion, it is of very great Importance to discover the Causes of the Decay of
Piety; and to show that if Men are Corrupted, it is not because Christ's
Religion is insufficient to introduce Virtue and Order into the World; But that
this Evil flows from some other Cause, and that if Christians did what they
might and ought to do, true Piety would not be so uncommon as it is amongst
them.

A Second Advantage which may be reaped from this Enquiry; is this, it will
appear by it, that how great soever the Corruption may be; It is not however,
as many imagine, past remedy. Which imagination, is a most dangerous Prejudice,
while Men look on it as impossible to stem the Tide of Corruption, and to
re-establish Order and Purity of Manners in the World, they do not so much as
attempt it, they let things go on at the same rate; and so the Disorder
increases and spreads farther. It cannot be denied, but that we Corruption is
great, general and inveterate; but God forbid, we should look upon it as an
incurable Disease. The Fountains of it may easily be discovered; and it is not
impossible to stop them. I hope this will be acknowledged by those, who shall
attentively, and without prepossession consider, what is proposed in this Work.

Thirdly, There is no means more likely to remove this Corruption, than to cut
off the Occasions of it: That is the surest as well as the most compendious
Method. One of the main Reasons, why so many excellent Books designed to
inspire Men with a love of Religion and Piety, have not all the effect that
might be expected from them; is, that the Authors do not sufficiently observe
the general Causes of the Depravation of Manners. It is to little purpose to
deplore the Corruption of the Age, to exhort Men, and to give them fine Lessons
of Morality: The Work of Reformation cannot be much advanced, as long as the
Evil is not taken in its Cause, and as long as such Principles and Abuses
continue among Christians, as are, and will always be, Obstacles to the
Progress of the Gospel.

Lastly, I considered that this Matter had not yet been thoroughly handled by
any Author, at least that I know of. Of those who have touched upon it in their
Books; some have confined themselves to Considerations purely Moral, and others
to Theological Reflections, upon the Errors which are in Vogue, or upon the
Controversies which divide Christians; but they have omitted many things which
seem essential; no doubt, because they did not intend to treat this Subject
purposely, or because they did not take a View of the whole extent of it.

As these Considerations have made me wish for a long while that among so many
able Men who write about Religion, some might undertake so important a Subject;
so they have determined me to Publish these Essays upon the Causes of
Corruption; hoping that others will apply themselves to the full Discussion of
those Matters, which are here but imperfectly hinted at.

But that the Scope of this Treatise may be the better understood; and that no
body may expect that in it, which according to the Scheme I formed to my self,
ought not to have a place here; I shall acquaint the Reader with one thing,
which he may perhaps have foreseen, from what has been already said.

I do not propose to my self to handle this Matter in the way of the Divinity
Schools. No Man therefore ought to wonder, if I say nothing of the State in
which all Men are born; nor of that Inclination to Vice which is observed in
them. For though this is the first Original of Corruption; yet certainly this
Corruption would be much less, if Christians did use the means which God
affords them, to overcome it; and if there were not other Sources which feed
and strengthen that vicious Propensity. Besides, I do not consider Corruption
in general, as it is Common to all Mankind, but I enquire into the Causes of
the Corruption of Christians in particular. Neither do I design to write a
Moral Treatise; so that it must not be expected, that I should discourse of
Self-Love and Pride, and of all the other Passions, which are the Ordinary
Occasions of Men's Sins; or that I should trace out all the particular Causes of
every Sin. This would carry me too far; and such things have been often
examined. I therefore apply my self only to the general Causes; and I manage
the the Matter thus.

I divide this Work into Two Parts, because the Causes of Corruption may be of
Two sorts. I shall call those of the first sort, Particular or Internal;
because they are within us, and to be found in every particular Man that lives
ill. Those of the Second sort, which are more general, I name External, because
they proceed rather from certain outward Circumstances, and from the
unhappiness of the Times; than from the fault of particular Persons.

The Causes I shall treat of in the First Part, are no other, but the ill
Dispositions in which most Christians are, and which hinder their applying
themselves to Piety: And of these I shall observe Nine.

I. Ignorance. II. Prejudices and False Notions concerning Religion. III. Some
Opinions and and Maxims which are used to Authorize Corruption. IV. The Abuse
of Holy Scripture. V. A false Modesty. VI. The Delaying Repentance. VII. Man's
Sloth and Negligence in Matters of Religion. VIII. Worldly Business. IX. Men's
particular Callings.
The Causes to be Considered in the Second Part are these Seven.

I. The State of the Church and of Religion in General. II. The Want of
Discipline. III. The Defects of the Clergy. IV. The Defects of Christian
Princes and Magistrates. V. Education. VI. Example and Custom. VII. Books.
I declare here that in discoursing upon these Sources, I do not mean to tax
all Christians without exception: So when I speak of Ignorance, and of
Prejudices commonly received; Knowing and Learned Men are excepted: And when I
observe certain Defects in the state of the the Church and of Religion, in
Discipline, in Clergymen, or in Christian Magistrates; I suppose those Faults
obtain more in some Places than in others. In short, whoever should apply what
is said in this Treatise, to all sorts of Persons and Churches, would certainly
mistake my Design.

And now I must desire those who may chance to see this Book, to examine
seriously what (...) propose in it. No Lover of Truth or Religion* can refuse
his attention to a Subject of this Nature. But I hope it will be more
particularly welcome to Churchmen and Divines; who are called by their
Function, to set themselves against Corruption, and to endeavor all they can,
to promote Piety and the Glory of God.

To Conclude; I heartily implore his Blessing upon this Work, who put it into
my Heart to set about it, and who is my Witness with what Design and Intention
I publish it.

A TREATISE Concerning the CAUSES OF THE Present Corruption OF CRISTIANS.
PART. I.
CAUSE I. Ignorance.
WHEN a Man thinks of the Causes of that Corruption which over-runs the
Christian World; the first which offers it self to his mind, is Ignorance, and
therefore I shall begin with it.

Our Notions and Knowledge, are the first Principles of our Actions. We can
never love a Thing, or adhere to it, when it is not at all, or when it is but
imperfectly known to us: Supposing then that Men are Ignorant, or very little
Instructed in Religion, there is no wonder that they should be Corrupt; for
they must of necessity be so. On the other hand, when they appear to be
extremely Corrupt, we may conclude that they want Instruction. I do not deny,
but that Corruption proceeds sometimes from the wickedness of the Heart, which
resists the Light of the Understanding; and that Men frequently Act against
their Knowledge. But it may safely be said, That if Christians were well
Instructed, they would not be so Corrupt, and that wherever an extraordinary
Corruption is visible, there is likewise a great deal of Ignorance.

This is confirmed by the Scripture, and by God's Conduct in the Establishing
the Christian Religion. When the Apostles speak of those Disorders, wherein the
Heathens lived before their Conversion, they ascribe them to the darkness of
their Minds. Ephesians. IV. 18.
The Gentiles (says St. Paul) have their Understanding darkened, being
alienated from the Life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their Heart. The same Apostle calls the Times which
preceded the Coming of of Christ, the Times of Ignorance. And the first Thing
which God did to change the Face of the World, and to rescue it from
Corruption; was to dispel the Clouds of their Ignorance, and to enlighten them,
with the Knowledge of himself, by the Preaching of the Gospel.

Although Christians cannot be charged with so gross an Ignorance as that of
the Heathens; yet they fall very short of that Knowledge they ought to have,
and it must be confessed, that for the most part, they live in shameful and
deplorable Ignorance. This is the Reason why Piety is so much wanting among
them, and why they are so Depraved and Vicious; which is the Thing I will
endeavor to make appear.

In order to this; As the Christian Religion may be reduced to these Two Heads,
First, The Knowledge of the Truth. Secondly, The Practice of Holiness.


It is fit to Enquire, whether with respect to these, Christians are furnished
with necessary Information? I shall make it appear that they are very little
Instructed.

I. In that which concerns the Truths of Religion. And

II. In what relates to Manners, and to the Duties, of Christianity.

The Reflections I shall bestow upon both these Heads; will I hope, clearly
prove, That among those vast multitudes of Men, who profess themselves
Christians, there are very few, who are well acquainted with their Religion.
From whence it will be Natural to Conclude, That they must needs be very
Corrupt.

I. To begin with the Knowledge of the Truths of Christianity; we must
distinguish Two sorts of Truths in Religion: The General, and the Particular
Truths. The General Truths, are those, upon which the whole of Religion is
founded; such as these, That there is a God, That the Bible is a Divine Book,
And that the Christian Religion is True. By Particular Truths, I mean the
various Doctrines which Religion contains, and which are the Parts of it; but
which at the same time, depend upon the General Truths, as upon their
Principle. The Doctrine of the Sacraments, of Justification, and many others,
are of this Number. Now let us consider the Ignorance of Christians in
reference to these Two sorts of Truths.

1. Every Man who makes use of his Reason, may easily apprehend, That the
General Truths are the most important; that they are those of which one ought
chiefly to be persuaded; and that without these General Truths, the Particular
ones would be useless, nay, would not be so much as Truths. To Enquire, Whether
there be any Sacraments, or how a Man can be Justified; one must believe first,
That there is a God and a Religion: For if I am not convinced of the Existence
of God, and of the Truth of Religion, it would signify little to me, whether
or not there were any Sacraments, and all the time I should employ in the
prosecution of this Enquiry, would be lost.

This first Reflection does already discover to us an Essential and Capital
Defect. A great many Christians want Instruction concerning the Principles and
Foundations of Christianity; they do not sufficiently consider the Certainty
and Importance of it. Their Knowledge of Religion, does seldom go further than
the Particular Truths of it, and does not reach the General. This is so common
a Fault, that it may be observed even in those whole Profession it is to Study
Religion and to Teach it to others. Some have spent the best part of their
Lives, in the Study of Divinity, or in Expounding the Scripture, who never
seriously examined the Arguments for the Truth of Christianity, or the Divinity
of the Scripture. Some are Masters of the principal Controversies which divide
Christians, who would stand mute if they were called back to the first Elements
of Religion, and if they were to maintain against an Infidel, that there is a
Religion, or that the Christian Religion is true. The People enter yet less
than the Divines into the Examination of the general Truths; and there are very
few who either attend to them, or indeed believe them as they ought.

And yet the Whole of Religion depends upon a firm Persuasion concerning the
Principles of Faith; it is that which renders the particular Truths effectual
to Salvation, and which begets Piety and the Love of Virtue. When a Man is
persuaded that Religion proposes nothing but what is certain, he immediately
receives with Reverence whatsoever it teaches; he feels an Inclination in
himself to observe its Precepts, and he believes a Judgment and another Life,
as if he saw them before his Eyes. Such is the Efficacy of a true Faith, and of
a steady Persuasion about fundamental Truths. But without this Persuasion it is
very hard, not to say impossible, to adhere sincerely to Religion, and to
perform the Duties of it. And this is the constant Source of the Corruption of
Christians.

It may perhaps be objected, that all Christians receive the general Truths of
their Creeds, and that these are not questioned but by Pagans and Atheists.
Upon which I shall make two Reflections,

1. It is but too true, that in the Point of Religion, there is at this Day a
great Number of Persons who entertain very loose Opinions and that do at least
border upon Atheism. These pernicious Tenets are spread wider than some People
think. Not only the Libertines are infected with them, but even the Common
People. All the profane Men and Deists are not to be found at Courts, in
Armies, or among the Learned; there are some in Towns, among the Vulgar, and
even among Country Clowns. If we examine a little the Discourses and
Apprehensions of Men, especially of those whose Life is irregular, if we do but
begin to reason with them and press them, we may soon perceive the Principles
of Incredulity and Atheism in many of them. It will be found that they are not
thoroughly persuaded that there is a God, and another Life; or that if they do
not proceed to that degree of Impiety which attacks directly the very
Foundations of Religion, they harbor at least this Fancy, that God does not
narrowly observe Men's Deportment; that he will not be so severe as to damn them
for some Sins they have committed, and that there is not such great Harm in
gratifying ones Passions, and living at the usual rate of the World. These and
the like Sentiments are general enough, and yet they lead the straight way to
Deism, and tend plainly to the Subversion of Religion. It would be therefore
highly necessary, in order to root out such dangerous Errors, carefully to
establish these great Truths; that there is a God, that this God speaks to us
in his Word, and that whatever the Gospel tells us of another Life, is most
certain. This I say would be altogether needful, if it were but for the
Instruction of those I have now mentioned, and their Number is greater than is
commonly imagined.

2ly. We may take notice, that though Christians profess to believe the Truths of
their Religion, yet that Belief is not lively and strong enough in them all. It
is beyond all question, that most Christians are so only because they were
engaged by their Birth in the Profession of Christianity; but that after all,
they know very little of the Truth and Divinity of it. They would in like
manner have been Jews or Pagans, if they had been born in Judaism or Paganism;
so that properly speaking they cannot be said to have Faith; for Faith is a
Persuasion; to believe, is to be persuaded; and it is impossible to believe a
thing right without Reason or Examination. That which is called Faith is
commonly nothing else but a confused and general Opinion, which makes but very
slight Impressions upon the Heart and Mind; but true Faith is a greater Rarity
among Christians than we are aware of. Now as Faith is the only Principle of
Piety, so a bad Life does chiefly spring from Want of Faith and from
Incredulity. And there are two sorts of Infidels; some deny and reject Divine
Truths; others do not quite deny them, but they doubt and believe but weakly.
The Infidels who deny the Fundamentals of Religion, are not many, but the
Number of those who doubt, and are not well persuaded, is very great.

This discovers to us the Reason why Men who are acquainted with the Divine
Truths and profess to believe them, do yet act quite contrary to the Dictates
of Faith and Religion. There seems to be in their Proceeding a manifest
Contradiction: It is a thing wondered at; that People who believe a God, and a
Religion, should live as if there was neither God nor Religion; upon this we
are apt to say, that Sinners are not consistent with themselves; and as if it
were impossible to reconcile their Practice with their Belief, we cry out, that
the depth of Man's Heart is unsearchable. But there is no such wonder in the
Case, and the proceeding of bad Christians, is not always so contradictory, as
it seems to be. I confess that Men Sin sometimes against the Convictions of
their own Consciences, and that some who want not Knowledge, do yet Live very
Ill.

This may proceed from Inconsideration, from the violence of their Passions,
from too great a regard to their Temporal Interest, from the flattering hope of
Pardon, or some such Principle. But for the most part, Men act consonantly and
suitably to their Belief, and it is but seldom, that in the Conduct of their
Lives, they behave themselves contrary to the Sentiments and Principles that
possess them. We suppose that bad Christians believe the Truths of Religion,
and in that we are mistaken. Many of them want Faith, and are not fully
convinced of those Truths. Is it to be imagined, that so many Persons who live
in Sin, who make Conscience of nothing, and who violate every minute the Rules
of their Duty; should be thoroughly persuaded, that there is a God who sees
them, and to whom they are to give an Account? From all this I Conclude, That
the Ignorance of the General Truths of Religion, is one of the principal
sources of Corruption.

Some will say, That these Truths need not be proved, and that they are of the
number of those first Principles, which are taken for granted, because they are
imprinted on the Hearts of all Men. But this Objection is easily answered by
what has been said just now. I own that the Ideas and Principles of Religion,
carry in them a Natural Evidence, inasmuch as they are demonstrable from Reason
and Conscience; and because there are Principles in Men by the help of which,
they may arrive at the Knowledge of the Truths of Religion. But these
Principles and Ideas have been in some measure stifled in many, either through
ill Education, or worldly Business, or Vice, or some other Cause; so that they
feel the force and evidence of them but imperfectly; and some have no sense at
all of them. Upon this Account it is necessary to excite and enlighten those
Ideas, to explain and establish those Principles. I acknowledge further, That
some parts of those Proofs upon which Religion is built, lie open to all Men's
Eyes; but yet the Ignorant, and those who are taken up with other Objects, do
not observe them: They should therefore be made to attend to them; just as we
make stupid and heedless People take notice of the Beauty of a Palace, or the
Skill of an Artist in some curious Workmanship, which would otherwise pass
unobserved by them. However the Opinion of those who pretend that the General
Truths ought not to be proved, is contrary to the Holy Scripture; which teaches
us to Reason upon the Principles of Religion, and to search into the Proofs of
them; where in order to Convince Men that there is an Almighty and Infinitely
Good God, it proposes to them, the Beauties and Wonders which shine in his
Works, and exhorts them to the Consideration of them. This may be seen in the
Book of Job. In the XIX. and CIV. Psalm. Romans 1.19, 20. and in many other Places.

3ly, It may further be said, That the Proof of General Truths, is too
difficult for the Common People, and that the Learned only are capable of such
a Discussion. I grant that all sorts of Persons are not able to comprehend all
that has been Writ upon these Matters. And therefore I do not pretend, that it
is impossible to have a true Faith* without entering into the Detail of all
these Proofs, and without following with the utmost strictness, all the deep
and abstracted Reasonings, which have been used to prove the Existence of God,
or the Truth of the Christian Religion. I think rather those Matters ought to
be treated with great Discretion, especially in Sermons. It would be a great
piece of Imprudence, to muster up in a Public Discourse, all the Objections of
Atheists, or the Subtilties of Libertines; these ought to be referred to
Private Conferences. Those who speak to the People, must take heed, lest by
Disputing and Speculating too much, they render the Fundamental Truths
Problematical, and raise Scruples in Men's minds. They ought to build upon this
Principle, That Men are carried by a Common and Natural Inclination to believe
the Existence of God, to acknowledge a difference betwixt Good and Evil, and to
own Providence, and the other Truths of Religion; but for all that, it may be
very useful and necessary to confirm those Truths, to set them in the clearest
Light, and to Convince the People of them.

As to what is said, That the Proofs of the Principles of Religion are not
suitable to the Peoples Capacity: I answer, That most of those Proofs are such,
that there is no need of being either Learned, or a Divine, to be affected with
them. We ought to suppose here, that the more important any Truth is, the
clearer and the easier the Proofs of it are. I do not speak of all Truths;
there are some that are most certain, whose Proofs are difficult, and above the
reach of common Understandings; such are many Metaphysical Truths, and
Mathematical Demonstrations; but at the same time, the knowledge of those
Truths is not necessary, and a Man without danger may be ignorant of them. I
speak now only of those Truths which it concerns every Person to know, and
which are of general usefulness and necessity. These are always clear and
easily proved. And this, by the by, ought on the one hand, to make us admire
the Wisdom and Goodness of God, who has so well provided for the Necessities of
Men; and on the other hand to set Bounds to our Curiosity, and to fortify our
Faith against those Doubts, which might start up in our Minds, by reason of so
many things which we are ignorant of.

As therefore of all Truths, none are of greater Consequence, or of a more
entire certainty than those, which Religion depends upon; so the Proof of those
Truths ought to be simple, evident and suited to all Men's capacity. Thus when
in order to prove the Being of a God; we allege, for instance, the State and
Order in which the World subsists; when we show that the World cannot be
eternal, and that things had a beginning; when we establish the Inspiration of
Scripture by the Prophecies it contains, which were undoubtedly written before
their accomplishment: When we prove the Truth of the Christian Religion by the
Truth of Matters of Fact and History, and demonstrate that if the Facts upon
which Religion is founded, are not certain, there is no such thing as certainty
in the World, in respect of things that are past; and that if the Testimony of
the Apostles is rejected, there are no Witnesses or Historians, who may not be
rejected upon better grounds: When we confirm the Sacred History, by the
concurring testimony of Pagan Writers, and by the most Ancient, and the most
unquestionable Monuments, which past Ages can afford: When we reflect upon the
manner in which the Christian Religion was planted in the World, and upon the
alteration it has made in it: When we insist upon the Characters of Truth,
Sincerity and Divinity, which are observable in the Scripture: In short, when
we take Religion to pieces, and make Men see and feel, that its Doctrines, its
Precepts, its Promises, and its Threatenings, have nothing in them that is
absurd or bad, or contrary to our natural apprehensions; nothing but what
perfectly agrees with sound Reason, and the Sentiments of our own Consciences;
and nothing but what is advantageous to particular Persons, and to Societies:
When I say, we urge these Proofs and others like them, and have the Art of
proposing them in a clear and judicious Method, it is certain that they contain
nothing that is very difficult. These are the clearest and the strongest Proofs
that can be used, in a Subject of this Nature; and the Arguments which are made
use of to establish these Proofs, are for the most part so natural, and so
conform to the Ideas of our Minds, and to the Principles of Common Sense, that
there are few even of the Vulgar who may not apprehend them; if not perfectly
and in their whole extent, which is reserved to Men of a larger Capacity; yet
so far at least as sufficiently to be sensible of their Force.

If then Difficulties and Obscurities are to be met with in the Discussion of
the Principles of Religion; it is because this Matter is neglected, and the
People are little Informed. But if the same Care had been taken to Instruct
Christians in the Fundamental Truths of Religion, which was bestowed upon
Explaining and Clearing Particular ones; they would have another kind of
persuasion than they have of the Truth of their Religion. These great and
sublime Truths, have without comparison more suitableness and affinity with the
Nature of Men and the Sentiments of their Hearts, than many obscure, difficult
and less necessary things, which yet have been effectually taught them.

4ly, But against this, Experience may possibly be Objected: It may be said,
that there are Christians, who most certainly have Piety, and yet did never
meditate much upon the Foundations of Christianity. I. Answer, That it is not
conceivable, how a Man should be a pious Christian, without being persuaded of
the Truth of his Religion. For at this rate, Piety would be but mere Conceit
and Enthusiasm; and we must say notwithstanding all that Scripture and Reason
tell us to the contrary, that Men are Christians without Knowledge or Reason.
It cannot be otherwise, but that good Men must have been convinced, of the
Truths of the Gospel, and have had a lively sense, that these are the most
certain and the most important of all Truths. If we enquire what Principle it
is, which produces Piety in the Hearts of the most simple People, we shall find
it is an unmovable Persuasion, that there is a God, a Judgment, a Heaven and a
Hell; which Persuasion is necessarily founded upon some of the Proofs I have
hinted at.

I grant, which no doubt will be Objected to me, that in many this Persuasion
is not clear enough, and that it is not the result of a particular examination;
but this does not lessen the force of my Argument. For though the Persuasion of
Good Men should not be so clear and so well grounded as it might be, yet it
does not follow but that it is sincere; a Man may be convinced of a Truth, though
he does not discover all the certainty and all the Proofs of it, and though he is
not able to answer all the Objections against it. So that still it is true that
there is no Religion, without the belief of the General Truths of it. After all
we must acknowledge, that there are Good Men, who are not so well instructed
upon this Head as it were to be wished. And this defect of Instruction, this
imperfection of their Faith, is one of the main Causes of the defects and
imperfections of their Piety. Thus we may frequently observe in their Conduct,
such Weaknesses and Opinions as do not agree with the pure Light of Faith, and
with the exactness of the Rules of the Gospel. This is part of the Unhappiness
we lament, and of that Corruption of which we seek the Causes. But no Man will
dispute, but that if the same Persons had more instruction, they would carry
Virtue much farther than they do. The degree of Piety, does ordinarily follow
the degree of Faith: Where there is no Faith, there is no Piety; and where
Faith is weak and faint, Piety is ^anguid and defective. This is the gene^al
State and Character of Christians at this time; either downright Impiety, or
(...) Piety that is both feeble and imperfect.

5ly, In the last place, some will perhaps Object here, that Incredulity is the
effect, ^ather than the Cause of Corruption; and that Atheism does not produce
Cor^uption, but Corruption Atheism. To this (...) say, that these two things do
mutually uphold and support each other. Many fall into Infidelity, because
their Hearts are vitiated, their licentious way of living takes them off from
enquiring into Religion, and hinders their believing of Divine Truths. But it
is not less certain that one of the great Causes, of the Dis^rders of
Christians, is that either they do ^ot believe at all, or that they believe
weakly and confusedly; and this cannot ^e reasonably contested.

II. Here is then the first and the prin^ipal Defect, That Men are not
sufficiently ^^structed in the general Truths and Prin^iples of Christianity. I
said that the Par^icular Truths and the Parts of Religion were better known;
which does not imply but that in this respect too, Ignoran^^ is very great and
general.

1. I shall not scruple to say, that the^ are prodigious Numbers of People,
wh^^^ scarce have any Knowledge at all of th^^ Doctrines of Religion. If all
Christian^ were obliged to render an account of their Faith, if they were
examined upon the Articles of their Belief, or the main Fact^ related in Sacred
History; there would appear in most of them, such an astonishin^ Ignorance, or
such confused and intrica^^ Ideas; that one would hardly think the^ more
knowing than if they lived in th^^ darkness of Heathenism. And what Religion,
what Piety can we look for amon^ such Men?

But besides this gross and palpable Ignorance, there are several defects of
Instruction to be observed, even in thos^ who have, or fancy that they have
mo^^ Knowledge than others. I shall particularly take notice of these two.

1st, Those who exceed the ordinary degree of Knowledge, have yet often bu^ a
false kind of Light: Either they do not know those Truths which they should
know, or else they know them not aright They apply themselves to things which
are not essential to Christianity, or which ^^e less considerable than others
which ^^ey do not study. Thus in all Christian ^ocieties, Instruction is
commonly placed in ^^e Knowledge of the Doctrines and Opi^^ions, particular to
every one's own Sect and Party. Whoever is able to debate ^ose Points, and is
skilled in Controver^e, is said to understand his Religion. ^hese Matters may
perhaps have their ^^se; but there are other things which ^en are more
concerned to know, because ^hey are more conducing to Piety; and ^et they are
almost constantly neglected. The occasion of this Error, is that the various
importance of the Truths of Re^igion, is not duly weighed, and that Religion is
not studied in an orderly method. Very few Persons distinguish between the more
and the less necessary Things, between the most useful Subjects and those which
are of little Edification. Most Men study Religion without Rule, and to no
purpose, and so run out upon many unprotable Subjects. That which is called
Learning in Divinity or Knowledge of Religion; is frequently nothing else, but
a heap of Notions, which have no influence upon Piety, or respect to Men's
Salvation. It is but a confused Medley, wherein the least necessary Things, are
blended without choice and distinction, with the most important. I do not speak
here of the perplexed and unaccurate Ideas, which Men often have about these
Matters; I pass by the false Reasonings, which are sometimes used to establish
the Truths of Christianity, as well as those Mists, which the School Divinity
has cast upon the Gospel: I do only observe, That the Knowledge which most Men
have of Religion, is not very fit to make them sensible of the Beauties of it;
so that when all is done, it is no wonder that it should seem to many an
obscure, crabbed, unpleasant and intricate Science, and that it should have so
little Effect upon Men's Minds.

2dly. The other Fault is, that Men content themselves with bare Instruction,
or with the simple Knowledge of the Christian Truths, while they are ignorant
of their use. If they do but know in an Historical manner, what is believed by
Christians, and are able to reason about it, and to discern Truth from Error,
they think themselves sufficiently instructed. But these Instructions do not
reach the Heart. Among that small number of Persons who have some Knowledge,
there are but few who consider that this Knowledge, is to be directed to a Holy
Life, as to its proper end and intendment; and they are fewer yet who actually
direct it to that end, and make it subservient to the reforming of their Lives.
And so it comes to pass, that a great many of those who are best acquainted
with the Truths of Religion, have yet but an imperfect and barren Knowledge of
it, and that with all their Seize, they live still in the darkness of
Corruption and Vice.

II. Hitherto we have considered Ignorance with relation to the Truths and
Doctrines, which the Christian Faith embraces: Let us now view this Ignorance
with respect to the Duties which Christianity prescribes. Upon this second Head
we shall discover yet a greater Ignorance than upon the first. For after all
something may be done, when we are only to infuse into Men some Knowledge of
Truths and Doctrines. It is usual enough to see very ill Men, who in this
regard are not destitute of Light. But it is much harder to instruct them in
the Duties of Holiness. We may apply here these Words of our Savior's; John
III. 19, 20.
Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil; for every
one that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his
Deeds should be reproved. The Maxims of the Gospel and the Rules of its
Morality condemn Sinners, and therefore they do not care to be informed about
them. Those who love the World and their Sins, are glad if they can enjoy the
Sweets of these without Disturbance and Interruption: And therefore they will
not enquire much into the Moral Precepts of Jesus Christ; they are loath to come
at such a Knowledge as would disclose to them the Turpitude of Vice, and breed
Disquiet and Remorse in them. Ignorance begets Security: The more ignorant a
Man is, the fewer Stings he feels in his Conscience, and the more Pleasure he
takes in his Sin. The very shadow of Evil frights a well-instructed Christian;
but Crime it self does not daunt one who is ignorant: He does not hear within
himself those Alarms or Reproaches, which are either the Preservatives against
Sin, or the Remedies of it.

From this it may be judged already, that Men are generally very little
instructed in what concerns Manners. But that we may ^he better understand how
great the Ignorance is in this Matter, it must be observed that whoever will
perform the Duties of Religion, must be persuaded of their Necess^ty, and
acquainted with their Nature. One cannot imagine how they can be practis^d by a
Man, who either does not know them, or does not think them necessary: This is
the plain Reason why Men do so little addict themselves to Piety; they know
neither its Necessity nor its Nature.

1. As the Foundation of Faith is the Belief of the Truth and certainty of
those Facts and Doctrines which Religion proposes; so the Groundwork of Piety
is, to be persuaded of the Necessity of the Duties which Christianity requires:
Without this Persuasion, it is impossible for Men to resign up themselves to
the Practice of Virtue. Now one would think that all Christians should be fully
convinced of this Necessity. For if there is any certain Truth in Christianity,
it is this, That the Practice of good Works is Necessary. Good Works do so
immediately belong to the Design and the Essence of Religion, that it falls to
the Ground as soon as they are taken away: And in Proportion as the Necessity
of a good Life is weakened, so much is the Power and Beauty of that Holy
Religion which Christ brought into the World, lessened. Religion contains
Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings. It does altogether depend upon
the Existence of a God, and the Certainty of another Life, and a Judgment to
come. But if you banish out of Religion the absolute Necessity of good Works,
you attack it in all its Parts, and you undermine its very Foundations. For
this makes the Knowledge of its Doctrines vain and needless; it turns its
Precepts into bare Counsels; the Promises of it, which are conditional, and
suppose Obedience, cease to be Promises; the Threats which God denounces
against Sinners, are but empty Menaces, which God makes only to fright Men, but
does not intend to execute. This destroys the chiefest and strongest Proofs of
the Existence of a God, and of another Life; it ruins that great Argument for
Religion, which is drawn from the Difference between Virtue and Vice, and from
the Deserts of both; and it contradicts the Necessity, the Nature and Justice
of the last Judgment. All this may easily be demonstrated. This Necessity of
good Works might likewise be proved, from the plain Declarations of the Word of
God; and it might be shown, that there is no Truth more clearly and frequently
inculcated than this in Holy Writ. But not to engage in these Particulars,
which do not properly belong to my Purpose; I shall take it for granted that a
Holy Life is absolutely necessary; for either that is true, or there is nothing
true in Religion.

Yet how clear soever this truth may be, it is but little known, and Men are
not much persuaded of it. No Man indeed does flatly and without some Preamble
deny the Necessity of Holiness; every Teacher professes that to be his
Doctrine; all Christians, in Show at least, are agreed about it. But when they
come to explain their Meaning clearly concerning this Necessity; when it comes
to the Application or to Practice, or when they establish other Doctrines, they
contradict themselves, they hesitate upon the Matter, or they explain it with
certain Restrictions, which sooth Men in Security, and dispose them to believe
that Salvation may be obtained without good Works; which overthrows their
Necessity. Nay, some frame to themselves such a Notion of Religion as even
excludes Good Works; this will appear in the following Chapters.

If it be said, that though this entire and indispensable Necessity of a good
Life were not supposed, yet this would not presently open a Door to
Licentiousness, since there remain other sufficient Motives to Holiness, such
as those which are derived from the Justice and Reasonableness of the Divine
Laws, from the Gratitude and Love we owe to God, from the Edification of our
Neighbor, and from our Calling and Duty. I answer, that these Motives are very
just and pressing, and that they necessarily enter into that Obedience, which
all true Christians pay to the Commandments of God. I acknowledge besides, that
they would be sufficient to inspire all men with the Love of Virtue, if they
did all govern themselves by the Principles of right Reason and Justice. But
these are not the only Motives which ought to be urged; God proposes others
besides; he promises, he threatens, he declares, Heb. XII. 14.
that without holiness no man shall see his face, which imports an absolute
necessity. And surely as Men generally are, there are many of them upon whom
those Motives taken from Decency, Justice, Gratitude, Duty, or the Edification
of our Neighbors, will have very litte Force. The most Honorable Motives are
not always the most effectual. Man being so Corrupt, is so many ways, and by so
strong a Biass carried toward evil, that it is hard for him, without an
absolute necessity, to abstain from it. But how much less will he refrain from
sin; if he is persuaded that it is not necessary to control his inclinations,
and to confine himself to a kind of Life, which appears unpleasant and
melancholy to him? Now as this is the Disposition in which most People are, we
need no longer wonder, why there is so little Religion and Piety among Men.

2. If it is difficult to practice those Duties, which we do not think
necessary, especially when they cross our Inclinations; it is yet harder to
practice them, when we do not know them. It is not possible to do good or to
avoid evil, if we do not know, the good that we should do, and the evil we
ought to shun. Now in this the generality of Christians want instruction. Every
body speaks of Piety and Virtue, but few Men know what they are. The Common
People are little acquainted with the Duties of Religion or the Rules of
Christian Morals. This must be confessed, and the Glory of God requires, that we
should ingenuously own it. I cannot but enter here into some Particulars, to
prove this Ignorance.

1. There are some essential Duties unknown to a great number of Christians,
and which were never thought of by an infinity of Men. I will allege for an
Instance one of the plainest and of the most necessary Duties of Morality, and
that is Restitution. Though the Scripture should not expressly enjoin it, we need
but consult Reason and natural Justice, to be convinced, that he who has done
an injury to another Man by taking from him any part of his Property; is bound
to make up that damage, by restoring to him whatever he has wronged him of.
There is every day occasion enough to make Restitution, nothing being more
common, than for one Man to appropriate to himself by unlawful means, what
belongs to another; and yet in many places Restitution is a thing without
President. But this we ought not to wonder at, considering that there are
Thousands of Christians who never heard a word of this Duty. This Matter is so
little known, and the People are so little instructed about it; that a Treatise
concerning Restitution, written by Mr. la Placette, having been published some
Years since; it has been read as a very singular Book, the Subject whereof was
new and curious. Nay some have gone so far as to censure this Doctrine of
Restitution, pretending that it was novel and too severe; such a pitch of
Ignorance are Men arrived at in Matters of Morality. And this is not the only
Duty which is not understood; there are many others besides, either among those
which are common to all Men, or among those which are particular to every
Calling, and which it does not appear that Men were ever taught or ever made
the least Reflection upon. Now a Man must needs neglect the Duties that he does
not know.

2. There are diverse Sins, which are not commonly ranked among Sins, or which
Men do not think to be Damning Sins. Of this number is Lying and unsincerity,
either in Discourse or in Dealings. Among these we may also reckon, Luxury,
Sloth, a Soft and Voluptuous Life; Many indirect Practices to grow Rich, which
are established and authorized by Custom; Drunkenness, which in some Countries
is not esteemed a Vice, and all those Sins which are only committed by our
Thoughts. Christians now adays think themselves innocent, so they do not do
things manifestly Criminal. They conceive that Murder is a Crime, but they do
not think themselves guilty for passing a rash judgment upon their Neighbors,
or taking up unjust suspicions of them. They believe Uncleanness to be a Sin,
though even some are very indulgent to themselves upon this Head; but impure
Thoughts or Sensuality go for nothing with them. Thus there are many Sins which
Men are not instructed about, and what wonder is it then, if they commit them
without scruple, and if there is so much Corruption in their Manners?

3. There are some general Maxims in Morality without the Knowledge of which,
it is impossible to have a solid Piety; and yet these are almost universally
unknown; especially these Two, which describe to us the Characters of true
Holiness. The first is; That a Habit of Sin is an infallible token of a Corrupt
Man; and that any one habitual Sin which a Man does not forsake, especially
when he is warned of it, is enough to shut him out of Heaven. This Maxim is
understood but by very few People. Most Men are engaged in vicious Habits; such
as Praying without Attention, Swearing, falling into a Passion, or the like:
These Habits grow stronger with Age, Men live and die in them, and yet they
think, they die in a State of Salvation. The other Maxim which is neither less
important nor better known; is that there is a vast difference, between Sin and
Sin, and between Sinners and Sinners; that the Frailties of Good Men are one
thing, and the great and wilful Sins of bad Men, another thing. If Men do not
apprehend this difference, they will confound Virtue with Vice, and good Men
with impious Wretches; and yet this is little observed. It is commonly believed
that all Men being Sinners, they are all upon the matter in the same condition,
and do sin all alike, so that there is no great odds between them. Such Notions
must needs make way for Libertinism.

4ly, If Christians have some Knowledge concerning the Duties of Morality; yet
that Knowledge is too general and superficial. They know perhaps in the main,
that some Sins are to be avoided, and some Virtues to be practiced; but that,
they only know confusedly, they content themselves with some general Ideas,
which for the most part prove useless and insignificant. The design of
Morality, is to regulate Men's Actions, in all the Circumstances they may be in,
and to teach them how they ought to behave themselves, in all the different
Cases and Emergencies of Life. Now as these Cases and Circumstances are
infinitely various, it is necessary that Men should know their Duty with some
exactness, and that they should have Rules at hand applicable to all particular
Cases, by the help of which they may discern, what is lawful from what is not.
For here superficial Knowledge and general Ideas, will not serve the turn;
because they do not determine particular Cases.

The Principles of Morality are clear, but it is requisite to make a just
application of them, and to draw right Consequences from them. Every body
acknowledges, that Wrong is not to be done to any Man, but few know what the
doing of wrong is. There are innumerable ways of violating Justice in relation
to our Neighbors, or of getting Money, which are sinful; and yet these are
made use of every day, and People think there is no harm in them; and so they
are guilty of Cheating, Extortion and Injustice, and they do not know it.
Whence does this proceed but from Ignorance, or from those general and
superficial Notions which I have mentioned? This is one of the Reasons why some
Books and Discourses of Piety produce so little effect, they handle things only
in the lump; they treat of Virtues and Vices, of Temperance, of Covetousness
and Injustice; they exhort and threaten; but they usually go no further than
Generalities, and they seldom descend to those Particulars, which are so
necessary to inform and direct the Conscience.

5ly, Men are no less Ignorant concerning the Degrees, than they are concerning
the Parts of Holiness. Christians are not only obliged to the Practice of many
Virtues; but they ought besides that to practice them in the most perfect
manner. Our Savior does not require in his Disciples a mean and ordinary
degree of Holiness; but he calls them to Perfection. He demands that they
should ^arry Virtue much farther, than either the Heathens or the Jews did;
that they should practice Charity, even to the loving of their Enemies; that
they should be so pa^ient, as to think it their happiness to suf^er; so humble
as cheerfully to bear Con^empt and Injustice; so pure, as to banish ^ll
uncleanness from their very Thoughts; and so of all the other Virtues. But an
^nfinite Number of Christians, are Strangers ^o these Ideas of Perfection. They
never ^new the extent of the Duties of Christia^ity; they have neither
tenderness of Concience, nor elevated Sentiments about Morality. They think
they do much, if ^hey observe that which is most simple and easy in every
Virtue; they confine themselves to that, and aim at no other ^erfection; so
that sublime Virtue and ^iety are not to be sought for amongst them.

6ly, Lastly Men's Ignorance does not ^nly appear in that they do not know
their ^uty; but it does likewise discover it self (...) this, that they do not
know themselves. The Knowledge of ones self is a Capital ^oint in Religion. For
it is not enough (...) be informed of ones Duty; every one ^ust know besides,
whether he observes it ^^r not, whether he really has Religion and Piety; for
upon this depends the ^udgment, he is to make of himself, and of his own
Condition. Now People are as much in the Dark about this Article, as about the
others I have mentioned. The greatest part of Men live without reflecting upon
themselves, and in a prodigious unconcernedness about their Spiritual State
They do not trouble themselves to inquire* whether they are of the number of
Good or Bad Men, whether they are in a Stated of Grace, or of Damnation or not.
Or if at any time they take this into Consideration, they most commonly flatter
themselves, by pronouncing too favorable a Judgment upon their own Condition.
There are many who boldly rank themselves among Good Men; and yet are not able
to give a solid reason of that Opinion they have conceived of their own Probity
and Virtue; Nay they are perhaps actually engaged in Vice and Impiety. If they
are but free from noisy and scandalous Sins, if they feel now and then some
good Motions, if they have some good Qualities, or an inclination to some
Virtues, or an abhorrence of some Vices; that is enough to fill them with a
good opinion of themselves. Now when Men are thus blinded by Self-love, and do
not know themselves; there is but little hope of them, and they will
undoubtedly fall into a state of Security.

These Considerations plainly show, if I ^m not mistaken, that Men for the most
^art live in very great Ignorance. But I ^hink my self bound to answer an
Objecti^n, which may be offered against what has ^een said. Some will think no
doubt, ^^at it is very difficult for Men, to be so ^ell instructed as I suppose
they ought to ^e; and that the People are not capable ^f such an exact Kowledge
of Morali^y.

To satisfy those who make this Obje^tion, and to clear this Matter fully: I
ob^erve first; that by all I have said, I do ^^y no means pretend, that all
Christians ^^an, or ought to be equally instructed. I ^now that there are
degrees of Knowledge, and that in Morality, as well as in Do^trines, Divines
and Men of Parts, go a ^reat way beyond the bulk of Mankind. It (...)
sufficient for every one to be instructed, according to his Capacity and his
Condition. ^ut after all it must be granted, that the ^nowledge of the
Principles of Morality, ^s necssary to every Body; or else we must ^^rike
several Precepts out of the Gospel; ^nless we imagine that those Precepts, are
^ntended only for a small number of Learn^d and Subtle Men; which is directly
op^osite to our Savior's Words, who said that his Doctrine is designed for all
Mankind, for the little ones and the simple, rather than for Mat. XI. 25, 1
Cor. X. John VI. 45. 1 Thessalonians. V. 20. Phil. IV. 8. 2 Pet. II. 5, 6, 7, 8.
the Wise and Prudent. There is no Christian but ought to be a spiritual man
and taught of God. When St. Paul says, prove all things, hold fast that which
is good. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise think on these things. When St. Peter exhorts Christians, to add to
their faith all Christian Virtues, to grow and abound in all these Virtues;
such Exhortations do belong, equally to all the Professors of Christianity.

It must not be said that there are Men in the World of very dull and shallow
Capacities, and that Country People and Mechanics cannot comprehend all these
Maxims of Morality. This is not so difficult as it is imagined. The Duties of
Morality are clear, they presently affect a Man, because they are consonant, to
the common notices and sentiments of Conscience. Choose what part of Morality
you please, and you may with due endeavors, make either a Handy-crafts-man, or
a Daylabourer apprehend it; so you confine your self, to the Knowledge and
Practice of those Duties, which are necessary to such People in their several
Callings. Is there any thing more subtle or difficult in the Rules of Morality,
than there is in a hundred dexterities and shifts, which are practiced in the
Affairs of this Life; and which common People can attain to, without any great
pains? If therefore Men's Understandings are so gross and stupid in moral
Matters; is not because these Matters are above their reach; but because they
were never taught them. ^or never applied themselves to them. We ought not to
judge of what Men might be by what they are. The best Ground becomes barren,
when it is not cultivated. If things were well ordered among Christians, in
relation especially to the instruction of the People, and the Education of
Children; the generality of them, would not be so stupid and ignorant as they
are.

We may therefore conclude, that Ignorance is one of the general Causes of
Corruption. Christians being ill informed of the Truths and Duties of their
Religion; and wanting instruction both as to Faith and Manners, they must needs
live in a great neglect of Religious Matters.

It may be asked, whence does this Ignorance proceed? I shall observe three
principal Causes of it. The first is Education; the way in which Children are
bred up, does infallibly lead to Ignorance. The second is the want of Means to
get good Instruction, and particularly the defect of those Instructions which
are delivered to Christians, in Sermons, Catechisms, and Books. The third is
the Sloth and Carelessness of Men, who will be at no pains to acquire necessary
Knowledge. We might bestow very weighty Considerations upon every one of these
three Heads; but since they will again come in our way, in the sequel of this
Treatise, it is enough to have pointed at them in this place, as the three main
Sources of Ignorance. In truth, if Men are ill Educated, if they are destitute
of the necessary Means of Instruction, and take no care about it; whence should
they have sufficient Knowledge? unless they were instructed by Miracles, by
Revelations, and Inspirations, they cannot but be Ignorant and Corrupt.

But now if Ignorance be the first Cause of Corruption; it is plain that the
first remedy to be used against Corruption, is the removing that Ignorance. It
is that we are to begin at, if we would bring back Christians, to a Life worthy
of the Religion they profess. Exhortations, Censures, and all other such
Methods, will signify nothing, as long as Men's Minds are not prepared by
proper Instructions.

From all that has been said in this Chapter, it may be gathered; that the
right way to instruct Men, is before all things to convince them of the Truth
of Religion; and to make them sensible that there is nothing more certain, or
of greater Consequence in the World, than the Principles of Christianity. The
Belief of the General Truths, ought especially to be well fixed in their Minds,
as that there is a God, a Providence, a Judgment and another Life. After this
we must proceed to the particular Truths of the Gospel, and as we go on in
explaining them, we ought to show, what influence those Truths have upon
Holiness and Salvation.

But the most important thing of all, when these Truths are settled; is to show
that the bare Knowledge of the Christian Doctrines, is not able to make Men
happy; that the scope of Religion, is to make Men truly good; and that without
Piety and good Works there is no Salvation.

It will not be sufficient to recommend Sanctification in general, but the
Nature of it must besides be distinctly explained; it must be showed which are
the general and particular Obligations, of a Christian life, and what Sins are
contrary to these. And here those whose business it is to instruct the People,
ought to be as particular, as possibly they can; showing upon each Virtue and
Vice what the Nature of it is, and what are the several Characters, Kinds, and
Degrees of it; and proposing likewise the Motives, which should discourage Men
from those Vices, and prompt them to the practice of the opposite Virtues; as
also the Directions which may facilitate the performance of all these Duties.
When Teachers shall go thus to work, they will soon perceive some Amendment;
God's Blessing will accompany the use of those Means which he has appointed.
Christians being rightly informed will of their own accord apply themselves
Virtue to; Corruption will lessen by degrees; and Christianity recovering its
ancient Luster, will begin to appear with another Face, than it does at this
day.

CAUSE II. Prejudices and False Notions concerning Religion.
HOW Ignorant and Corrupt soever Men may be, they cannot live absolutely
without Religion; very few at least can go so far. If they are hindered by
their Corruption, to know and practice pure Christianity; yet a remnant of
Light and Conscience within them, does not suffer them to run themselves wholly
into Irreligion, and to lay aside all thoughts of Salvation. But to reconcile
these two Principles, of which one draws them off from Religion, and the other
leads them to it; they form to themselves such Ideas of Religion, as are
agreeable to their Inclinations, and flatter their Security; and being
possessed with those Ideas, they confirm themselves more and more in their
Corruption. These false Notions and Prejudices are worse than Ignorance, and
prove a greater Obstacle to the reviving of Virtue and Piety. It is better to
deal with Men who are simply Ignorant, than with People who have wrong
Apprehensions, and are full of Prejudices. The former being not prepossessed,
may more easily be reclaimed; but it is much harder to prevail upon preingaged
Persons, especially in point of Religion; because while they maintain their
Errors, they fancy they defend the Truth, and that they promote the Glory of
God. False Notions and Prejudices in Religion, are therefore one of those
Causes of Corruption, which it concerns us most to take notice of. I shall
endeavor to point at the chief of them in this Chapter.

Mercy, which Religion gives to Men; and they persuade themselves, that their
Sins will not obstruct their Felicity. This is properly the Notion which Men
entertain of Religion, and that which they think it is good for. But that
Religion should indispensably oblige Men to fear God and to live well, and that
without this, there is neither true Religion, nor Happiness; is that which is
not commonly believed.

There is no question but that the Design of Religion is to comfort Men, and to
lead them to Happiness. This was God's purpose in sending his Son to redeem the
World. But this is not the only end of Religion; it is intended besides for the
Glory of God and the Sanctification of Men; and it does properly consist in the
Service and Obedience which are paid to God. Salvation is a consequence of this
Service, and a gratuitous Reward, which God is pleased to bestow upon those,
who honor and fear him. Nothing therefore is more absurd than the conceit of
those, who look only upon that side of Religion, which promises Comfort and
Salvation; and nothing is more dangerous or more apt to make Men remiss and
careless in their Duty; yet this imagination is very common, and if I was to
define Religion, by the ordinary apprehensions which Men have of it, I would
say; that it is nothing else, but a mean to bring Sinners to Heaven, and to
make Men eternally happy, whatsoever their course and manner of Life may be.



Secondly, That Men commonly place Christianity, either in bare Knowledge, or
in an external Profession, or in Confidence. But Holiness does not make a part
of their Notion of Religion, or at best it makes but a very inconsiderable part
of it.

It is not to be denied but that Knowledge is essential to Religion, and that
as it holds the first rank in it, so it is the Foundation of it all. Nay it is
impossible to engage Men to Holiness, without laying first in them the
Foundation of good and sound Doctrine. This I have proved in the first Chapter
of this Treatise. An outward and public Profession is likewise essential to
Religion, for one cannot be a Christian without it. And further, It is beyond
all doubt, that Religion inspires Confidence, Peace and Joy. The Knowledge of
Christ, and of the Salvation he has procured for us, must naturally produce
these effects. Knowledge, Profession, and Confidence, are therefore included in
the Idea of Religion, but as necessary as they are, yet they are not sufficient.

Knowledge is not the whole of Religion, since the Gospel as well as Experience
teaches us, that it may be found in the worst of Men; it is not therefore a
saving knowledge but when it produces Piety and Charity. The Definition which
St. Paul gives of the Christian Religion, is that it is a knowledge of the
truth according to godliness. We may read what the same Apostle tells us
concerning that Knowledge which is void of Charity, 1 Cor. XIII. As for an
outward Profession, it is altogether useless without Sanctity. A Hypocrite may
live in the Church, and perform even with Applause, the external Duties of
Piety. This we may likewise learn from Scripture and daily Experience. Lastly,
All Confidence which is not supported by Piety, is vain and deceitful. The bare
persuasion that one shall be saved, gives no Man a Right to Salvation. A very
wicked Person may without any ground rely upon God's Mercy, and this is what
Divines call Presumption and Security. * Tit. I. 1.


But though all this is very plain, both from Scripture and good Sense, yet Men
entertain Opinions contrary to it. A great many think themselves Christians,
because they know the Truths and Doctrines of Christianity. I do not enquire
here, whether all those who think they know Religion, do really know it. But
howsoever this Knowledge true or false, makes many judge most favorably of
themselves; it does so puff them up, that they look on themselves as the Stays
and Supporters of Religion. Others, of whom there is an infinite number,
imagine that so they profess the true Religion, they need not fear any thing
concerning their Salvation; especially if this outward Profession is attended
with some apparent Zeal, and some assiduity in the public Exercises of
Religion. Lastly, it is believed by many that God requires nothing else of Men,
but Confidence, and that if they are in that Disposition they cannot come short
of Salvation. They think that in order to Salvation, it is enough to
acknowledge that they are miserable Sinners, and to trust in he Divine Mercy,
and in the Merits of Jesus Christ.

This last Prejudice which reduces Religion to Acts of Confidence, is perhaps
the commonest of all. And yet if we were to determine which of these Three,
viz. Knowledge, Profession, and Confidence, is the least essential to Religion;
we must say, that it is Confidence. It is a thing unconceiveable and
contradictory, that a Man should be a Christian without Knowing and without
making public Profession of his Religion: But a Man may be a Christian and a
good Man too, and yet want Confidence. For as it frequently happens that a bad
Man, is animated with a false Confidence; so a good Man may have a timorous
Conscience, and be possessed with groundless Fears. Sometimes Melancholy, or a
want of Knowledge, or of force of Mind, or even Constitution, may throw good
Men into a State in which they feel no comfort. But without insisting upon
this; it is visibly an Error as common as it is pernicious, for Men to pretend,
that Knowledge, Profession, or Confidence, are sufficient to Salvation, when
they are separated from the practice of Holiness.

It may perhaps be objected, That no Man has these Opinions, and that every
Body acknowledges, that Religion obliges Men to be Holy. I grant that no Man
does expressly exclude Holiness; it is Confessed by all, that the practice of it
is necessary. But yet I maintain, that it is looked upon as the least necessary
thing in Religion. And to prove this; I need but allege the difference which
is made between Knowledge, Profession, and Confidence; and the practice of good
Works. The Three first are generally pressed and recomended in another manner
than the last.

As to Knowledge, it is not without Reason represented as absolutely necessary;
it is said, that a Man must know and believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; and whoever denies any one of them, is excluded from Salvation. This
necessity are extended to many Doctrines, which is not of the same importance
with Fundamental Truths; many Questions are determined, and all these Decisions
are made Articles of Faith. If any one raises any Doubt about them, he is
treated as a Heretic, and People cry out as if Religion was upon the brink of
Ruin. So that upon this Head extreme severity is used, every Fault is Capital,
and no allowance is made for Humane Infirmity.

As to outward Profession; the necessity of it is openly maintained, and not
without just Cause. In this Point Man's Duty, and the Precepts of the Gospel
are rigorously pressed. The least dissembling of a Man's Belief, the least Act
of unlawful Worship, is called Apostasy. It is declared that Men are bound upon
pain of Damnation, to forsake and suffer all; rather than do any thing against
their Conscience. In relation to this nothing is remitted or softened, and the
weak and timorous, are no ways indulged.

As to Confidence, it is spoken of in such a manner, as makes People conceive,
that it is the more effectual to Salvation, the firmer it is, and the more
removed from doubt. The greatest Sinner relies boldly upon the Mercy of God,
and does not question but that he has a Right to apply to himself all the
Promises of the Gospel, provided he believe; that is to say, as it is meant, so
he has but Confidence enough.

But when the practice of good Works is Discoursed of, the Declarations of the
Gospel are not pressed with the same rigor. That Zeal which upon all other
Heads hearkens to no Accommodation, becomes here very tractable; and a great
deal of remisness appears as to this Article. The Doctrines are pressed,
Public Profession is strictly enforced, and Confidence is highly recommended:
But it is said, That Moral Duties must not be so severely urged, and that
something is to be allowed for Humane Frailty. And yet it seems that as the
Scripture inculcates nothing so much, as the necessity of a good Life; so it
were necessary to insist as much at least upon this Point, as upon any other,
and that it should not be ranked as it is, in the lowest Degree, and among the
least necessary Things. One would think likewise, that the pressing
Sanctification, is to require nothing of Men, but what is as easy, if not more,
than certain other Duties, which are absolutely imposed on them, upon pain of
Damnation; such as the forsaking all that is dear to them in this World, and
the suffering of Death in time of Persecution. But without enlarging upon this
Subject, it is evident, that the generality of Christians, do not believe, that
Holiness is so essential a part of Religion, as it really is; and that they do
not well understand the nature of Christianity; from whence it necessarily
follows, that they must neglect the practice of Holiness.

Morals do not apprehend the Nature of the Gospel. Now one would think that
such Absurd and Unchristian Imaginations, should be universally rejected; but
because whatever gratifies Corruption is usually welcome to Men; these Opinions
have their Advocates, even among Divines, as might easily be shown from the
Printed Works of some Authors, who seem to have had a design to disparage
Good-works, and to oppose the necessity of Sanctification. This Prejudice
overturns the Foundations of Morality, by destroying its necessity, and
rendering it Contemptible. I only give here a hint of it, because I am to show
in other Places, that it is the height of Extravagance, thus to set up Faith
against Morality, to ascribe all to the one, and to speak but very slightly of
the other.

I am willing to believe that those who advance them, qualify them with some
Restrictions, and that they are not sensible of the terrible Consequences which
flow from them; but that they have been betrayed into the Speaking, or Writing
of such things, either through some Prejudice, or through the heat of Dispute.
But after all, if these Propositions were strictly taken, and set out in their
true Colors, they could not but be looked upon, as false, rash, scandalous,
and capable of producing most dismal Effects, especially, being asserted by
Divines: and if we did not judge charitably of the Intentions of their Authors,
we might justly say, That those who dare disparage Morality, and insinuate,
that the pressing it is a Mark of Heresy; do themselves publish, a most
pernicious Heresy. Can it be a Mark of Heresy to insist upon that, which our
Savior has so vehemently pressed; which is the only thing he in^^^^^^s in his
Sermon upon the Mount; Mat. 5.6, 7.
which the Apostles perpetually ^^ge in their Epistles, 1 Timothy ^.5. ^ John 3.8.
and declare to be the end of our whole Religion, and the Character whereby the
Children of God are discriminated from the Children of the Devil; and without
which, both Christ and his Apostles assure us, Mat. 7.21. Heb. 12.14.
that no Man shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

By this, the Truth of Religion is as much struck at and injured as Piety it
self. It gives one an Indignation to see, that the Honor of defending Virtue
and Piety, should be yielded up to Heretics. To say that for the most part,
Heretics are strong upon the Head of Morality, is in a manner to give up the
Cause; it is the ready way to confirm them in their Errors; and it does basely
to ascribe that to Heresy, which belongs to True Religion, and is the Glory of
it. It would be to no purpose to allege that some Heretics have writ upon
Morality with good Success. For granting this to be true, it is not a Token of
their Heresy; on the contrary, so far they are Orthodox. Some Orthodox
Christians have recommended Morality as much and better than the Heretics,
because they have established it upon the Foundations and Motives, which pure
Doctrines afford. On the other hand, there have always been Heretics, who did
subvert and ruin Morality; as for instance, those who are described by St. Paul
in the 2d to Timothy, and by St. Peter in his 2d Epistle. It is then very
unreasonable to say, That a thing which neither agrees to all Heretics, nor to
Heretics alone, is a Mark of Heresy. There is much more reason to charge those
who speak so injuriously of Morality; with maintaining a Heresy, which comes
very near that of the Gnostics, who were opposed by the Apostles, and
Condemned and Detested by the whole Church, as Corrupters of the Morals of the
Gospel.

1 J^hn 5.3.
God's Commandments are not grievous: Mat. 11.30.
And Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light. We should therefore always
suppose, that it is not difficult to lead a good Life, and to work out one's
Salvation. But the Error lies in imagining, too great an easiness in this, and
in not considering aright, the Nature and the extent of the Duties of Morality.
There are but few whose Notions in this Matter, come up to the Standard of the
Gospel, and to that Perfection which Christians are to aim at. Few understand
to what degree the practice of Virtue is to be carried: As for the purpose;
what sort of Justice, Equity, Honesty, Disinterestedness, Purity, or Charity
becomes a Professor of Christ's Religion? Instead of rising up to that high and
sublime Pitch of Morality which the Gospel demands; and instead of being acted
by Noble Views and Designs worthy of Christianity; Men commonly take up with
mean and slight Apprehensions of it. According to the general Opinion, a very
extraordinary and elevated Virtue is not requisite, in order to be a good Man.
It is enough for a Man if he is not a notorious Villain, or a profligate
Wretch; and if he observe some of those Duties which have a show of Sanctity.
Thus Holiness is reduced to the lowest Degree of Virtue, or rather, to the
least degree of Sin; it is brought to very little, and yet that little is often
neglected; for Men never go so far in Practice as they do in Speculation; they
always do less than they think themselves bound to do; so that their Actions
still fall short of the Idea which they form of their Duty.

6. What Judgment then are we to make of Christians now adays? Though they
should Act suitably to their Notion of Piety and Morality; yet they would
discharge their Duty but very indifferently, because that Notion is but low and
defective. But yet as mean and imperfect as it is, their Practice does not
reach it. They frequently allow themselves in things which are against their
own Conscience; and though they violate the clearest and the easiest Rules of
Virtue, yet they fancy those to be Sins from which no Man is free, and which
will however be forgiven. At this rate Corruption must needs be very great.

But as Men often form to themselves too easy a Notion of Piety, so they have
sometimes too severe an Idea of it. It may perhaps seem at first sight, that it
is not very necessary to remark and confute this Prejudice. The general
depravation of Manners seems to make it evident, that the Notions which prevail
at this time are not the rigid ones, and that Men do not much trouble
themselves about the Rules, of too austere a Devotion or Morality. But yet it
is usual enough for Men to run into this other extreme; and such an excessive
severity is not so inconsistent as it may be thought, with the Corruption of
Manner For though many frame to themselves too hard and rigid a Notion (...)
Piety; yet they do not think them^^lves bound to live according to it, but ^^ey
leave those Maxims to the Devout, ^^d they imagine that so much Piety is ^ot
necessary; so that they fashion to ^^emselves a commodious Religion, and ^^ch a
Morality as has nothing that is trou^^esom or difficult in it.

Howsoever there are many who look upon Piety as an austere thing; they
con^^ive it to be an enemy to all Joy, and that (...) debars Men of all
Pleasure, so that it ^roduces nothing but Sadness, and Me^^ncholy. And they are
besides possessed ^ith this Error; that the Practice of it is ^^easie and
difficult, or even impossible. ^ut why do Men judge of Piety with so ^uch
Prepossession and Injustice? This ^roceeds from two Causes.

The first is their Carnal Disposition. They are incapable of relishing any
other ^leasures, but those of the Body or of this ^resent Life, because they
are accustomed ^o be governed only by their Senses; and that is enough to
represent Piety to them ^s sower and distaful; not only because it ^oes not
procure to them those gross plea^ures; but because it does likewise in many
^ases oblige them to renounce them.

The Second Reason why Men entertain this Prejudice against Piety, is that it
(...) not represented to them in its true shap^ And here first, there is a
great deal of him done by the false Pretenders to Devotion who affect a
mournful and severe outward appearance, and whose behavior is often
intollerably stern and savage. In the nex^ place profane Men contribute to this
Mischief; for as they neither know nor lov^ Religion, so they make odious
Pictures o^ it, and they take a delight in carrying the Notions of Devotion too
far, that it may appear ridiculous.

Thirdly, There are several well-meaning Persons, whose Zeal being not
regulated and softened, by a discreet and pruden^ Knowledge, gives an occasion
to those unfavourable Judgments, which the World passes upon Piety. Such People
think that it is the Duty of a Devout Person, never to be seen but in an
austere Appearance, and with a dejected look; they are continually censuring
and never pleased; their Zeal is either Superstitious, Scrupulous, or Ignorant,
Sharp, or Unseasonable; and so it is extremely apt to alienate Men's Minds from
Devotion and Piety.

Fourthly, Some Divines and Moralists confirm this Prejudice, by their way of
recommending the Practice of Piety, both in their Public Discourses and in
their ^ooks. Religion and its Duties, are often proposed to the People from the
Pul^it, in such a severe and frightful manner, ^s is not very fit to make it
appear lovely ^o Men, who for the most part, have al^eady a Prejudice against
it. We find too ^igid a Morality, and several strained Max^ms in many Sermons
and Books of Devo^ion. And it may perhaps be of some ^^se, to give here some
Instances of this ^ind.

When Worldly-minded Men are told, that Salvation is a most difficult thing,
and that whoever will obtain it, ought to ^pend his Life in perpetual mourning;
This is no great attractive to gain them ^o the love of Religion. Such Maxims
may be true in some respect; but they are false and extravagant, when they are
proposed without Distinction or Explication. By the Descriptions which are
sometimes made of the Vanity of the World, and of Devotion; one would think,
that a Man cannot live like a Christian; without laying aside, all secular
Concerns and Business, and giving up himself to Solitude and Retirement. Now
this is what few Men are capable of; and besides it is against the Order of
Providence, which has placed us in the World, to live and labor in it, and to
enjoy the good things which the Divine Liberality has provided for us.

That which is asserted by some Moralists, concerning the Love of God, and
their Zeal for his Glory; supposes that Men are obliged, to think actually upon
God at all times, and to have a positive intention to promote his Glory in all
the actions of their lives. But such Morality to say no more, is absurd, and
impossible to be reduced to practice. It is not possible for a Man to have God
always in his thoughts, and to make pious Reflections upon every step he takes,
or every word he speaks And there are such Actions in Life, which cannot
without Profanation be referred to the Glory of God by a direct intention St.
Paul indeed enjoins us, 1 Cor. X. 31.
to do all things to the glory of God; But this Rule is not to be taken in the
utmost strictness, nor extended to all particular Actions. It is enough to have
a sincere and general intention, to procure God's Glory, and to do ones duty
upon all occasions. In order to which these Four Things are necessary. 1. That
we should not fail to think of God actually, in all those Actions that require
it. 2. That if by reason of the present State we are in, we cannot think on God
at all times, and in all our Action we should at least think often upon him,
and make frequent Reflections upon our own Conduct. 3. That in indifferent
Actions, we should not abuse our Liberty, but demean our selves according to
the Rules which the Gospel prescribes; and that we should especially have a
great regard to the Edification of our Neighbor; it being particularly in that
sense that this Commandment of doing all things to the Glory of God, is to be
understood. 4. That we should love God above all things, and that it should be
our chief Care and Endeavor, to Obey him, and to advance his Glory to the
utmost of our Power.

How many Scruples have been infused into Men's Minds, by straining the sense of
this Declaration of our Savior's, Mat. XII. 36.
Men shall give an account at the Day of Judgment of every idle word that they
shall speak? What Inferences have not been drawn from this Place, to fill good
Men with dread and terror? It is Expounded as if all Discourses, which neither
contribute to the Glory of God, nor to the Edification of our Neighbors, nor
to the promoting of our own Salvation; were those idle Words, of which Men are
to give an Account to God. And yet it does not appear that Words purely idle,
are always sinful, or that they deserve the severe threatening, which our
Savior denounces here. We cannot forbear talking every Day, of many
indifferent things, and holding several Discourses, which do neither good nor
harm. Indeed if this should grow into a Habit, if we should for the most part
speak only of trifling and frivolous Things; it would be a Sin. But I do not
apprehend what hurt there can be, in talking now and then of News, of Rain, or
of the Weather. Certainly these are not the Words which are meant in this
Declaration. The Place where we find it, and the Terms in which it is
conceived; do manifestly show, our Savior's meaning to be this; That Men shall
give an Account at the Day of Judgment, of all the Wicked and Impious Words
which they have spoken; and that the Pharisees particularly should be
answerable to God, for the Blasphemies which they uttered against his Miracles.

These strained Maxims produce very pernicious Effects. They expose Piety to
the Flouts and Contempt of Libertines; and they discourage great Numbers from
it Young People especially, are by this means disgusted with Religion, and they
take up an Aversion to it, which they seldom shake off afterward. They
accustom themselves in that Age which is so sensible of Pleasure, to look upon
Piety under an austere and melancholy Form; whilst on the side of the World and
of their Passions, they see nothing but sweetness and charms, Between these Two
Objects; one of which is so enticing, and the other so disgustful; it is easy
to imagine which side they will choose. They run into the embraces of the World
with the full swing of their Affections. But as to Religion they must be urged
and driven; and it is much if they can be brought to make some steps toward
it. Even good Men being discouraged by this excessive severity; do not make
that progress in Sanctification, which otherwise they might. Their Consciences
are disturbed with troublesome Scruples and continual Fears. It is therefore
very necessary to remove this Prejudice; by representing Virtue and Piety,
under that easy and agreeable shape which is natural to them; and by proposing
such Ideas of Religion, as may neither on the one hand, produce Security, and
lull Men's Consciences asleep, nor on the other hand, involve them in groundless
Scruples.

what in them, that is mean and ridiculous. And there are many who have such an
Opinion of Piety: Which proceeds first from the Ignorance and Corruption of
Men; who because they are not well acquainted with Religion, or are possessed
with false Notions of Honor; look with Contempt upon every thing, which does
not agree with the prevailing Customs and Maxims of the World. And then we may
take notice besides, that Libertines do sometimes observe either in that
Religion which obtains in the Society wherein they live; or in the Deportment
of those who have the reputation of being Devout, several things, which lead
them into this Opinion. With relation to Doctrines, they find certain Articles
which Men of good Sense cannot digest, and they perceive manifest Abuses in the
Worship; they see the People amused with Childish Devotions, which savor of
nothing else but Superstition, Credulity or Bigottry. Some of those who do
profess Devotion seem to them to hold Opinions, contrary to sound Reason, and
to have some odd and ridiculous ways with them. They perhaps, observe in the
Ministers of Religion several Whimsies, Ignorances, and Weaknesses; they do not
always find the best Sense in Discourses of Piety, neither do they think the
Idea which is given them of Religion and it is Duties, to be True, Rational, or
Satisfactory. From all this they conclude, that to give themselves up to it,
would be a disgrace to them; that it is calculated only for the Vulgar, and for
weak Minds; and that the being neither Pious nor Devout, argues a strength and
a greatness of Soul. This certainly is a most false and unjust Prejudice. There
is nothing more serious, nor more worthy of Esteem and Respect than Religion,
and it is the highest pitch of Injustice, to take an Estimate of it by the
Errors and Weaknesses of Men. But yet this Prejudice is very common.

Europe, where it does not obtain under various Denominations, and where it has
not occasioned some Disturbance.

It would be difficult to give here an exa^^ Account of mystical Piety and
Fanaticism. It is a Subject upon which we cannot speak very clearly, because we
can hardly have perspicuous and distinct Ideas of it; besides, that the
Mysticks are not agreed among themselves: They are a Sect which is sub-divided
almost to Infinity, For not to mention the Anabaptist, the Quakers, the
Quietists, and all those who come up to the height of Fanatical Extravagances;
there are many particular Sects which would scorn the Name, and yet are wholly,
or in part, possessed with the Principles of the Fanatics. But in the main
here is their Character.

They are almost all agreed in one thing; which is, that they make but very
little count of Outward Means, and of those Acts which concern the Exterior of
Religion; such are the Order of the Church, Government, Discipline, Preaching,
Liturgies, and the public Exercises of Devotion. All these, if we believe
them, are to be considered, as the first Elements of Piety, which are useful
only to imperfect Christians. They have no great Esteem neither for those
Labors and Studies, by which Men endeavor to acquire Knowledge. They reason
little about Religion, and for the most part, they allege no other Arguments
for the Articles of their Belief, but the inward Sense they have of them. They
do not condemn Morality and Good-works, but among themselves, they speak but
feebly of them, and in such a strain, as lessens considerably their usefulness
and necessity. They say, That our Works are nothing but Desilement and
Abomination; that God does not look upon Works, and that Man ought not to judge
of his Condition by them; but that all depends upon Faith, and an Union with
God. Hence it is that those Books, which lay a great stress upon the Practice
of Christian Virtues, do not relish best with them. They prefer Contemplations,
Meditations and inward Recollections, before an active Life and the practice of
Morality. Nay there are some who think, that all the care which Men use, and
all the efforts that they make to advance in Piety, signify but little.
According to them, the way to Perfection and solid Virtue, is for a Man to be
in a State of inaction, to go out of himself, to annihilate himself; to have
neither Thoughts, nor Desires, nor Will, but to be as it were dead in the sight
of God; for thus they express themselves in figurative and mysterious Words.
Under pretense of ascribing all to God, they assert, that Man is a mere
Nothing, and an Abyss of Misery; that in order to be Happy, it is enough for us
to be sensible of our Nothingness, and to wait in Silence and Tranquillity, till
God is pleased to work his Will in us; and that when the Soul is thus in the
State of inaction, and entirely abandons it self to God, then it is, that God
speaks to, and operates in it. What they say concerning Man's Nothingness, does
not hinder but that most of them pretend to be in a State of Perfection, and
look upon the rest of Christians, as Carnal Men, who are yet in darkness, and
who never tasted that which they call the Heavenly Gift. I might relate here
their refining upon Divine Love and upon Prayer; but what I have said is
sufficient, to discover the Spirit and Character of Fanaticism.

I am far from charging all those who hold these Opinions, with Hypocrisy and
Impiety; I am persuaded that there are good Men amongst them, who are not
sensible of their Errors; so that I cannot but blame the severity which is used
toward them in some Places, and the odious Imputations that are cast upon them
in order to vilify them all, without distinction. If they err, it is for the
most part, through Weakness and Prepossession, rather than through Malice.

Nay it may be said in their behalf, that these Illusions would not have grown
so Common, if there had not teen a general, and in some measure an incurable
Corruption in the World. But they saw every where a prodigious decay of Piety,
and little hope of amendment. For what may we not say of the present State of
Christianity? There is in many Places an Ignorant and Superstitious Clergy and
People; whose whole Religion consists, in Ceremonies, and in Devotions, which
are merely External, and often Ridiculous; above all, there appears in those
Places a Deluge of Immorality. Is it then to be wondered at, that Quietism and
Fanaticism should rear up their Heads in such Places? These gross Abuses do not
indeed prevail everywhere; but generally speaking, there is but little of true
Piety among Christians, there is scarce any Order or Discipline left amonst
them; Men live as they please; the Sacraments are profaned; the Precepts of
the Gospel are trampled under foot; Charity and Honesty are almost entirely
banished. No Man sets about the redressing of these Disorders; Churchmen make
it their Capital Business, to maintain their Disputes and their Tenets, and
they apply themselves but faintly to the reforming of Manners. Religion being
upon this Foot, many who had good Intentions, could not but perceive that this
was not true and genuine Christianity. But because they saw no likelihood of
Things being brought to a better posture; or because they wanted Capacity to
find out the Occasions and Remedies of so great an Evil; or lastly, because
they were Men of weak parts; they hearkened to those who proposed to them this
Mystical Piety.

This is the Cause of the progress of Fanaticism, and the Reason why some
Persons of Virtue and Piety are engaged in that Party. And therefore the true
way to reclaim them, would be to re-establish Order in the Church, and to
labor for the Reformation of Manners. As long as these are neglected, all the
Precautions and Methods used against Fanatick's by the Clergy or by the
Magistrate, will either prove unsuccesful, or be found contrary to the Spirit
of Christianity.

But after all, this Spirit of Fanaticism is highly pernicious. For first it
opens a Gap to all manner of Licentiousness. Not to mention the Mischiess which
may redound from thence upon Civil Society; Mystical Piety is at large Fountain
of Illusions; it leads Men into endless Errors, and it is apt to turn all
Religion upside down; for as it is lodged only in inward Sentiments, it cannot
happen otherwise, but that vast Numbers of Men who either want Knowledge or
Strength of Parts, will take the wanderings of their own Fancies, for Divine
Inspirations. I know that some of those. Contemplative Men, acknowledge the
Scripture for the Rule of their Faith, and read it carefully; but the mischief
is, that through their Prejudices, they fix a wrong Sense upon it, so that what
they read does but confirm them in their Errors. Their Expositions are very
singular; they do not affix to Words the same Ideas which other Men do; they
forsake the literal Sense, to run after mystical Explications suitable to their
preconceived Notions; they reject or make very light of those Helps which the
Knowledge of Languages, History, and the Scope of Sacred Writers, afford; and
it is one of their Principles, That Women, Mechanics, and the most simple
People, are able to understand the Scripture as well, if not better, than the
most Learned Doctors.

2. Fanaticism is an Evil which is hardly to be remedied. A Heretic, or a
profane Person, may sooner be undeceived, than a Man intoxicated with Mystical
Devotion; for these will Reason, but the other will hearken to no Reasoning; so
that he is Proof against all the Arguments which can be offered to him. It is
in vain to Dispute with People, who look on all those who are not of their
Mind, as Ignorant Men; who think themselves Illuminated above the rest of
Mankind, and who return no other Answer to the Objections urged against them,
but that they are otherwise persuaded in their Minds. There is no good to be
done upon them; either by Reasoning or by Sense, of which they make but little
use; or even by the Scripture, wherein they seek nothing less, than the literal
meaning,

3. Though Mystical Men profess a sublime Piety; yet their Principles favor
Corruption more than one may be apt to imagine. How can we reconcile those
Maxims concerning Contemplation, Inanition and Silence, with that Activity,
Zeal, and fervor which the Scripture recommends? If Man is a mere Nothing, if
he is to wait patiently till God works his Will in him, and speaks to his Soul;
it is in vain to exhort Men, and it would be to no purpose for them, to use any
endeavors on their part. Besides, that Contempt of outward means which the
Mysticks express, makes way for a total neglect of Devotion, introduces
Disorder and Licentiousness, and is directly opposite to God's design, who
thought fit to prescribe the use of those means. I might add that the
Principles of Fanaticism, are commodious enough for Sinners, so that I do not
wonder, that some of them should go over to that Party. A Devotion which
consists in acknowledging a Man's own Nothingness, or in Contemplation and
Silence, is much more acceptable to a Corrupt Person, than an exact Morality,
which obliges a Man, to do acts of Repentance, to put his own hand to the work,
and to set about the reforming of his Life, and the practicing of Christian
Virtues.

Upon the whole matter, Fanaticism makes Religion contemptible; because the Men
of the World confound true, with Mystical Piety. They fancy that a Man cannot
be devout, without being something Visionary and Enthusiastical; and that
Devotion does not well agree with Sense and Reason.

The Prejudices I have mentioned in this Chapter, are not the only ones which
foment and cherish Corruption; some others might have been added, but they may
more conveniently be ranged under the Titles of some of the following Chapters.
What I have said in this, does yet farther show the necessity of good
Instruction; which may conquer these Prejudices, and give Men true Notions of
Religion and Piety.

CAUSE III. The Maxims and Sentiments which are made use of to Authorize
Corruption.
IT has been shown in two preceding Chapters, that Men are generally involved
in Ignorance, and that they entertain such Notions concerning Religion and
Piety, as must of necessity maintain Corruption in the World. But they are
likewise possessed with diverse particular Maxims and Sentiments, which lead
directly to Libertinism. A modern Author very well observes; New Moral Essays,
Tom. 1. in the Preface.
That People are not only very little acquainted, with the extent of that
Purity which the Gospel requires; but that they are besides full of Maxims,
incomparably more pernicious, than Errors of pure Speculation. These Maxims do
the more certainly produce Corruption, because they are used to Authorize and
Countenance it. And in fact, Men's Blindness and Licentiousness are come to that
pass; that not being contented with the practice of Vice; they do besides plead
Authority for an ill Life. They proceed so far as to defend the Cause of
Corruption; they dispute with those that condem them, and they vent such Maxims
and Sentiments, as (if we believe them) will justify, or at least excuse all
their Disorders. I could not omit here the examining of those, Maxims since
their effect is so pernicious; I shall therefore observe them as the third
Cause of Corruption.

The Maxims and. Sentiments which favor Corruption are of two sorts. Some are
visibly Profane and Impious; such are a great many Maxims of the Libertines,
which go for Current in the World: But there are others which Men pretend to
draw from Religion. I shall insist particularly upon the latter, because as
they are taken from Religion it self, they are by much the more dangerous. When
Profane People, undertake to defend Vice with Maxims which are manifestly
impious, we stand upon our guard against them, and we may confute them by the
Maxims of Religion. But when they employ Religion and the Truths of it, in the
defense of Vice; the danger of being feduced is infinitely greater.

I shall reduce the Maxims which are made use of to Authorize Corruption to
these Four Orders.

I rank those in the First Order, by which Men endeavor to prove, that
Holiness is not absolutely necessary.

The Second Order contains those which tend to show, that the practice of
Holiness is impossible.

The Third Comprehends those which insinuate, that it is dangerous for a Man to
apply himself to good Works.

The Fourth and the Last includes those which are alleged to excuse Corruption.

But as it is not less necessary, to know the Remedies against Corruption, than
to discover the Causes of it; I shall not only mention, but as I go on Confute,
those Maxims.



1. In order to prove that God does not require Sanctity and Good-works, as a
Condition absolutely necessary to Salvation, these two Maxims are abused. 1.
That we are not saved by our Works. And 2. That Faith is sufficient to
Salvation. The first of these Maxims is intended to exclude Good-works; and by
the second Men would substitute another Mean for obtaining Salvation. I referr
the Discussing of these Two Maxims to the next Chapter, because they are drawn
from the Holy Scripture.

II. Men endeavor to persuade themselves, that though they neglect Holiness, yet
for all that, they shall not be excluded from Salvation. And that which
contributes most to flatter them in this Imagination, is first, The Notion they
have formed to themselves of the Mercy of God. God, say they, is Good, and will
not judge us with the utmost rigor. This is said every Day, and it makes every
Body hope for Salvation. The Divine Mercy indeed is without question, the only
ground we have to hope for Salvation. But the vilest Affront we can offer to
that Mercy, is to make it an occasion of Security. Because God is Good and
Merciful, must not we therefore endeavor to please him? May we freely offend
him, because he is Good, and we hope he will forgive us?

Those who Reason at this rate, understand very little what the Divine Mercy
is. They must suppose that it extends indifferently to all Men without any
regard to their Obedience or Disobedience. But this Supposition, is evidently
false, and contrary to the Holy Scripture. The Effects of God's Mercy, are
promised only to those who fear him and depart from evil, and by consequence,
it is a false and pernicious Maxim, to say, So much Holiness is not necessary;
God is Good, and he will not mark severely what is done amiss. This is to
ascribe to God an easiness and a connivance, utterly unbecoming the Sovereign
Judge of the World.

It is said besides, That God will not judge us rigourously. That indeed, is
true; God is indulgent toward us, and the Gospel is a Covenant of Grace, in
which God has a great regard to our present Condition, and Weakness. But it is
likewise certain, that God will judge us according to the rigor of the
Covenant of Grace; and that no Salvation is to be had for those, who do not
fulfill the Condition of the Gospel; now this Condition, is a true Faith,
inciting us to Holiness. This must be granted, and we must acknowledge the
necessity of performing this Condition, and of leading a Holy Life; or else the
Gospel is but a Jest; and we must say, That God does not speak seriously in it;
that indeed, he prescribes certain Conditions, that he Commands and Threatens;
but that nothing of all this is to be strictly understood; so that though a Man
does not comply with the Conditions which God require, yet he shall feel the
Effects of his Clemency. If this is true, there is an end of Christian Religion.

2. It will no doubt be replied, That provided vided a Man Repents, and asks
God's forgiveness, he shall be Saved. This is an unquestionable Truth; so by
Repentance we mean that, which the Gospel requires, and which consists in a
sincere detestation of Sin, in true Conversion and Amendment of Life. But this
is false, if by Repentance, we mean only a general Confession of Sins,
accompanied with some sense of grief and fear, whereby Sinners hope at the Hour
of Death, to atone for all the disorder of a Vicious Life. I would show here
that this is no saving Repentance, but that I am to handle this Matter
purposely in another Chapter.

That it is impossible for a Man to be so Holy, and to do that whi^ God
Commands. A great many like the Precepts of the Gospel very well, and
acknowledge their Justice and Excellency; Would to God, say they, we might live
thus, but we are not able to do it: And being possessed with this Opinion, they
use no endeavor to practice those Duties which they own to be Just; or to
attain to that Holiness, to which God calls them. And indeed, what Man would
attempt that, which he looks upon as impossible.

Now what is said of Man's Incapacity to do good, is very true, when we speak
of Man considered barely as Man, in the corrupt State of Nature. But the
Question is, Whether those whom God has rescued out of that State, and called
to the Communion of the Gospel; are incapable to arrive at that degree of
Holiness, which he requires of them? The Apostles give us another Notion of
those who know and believe in Jesus Christ. They represent to us indeed the
miserable Condition in which Men naturally are, and the greatness of their
Corruption; but they tell us at the same time, that Christ is come to deliver
them from that State; Phil 4.13.
that a Christian can do all things through Christ, that strengthens him: 2 Timothy 11.21.
That he is perfect and thoroughly furnished to all good works: 1 John ver. 34.
That he who loves God keeps his Commandments, and overcomes the World. This
plainly imports, that we are no longer in that State of Corruption and Death,
wherein Man being left to himself, is a slave to Sin; or at least that we ought
to be no longer in that State, after all that which the Grace of God has done
for us. It is the greatest Injury, that can be done to Christ and his Grace, to
say, That his Coming, his Death, his Gospel, and his Spirit, are not able to
Sanctify Men; and that after they are Redeemed and Adopted by God, it is
impossible for them to be good, and to do what he Commands.

If this was true, where would be the Power of the Christian Religion, and what
could we think of God's proceeding when he addresses his Commandments to us? At
this rate, he gives us a Law, not that we should keep it; but rather to
convince us that we cannot observe it. In this Case, what will become of our
Savior's Precepts, and what are We to think of those pure and exalted Morals
which he has left us? Evangelical Holiness will be nothing else but an
imaginary and unpracticable Sanctity. Those Ideas of Perfection will be but
mere Ideas, without any reality; like those of that Philosopher, who formed a
fine Scheme of the best Government of a Commonwealth; but it was a Project
which could never be executed. It were to be wished, we might remember, that,
Thanks be to God, we are no longer Heathens; and that Men should be encouraged,
and not disheartened by extravagant Maxims and Discourses. Which is the
imitating those Cowardly Spies, who after they had viewed the Land of Canaan,
went about to dispirit the Israelites, and to persuade them, that the Conquest
of that Land was impossible.

2. It is not only said, That we are not able to be so Holy as the Gospel
requires; but it is added besides, that God would not have us be so; that he
makes use of Sin to keep us humble, and to make us feel the constant need we
have of his Grace, as well as to kindle in us, the desire of a better and more
perfect Life. This Maxim represents Corruption as a thing unavoidable,
agreeable to the Will of God, and in some measure useful. But what can be more
false than to pretend, that God would not have us be Holy? Why then does he
Command us to be so? Why does St. Paul say, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
This is the Will of God, to wit, your Sanctification? What can be meant by
these Words of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
As he who has called you is Holy, be ye also holy in all manner of
Conversation; for it is written, be ye holy, for I am Holy? If it be said, that
God would have us be Holy, but not perfectly Holy, as we shall be in Heaven: I
ask no more, Who did ever pretend that we ought to be as Holy in this World, as
we are to be in the Life to come? Nothing else is required of Men, but that
they should be as Holy, as God would have them to be, and as Holy as his Grace
enables them to be in this Life. To allege against this, That God would not
have us be so Holy; is a ridiculous Evasion, which implies a Contradiction.

Besides, this Maxim taken in that Sense, which it first offers to the Mind,
seems to make God the Author of Sin. For it supposes, not only that God would
not have us to be so Holy, but which is more strange, that he wills the
contrary, that lie has his Views, Designs, and Reasons, why he should not
permit us, to attain that degree of Holiness, to which the Gospel calls us.
That is the meaning of these Words, That God makes use of Sin, to keep us
humble, to make us feel the need we have of his Grace, and to make us long for
another Life. If it was said only, That God had some Reasons to permit Sin:
such an Assertion would be true; but those who allege this Maxim, to excuse
themselves from obeying the Gospel, ascribe to God a positive Design; and a
direct Intention, which renders that Obedience impossible; which derogates from
his Holiness and Justice, and which is manifestly contrary to those
Declarations which he himself has made in Scripture. If it were further said,
That our Sins ought to humble us, and that they should serve to make us wiser,
and more circumspect for the time to come, and to raise in us a longing after a
happier State; this would be very Reasonable. But it does not follow from
thence, that we are to ascribe to God, those Views and Intentions which this
Maxim ascribes to him. There is a vast difference between the Design which God
proposes to himself, and the Event of Things. These Two should never be
confounded. Neither ought the natural Effect of Sin, to be confounded with the
Consequences of it. The natural Effect of Sin can be no other but Evil; if the
Consequences of it are not always fatal, and if Men reap some Advantage from
it, that is, as we say, by accident. However God has no need of Vice to form us
to Humility; he has other Means enough to humble us, and to make us feel the
need we stand in of his Grace; without being necessitated to let us live under
the Dominion of Sin, to produce those Dispositions in us. And there remains
still even in the very holiest Men, matter enough for them to have recourse to
the Divine Mercy, and to aspire to a better Life, notwithstanding all the
progress they can make in Holiness. This will be fully cleared in the sequel of
this Chapter.

3. Here is another Maxim which is pretty common; it is said, That this World
is the place of Corruption, that this Life is the time of Sin, and that
Holiness is reserved for Heaven. Men's Minds are so infected with this
Imagination; that we hear it said every Day, even by those who have some Piety;
That we live in this World only to offend God, and that we do nothing but sin.
But certainly, nothing is more contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel. Than
this, for though it is true, in a sound sense, that this World is the Place of
Corruption, and that Sin will never be entirely abolished but in Heaven; yet
that does by no means excuse us from serving and fearing God, as long as we
live here. The first thing a Christian ought to know; is that God has placed
him in this World, not to offend, but to glorify and serve him. The Gospel
tells us, every where, that this Life is the time which God gives us to
sanctify our selves in. That this Earth is the Place where Christian Virtues
are to be pracised; that now is the time to labor, to walk, to fight, and to
sow, if we intend to obtain Salvation; and that whoever neglects these Duties
shall be shut out of Heaven. In the Life to come these Opportunities will be
over, the Door will be shut, and the Sentence which God shall pronounce at the
Day of Judgment, will be founded upon that which Men do in this Life.

Nay, we may draw an Argument from the nature of Holiness it self, to
demonstrate, that the practice of it is not referred to another Life. The
greatest part of the Duties which God prescribes; such as Repentance, Patience,
Chastity, Sobriety, Almsgiving, and Hope, cannot be practiced in Heaven. Here
then, is the Time, the Place, and the Opportunity, to perform these Duties. Let
us reflect upon what St. Paul says, in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 11. There he
declares, That the Grace of God which brings Salvation, teaches Men to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. That is, In this Life,
and upon Earth; and then he adds, looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. He makes a
distinction between the Duty, and the Hope of a Christian; between this World
and that which is to come. This Life is the time, and this World the place,
wherein we ought to practice Temperance, Justice and Godliness. It must not be
asked, Where the difference then lies, between this Life and the other, between
Grace and Glory? For the difference is great and sensible enough in other
Respects. In the next Life we shall be perfectly Holy; our Holiness will be of
another Nature than it is here; we shall be like the Angels, and as we shall
practice no longer a great many Duties, which we practice here on Earth, so we
shall exercise many Virtues, which cannot be exercised in this Life.

4. I ought not to omit here another Maxim, which is not only very common, but
is likewise most pernicious, by reason of the use that is made of it. Some say.
That there was always, and that there will always be Corruption; that this is
the way of the World, that Men will always be men, and that the World will not
change. It is necessary to dwell a little upon this Maxim, because it is
specious, and tends as well as the former, to make Men believe that Corruption
is necessary and unavoidable. It has besides a general Influence upon the
Subject Matter and Design of this Book; for it is to little purpose to descant
upon the Sources of Corruption, if there is no amendment to be hoped for. I
have four Things to say upon this Maxim.

1. The Inference which is made from it is absurd. For though an Evil is general,
it does not follow, that it is to no purpose to endeavor to keep our selves
free from it; unless it were an Evil from which Men could not possibly preserve
themselves There have been always and there will always be Diseases in the
World; and yet no Man hitherto has been so weak as to maintain, that the
Precautions and Remedies which are used against Diseases, are altogether
useless. Thus tho Corruption reigns in the World; yet that does not hinder, but
that Men ought to use their best endeavors to escape it; and it does not prove
but that they may actually avoid it, if they use those means which God affords
them to that end.

2. This Maxim is founded upon a false Supposition. For though it is true that
there has been always, and that there will always be Corruption in the World;
yet it ought not to be supposed, that this Corruption is alike at all times, or
that things are always to be in the same state they now are in. This were a
false Supposition and contrary to Experience, as may easily be proved with
respect to the Time past, the present and the future. First, when we reflect
upon past Ages, we cannot say that all Times have been alike, in reference to
Religion. It is not to be denied, but that before Christ's coming, the World
was plunged in a general Corruption, and that the State of it has been
considerably altered by the Preaching of the Gospel. Can any one deny but that
the Primitive Church was purer, than the Church which we find in the Ninth or
Tenth Century? At this day, though there is a general Dissoluteness, yet there is
more or less Corruption in some places than in others. It is true in Fact, that
where the Gospel is duly Preached, and where there is some Order and Discipline
left, there appears more Piety and Religion than in other Places. As for the
time to come we must not think it impossible to restore Things to a better
State, or imagine, that the World will always continue as it is, though the Means
were used which God has appointed to Reform it. For this will no sooner be
done, but Corruption will abate; as I hope to make it appear, in the Second
Part of this Book.

3. This Maxim is directly contrary to the Word of God. The Scripture often
speaks of the Corruption of the World, but does it always in such a manner, as
gives us to understand that Christians may, and ought to renounce it. St. Paul
speaks of the sinful Courses which the World lies in, Ephesians. 11. But he supposes,
that the Ephesians did no longer follow those Courses after they were Converted
to the Christian Religion. The same Apostle Commands us, Romans 12.2.
not to be conformed to this present World. And St. James when he describes the
Spirit and Character of that Jam 1.2, 7.
pure and undefiled Religion, which is acceptable to God, he tells us, among
other things, that it consists in man's keeping himself unspotted from the
World.

4. In the Last place, this Maxim is extremely dangerous. In that Sense and
Design in which it is proposed, it leads to Impiety, it robs Religion of all
its Power, and it furnishes Libertines with a Plea, which does entirely justify
them. For in short, either Corruption may be remedied, and Men may be reduced
to a more Christian Life; or it may not. If it cannot be remedied, this Maxim
is true, and profane Men are in the right. But in that Case, I say it again,
Religion is but a Name; for if no stop can be given to Corruption, if things
must still go on at the same rate; why do we talk of Religion, or why do we
Preach the Gospel? We may teach and exhort as long as we please, but for all
that, there will be neither more nor less Sin; Men will always be what they
are, and the World will not alter. What Notion must this give us of the
Efficacy of Christianity, or of the sincerity of its Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings? I grant then, that Corruption is great, that the Course of the
World is very bad, and that in all probability, there will always be Wickedness
upon Earth. But that this Corruption should be always the same, so that no
Reformation can be hoped; is what cannot be maintained without affronting
Religion, without introducing Fatality and extinguishing all Zeal among
Christians.

their Adversaries, who recommend the Duties of Holiness.

1. They pretend that we cannot insist so much upon Works, without obscuring
the Glory of the Divine Mercy. We must ascribe all, say they, to Mercy, and
nothing to our own Righteousness. There is no true Christian, but acknowledges,
That our Salvation, is entirely owing to the Divine Mercy; and rejects the
Opinion which attributes any Merit to Good-works. It is that Mercy which gave
us Christ for our Redeemer, and our Salvation is founded upon that Redemption.
It is that Mercy which pardons the Sins of those who Believe and Repent, and
which bears with the Infirmities of Regenerate Christians. And it is from the
same Mercy, that we expect that Glorious and un-merited Reward, which is laid
up in Heaven for Good Men. All these are as many Acts of the pure Mercy of God.
But as we have showed that the Mercy which Saves us, does not excuse us from
Good-works, so the necessity of Good-works, does not lessen in the least the
Riches of God's Mercy. Unless we admit that there are Contradictions in
Scripture; we must acknowledge, that the Doctrine of Sanctification, does
perfectly agree with the Doctrine of Grace.

And in Truth, to say, That God gave up his Son to Death, in order to Save Men,
and that he will grant Remission of Sins, and Eternal Happiness, to every
believing and repenting Sinner; is as much as can be said to magnify the Divine
Mercy: Except we should pretend, that God would be more merciful, if he did
indifferently Save all Mankind, and Reward Vice and Virtue alike; but this
would be a horrid Thought, and no less than downright Blasphemy. Then Sinners
might say, indeed, Let us continue in Sin, that Grace may abound.

Let us suppose that a Prince pardons a Rebellious Subject, and that he is
ready to confer the greatest Honors and Benefits upon him, on condition that
this Subject, shall accept of the Pardon that is offered him, and shall relapse
no more into the same Crime; Would any Man be so unreasonable as to say; that
the Clemency of that Prince would be much greater, if he did grant his Favors
to this Rebel, though he should persist in his Crime? And yet this is the same
thing which some Men would have God do. It is very strange, that any one should
think to Honor God, by such Conceits, as do not only injure his Mercy, but his
other Perfections too. Because God is Merciful, must we forget, that he is
Holy, Just and Good? It is said, that we must ascribe all to the mercy of God;
what then, must we have no regard to his Holiness, his Justice and his Truth?
Must what the Scripture tells of these last Perfections, be faintly and
tenderly expounded, whilst we press and scrue up to the highest pitch, what it
says of Mercy?

As to what is added, that we ought to ascribe nothing to our own
Righteousness; it is unquestionably true. But do we ascribe any thing to Man,
when we say that he is bound to do his Duty, and to accept the favor which God
is pleased to bestow upon him? Can any Man say that the Rebel I Mentioned just
now, is the Author of his own Happiness, and that he deserves the Pardon
granted him by his Prince; because he accepts of it, and fulfils the condition,
upon which it is offered? What reason then has a Man to value himself upon his
own Righteousness, or to arrogate any Merit to himself, since he is indebted to
the Grace of God; both for the beginnings and the progress of his
Sanctification? In short, we should take heed, that for fear of ascribing any
thing to Man, we may not rob the Divine Grace of what belongs to it, by not
acknowledging its Gifts and Power in a Regenerate Man.

2. Here is another Maxim, which is alleged in Confirmation of the preceding,
and which aims at the same Mark; It is this, That we must not speak so much of
Goodworks, lest we inspire Men with Pride and Presumption. And to support this
Maxim it is usual, to run out upon Men's inclination to Pride; and upon the
heinousness of that Sin. But this Maxim proceeds only from the false and
confused Notions which Men have about Religious Matters.

Either this Maxim has no Sense at all, or else it mounts to this; That
whosoever applies himself to Holiness and Goodworks, is in danger of falling
into Pride; and that a neglect of Virtue contains a Man within the Bounds of
Humility. Which is as much as to say, that a Man may be Holy without Humility,
and humble without Holiness. Two Things which are the most ridiculous and
contradictory, that can be asserted. At this rate it would be a dangerous thing
to be a Good Man, and more safe to be otherwise. By pursuing Virtue and
Holiness a Man draws near to Sin, and to the greatest of Sins, I mean Pride;
and by neglecting Holiness, he attains Humility, which is one of the chief
Christian Virtues. If this is true, all that we call Vice or Virtue, is but an
empty sound. It is much that Men should not see, that there can be no Holiness
without Humility, nor Humility without Holiness; that where there is Holiness,
there is Humility, and Pride is excluded; and that where Pride is there is no
true Sanctification. The holier a Man grows, he becomes the more humble; and he
is so far from coming the nearer to Pride by proceeding in Holliness, that on
the contrary he removes the farther from it. The instance of our Blessed
Savior, who was both perfectly Holy, and perfectly Humble; is a proof, that
Humility is not incompatible with Holiness.

But the Nature of Humility is not well understood. There are many who conceive
no other Humility, but that which arises from the Disorders of a vicious and
irregular Life. So that when they would humble good Men, they rank them among
the vilest Sinners; they make them say, that there is nothing but Wickedness
and Abomination in them; and that they have deserved Eternal Damnation by
innumerable Sins which they have committed, every Moment of their Lives, and
even by the best Actions they have done. The strongest Expressions and the most
excessive* Hyperboles; are scarce sufficient to exaggerate the number and
greatness of their Sins. But there is enough of other Inducements and Motives
to Humility, without thus confounding Vice with Virtue. It would be a pretty
sort of Humility, for a Man to live in Sin, to be at defiance with God, to do
nothing for his sake, and then with all this to confess himself a miserable
Sinner.

Pride and Presumption should not be encouraged; but yet under the pretense of
humbling Men, we ought not to turn them into Blocks, or to confound a good Man,
with a profligate Sinner. When we inveigh against the Pride of Man, we ought
not to sink his Courage; for that would immediately make him incapable of any
thing that is good. Under color of Honoring God, we must not dishonor his
Workmanship, speak slightingly of his Gifts, and overlook his Image, in those
who bear it in a double Capacity; as they are Men, and as they are Christians.
It is a piece of Pride, to arrogate any thing to our selves, which we have not,
or which does not come from us; but it is a false Humility, it is Hypocrisy,
not to acknowledge the Graces of God in us,

It is objected; that some presume much upon themselves, that Man is very apt
to flatter himself, and to this purpose, the Pharisees are mentioned; who
trusted in their own Righteousness. To this I reply, That those Presumptuous
Persons are Hypocrite, who have no solid Piety. I say, that the Grace of God,
beats down that Pride, and that the Pharisees had nothing but an external
Righteousness, a deceitful and Hypocritical Sanctity. It is therefore without
Reason, that Men cry down Holiness, and pretend that the Study of Good-works,
begets Presumption, because there have been, and there still are Hypocrites. If
we may say where Pride is to be found; it is in those wild and extravagant
Moralists, who make all these Objections. Those Men ascribe very little to
Good-works, and yet what Opinion do they not entertain of themselves? They
fancy themselves God's Favorites, and the truly Humble Men; and all this by
virtue of their stock of Confidence: And which is yet worse, they judge rashly
of those, who endeavor to live better than themselves, and they make bold to
call them Pharisees and Hypocrites. Is not this a most intolerable Presumption
and Boldness?

3. The Abettors of Corruption insist mightily upon this Maxim, That Excess in
all things is to be condemned; and that Piety, when carried too far,
degenerates into Superstition and Hypocrisy. It is not only the Libertines
speak after this manner; many who would be thought Wise and Rational Men, use
the same Language. They pretend to Virtue, they condemn Atheism and Impiety;
but they likewise condemn those who would tie Men to the strict Practice of the
Duties of Holiness. In all things, say they, a just Medium is to be observed.
The worst of it is, that some Moralists give an occasion to these Opinions, by
the Pictures they make of Hypocritical and Superstitious Men. They represent
them as Men, who carry all the appearances of Devout Persons; they tell us that
Hypocrisy goes beyond true Devotion; and they are not aware that by this, they
turn Religion into ridicule, and render it odious.

This Maxim as well as the former, is founded upon the un-accurate Notions,
which most People have concerning Morals; for it will appear to every Man who
examines this Matter with some care; 1. That Piety can never be carried too
far, and that we can never do too much in obedience to God, and in compliance
with our Duty. And, 2. That Piety, and Superstition or Hypocrisy, are things
opposite to one another: So that to imagine, that a diligent and earnest
application to Piety, leads Men to Superstition, or Hypocrisy, is amonstrous
Absurdity, and the highest Contradiction that can be maintained. It is just as
if one should say, that Gold or Silver by being very much refined, might at
last degenerate into Lead, or Earth How or which way can Piety turn to
Superstition, or Hypocrisy? This is a thing that cannot be conceived. As long
as Me^ Reason upon true Principles, they may pursue them with assurance, and
without fear of running themselves into false or dangerous Consequences. Men
will never fall into Superstition, or Hypocrisy, by the Practice of Virtue. So
far from it, that the more true Piety a Man has, he will find himself at the
greater distance from Superstition and Hypocrisy: And a Superstitious Person is
so far from out-stripping a good Man, that on the contrary he comes infinitely
behind him. Solid Virtue is always attended with these two Characters First it
is sincere and from the Heart, and by that it destroys Hypocrisy, instead of
producing it: And then Secondly, it is well-informed and Rational, it fills the
Mind and Heart with true Notions, with great and elevated Views; and so it sets
Men at an infinite distance, from those mean, ignorant, and trifling Things
which the Superstitious are taken up withal. Let us conclude then, that
Hypocritical and Superstitious Men, are so far from having too much Piety, that
they have none at all. If it happens sometimes, as it certainly does; that Men
who have a sound and honest Heart, are somewhat given to an odd kind of
Devotion, which in some respects savours of Superstition; this does not proceed
from Piety it self, but from a defect in those that profess it, who may either
want Knowledge, or force of Mind.



1. It is customary to excuse Corruption, by saying, That we are Men, and not
Angels. This Excuse might be destroyed by what has been already said, but yet
it may be useful to dwell a little upon it. It is said then, That we are Men,
and not Angels; and that is a most certain Truth; but there is no ground to
justify or excuse by that the ill Lives of Christians. For first, that very
thing that we are Men, obliges us to the Practice of Virtue, instead of
exempting us from it. We are Men, and as such, we have a Reason which
distinguishes us from Brutes, and a Conscience which discerns between Good and
Evil; we ought then to live according to Reason, and the Principles of
Conscience; and to do that which becomes the Nature of Man. We are Men, and by
consequence Mortal, we know we are not to live always in this World; and
knowing this, we must either think of another Life, or propose to our selves no
other End, than that of Beasts; which follow their Instinct while they live,
and then die never to live again. We are Men, but we are not Independent, we
have a Creator and a Master; and as we are endued besides with Understanding,
we are to give an account of our Actions before his Tribunal; it is therefore
agreeable to the Nature of Man, to live like a Creature that depends upon God,
and that must be Judged. So that this Consideration, that we are Men, is so far
from excusing, that it condemns Corruption.

But it may be said that we are weak Men. This is very true, our Nature is
frail, and has besides a strong bias to evil. But God speaks to us as to weak
Men; he commands us nothing but what is proportioned, to that state of
Imperfection we are in. Besides, this Excuse does not at all become Christians.
To say we are weak Men, is to show we have but little sense of God's kindness
toward us. We are not only Men, but we are Christians too, and this quality
raises us above the natural condition of Men; it makes us New Men and New
Creatures. Why do we then forget the Glory to which God has exalted our Nature
through Jesus Christ? Why would we still lie down under the burden of frail and
corrupt Nature?

It is further said, that we are not Angels. But neither is it necessary that
we should be so, to do that which God Commands us. When God gives us his Laws,
he knows he gives them to Men; and therefore they are admirably suited to our
present Condition in this World. If we were Angels, God would give us quite
other Laws, the Gospel would be abolished, and the World should continue no
longer in the state it is in. It is therefore an absur^ Imagination, to think
that one cannot perform the Duties of Religion without being of an Angelical
Nature.

Let us then no longer pretend, that because we are Men we are too weak to
observe the Duties which Religion prescribes; th^^ excuse charges God with
injustice, as if he did require from us such things, as are not agreeable with
our Nature and Condition; it is injurious to the Gospel and to the Christian
Religion, as well as to the Grace of Christ, and the power of his Spirit; i^ is
false, since the Scripture declares, that Grace regenerates and strengthens us,
and that it makes us able to overcome the vicious inclinations of our Nature,
and to free our selves from the dominion of Sin: And Lastly, it is contrary to
Experience; for those many Saints and good Men, who Practiced the most Jam.
5.17.
sublime and difficult Duties of Piety, were Men as we are, and as the Heb.
12.1.
Sacred Writers observe, they were subject to the same infirmittes with us, and
many of them perhaps, had not those Advantages which we have.

2. It is often alleged as an excuse, That no Man is perfect, and that every
one has his Faults. This is said every Day, and some pretend with that saying,
to excuse every thing. Excuses for the most part, have something of truth in
them. This Proposition, That no Man perfect, is very true in one sense, and
altogether false in another.

No Man certainly is Perfect, in the strict sense of that Word, or as it
imports a full and accomplished Perfection, free from all defect; such a
Perfection is to be had no where else but in Heaven. But there is a Perfection
commenced, or begun, of which a Man Redeemed and Sanctified by Jesus Christ, is
capable. If it was not so, why should Christ and his Apostles exhort us Mat.
5.48. Phil. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
to be perfect? Why should they tell us, 1 John 5.9.
that he who is born of God does not sin? And that a Christian is 1 Cor. 1.8. 2 Timothy 11.21.
thoroughly furnished to every Good Work? If you ask, Who those Perfect Men
are? I answer, That they are those who aspire to Perfection, in whom Sin does
not reign, who do not allow themselves in any vicious Habit, who sincerely and
honestly apply themselves to Holiness, and have accustomed themselves to
practice (...) the Duties of it with delight Whoever is arrived at such a
State, has attained tha^ Perfection which is attainable in this Life and to
which Christians are called by the Gospel; though there remain still in him some
infirmities inseparable from Humane Nature, and never totally to be rooted out
before he gets to Heaven. We cannot be Perfect in that first and strict Sense I
have mentioned; but we may be Perfect, and God will have us be so, in the
second and Evangelical Sense of that Word.

It is therefore a frivolous Excuse in the Mouth of Corrupt Men, to say, That
no Man is Perfect, and that we cannot attain to the Perfection, or to the State
of the Blessed in Heaven; for this is to shift the Question, because that is
not the Perfection which God requires. We ought not to fix a false and absurd
Sense upon God's Commandments, that we may have a pretense not to obey them.
The Question is, Whether Christians are not bound to do that which God would
have them do, and which they are able to do in this World; this is the
Perfection to which he calls us.

We may apply very near, the same Answer to that other Excuse, That every body
has his Faults: There are Faults which do not destroy Piety; and God is
graciously pleased not to impute such Faults to those that Fear him; and in
this Sense, no Man ^s free from Faults; but there is another ^ort of Faults,
which should not be called bare Faults or Defects; those are the Vices and
Passions which cannot consist with Piety, the great, the reigning, the habitual
or deliberate Sins. True Christians are free from such Faults, and those who
are not free from them, are not true Christians. If this Maxim, That every one
has his Faults, is not thus explained; we must speak no longer of Virtue and
Vice; for this Excuse will serve for all Sins, and acquit every Body. If a Man
is given to Swearing, if he is Revengeful, Passionate, or False, if he commits
Adultry, it is but saying, Every one has his Faults, and no Man is Perfect.
Such Language from a Man full of vicious Habits is unsufferable. What dismal
Consequences, would not Libertines draw from such a Principle? We must
therefore understand this Proposition, in the sense, and with those
restrictions I have observed, and then it may be useful to comfort Good Men,
but it will never excuse those who are Vicious.

3. Men endeavor to excuse themselves, by laying the Sins they commit, upon
the great Number and the Force of Temptations. It is very hard, say they, to
avoid Sin, we are so many ways drawn into it, Temptations are so strong and so
frequent, that we must go out of the World, if we would preserve our Innocence.
Sometimes they impute to the Devil the Sins which they fall into, and at other
times so great is their Audaciousness, that they throw them upon God and his
Providence.

All these Excuses are trifling, and some of them are impious. For, to begin
with that which is borrowed from the Multitude and Strength of Temptations; it
is unreasonable to imagine, that the number of Temptations is so great, that
their force is irresistible. Temptations are frequent, I Confess; but it is an
Error to think, that there is nothing but Snares and Solicitations to Sin in
the World. This would give us a strange notion of God and of his Works, and in
that Case Man's Condition would be very Miserable. It is certain on the other
hand, that the Opportunities and Solicitations to Good, are very common,
especially in relation to Christians, whom an infinite Number of Objects and
Motives call back to God, and to their Duty. Even Temptations themselves give
them occasions of doing Good. God supplies them abundantly with all things
necessary to Life and Godliness; as we are told, 2 Pet. 1. Certainly we are to
presume, that if God permits that Men should here meet with Temptations and
Opportunities of undoing themselves, he offers them on the other hand, many
Occasions and Inducements to take care of their Salvation. So that the great
Number of Solicitations to Good, does already destroy the Excuse which is taken
from the great Number of Temptations.

Neither is it more reasonable to complain of the Strength of those
Temptations. Such a Complaint is very unseemly from Christians, who are
appointed to overcome the World, the Flesh, and all other Temptations. When all
things, are well considered, it will appear; that it is within our selves, in
our own Negligence, and in the perverseness of our Wills; that we ought to look
for that, which makes Temptations so strong and too hard for us. They have no
more strength than we give them. St. James has decided this Question in such a
manner as should stop the Mouth of those, who seek the cause of Evil any where
else but in their own Hearts. 1 Jam. 1.14.
Every Man says he, is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed.

The Devil has no more Power over us, than Temptations have; For he can but
tempt us. But yet we are apt to ascribe to him a kind of Omnipotence, According
to the Vulgar Opinion, one would think that the Devil, is the Author of all the
Sins that are Committed; that he is every where, and that Men are but his
Instruments, which he uses at pleasure. If this was true, Men were indeed to be
pitied, and it would be some Excuse to those who live ill. The Scripture
teaches us no such thing.

But the highest pitch of Temerity, is to charge God and Providence with our
Sins. Thus some Men are wont to, say, such a thing comes to pass because God
would have it so; and such another thing did not happen because it did not
please God that it should. When this Excuse is made with relation to Sin, it
amounts to the most horrid of Blasphemies; it lays upon God all the Evil that
happens, and makes him the Author of it. For either this Excuse signifies
nothing; or else it imports, that God is the Cause of what happens, and not we.
This must needs be the meaning of it, because Men pretend to excuse themselves
with saying, God would have it so. In a word, here is no middle way; either the
Cause of Sin is in Man, or it is not. If it is in Man, he can accuse no body
else but himself; he cannot clear him self by saying, God would or would not
have it so. If the Cause of Sin be not in Man, he is discharged, and all the
Evil lights upon God. It is an astonishing thing; that Men who believe God to
be infinitely Holy and Just, can entertain such thoughts.

4. Another Excuse is often alleged, and it is fetched, from Common Practice,
Custom and Example. That which is generally done is thought to be Innocent or
at least Pardonable. But the Greatness and the Universality of Corruption
excuse no body: Custom and Example cannot make any thing lawful which is bad.
Where there is an express Law, it is to no purpose to plead Practice to the
Contrary. Custom or Numbers exempt no Man from doing that which God Commands,
and will never Protect him at the Day of Judgment. Custom and Example are so
far from excusing Vice, that on the Contrary, this very thing that the Custom
is bad, ought to make Men sensible how necessary it is, to set about a good
Reformation.

5. But if Men think that Example and Custom excuse them, they fancy themselves
yet much more excusable, when they can allege the Examples and the Sins of
Good Men. The Libertines triumph here. To what purpose is it, say they, to
recommend Holiness so strictly and to enforce it with such severe penalties,
when he see many Good Men follow a course, give opposite to those Maxims, and
to that exact Morality? But they ought to consider that it is extreme hard, or
rather impossible, to know certainly whether a Man is truly a good Man or not.
We cannot be assured of this, unless we knew Men's Hearts, which belongs only to
God. This Reflection does already defeat the Excuse, which is borrowed from the
Sins of Good Men. We frequently imagine the Person who sins, to be a good Man,
when he is but an Hypocrite, or an, Atheist. Indeed Piety and Charity require,
that we should think the best of our Neighbors, especially of those in whom
the Marks of solid Piety and Virtue appear; but neither Charity nor Piety
obliges us to confound Vice with Godliness, or to call Evil Good. Sin is Sin,
and ought to be condemned wherever we meet with it, and more particularly in
those, who pass for better Men than others. When Men who seem to be Pious fall
into such Sins as are inconsistent with. Regeneration; we ought to think, that
those Men either give the Lie to their Character, and are not what we took them
for, and then we may apply to them the Words of Ezekiel, Chap. xxxiii, ver. 18.
When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, he
shall even die thereby; or else we must think, that though they have some Piety,
it is but weak as yet, so that they are not what they appear. To be but however
we ought to be positive in this, That the Examples and the Sins of others, will
excuse no Man in the sight of God.

6. Another very Common Evasion, by which Men endeavor to excuse the neglect
and omission of their Duty, is that they do not profess Devotion and Piety.
This is the ordinary Plea of Men of Business, of Worldlings, of Young People,
of Courtiers, of Military Men, and of a great many besides in all Conditions.
We do not pretend to Devotion, they cry, we are engaged in the World. And with
this shift, they not only think themselves excusable for neglecting Piety; but
they fancy they have a Right to neglect it, and that they do a great deal, if
they observe some of the External Duties of it. One can hardly believe, that
these Persons are in carnest, when they make such an Excuse. It astonishes a
Man to find Christians, who have the considence to say, That Piety is not their
Business, that they are of another Profession, and that they are not at leisure
to be Devout.

I fancy, there are Two Things which deceive those who who allege this Excuse.
1. That they do not well understand what Devotion is; they look upon it as a
very austere and singular way of living; from whence they conclude, that but
few People are able to apply themselves to it, and so they turn it over to the
Clergy, to Women, or to those who have much leisure. I have observed already
the Falseness of this Prejudice, and showed that Piety is neither singular nor
austere. 2. The other cause of their Error seems to be this; that they do not
consider that Piety is every Bodies Business, and that such is the nature of
it, that it may be practiced by all Men. Not but that secular Occupations and
Callings, do frequently obstruct Piety and engage Men in Vice; and therefore a
Christian should never be so taken up with the Affairs of this Life, as thereby
to disable himself from performing the Duties of Christianity. But after all, a
Man may live like a good Christian, in any lawful Calling; and in that sense
properly we are to understand the Words of St. Paul, That the Grace of God
which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, teaching them to live
soberly, righteously and godly, in this present World. Tit. II. 11.


Do those who plead it for an Excuse that they do not profess Devotion,
imagine, that there are two ways to go to Heaven, the one for Devour, and the
other for Worldly Men; the one narrow, and the other broad? Do they think that
the Commandments of God do not concern all Men, that there is respect of
Persons with God, or that he dispenses with his own Laws? How can they prove
these Distinctions? Are not we all Christians? Have not we all been Baptize?
Does not God give us all the same Laws? Or have some more reason to love God
than others? And ought not the great Concern of our Salvation, to be equally
dear to us all?

I grant that those who have greater opportunities, and more Leisure than
others; ought to make use of these Advantages: But I maintain at the same time:
that none stand in greater need of Piety, than those who say, we are engaged in
the World, we do not pretend to Devotion. It is because they are not Devout,
that their Condition is very sad; and the more they are engaged in the World,
the greater are the Temptations and Distraction, to which they are liable: Now
he that is exposed to a Storm, had need take more care, than he who enjoys a
Calm.

These are the principal Maxims and Sentiments, which are made use of, to
Authorize Corruption. Whoever takes notice of what is said and done in the
World, must needs acknowledge that these and the like Maxims are vented abroad
every day; so that in order to obstruct the Progress of Corruption, it is
absolutely, necessary to undeceive Men, in reference to these Sentiments, and
to oppose that Criminal Boldness, which shamefully Corrups the Truths, of
Reilgion and turns Impieties into Religious Maxims and Articles of Faith.

CAUSE IV. The Abuse of Holy Scripture.
IT is a daring piece of Confidence to Authorize Corruption with Maxims
borrowed from Religion; but it is the last degree of Audaciousness and Impiety,
to turn the Holy Scripture to such a scandalous use, and to seek in that Divine
Book Pretenses and Apologies for Vice; and yet the Extravagance and Temerity of
many bad Christians come up to this pitch. Several declarations of the Word of
God, are made by them as many Maxims, under which they think to shelter
themselves; and if we believe them, there is nothing either in their Practice
or Opinions, but what is agreeable to the Will and Intentions of God himself.
This Abuse of the Scripture, I design to show in this Chapter, to be one of the
Causes of Corruption; and it cannot he too seriously considered.

The Passages of Scripture which are abused to this purpose, may be reduced to
these Four Heads. The first comprehends the places which are, brought against
the necessity of Good Works. Under the second, we will examine those
declarations of Scripture, by which some endeavor to prove, That all Men
without exception, are in a state of Corruption which subjects them to Sin. In
the third place, we shall answer the Arguments drawn from the Examples of those
Saints, whose Sins are Recorded in Scripture. And lastly, we shall make some
Reflections upon those Scripptures, in which the Divine Mercy is promised to
the greatest Sinners

There are diverse Passages in Scriptures, which being ill understood, lead many
into this persuasion, That Good Works are not of absolute Necessity. And First,
nothing is more confidently alleged to this purpose, than what we read in many
places; Romans III. etc.
That we are justified by Faith, and not by our Works. No Doctrine is more
clearly and expressly delivered in the Gospel, than that of Justification by
Faith. But it is a Perverting of this Doctrine to conclude from it, that
Salvation may be obtained without Good Works. This Conclusion must needs be
false, since the Gospel enjoins Good Works as a necessary Condition in order to
Salvation. St Paul tells us, that Heb. XX. 14.
without Holiness no man shall see God. And does not that import, that none
shall be saved without Holiness and Good Works? The same Apostle teaches us,
that at the Day of Judgment, when Men shall be admitted into, or excluded from
Heaven; God will have a regard to their Works, to the good or evil which they
shall have done Romans 11. 6.
God will render to every man according to his Works. 2 Cor. V. 10.
We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that we may receive
according to what we have done, whether good or bad. This is very positive, and
therefore since there can be no Contradiction in Scripture, here is enough
already, to Convince us that the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, has
nothing in it which destroys the necessity of Good Works.

But it will appear yet less difficult to reconcile these two Doctrines; if we
suppose that which no Man can reasonably Contest, namely, that when the
Scripture says, that Faith is sufficient to Salvation, we are to understand by
the word Faith in this Proposition; that true Faith which the Gospel requires.
Now if we ask what that Faith is, and by what Marks it may be known? All the
Apostles will unanimously tell us, that true Faith produces a Holy Life, and
that it discovers it self by all manner of Good Works. They assign Good Works
as the essential Mark and Character, that distinguishes a saving from an
Hypocritical Faith. By that very thing therefore that the Gospel requires
Faith, it does likewise require Good Works, since Faith cannot be without
Works. And by consequence the Opinion of those, who fancy that Faith is
sufficient without Works, is evidently absurd, and contrary to the Gospel, and
to the Nature of Faith it self.

But to set this matter still in a clearer light; it is necessary to take
notice here of two Mistakes, which Men are apt to run into when they speak of
Faith and Good Works. The first is, that they separate Faith from Works; they
look upon Faith as a thing quite different from Works, and which supplies the
want of them; or rather they oppose Faith to Works, as if these two things were
contrary to each other A Corrupt Man will say, I confess that I have not Good
Works, but however I have Faith.

Those who speak thus, suppose that they may have Faith though they have not
Works; but St. James has directly confuted this Imagination; Jam. II.
What does it profit, my Brethren, though a man say he has Faith and have not
Works? can Faith save him? If Faith have not Works, it is dead, being alone.

Who can after this separate saving Faith from Good Works? Can we separate that
from Faith, which God has declared to be inseparable from it? It shows that Men
are strangely blinded With Ignorance and Prejudice, when at this time of day we
are fain to prove things so plain and questionable.

The Second Illusion is, that Men place Faith in Confidence alone, and many
define it by that. They fancy that to have Faith, is nothing else but to
believe that God is merciful, and to rely upon the Merits of Christ, because
Faith embraces the Promises of the Gospel, the natural effect of which Promise
is to fill the Heart with assurance and tranquillity. It is beyond all doubt
that for the most part true Faith is attended with Confidence. But Confidence
is not the Whole of Faith; and I cannot Imagine what part of God's Word
countenances that Notion, which places the Essence of Faith in Confidence
alone. The Faith which the Gospel speaks of, consists in believing that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, and the Savior of the World; in embracing his
Doctrine as true, and in making Profession of it, in doing his Commandments,
and hoping for Salvation from him. But the resolving all Faith and Religion
into Acts of Confidence, is the most extravagant Conceit that can enter into a
Man's Head. If this Notion was true, it would follow from it, that in order to
be saved, it is enough fore Man to believe that he shall be saved. Which is the
same thing as to say, that whoever would have a right to confide in God needs
do no more in order to that, than actually to trust in him; and that is a most
ridiculous Thought, which turns all Religion into a strong Fancy. Before we
believe a thing we ought to know why we should believe it, and have good reason
and solid Grounds for our Belief. Before we trust in God, we ought to satisfy
our selves that we have a Right to confide in him; for can a Man be saved only
because without any ground or reason he fancies that he shall? We ought not to
rely upon God but according to his Promise. Now God has promised nothing to
those who live and are hardened in Sin; far from promising any thing to them, he
threatens them with inevitable ruin. What claim or title then can an obdurate
Sinner have to the Mercy of God? What Confidence can he repose in God's
Promises, as long as he continues impenitent? None at all, except we suppose in
God a general Decree, to save indifferently all sorts of Persons.

It must not be said that these Considerations are apt to Alarm and Disturb the
Peace of Men's Consciences; for they will Alarm none of those who are animated
with true Faith and sincere Piety. And as to others; we do them a great piece
of service, when we awaken and terrify them, out of that false Quiet, into
which a groundless Confidence has betrayed them* On the other hand, it is a
dangerous thing to teach, that Confidence is the most essential thing to Faith;
for by this we may alarm some good Men, who either through Melancholy or want
of Instruction, are destitute of Confidence and inward Peace, And it has
certainly happened, that several Pious Persons are fallen into black Thoughts
and sad Scruples concerning their Salvation, and that they have in some measure
desponded, because they did not find Confidence, and a sense of the love of
God, in themselves.

From all these Reflections it does evidently appear, that Faith never ought,
nor can be separated from Good Works; and that Christians are as much obliged
to aply themselves to Good Works, as they are to believe, and to have Faith.

But now if it be asked; why St. Paul ^hen opposes Faith to Works, and why he
excludes Works, when he treats of Justification; I answer, that the Apostle
^ins at two things by this. His design, ^s to show, 1. That Works are not the
Cause and Foundation of Men's Salvation; ^ut that it flows from the pure Mercy
of God through Jesus Christ. This he proves with respect both to the Heathens
and the Jews, in the first Chapters of his Epistle ^o the Romans. But he did
not mean to say, that Good Works are not necessary under ^he Covenant of Grace.
His expressions are too clear to leave the least Room for any doubt about this
matter: To re^eject the meritoriousness of Good Works ^s one thing, and to deny
their necessity is another. But 2ly. because it may be ob^ected, that St. Paul
does entirely exclude Works, and that he uses expression which implie, that
Christians are no longer obliged to the practice of them, and that they have no
influence on Men's Salvation, either as Causes or Conditions; but on the
contrary, are opposed to Faith: Therefore I add, that he speaks thus with
relation to the Works of the ceremonial Law, and especially to Circumcision.
There were many in St. Paul's time, who asserted that Christians were bound to
observe those Legal Ordinances. It was about the Question that the Apostles met
a Jerusalem, and determined, Acts. XV.
that Christians (...) justified by Faith only, and that the yoke of Mosaical
Ordinances, ought not to be laid up on them. The same Conroverly is handled by
St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Galatians, where giving an account of his
Dispute with St. Peter, and of his reproving him for his too great Compliance
with the Jews; he affirms, that we are justified by the Faith of Christ, and
not by the Work of the Law.

Why has not than difference been observed which St Paul makes about Works?
When he speaks of the Works of the Mosaical Law, he calls them the Works of the
Law, or barely Works; but when he treat of the Works which the Gospel
prescribes, he call them Good Works; because they are really good, holy and
profitable in their own Nature; but this Title of Good Works; is never bestowed
upon the Works of the Ceremonial Law, which considered in themselves had
nothing of Goodness or Holiness in them. In a word, Good Works in St. Paul's
style, are quite another thing than barely Works, or the Works of the Law.

If this had been considered, such great ^ains needed not to have been taken,
to make Romans 3.27.
St. Paul agree with St. James. Galat. 11.16.
St. Paul says, that Man is justified by Faith without the Works of the Law;
Jam. 11.24.
and St. James, that Man is justified by works, and not by Faith ^nly. There is
no contradiction between these two Apostles. Both follow one Hypothesis, and
argue upon the same Principles. St. Paul disputing against the Jews, who would
tie Christians to the Observance of the Works of the Mosaical Law, ^^ffrms,
that Faith in Christ is sufficient, provided it brings forth Good Work's; and
that it is not necessary to observe the Mosaical rites. St. James disputing
against ^ereticks, who pretended that Faith did ^ave without Good Works, and so
did ^ntirely ruin our Savior's Morals; de^lares that Faith which does not
pro^uce Good Works, is not sufficient to ^alvation. Is not this the same
Doctrine with St. Paul's? But instead of reconciling these two Apostles, some
People find here great difficulties. They do not reconcile St. James with St.
Paul, but they rather refute St. James by St. Paul. St. James is expounded with
great Caution; as if he had gone too far by saying, that Man is justified by
works, and not by Faith only. This Proposition is softened as much as possible,
it is excused rather than explained; but as for what St. Paul says, that Faith
alone justfiies without Works, it is taken in the utmost strictness; so that
all is ascribed to Faith, and nothing to Good Works. Nay Faith is set in
Opposition to Good Works, and God to God himself; the Passages of Scripture
which speak of Faith being brought out against those which relate to Works. It
is true, say some, the Scripture says that without Holiness no manshall see
God, but it is likewise written, that we are not justified by our Works, but
only by Faith. And by this way of reasoning, Men raise themselves above the
reproaches and accusations of their own Consciences. I say it once more; this
is to attack and confute the Word of God by it self, and to charge the Holy
Ghost with self-contradiction. For in short, if a Man can be justified without
Good Works, he can be saved without them too; since the being, justified is the
same thing with the being saved: Now if a Man can be saved without Good Works,
he may see the Face of God without Holiness; which is directly contrary to what
St. Paul tells us, Heb. 21.14.
that without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.

2. A great many People imagine, that it is one of the Privileges of
Christians, not to be tied to the Observation of God's Law as the Jews were;
some mistaken places give occasion to that Error, and particularly this; Romans 6.
We are no more under the Law but under Grace. These words are thus
interpreted. The Law did prescribe Works, but the Gospel requires only Faith;
the Law did threaten, but the Gospel speaks only of Grace and Pardon. So that
to require Works, at this time of day, is to bring back the Dispensation of the
Law. There is something of Truth in this reasoning; but those who make use of
it, to free themselves from the Observation of God's Commandments, do very
little understand either what the Law or the Gospel is, and wherein these two
Dispensations differ. It is certain, that the Law was a Dispensation of
Severity; it did not propose to Men remission of sins and salvation as the
Gospel does. The Law had not that power and efficacy to sanctify Men, which
Grace has. The Law laid upon the Jews, great many Obligation which were not
only burdensome and painful; but which besides had no intrinse^^^ Holiness in
them; and those Duties were enjoined under a Curse. The Law it self was a time
of Severity and Malediction, in respect to all the Nations of the Earth, since
all the while that Economy did subsist, they were excluded from the Covenant,
which God had made with the Jews. In these several regards, we are not under
the Law, but under Grace.

But if from this, that we are not under the Law, we should infer that we are
no longer bound to do what is just, this Inference would overturn the whole
Gospel* and transform Religion into Libertinism. I^ because we are under Grace
we ought to speak no more of Works; why should the Gospel prescribe Works, and
the same Works which the Law enjoined, excepting only the Ceremonies? Why
should this Gospel call us to a Holiness, which exceeds that of the Jews, and
enforce this Obligation, with more terrible Threatenings, than those of the Law?
Why did our Savior, John the Baptist and the Apostles, preach up Repentance,
and enter upon their Ministry with these Words, Mat. 3.2. and 4.4.
repent ye? According to the Hypothesis of these Men they should have spoken to
them after this manner; Acts 11.17.
This is the time of Grace, the Law is past, and the Covenant of Works is
abolished; therefore fear nothing, let not your sins trouble you, for Salvation
is promised to all Mankind. Whence comes it to pass that our Mat. 5.6.7.
Savior speaks only of Works, in his Sermon upon the Mount; or that St. Paul
declares, that the natural intention and the proper effect of Grace, is to
teach Men to live, according to the rules of Temperance, Justice, and
Godliness? Must we say that God is altered, that he does not love Holiness so
much now, as he did heretofore; of that Sin is become less odious to him, since
it was expiated by the death of his Son? But (it is said, we are no more under
the Law,) What, are Christians then a Lawless People? On the contrary we are
under the Law, I mean under the Law of Christ, under Romans 8.2.
the Law of the Spirit of life, which makes us free from the Law of Sin and
Death.

But let us hear St. Paul himself, in what sense and respect does he say, that
we are no more under the Law but under Grace? He says this, precisely to show,
that we ought to live no longer in Sin. These are his own words; Romans 7.14, 15,
16, 17.18.
What then? Shall we Sin because we are not under the Law but under Grace? God
forbid. On the contrary, Sin shall not have dominon over you, for ye are not
under the Law but under Grace; you were formerly the servants of Sin, but now
being made free from Sin, and become the servants of God. Ye have your fruit
unto holiness We need but read the sequel of his Discourse to see how he
inveighs against those, who turned the Grace of the Gospel into a pretense to
live in Sin.

Before I leave this matter, I shall ta^^ notice of two Errors, which are
pretty common. The First is, the applying to Christians at this day, all those
things which were spoken of old by the Apostles, to the Converted Jews. It is
said, that we are no more under the Law, and Christians are often exhorted to
bless God for being no longer, under the Curse of the Law, and the Yoke of
Moses. And upon this a great many Oppositions are observed betwixt the Law and
the Gospel. For my part, I do not think those Exhortations and Oppositions, so
very proper to be insisted on, when we are speaking to Men, who never were
Jews; unless we do it with a design to show the Excellency of the
Gospel Covenant, above that of the Law, and the advantages of Christians above
Jews. For after all, the Law was given only to the Jews, and the Gentiles were
never subjected to the Ceremonies or the Curse of it, as the Jews were. Why
should we then say to People who never were under the Law, You are no more
under the Law? The Apostles indeed spoke in that manner to the Converted Jews;
but as to those who were formerly Pagans, it would be more fitting to tell
them; These. 1.9. Ephesians. 11.12. and 4.17.
You have been converted from Idols to the living God. Remember that ye were in
times past Gentiles without hope, and without God in the World; and therefore
live no longer like Heathens. It is a great fault not to expound the Scripture
according to the true scope of it, and to apply all that it contains, to all
sorts of Persons without distinction.

The other Error is of greater consequence. People fancy that because we are
not under the Law, which was a Covenant of Rigor, we are now to speak of
nothing else to Men, but of Grace and Promises, and that it is contrary to the
Spirit of the Gospel, to threaten and to denounce Curses against Sinners. It
has been said already, in what sense the Law was a Covenant of Rigor, in
opposition to the Covenant of Grace; but the Gospel has also its Curses, and
they are much more terrible than those of the Law. The Gospel speaks of the
future Punishments of another Life, in much clearer and stronger Expressions,
than the Law does. To be convinced of this, we need but reflect upon that
opposition, which St. Paul makes between the Law and the Gospel, in the Tenth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, He that despised Moses Law died without
mercy, under two or three Witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing,
and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? We know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, faith the Lord. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hand of the living God.

3. The Libertines do likewise abuse what St. Paul says in the Epistle to the
Gal. 5.
Galatians concerning Christian Liberty; when he declares that Christians are
freed from the bondage of the Law, when he exhorts them, to stand fast in that
Liberty, and protests, that Christ prositeth nothing to those, who would be
justified by the Law. But a Man may see with half an Eye, that the Apostle
means only, that Christians are no longer bound to observe Circumcision, and
the other Ceremonies of the Law of Moses. That St. Paul has no other view or
design but this, will plainly appear to every one who will read the whole
Epistle, and particularly the second Chapter of it.

In the V Chapter we find two things which are decisive in this Matter. 1. St.
Paul speaks there expressly of Circumcision. Gal. V.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing; for I testify again to every Man that is circumcised, that he is
a debtor to do the whole Law. ver. 13.
Christ is become of none effect unto yon, whosoever of you are justified by
the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. 2. It is very observable, with what
circumspection the Apostle delivers himself, left his Doctrine should be
wrested to favor Licentiousness; after he had said, You are called to liberty,
he adds, immediately only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh. He
explains what he means by living after the Flesh, by making an enumeration, of
those Sins which the Flesh produces, and which exclude Men from the Kingdom of
Heaven. He exhorts Men to live after the Spirit, and to practice the Christian
Virtues. In the Fourth Chapter he pursues the same Exhortations, and he ends
the Epistle with these remarkable Words, which contain the sum of his
Doctrine; Chap. VI. 15.
For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature; that is to say, Whether a Man be a Jew or a
Heathen, it matters not so he believes in Jesus Christ, and observes God's
Commandments: ver. 16.
Peace and Mercy be on them all who walk after this Rule. Is there anything
plainer than this Doctrine? And yet how clear soever it may be, Christian
Liberty is alleged to set Men free from the Obligation to keep God s
Commandments. All that St. Paul fays against Circumcision and the Ceremonies of
the Law, is by an Enormous Blasphemy, turned against the Holy Commandments of
the Son of God. Can any thing more Odious or Profane be imagined, than the
perverting of the Holy Scripture at this rate?

4. Those who plead on the side of Corruption, are wont to object against what
is said in behalf of Holiness, this Sentence of Solomon's, Ephesians, VII. 16.
be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise. And what
Inferences do they riot draw from thence? They conclude from this Place, That a
Man ought not to pretend so much to Holiness, or to set up for a good Man, and
that in all things Mediocrity is best. One may easily apprehend that such
Sentiments must needs introduce Licentiousness, especially, when they are
thought to be supported by a Divine Authority.

But let us see whether or no, such Conceits can be founded upon this Sentence
of Solomon's. I shall ask in the first place, Whether it is possible for a Man
to be too Just or too Wise, and whether there can be a vicious excess in
Righteousness or Wisdom? If a Man may be over-righteous, he may likewise love
God too much; for to be righteous, and to love God is the same thing. Now God
requires that we should love him with all our Heart, and consequently that we
should be as righteous, as it is possible for us to be. But far from being
over-righteous, we can never be righteous enough. And if we can never be
righteous enough, is there any occasion to exhort us, that we should not be
over-righteous? I wish Men had at least that reverence for the Scripture, as
not to make it speak Absurdities.

I know the ordinary Evasion: Vicious Men will say, that when Piety runs to
excess, it leads to Superstition or Pride, and becomes troublesome and
ridiculous. Every body says that, but without Reason. I have refuted that
Opinion, and showed that true Piety never degenerates into Superstition, or
Pride, and that Devout Men who are Superstitious, or troublesome, have but a
false Devotion, or a misguided Zeal.

This may direct us to the true meaning of the Sentence in Question; Solomon
does not speak here of true Justice and Wisdom. For whether he may have an eye
here upon Superstitious or Hypocritical Persons whose Righteousness is but
imaginary, which Sense is adopted by many Interpreters, or whether he speaks of
those who exercise Justice with too much severity, as some think; or whether as
it is conceived by others, he gives this advice to busy and presumptuous
People, who meddle in things which do not concern them, and fancy themselves
able to determine all Matters; however, it is plain, that Solomon does not
speak here of good Men, who exactly follow the Rules of true Justice and
Wisdom. If we stick to the last of these Three Expositions, which seems to
agree best with Solomon's design; then the meaning of this place is clear and
rational, and has nothing in it contrary to Piety; whereas the sense which is
put upon these Words by the Libertines, is both Absurd and Impious.

Those who would either justify or excuse Corruption; use to object in the
second place; That since the Scripture teaches, that all Men, and even good Men
are deeply engaged in Corruption; it must follow from thence, that Holiness and
Good-works are not so very necessary, and that the practice of these is
impossible. Now to prove this universal Corruption of all Men, they bring
several Declarations of Scripture, and this among the rest. There is not one
that does good, no not one, etc. Psalm. 14. Romans 3.

If their meaning in citing these Words, was only to show, that there is no Man
altogether free from Sin; and if it was granted on the other-hand, that good
Men do not sin in the same manner that the wicked do; I would not quarrel much
about this Interpretation, though not altogether exact or agreeable to the scope
of David in the 19th Psalm. But there is another design in it, which is to
infer from these Words, that Men differ very little from one another, that
they are all guilty of many great Sins, and that none do, or can practice the
Duties of Holiness. In a word, this is intended for the Apology of Corruption,
and to silence those who oppose it.

If what David says in this place is to be strictly understood, it will follow,
that there is not one good Man upon Earth; that all Men are perverted, that
they are all become abominable by their Sins, and that there is not one single
Person that is just or that fears God. But this Consequence raises Horror, it
is contrary to Truth and Experience, and to what the Scripture declares in a
Thousand places, where it speaks of Good Men, and distinguishes them from the
Wicked. Nay this Consequence may be destroyed from what we read in that very
Psalm, which mentions the Just who are protected by God, and the Wicked who
persecute them. This complaint of David, must therefore be understood with some
restrictions.

By reading the XIV Psalm, we may perceive that David intends to describe in
it, the extreme Corruption of Men in his time. There he draws the Picture of
Impiety and Atheism, and speaks of those Fools who say in their hearts that
there is no God, and whose life is a continued chain of Sins. It must be
observed in the next place, that when St. Paul cites these words out of the XIV
Psalm in the Epistle to the Romans Chap. III. he does it with a design to show,
that the Jews were not much better than the Heathens, and that they had as much
need of a Savior. V. 9.
What then, are we better than they? No in no wise, for we have before proved
both Jews and Gentiles that they are all under sin. This is the Assertion which
St. Paul maintains, and which he proves from that complaint which David made of
Old, V. 19.
There is not one that does good, etc. From whence he concludes, that all
mouths must be stopped, and that all the World is become guilty before God; so
that the Law of Moses could neither justify nor sanctify the Jews. But he
teaches at the same time, that Christ was come to rescue Men out of that
miserable Condition. And it were a strange thing if we must dill say of
Christians, that there is none that does good, no not one.

2. This answer is to be applied to that place in the Ephesians, where it is
said, Ephesians. II. 1. i.
that we are dead in trespasses and sins, for to the same end these words are
quoted. I do not deny but all Men abstracting from the Divine Grace, are to be
considered as dead in their Sins. That is St. Paul's meaning in that place; he
speaks here of the Natural state of Men, and particularly of Heathens; which
was a State of Corruption and Death, in which they had perished had not God
taken pity upon them. But the Apostle intends to make the Ephesians sensible,
of that unparalled Mercy of God by which they were converted to Christianity,
being but poor Heathens before, who were dead in their sins and obnoxious to
the Wrath of God. He does not say to them, you are dead in your sins; it is
falsifying the Text to cite it so, and to say, we are dead in our sins; but,
you were dead; he speaks of the time past when they were Heathens; and 5. etc,
Among whom, says he, speaking of the Jews, we had our Conversation in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
mind; but now he adds, God has quickened us together with Christ; both you that
were Heathens, and we that were Jews, are raised again from this spiritual
death by virtue of God's great Mercy. This is the true meaning of that place,
which gives us a lively Idea of Men's Natural Corruption, and of that happy
State to which Christ has exalted them. I do not deny but that many Christians,
are still in the same condition with Heathens, or very near it, being dead in
their Sins, and following the course of this World; but this can be said only
of bad Christians and not of those who have felt the Divine and Sanctifying
virtue of the Christian Religion.

3. It will be further said, that we must needs acknowledge, that all Men
without exception are Sinners, because that is St. John's Doctrine, John. 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves. This is a truth which no
Man denies, because it is too evident both from Scripture and Experience. But
we must take care to understand this Proposition aright, that all men are
sinners, and that we explain it so, as that it may Comport, with that just
difference we are to make between good and bad Men; else under a pretense that
all Men are Sinners, the distinction between Virtue and Vice will be taken
away. It is fit to remark upon this occasion, that the Scripture does not give
the name of Sinners to all Men, but only to the wicked and impious, this may be
seen in the whole Book of Psalms. When we say then, that we are all poor
Sinners, we must know in what sense we say it.

As to these words; If we say that we have no sin we decieve our selves. It is
visible that St. John says this upon two accounts, which relate to two sorts of
Sins, into which Men may fall. First there are great Sins, there is that
Corruption in which Men lived before their Conversion. In this regard St. John
might say to those he writes to, who were new converted Christians, that they
were all Sinners, meaning that they had all been so; for indeed both Gentiles
and Jews had been extremely Corrupt. Secondly, there are Sins, into which those
whose Regeneration is not yet perfect, may fall; as Fhere are Infirmities from
which the most regenerate Men, are not free. In this sense all Men are Sinners,
and the Christians to whom St. John directs his Epistle, were all Sinners also,
though already converted. But the question is, whether a true Christian sins like
other Men, and whether he who is a Sinner, taking that word according to the
ordinary use of Scripture, that is to say, one in whom Sin reigns, is a true
Christian: That can never be said. To this purpose we may hear St. John himself
in the III Chapter of the same Epistle; where he expressly tells us, that he who
is born of God does not commit Sin, that whoever sins is of the Devil, and
that by this we may know the Children of God and the Children of the Devil. Are
not these words very plain? Who can have the confidence after this; to excuse
Corruption by saying we are all Sinners? But yet it is not only said that we
are all Sinners by these Men, but besides, that we are all Great wretched and
abominable Sinners, It is no wonder that Men who have such Sentiments, should
be so Corrupt.

4. But to this, there is a reply at hand, to show that the justest Men are
guilty of very frequent Sins, and it is taken from these words; The just man
sins seven times a day. I might let this alone, because I am engaged only to
answer those Places of Scripture which are wrested into an ill sense about this
matter. And this, that the just man sins seven times a day, is no where to be
found in the Bible. Those who quote these words as if they were Scripture; will
pretend no doubt, that they are contained. in Prove. xxiv. 16. But there is
nothing like this in the Sacred Text. These are the words of Solomon, a just
man falls seven times, and rises up again: But the wielded shall fall into
Mischief. Solomon speaks of the frequent Afflictions of good Men, and
particularly of the ill usage they meet with, from wicked Men. In the 15 Verse
he addresses himself to the wicked, and tells them, that it is in vain for
them, to lay wait for, and to persecute the Just, for, adds he, a just man
falls seven times, and rises up again, but the wicked shall fall into
Mischief and perish. The meaning is, that God takes care of the Just, and that
if he permits that they should fall into many Calamities, he does likewise
deliver them. This is asserted almost in the same words Psalm. xxxvii. 24.
Though the just fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand. To the same purpose we are told, Job V. 19. He shall deliver
thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee: This admits
of no difficulty, and all Interpreters are agreed about it. And yet for all
that, as men are apt to entertain every thing, which excuses Corruption; this
Proverb, That the just man sins seven times a day, prevails, and passes for an
Article of Faith. Is it not a lamentable thing, that Men should be thus
obstinately bent to wrest the Scripture, into a sense favorable to Corruption,
and that they should dare to falsify it at this rate?

There are many falsifyings in the way of citing this Passage. 1. Whereas
Solomon says only the just, he is made to say the justest man, to give the
greater force and extent to this Sentence, to debase Piety the more, and to
insinuate, that the best and holiest Men, are great Sinners. 2. Solomon is made
to say, that the just Sins, but he does not say that, he says only that the
just falls. I know that to fall, signifies sometimes to sin, but falling
denotes likewise very frequently, to be afflicted, and a Man is blind who does
hot see, that in this Text, the word fall is used in this second sense. The 17
Verse which comes immediately after that, which we are now examining, proves it
beyond exception, rejoice not when thine enemy falls, etc. Besides, those who
are acquainted with the Sacred style, know, that it does not usually express
the Sins of infirmity, to which the Just are subject, by the word fall, that
word importing commonly, the fall of wicked Men. 3. Solomon is made to say,
That the justest Man sins seven times a day. This is another falsifying, an
addition to the Text, which is of no small consequence. Seven times a day, is
not in the Text, there is only seven times. Every body knows that Seven times,
signifies many times. And so the meaning would be, that the Just do nothing
else but transgress; that many times a Day he falls into Sin. But who does not
see, that this would be the description of a Man in whom Sin reigns, and who is
habitually engaged in it, and not the Character of a good Man? I do not say,
but that just Men have their weak sides, and fall sometimes into Sin; this
happens more or less according to the degree of their Regeneration; but it is
Impious, to say, that their Life is spent in continual Sins, and that they
offend God at every foot; and yet this is what Men would establish from this
Maxim, That the justest Man sins Seven times a day. Those who have a mind to
Quote the Scripture; should neither add to, nor diminish from it, they should
not alter the Words, nor divide Sentences from what goes before and what
follows; for otherwise there is no Absurdity or Impiety, which may not be
proved from the Word of God.

5. But our Adversaries will say, Whether that Place is alleged right or
wrong, it does not matter much, since there are others which say the same
thing, in stronger Expressions. Does not St. Paul say, Romans VII. Romans VII.
I am carnal sold under sin, for in me dwells no good thing; for that which I
do I allow not: and what I would, that do I not; but what I hate that do I. I
see a Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me
into captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this Death! If St. Paul himself
speaks after this manner, who can deny, that the greatest Saints fall into very
heinous Sins, and have still a large stock of Corruption in them?

Those who draw this Inference from the Words of St. Paul, make him speak that
which is quite contrary to his thoughts. He is so far from saying any thing
that favors the cause of Sinners; that on the contrary his design is to prove,
the necessity of a good Life, and to make Men sensible of the Efficacy of the
Gospel in reference to Sanctification. He has this in his view, in the VII
Chapter to the Romans, where he represents the difference between a Corrupt and
a Regenerated Man, and between the Condition of Man under the Law, and his
State under the Gospel. So that all he says of the Carnal Man sold under Sin,
etc. is to be understood of a corrupt Man, living under the Law.

I am not ignorant that Divines, otherwise Able and Pious Men, have thought
that St. Paul speaks of himself in this Chapter, and that he represents there,
what passes within a Regenerate Man; but I know likewise that a great many
Orthodox Divines, have rejected that Exposition, as contrary to the scope of
the Apostle, to the constant Doctrine of the New Testament, and to the Spirit
of the Christian Religion. It h a sad thing that when a place is capable of two
Senses, Men should pitch upon that, which comes nearer to the Pretensions of
Sinners. I do not intend here to enter into a Dispute, nor to offend those of a
contrary Opinion; I am persuaded that they have no design to countenance
Corruption; but as in all things we ought to seek the Truth, and as the Truth
here, is of great Consequence for the promoting of Piety, so I entreat those
who might have Scruples concerning those Words, to make these following
Reflections.

1. Let them seriously and impartially consider, whether it may be said, that
St. Paul was a Carnal Man fold under Sin, a Man who did no Good but Evil, and a
Man involved in Death; these are the strongest Expressions which can be used,
and which the Scripture uses to give as the Character of Wicked and Impious
Men: To believe this of St. Paul, is so very hard, that a Man must be able to
digest any thing, who is not startled at it.

2. I desire them to attend to the Drift of St. Paul, he had undertaken to
show, that the Doctrine of Justification by faith, did not introduce
Licentiousness; this he had proved in the whole VI Chapter, as may appear by
the reading it. Is it likely that in the VII Chapter, he should overturn all
that he had established in the preceding,\ and say, that the holiest Men are
captivated to the Law of Sin? If this be St. Paul's Doctrine, what becomes of
the Efficacy of Faith to produce Holiness, and how could he have answered that
Objection which he proposes to himself, Chap. VI. 1. and 15. Shall we continue
in sin, shall we sin, we that are under Grace? St. Paul ought to have granted
the Objection, if it be true, that the most Regenerate, are sold to Sin. But it
is plain, that in the VII Chapter he goes on to prove what he had laid down
already, to wit, that the Gospel sanctifies Men, and not only this, but that
the Gospel alone can sanctify Men, and that the Law could not. This is the
Scope of the whole Chapter.

In the very first Four Verses, he shows that Christians are no longer under
the Law, nor consequently under Sin, and that they are dead to the Law, that
they may bring forth fruits unto God. He expresses himself more clearly yet in
the 5th Verse, where he says, that there is a considerable difference, between
those who are under the Law, and those who are in Jesus Christ. He plainly
distinguishes these two States, and the time past from the present. When we
were in the flesh, says he, the motions of sin which were by the Law, did work
in our Members to bring forth unto death, but now we are delivered from the
Law, that we should. serve in newness of Spirit. These are the two States; The
Sat past was a state of Corruption, the presect State is a State of Holiness.
But as it might have been inferred from thence, that the Law was the cause of
Sin, the Apostle refutes that imagination, from the 7th to the 14th Verse.

After this he describes the miserable Condition of a Man, who is not
Regenerated by Grace, and who still is under the Law. He begins to do this from
the 14th Verse, by faying, the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under
sin, etc. And here no doubt it will be said, that St Paul speaks of himself,
and not of those who were under the Law; for says he, I am carnal, etc. But one
may easily see that the Apostle, uses here a way of speaking which is very
ordidinary in discourse, and by which he that speaks puts himself in the room
of those he speaks of. And St. Paul had the more reason to express himself in
this manner, because he had been himself under the Law, before he was converted
to Christianity. There are many instances in Scripture of this way of speaking,
and we find one in this very Chapter which is beyond exception St Paul says in
the 9th Verse; I was alive without the Law once, etc. If we do not admit here a
figurative expression, or if these words are strictly taken; then we must say
that there was a time when this Apostle was without Law, which is both false
and ridiculous. As therefore it is plain that when he says Ver. 9th. I was
without Law, he speaks of the State of those Men to wliom the Law was not
given; so it is unquestionalbe, that when he says, I am carnal, etc. he
describes the State of a Corrupt Man living under the Law, and not his own.
This is the Key which lets us into the meaning of his Discourse, in which the
Law is mentioned, almost in every Verse.

3. Lastly, That which makes it as clear as the Sun, that this is his true
sense, is, that when the Apostle considers and speaks of himself as a
Christian, he uses quite another Language. To be satisfied of this we need but
run over, this Chapter, and compare it with other places in his Epistles.

If he says here ver. 7, 8. That concupiscence is felt and reigns within a man
who is under the Law; he declares Gal. V. 24. That Christians have crucified
the flesh with the lusts of it. If he says ver. 9, 10. That sin lives within
him, and that he is dead; he had said, Chap. VI. 2, 11. That he was dead unto
sin and living unto God through Jesus Christ. If he says ver. 14. That he is
carnal and sold under sin, it is apparent that he does not there speak of
himself, since Chap. VIII. 1, and 8. he tells us, That those who are in Christ
Jesus are not in the flest, and that those who are in the flesh cannot please
God, and have not his spirit. If he says here v. 18. I know that in me dwells
no good thing; he declares Ephesians. III. 17. that Christ dwells in our hearts by
Faith. If he says, ver. 19. The good that I would, I do not, and the evil which
I hate that I do; he testifies in many places; That the faithful do that which
is good, and abstain from evil. If he complains, ver. 21, 22, 23. of his being
captivated to the Law of Sin; he teaches Chap. VI. 17, 22. That Christians are
no longer the servants of Sin, that they an freed front it, and become the
servants of Righteousness. If he cries out ver. 24.0 wretched man that I am who
shall deliver me from the body of this Death! It is manifest that these are not
the Expressions of a Man Regenerated by Jesus Christ; for he add^ immediately,
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. There is therefore now as
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit. For the Law often he Spirit of Life which is in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, Chap. VIII. 12.

Now let any Body judge, whether what is said in this Chapter, can be applied
to St. Paul, considered as a Regenerated Christian? Can it be said, that
Concupiscence reigns in him who has crucified it? That Sin lives in him who is
dead to Sin? That he who is not in the Flesh; is a carnal Man? That he who is
freed from Sin, is sold to Sin? That no good thing dwells in those in whom
Christ dwells? That a Man is at the same time miserable and happy, a Slave and
yet delivered by Jesus Christ, dead and alive? To say this, is it not to call
Good Evil, and Evil Good; to put Darkness for Light. and Light for Darkness? Is
it not to admit downright Contradictions in Scripture? But especially, is it
not to open a door to Licentiousness, and to give us a strange Notion of a
Regenerate Man?

By all that has been said; I do not mean that there are no remnants of
Corruption, in those who are Regenerated. Neither do (...) deny, but that in
those whose Regeneration is but begun, there is some such struggle as that
which is described in this Chapter. This is Musculus's Notion, in his
Commentary upon the Romans Page 118.
But that this Chapter should be the Picture of a Regenerate Man, and of a true
Member of Christ, is a thing so contrary to the Gospel, and to all he Ideas of
Religion, that one can hardly ^imagine, how there could ever be Men, who
believed it.

Noah, Lot, Abraham, Sampson, David, Solomon, St Paul, St. Peter, etc and from
these Instances they conclude, that since those great Saints, fell into such
heavy Sins; Sin is no Obstacle to Salvation, and that it is not inconsistent
with Piety.

If We did make a right use of the Word of God, we would draw a quite contrary
influence from these Instances; and consider that it is absurd to plead
Precedents, against an express Law. If we must needs be governed by Examples;
we ought certain^^ to choose the good, and not the bad one to imitate what is
praise worthy in the Saints, and not what deserves blame; the^ Faults being
like so many Beacons, set (...) to keep us from striking upon the sam^ Rocks.

But to answer directly; I say first, Tha^ we are a little too apt to rank
among Saint some Illustrious Persons mentioned in the S^cred History; who
perhaps were nothing less than Holy Men, and who it may be di^perish in their
Sins, though God thought i^ to make use of them, to carry on the Designs of his
Providence, and to deliver hi^ People. It would be a rash thing to pronounce
upon any Man's Salvation, or (...) speak irreverently of those great Men; b^
the instance of Solomon, whose Salvation has been at all times questioned by
Divines should teach us, not to be so hasty, in placing those among Saints of
whom the Scripture speaks with some honor, and is sheltering our selves under
their Examples.

As to those who by the Testimony of Scripture it self, did truly fear God;
(...) might observe that they fell but once into those Sins related in the
Sacred History which would by no means favor impenitent and habitual Sinners.
But this answer does not fully satisfy; for besides that it apposes a thing
which in respect of several ^ersons cannot certainly be known; there are ^ome
Sins which are so black, such as Adulte^y and Apostasy, that a Man can hardly
com^it them more than once, except he is al^gether sold to Sin, and further,
any one of ^ose Sins is incompatible with a State of ^egeneration.

We must therefore frankly own; that ^hen those great Men sinned in that
man^er, they did not act like Saints, that they ^ut themselves into a State,
which consider^d in it self, was a State of Damnation, and that they had
perished, if they had conti^ued in it; for as Ezekiel says, Chap. XXXIII. ^8.
When the righteous turns from his ^ighteousness, and commits iniquity, he
shall ^ven die thereby. We may judge of the hein^usness and danger of those
sins, by the de^ree of Repentance, which some of these Men ^ave expressed for
them, and by the public ^cknowledgments they made of them. What ^arms was
David in, when he composed he LI Psalm, which is the Psalm of his Repentance?
What a deep sense had St. Peter of his fault, in denying his Master? What do
then such Examples signify to those who live in Sin and Impenitency? Who can be
sure that God will give him ^he Grace, to recover himself as those Ho^y Men
did? Those who presume to sin as they did, in hopes that they shall in like
manner wipe off their Sins by Repentance and Amendment, reason just like a Man,
who should swallow down Poison, and conclude, it would not kill him, because
some who have been Poisoned, have Escaped Death.

But that which deserves here our greatest Consideration, is the time which
those Saine^ lived in. There is great difference between (...) Christians, and
the good Men under the Old Testament. Men before Christ, ha^ not by a great
deal, that Light which we have; and did not know as we do, the Duties of
Holiness. Our Savior teache^ us that distinction, when he says, Mat. XII. 1.
The John the Baptist was the greatest among they who were born of a Woman, but
that the le^^ in the Kingdom of Heaven was greater the^ John the Baptist; that
is to say, that Christians have a much greater Light, than either John Baptist,
or all the ancient Prephets had. Now the measure of Knowledge ought to be the
measure of Piety; and therefore Christians ought to excel the Jews in Holiness.
What God did bear with as that time, would be in us altogether intoleable; and
how can it be lawful for us to imitate the Ancients in their Vices, when we are
bound to surpass their Virtues?

This Principle is of great moment, and without it we can hardly silence
Profane Persons. a Libertine insisting upon Presidents, will say, That
Polygamy, he keeping of Concubines, Murder, Divorce upon the slightest
pretenses, and such like Disorders; are not so criminal as they are imagined to
be; he will produce the Instances of Abraham and Jacob, of the Judges of
Israel, of David and the Jews. Far be it from us to detract from the honor and
praise due to those Ancient Worthies; they have done much for the Time they
live in. But God forbid too, that we should lessen the Glory and the Advantages
of the Christian Religion. If we speak like Christians, we will say, That God
in his Goodness did pass over many things, by reason of the Time, and of the
natural Temper of the Jews, who were a gross and carnal People. Our Savior's
Answer to the Pharisees coneerning Divorce, is very much to our purpose. Mat.
XIX.
Moses suffered you to put away your Wives, but from the beginning it was not
so; And then he adds, that whosoever should imitate the Jews, and do that which
had been done and tolerated till then, should be guilty of Adultery.

We may easily apply this Answer to the instance of St. Peter, since before our
Savior's Ascension, the Apostles were weak as yet, and possessed with various
Prejudices. But I think my self bound to add a Word or two concerning the
Example of St. Paul, because it is commonly mistaken. That Apostle says, 1 Timothy
I. 13, 15.
that he was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, who was not worthy to be called an
Apostle, and that he was the chief of Sinners. At the first hearing of these
Words many imagine, that St. Paul had been a profligate Man, a Swearer, and a
Godless Wretch; and yet he means nothing else, but that he had once persecuted
the Church. For otherwise, St. Paul before his Conversion to Christianity, was
a good Man, and his Life was blameless and exemplary; for this he appeals to
God, and the Jews, Acts XXIII. 1. and XXVI. 4. If he did persecute the Church
then, it was through a blind Zeal and Ignorance; and for that reason, as he
tells us himself, ver. 13. he obtained mercy from God. Is not this quite
another Case, than that of those Christians, who knowingly and wilfully allow
themselves in Sin.

It is another mistake to make St. Paul say, as some do, that he is the
greatest of Sinners; he does not say that, he says only, that he is the chief
or the first of those Sinners whom Jesus Christ did save. His meaning is, that
he holds the first rank among converted Sinners, that he is a remarkable
Instance of the Divine Mercy, and that Jesus had begun by him, to show his
Clemency and Goodness, Thus he explains himself Verse 16. For this cause, says
he. I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him.
This is exactly what he meant; for as to what some imagine, that St. Paul out
of Humility, acknowledges himself the greatest of all Sinners; I think that
explication is wrong, and that it neither agrees with Truth nor Piety, nor good
Sense. A good Man is not bound to think himself worse than the greatest
sinners; on the contrary, he ought to bless God, for that Good which the Divine
Grace has wrought if him.

Where Sin does abound, Grace does much more abound. Under the Covert of this
short Sentence, the most flagitious Sinners think themselves safe. But the bare
reading of St. Paul's Discourse, will soon convince us, that this is to wrest
the Scripture into a false and pernicious Sense. The Apostle's Design is to
show, that all Men being rendered Sinners in Adam, and by the Law; the Goodness
of God was so great, that he was willing to Save them through Jesus Christ. In
order to establish this Truth, he had prove the before Christ, Sin and Death
reigned erery where; not only among the Heathen but also among the Jews; upon
this ^^adds, that where Sin did abound, Grace ^^mercy more abound; to signify
God's hav^^^ mercy on them, when they were involved in Sin and Death. In a
Word, St. P^^ sets the happy Condition to which M^^ were advanced by Jesus
Christ, in opposition to that which they were in before. This is the sense of
that place, and the drift of the whole Epistle. Can any one infer from thence,
that now we may freely sin, and that Grace will exert in self rewards us,
whatever sins we may commit?

It is fit to observe besides, that whi^^ St. Paul speaks of Grace, he does not
only mean the pardoning, but likewise the sa^ctifying Grace; which destroys the
pretention of the Libertines. The Apo^^ himself confutes it with a great deal
of vehemence He foresaw that some would ^gue like those we now contend with;
a^^ he makes this Objection to himself, Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 11, 12.
Wh^^ then? shall we continue in sin, that Grace may bound? And this is his
Answer, God forbid how shall we that are dead to sin, live (...) longer
therein? We who have been baptized into Christ's death, that we should walk in
newness of Life. Reckon ye also your selves dead unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in your Mortal Body,
that ye should obey it in the lusts hereof. The Apostle pursues these
Exhortations to the end of the Chapter.

2. The Promises and Instances of God's Mercy, are frequently also taken in a
sense which favors Corruption and Security. All that the Gospel says upon this
head, is interpreted by vicious Men, as if the Son of God was come into the
World, to give Men a license to sin. To this purpose the Instances of that
Woman who was a sinner, of Zacheus and the converted Thief, are often alleged;
as likewise the Parable of the Prodigal Son, of the Publican, and of the
Laborers: And from these Instances as well, as from our Savior's
Declarations, Mat. 11.13.
that he is not come to call the righteous, but Sinners to Repentance; it is
concluded, that the greatest Sinners may obtain Salvation, as well as the Just.
But if those who quote these Instances, did narrowly examine them, they would
read in them, their own Condemnation. For first, all these Sinners mentioned in
the Gospel, did repent and were Converted. That Woman who had been a Notorious
Sinner expresses the most lively Sorrow; the Publican. smites his Breast, the
Prodigal comes to himself again, and detests his former excesses; Zacheus if he
was an unjust man, restores fourfold. From these Instance we may very well
infer, that God never rejects returning sinners. But even this, is an
invincible Argument, that there is no mercy for those, who persist in their
Sins and that too in hopes of Pardon.

Besides, we must know that our Savior's design in all these Parables and
Instances, was to inform Men that he was come to invite the greatest Sinners to
Repentance and especially to let the Jews understand that for all the high
opinion they had of their own Dignity and Merit, the Heathens who lived in the
greatest Corruption were to be admitted into God's Covena^ and to have a Share
in his favor. Which actually happened to all those Heathens who did believe in
Jesus Christ. These Instances and Parables then represent the Stare Men were in
at that time, and not the State of those, who are entered already into the
Christian Church. It can never be said too much, nor remembered too often in the
reading of the Gospel; that there is a vast difference, between those Heathens,
who never heard a word of God or Jesus Christ^ and Christians who are born in
the Church and live in the Covenant with God.

Thus I think I have examined those Places of Scripture, which are most
commonly abused by the Libertines. If I have omitted any, I hope what has been
said in this Chapter, may serve to suggest pertinent and satisfactory Answers
to them.

CAUSE V. A false Modesty.
COrruption is not wholly to be imputed to that Ignorance, or to those
Prejudices and loose Opinions which prevail among Christians. For men do not
always sin through want of Knowledge, or out of mere Wantonness and
Libertinism. There are many who acknowledge the viciousness of the Age, and the
necessity of a good life; and yet they neglect their Dury entirely, or at least
they are very remiss in the doing of it; acting for the most part, against
their own persuasions.

There must be then other Springs of Corruption in Men, besides those which we
have hitherto discovered. It is necessary to search into these, and to find
out, if possible, why many persons, who want no Instruction, and are solicited
by the Motion of their own Consciences, to embrace the side of Virtue and
Piety, do not withstanding continue in Vice and Corruption.

This seems to proceed chiefly from two Dispositions, which Men are commonly i^.

On the one hand they are restrained by an ill Shame, from acting suitably to
the sentiments of their own Consciences; and on the other hand, they put off
their Conversion, hoping that they shall one Day make up all the Irregularities
of their Conduct, by Repentance. I look upon these two Disposition, as two of
the principal Causes of Corruption, and therefore I thought in might be proper,
to consider them both distinctly. I design to treat of false Modesty in this
Chapter, and to show, 1. The Nature, and 2. the Effects of it.

1. By false Modesty, I mean that Shame, which hinders Men to do that which
they know to be their Duty. I call this Shame vicious or illl, to distinguish
it from another kind of Shame, which is good and commendable, which consists,
in being ashamed to do ill things. If false Shame is a source of Corruption;
that other Shame which restrains from Evil, is a Principle of Virtue, and a
Preservative against Sin; And therefore it ought to be as carefully cherished
and maintained, as vicious Shame should be avoided or shaken off. For as soon
as the sense of this commendable Shame is gone, Innocence is irrecoverably
lost. It is a part of the Character of Sinners in Scripture, that their
Wickedness raises no blushing or confusion in them.

I say then, that this false Shame, keeps Men from doing at the same time what
they know and approve to be their Duty; and it is under that Notion
particularly, that I am to consider it here. It is not my design to speak of
that Shame, which arises from Ignorance, or Contempt, and which is to be met
with in those profane and worldly Men, who because they do not know Religion,
or judge it unworthy of their Application, think it a disgrace to follow its
Maxims. I refer such Men to the first Chapter of this Book, and to some further
Considerations, which I am to insist upon elsewhere. The Shame I speak of at
present, supposes some Knowledge in the Mind, and some value for, and
inclination to Piety. From whence it appears, how dangerous the Effects of that
Shame, are, and how important it is to know and observe them; since it seduces
and corrupts even those who are none of the worst Men, and of whom otherwise,
we might reasonably hope well

Now to apprehend the Nature of this vicious Shame; it must be observed, that
Shame commonly springs from two Causes; Sometimes it proceeds from the Nature
of the thing we are ashamed of, or from the Opinion we have of it: Thus Men are
ashamed of things, which either are, or appear dishonest in their Nature. But
sometimes also Shame is an effect of the regard we bear to other Men's Judgment,
and then we are ashamed to do things which may bring Contempt upon us, and
Disgrace us in the World. One may soon perceive that the Shame that is vicious
does not arise from the first of these Causes. Religion has nothing in it, that
is shameful arid dishonest; for far from that; it is of all things the most
Comely and Honorable, and the most worthy of a Man; and it appears such, even
to those, who by reason of a groundless Shame, dare not practice the Rules of
it. The true Cause then of this false Modesty, is a feeble regard to Men's
Judgment, and a fear of falling under their Contempt or Hatred. Piety is little
Practiced in the World, it is despised, and, it is hated; and these are the
three principal Causes of vicious Shame.

1. Piety is little Practiced in the World; few People love or practice it. Now
a Man is very inclined to do that which is commonly done; he thinks it is
safest and most honorable, to side with the multitude; he is afraid of making
himself Ridiculous, by being singular. It is a Maxim generally received, That
we ought to comply with Custom, and to do as others do. The Reason then why
many have not the Courage to be on the Side of Religion, is because that Side
is deserted and abandoned.

2. Piety is often despised in the World. It is looked upon as a mean and
disgraceful thing. The strictness of a Man, who Acts upon Principles of
Religion and Conscience, is imputed to weakness of Mind, singularity of Humor,
or Caprice, and sometimes to Hypocrisy and Pride. Those who profess Devotion
and Piety, are turned into Ridicule: And on the contrary, it is thought
honorable to comply in every thing, with the Ways and Fashions of the Age.
Though these Sentiments are very unjust, yet they make a great Impression,
because few People have Firmness enough to slight the Judgment and Contempt of
Men. We have naturally a quick sense of Honor, and nothing is so unsupportable
to Selflove, as Contempt; so that this Temptation is dangerous, and it easily
produces in a Man a false Shame, which diverts him from Religion.

3. Piety does likewise procure the Hatred of the World; because a good Life
accuses, condemns, and reproaches those who live ill. Besides, Religion obliges
us sometimes to do things, which displease and offend Men. How cautious soever
it may be, it is much, if upon many occasions, it does not stir up their
Jealousy, their Hatred, or their Spleen. A good Man is often bound to refuse
what is desired of him. He is unacquainted with the Maxims of that mean and
fawning Complaisance, which is necessary to get every bodies Love. Many for
this Reason neglect Piety. They dare not let shine a Light, which discovers the
Weaknesses and Errors of others; and Fear and Shame together make them think,
that it would be Ill-breeding, as well as a piece of Imprudence, to follow a
Course of Life which might render them odious.

From these Considerations it appears already, that this Shame is one of the
general Fountains of Corruption, and that it can produce none but very ill
effects; first upon those in whom it is, and next upon other Men.

1. The natural Effect of vicious Shame, is to dissuade a Man from his Duty,
and to draw him into Sin. It makes his Knowledge useless, it frustrates the
warnings which his Conscience gives him; and so it extinguishes in him the
Principles of Virtue. Those who are possessed with this Shame, dare neither
Speak nor Act as they ought, they dissemble their true Sentiments they offer
violence to their Consciences, they have not the Courage to speak the Truth, or
to reprove their Neighbors, when occasion requires; they are loath to confess,
or to amend their Faults; in a Word, they frequently neglect the most
indispensable Duties of Piety and Charity: And all this because they are checked
by a false Shame.

But if this Shame hinders us to do Good, it does as forcibly prompt us to
Evil: As soon as a Man thinks it a disgrace to do Good, and to distinguish
himself by a Christian Deportment; he presently conceives likewise, that it
would be a Shame to him, not to imitate the Irregularities of others. Hence it
is that we applaud Sin, that we are carried away by the Solicitations, or
Examples of Persons of Authority; that we cannot withstand the Entreaties of
Friends; that we engage in unjust Enterprises, or criminal Diversions, and that
we fall into many other wicked Practices. A very little Reflection upon our
selves, will easily convince us, that Shame produces all these Effects. A
Heathen Author Plutarch
has proved long ago, in an Excellent Tract, That false Modesty is one of the
greatest obstacles to Virtue; and that Men commit many Faults and bring a great
deal of Mischief upon themselves, only because they dare not refuse to comply
with others.

The effects of this Shame are not less fatal in respect of other Men. As it
proceeds from the regard we bear to their Judgments, so it usually shows it
self in their company; so that we cannot but scandalize and corrupt them, when
we govern our selves by the suggestions of this false Shame. For not to mention
here the Scandal which this gives to good Men; those very Persons, for whose
sake we use such sinful Compliances, and who despise Religion; conceive yet a
greater Contempt of it, when they see, that those who ought to support its
interest, are ashamed of it, and dare not openly profess it. They judge that
Piety must be indeed, a very mean and contemptible thing; and when they observe
that Men are afraid to displease them, they take such an Ascendent over them,
that Virtue dares no more appear in their presence. Besides that such an
Indulgence toward Vice, gives a new force to it. If vicious Men are not
reproved, it confirms them in their ill Habits; if they are imitated, they are
Authorized; if we are ashamed to confess our Faults before them, we do not heal
the Scandal which we have given them, and that is the greater for having been
occasioned by Men who are thought Pious, and not by Libertines. But that we may
be the more sensible of the pernicious effects of this kind of Shame, we ought
to take notice of three things, which are very remarkable in this matter.

1. Shame is a thing which has an absolute power over a Man. Other Passions may
more easily be resisted; but when Shame has gained an Ascendent over the Mind,
it is extreme hard to be conquered, especially if it proceeds from the regard
we have for Men; for when it arises from a natural disposition, it may sooner
be overcome. The greatest Threats and Promises will not sometimes shame a Man,
who will presently yield if Shame can be excited within him. How often do we
find the most vigorous efforts we can make upon our selves, and our best
Resolutions quite dashed, by a filly bashfulness? A Jest, a bare Look, or a
slight Apprehension of being thought ridiculous, or a Bigot, is sometimes
enough to Confound us, and to make all our good purposes vanish.

2. It ought to be considered; that the Shame we speak of here, restrains those
Persons, who in their Hearts are inclined to Virtue; those who live in a
profound Ignorance, or in a total Obduration, being not susceptible of this
Shame. It supposes, as has been said, some remainder of Conscience and
Knowledge soliciting Man to his Duty; but it overcomes that Knowledge and those
good Sentiments. We are to impute to this vicious Shame, a great part of the
Sins of good Men; and this is one of the Articles upon which they have most
reason to reproach themselves; as is well known to those who make any
reflection upon their Conduct. And if this Shame is able to spoil those who
other wise are Virtuous, and to extinguish their Zeal and Piety; we ought to
reckon it among the Principal Causes of Corruption.

3. Shame may lead men to the highest Degrees of Wickedness. For besides that a
man sins against his Conscience, when for fear of Men he dares not do his Duty;
besides that he offends God in a very provoking manner, when he is ashamed to
obey him, and fears Men more than Him; I say that this shame is apt to betray
him into the great est Enormities. A man is capable of every thing when he
becomes a Slave to other men's Judgment, and when Complaisance or Humane
Consideration, have a greater force upon him, than the Laws of Religion, and
his Duty. Whenever a man dares not appear good, he dares appear in some measure
wicked. And when he ties to Virtue an Idea of Honor to Vice, and from
complying in every thing with the Opinions of loose and profane Persons.

1. Men do not arrive of a sudden at this degree of Corruption; false Shame
carries them to it by little and little. It makes one sin at first through
Complisance, though with some Reluctance. By this, Conscience grows weaker; a man
contracts the Habit of slighting its Suggestions, and Vice becomes more
familiar to him. Then he begins to sin more boldly; the shame of doing good
increases, and the shame of sinning grows less. In a little time he comes to do
out of Custom and Inclination, what he did before but seldom, and with some
inward Conflict. From thence he proceeds to an open contempt of Piety, and so
he forsakes an Interest to which he was well affected at first, but which this
shame has made him dislike. Thus many Persons, who had good dispositions in
their youth; being let loose into the World, have lost their Innocence, and are
turned Libertines and Atheists.

Now this false Modesty being so pernicious we can never labor too much to
prevent its ill effects. And this we shall succeed in, if we seriously
consider, that there is a great deal both of Error and Cowardice, in the
sentiments and conduct of those, who are hindered by shame, from discharging
the Duties of Religion and Conscience. First, there is a great deal of Error in
their Proceeding. This Shame is founded upon nothing else, but the Judgment
which the World makes of Piety. But if those who despise Religion are in the
wrong, as they most certainly are; if it is Extravagance and Folly in them, to
pass a false Judgment upon Piety; it is a much greater Madness in those who
understand better Things, to subscribe to a Judgment which they know to be
False and Erroneous, and to make that the Principle of their Actions. If Virtue
is a Thing that is Good, Just, Necessary, Acceptable to God, and Useful to
those who Practice it; if with it we cannot fail of Happiness, and if without
it there is nothing but Dread and Terror; why should we be ashamed to give up
our selves to it? A Wise Man ought to esteem that, which deserves Esteem, and
if Ignorant and Corrupt People are of another Mind he ought to set himself
above their Judgment, and to despise the Contempt of the senseless Multitude.
The Judgment of Men cannot make that Just which is Unjust, nor supersede the
Necessity of what is Necessary; so that it should be of no weight in so
important a Concernment, as that of our Salvation. Our Happiness is not to be
Decided by Man's Esteem, or Contempt and the Approbation of God and our
Conscience, is infinitely to be preferred before their groundless Opinions.

But if there is so much of Error in vicious Shame, there is likewise a great
deal of Cowardice in it. Nothing is more base and unworthy, than for a Man to
desert the Interest of Virtue, when he is solicited by his own Conscience to
adhere to it. Not to have Resolution enough to do his Duty in such a Case, is
on the one hand to submit his Reason and Conscience to the Caprice of others,
and to depress himself be^ow the vilest Things in die World; and ^on the other
it is to have greater Regard for Men than for God. And is there any thing more
abject than this Proceeding. Is not this shameful Cowardice in a Christian, who
is called to profess openly his Religion and Faith, and who ought to think it
his Glory, to maintain the Cause of Virtue and Justice, in spite of all the
Contradiction and Contempt of the Age? That Threatening which our Savior has
denounced against those, who should not have the Courage to embrace the
Christian Profession, or should abandon it, belongs also to those mean-spirited
Christians we are now speaking of. Mat. VIII. 38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the
Glory of his Father with the Holy Angels.

The first and chief Remedy, against this false Shame, is then to be possessed
with the following Reflections. Before all things to have a right Apprehension
of the Certainty and Importance of Religion; to consider that it proposes to us
infinite Rewards, but that those Rewards are reserved only for those, who have
the Courage to observe its Precepts; to think what Pleasure and Glory it is, to
be approved of God and of one own Conscience; To fix deeply this great Truth in
our minds; that Men's Judgment is very inconsiderable; that our Felicity depends
neither upon their esteem nor contempt; and to remember that the Scripture
calls the Men of the World Fools, and that a time will come, when Shame,
Confusion and Misery, shall fall to the Lot of those Despisers of Religion,
while Romans II.
Glory, Honor and Peace shall be to every one that does good.

2. We shall easily conquer this Shame if we consider, that the Danger of
incurring Men's Contempt or Hatred by doing our Duty, is not always so great as
we may imagine. I confess Piety is often despised; but yet it frequently
commands Respect Even those who think it strange that their Example should not
be followed, cannot help having a secret esteem and veneration for good Men.
When Zeal is accompanied with Meekness and Discretion, there is no fear that a
Man should make himself odious or ridiculous by practicing Virtue. A Christian
Deportment, is so far from exposing Men always to the Contempt of the World;
that on the contrary it frequently happens, that those who would avoid this
Contempt, by neglecting their Duty, do thereby bring it upon themselves.

3. There might be yet another Remedy against this Vicious Shame; and that is
the Example of Men of Authority. Whatever they approve or do, is reputed
Honorable in the World; and on the other side, what they despise or neglect,
is thought mean and disgraceful. It would therefore be an easy thing to them,
to correct the Notions which Men commonly have of Religion. As soon as they
shall love and honor it; other Men will no longer be ashamed of it, but will
place their Glory in practicing it. This I am to enlarge upon in the second
Part of this Treatise.

CAUSE VI. The delaying of Repentance.
I Do not know whether any Illusion is more Ordinary, or contributes more to
the support of Vice in the World, than that which I design to attack in this
Chap^er, and that is the Delaying Repentance. We must not believe that Men are
so blind and so hardened, as never to think of their Salvation. There are few
who have not a general Intention to obtain it. Even among those who live ill,
many are convinced, that Conversion is necessary, and that they are not yet in
a state of Grace. If it be asked why then they do notrepent? I answer, That so
unreasonable a Proceeding, which seems so contradictory to it self; ought to be
imputed to the hope they entertain, of clearing all scores one day by
Repentance; and of obtaining the Pardon of all their Sins, through the Divine
Mercy. This is the true Cause of the greatest part of those Sins which are
committed in the World. It is that deceitful Hope which frustrates all the
endeavors that are used, to make Men for sake their Vicious Habits. The delay
of Conversion ought therefore to be placed among the Causes of the bad lives of
Christians; and the importance of this Subject, has made me resolve to bestow a
particular Chapter upon it.

Now to handle this matter right, we are to observe two different ways of
putting off Conversion; for all Men do not delay it in the same manner, and the
same Sentiments and Dispositions ought not to be supposed in them all. Some put
it off to a remote time, and to the very end of their Lives. Others do not
adjourn it so long; they design to go about it a good while before Death; at
least they hope so; and they put it off to an undetermined time. The first, sin
properly in hopes of Pardon, but the others sin, in hopes of Repentance. The
former deceive themselves more grossly, they think that in order to be saved,
it is enough to beg for Mercy, and to repent though never so late; the Illusion
of the others is more subtle, they conceive it is necessary to reform and to
forsake sin; but for all that they do not Convert themselves. Though these two
ways of delaying have an affinity with one another, and might in a great
measure be encountered with the same Arguments, yet I shall consider them here
separately.

Principle they Act upon, and to unfold the true Sentiments of their Hearts.

The delay of Repentance includes Two different Motions; the one carries a Man
toward Salvation, and the other toward Sin. On the one had Man is neither
such an Enemy to himself, as to be altogether unconcerned about his Salvation,
nor so as blind not to perceive that Repentance is necessary. On the other
hand, he is so addicted to his Lusts, that he cannot resolve to renounce them.
In perplexity, Self-love finds him out an Expedient by which he things to
reconcile with his Appetites, the care of his Salvation. And that is, that if
he sins yet he intends to Repent.

But here it is manifest, that this Man puts a Cheat upon himself, and that
such Sentiments proceed only from self-love, and from a strong affection to
Sin. Nothing else but the absolute necessity of Dying, and, of giving an
Account to God obliges him to destin the end of his Life to Acts of Repentance.
For it cannot be said, that the Love of God and of Virtue has any share in this
Conduct. Is it any love or regard to God, that makes a Man desire him in his
last Extremity, and when he can enjoy the World no longer? This shows that a
Man thinks of God only because he expects Salvation at his Hands; which is to
deal with him as with an Enemy, to whom we surrender our selves as late, and
upon as good Terms as we can, and only that we may not perish. Such a Delay
includes a positive Resolution to offend God, and to gratify one's Passions, at
least for the present. He that thinks to Repent hereafter, is not willing to
Repent now. He allots the present time for the satisfying of his Lusts, and for
the committing of those Sins, which are to be the matter of his future
Repentance. This is all that is fixed and certain in his Resolution; for as to
what he promises for the future it is most uncertain; and if we consider the
thing right, he promises nothing at all, for he does not know, whether he shall
not die very soon, nor what he shall do, in case he lives sometime longer.

The Hazard to which a Man exposes himself by this Delay, is evident. In order
to a complete Repentance, Two Things are requisite. The first is to have Time
and Opportunity to Repent; the second is, to make use of that Time and
Opportunity. Those who put off their Conversion to the last, Must suppose that
they shall have these two Advantages. But these things are extremely uncertain,
and no Man in the World can be sure of them.

1. No Man can promise himself, that he shall have Time and Opportunity to
Repent at the end of his Life. It is true in fact, that more than one Half of
Mankind, die without having time to prepare for Death. If we reckon up all
those who are snatched away in an Instant by unforeseen Accidents, or a sudden
Death, all those who perish in War, all those who are seized with Distempers
which take away their Senses, all those whom the Approaches of Death do not
move to Repentance, because they do not apprehend themselves in any danger of
dying; And if we add to these, those whose only Preparation is to have a
Minister to pray by their Bedside, when they can hardly hear a few Words of
what he says. It is certain that all these together, make up above the Half of
Mankind. Upon this I ask, even supposing that it were time enough for a Man, to
Repent when he sees Death coming, whether it would not be Folly and Madness,
for him to venture his Salvation upon the hope of repenting then.

It seems to many, that it is the way to drive Sinners into despair, to tell
them they ought not to build the hope of Salvation, upon what they shall do in
the Extremity of Life. But what I have said just now proves evidently, that if
Salvation did depend upon the manner of dying, Men must live in continual
Fears, and in a kind of' Desperation; since their Salvation would depend upon a
thing, which the Half of Mankind cannot reckon upon. On the contrary nothing is
more comfortable to Men, than to know that God grants them their whole Lives to
work out their Salvation in; and that if they improve to that purpose the
Leisure and Conveniences they have, their Death will be happy, which way soever
it may happen. But though what I have said were not true, and though all might
assure themselves that they shall perceive the Approaches of Death, and have
time to prepare for that last Passage; yet what certainty have they, that they
shall make use of that Opportunity, and that their Conversion will not be most
difficult, if not impossible? Conversion is not wrought, without God
interposing, by those Means which Grace uses for that end. And can any Man
flatter himself with the Hope, that these Means shall be offered him to the
last, and that God in his just Anger will not withdraw them from him? There is
neither particular Revelation, nor General Promise, to give such Assurances to
any Man living. So far from it, that God tells us many things in Scripture,
which leave no ground for Hope, to those who abuse his Mercy.

But further, What can we imagine that God will do in favor of a hardened
Sinner, at the time of Death? When God has made use of the Preaching of his
Word; of Exhortations, Promises, Threatenings, inward Suggestions and Motions of
his Grace; when God, I say, has used all these Means, for Twenty, Thirty, or
Forty Years, without any success: I cannot Apprehend, what Men expect that he
should do more, at the Hour of Death. If it be said, that he can by a
particular Dispensation, by sudden Inspirations, by a kind of Miracle, Convert
a Sinner in his last Minutes; I will not dispute what God can do; but I will
not scruple to say, that in the ordinary course of Grace, Conversion is not
wrought by sudden and miraculous Inspirations: The Gospel speaks of nothing
like that, and those who look for such Miracles, had best see, what they found
their hope upon.

It is certain besides, that Repentance is most difficult on Man's part, when he
is at the point of Death. If a Man has lived in Ignorance and Vice, is he not
in great danger of dying Ignorant and Hardened? How will he perform Duties then,
of which he has not so much as a Notion? Can a Man at that time change his ill
Inclinations and shake of his vicious Habits of a sudden? All those who have
applied themselves to the Work of Conversion, know by experience; that the
Conquest, I will not say of many, but of one single Vice, has required both
Time, and assiduous and constant care. Vicious Habits are not to be destroyed
but by degrees, and good ones are acquired only by reiterated Acts. It is
repugnant to Man's Nature, that this should be done in an Instant. How can any
one then reckon, that so considerable a Change, as that which true Conversion
requires, will be effected in the short time of a Sickness? And if this was
possible, and through great endeavors might be done, yet can any Man assure
himself, that he shall have then all that Freedom and all that Strength of Mind
and Body, which are necessary to set about this general Reformation? Is the
time of Sickness wherein a Man is so much sunk, and has the least either of
Leisure or Strength, so very sit for a Business of this Importance? All that a
Man can do then, is to betake himself to some confused and abrupt Devotions,
the ordinary Refuge of those Sinners, who have lived in a state of Obduration.
But will that serve the turn? Are some hasty Reflections upon a Man's past
Life, some Acts of Contrition, some Prayers proceeding from trouble and agony
and extorted only by the fear of Death, some Sobs and Groans indistinctly
breathed up to Heaven; are these, I say, sufficient to make amends for all that
is past, to extirpate many inveterate Habits, and to secure to a Sinner an
Eternity of Bliss?

I shall add Two Consideration which are Convincing, and cannot be contested.

1. By growing in Years, Men lose the sense and remembrance of their Sins. Age
and Custom produce this Effect. Excepting some extraordinary Sins which cannot
be forgot, most Men do not remember their Faults. And how should they remember
them, since for the most part they do not perceive when they commit them? We
daily see Men, who will Lie, and Swear, and fly out into Passion almost every
Minute; and yet do not reflect upon it; nay, they think themselves free from
those Faults. This Error proceeds so far, that some very great Sinners, who are
living in Criminal Practices, fancy themselves Pious, and make no doubt, but
that they are in the Favor of God. Now since the Custom of Sinning, does blind
Men to such a Degree; is it likely that after they have spent their Lives in
this Security, they will effectually Repent at their Death? Can a Man Repent
who does not know the. Reasons why he should, who docs not feel, or has forgot
his Sins, and who thinks besides, that he is in a good State, and that he needs
no Repentance.

2. If Repentance supposes the Knowledge, of Sin it supposes besides a Hatred
of it. But hew ho has loved Sin to the last, is less able then to hate, than he
is to know his Sins. I cannot comprehend, how a Man who has loved the World all
his Life, who has made it his only delight and study, to gratify his Lusts,
and who has always been cold and indifferent toward Religion; should when
Death appears; suddenly change his Inclinations, hate what he loved, and love
what till then he looked upon with indifference. So quick a passage from the
Love, to the Hatred of Sin, is very rare. The sorrow for Sin, and the Hatred of
it, are always faint and weak in the beginnings of Repentance, even in those
who repent sincerely. Conversion proceeds by degrees; a Man must have
discontinued sinning, and be already settled in the Habits of Virtue; before he
can have a strong aversion to sin. And what kind of Repentance then can that
be, which begins in the extremity of Life?

1. But here it is Objected first, that God is always ready to restore the
greatest Sinners to his Favor, when they have recourse to his Mercy, and that
there are express Promises in the Gospel, which assure us of this. I grant it:
God never rejects a repenting Sinner. But before a Man can build upon this, the
hope of being received into God's Favor at the Hour of Death, he must be sure
that he shall then sincerely repent. Now I think I have demonstrated, that this
is what no Man can depend upon. As to the Promises which are made to Repentance
in the Gospel; I do not deny but that they may be applied in a good sense to
all Sinners; but yet it is certain, that they are made in favor of those, whom
God was to call to the Christian Religion, and chiefly in favor of the
Heathens. Christ and his Apostles were to assure all Men, that the sins they
had committed, should not exclude them from the Covenant of Grace, provided they
did sincerely mourn for them, and part with them. When the Heathens came to
Baptism, nothing else was required of them, but that they should Repent, and
make a solemn Vow of being Holy for the time to come. But as to Christians it
cannot be said, that God demands nothing of them but Repentance and Sorrow for
Sins; for he calls them to Holiness upon pain of Damnation.

In this sense it was that the Apostles preached Repentance, and by this we may
know, how much Christianity is decayed. That Repentance which consists in the
Confession of Sins, and in a Resolution to forsake them, is the Duty at which
the Heathens began. This was the first thing which the Apostles required of
them, it was preparatory to the Christian Religion. St. Paul Heb. VI.
places the Doctrine of Repentance, among the Fundamental Points, and the first
Duties in which the Catechumens were instructed before Baptism. But now
Christians look upon Repentance, as the Duty with which they are to end their
Lives, that is to say; they design to end, where the Heathens begun, and to
enter Heaven at the same Gate, which admitted Pagans into the Church.

2. It will be said further, that sometimes Men, who have lived in Sin; die to
all appearance, in very good Dispositions. To this I reply; That we see a great
many more of those Persons, who die in a state of Insensibility; and that by
Consequence, a Sinner who puts off his Repentance, has more reason to fear,
than to hope. For who has told him, that the Fate of these last, will not be
his; and what surer Presage can there be, of so Tragical a Death, than the
present hardness of his Heart? Besides I do not know, whether it happens
frequently, as the Objection seems to suppose; that Persons who have lived ill,
are well disposed when they die. If Repentance can be saving and effectual when
it begins only upon a Deathbed, every body must own, that it ought to be very
lively and deep, attended with demonstrations of the most bitter Sorrow, and
with all the Proofs that a dying Man can give of the Sincerity of his
Conversion. But we do not see many Instances of this Nature. There are but few
great Sinners, who express a lively Compunction at their Death, or a sincere
Detestation of their Sins, who have a due sense of their Wickedness, and
endeavor as much as they can to make Reparation for it, who practice
Restitution, and edify all about them, by discharging the other obligations of
Conscience. It is but seldom that we see such Penitents.

Besides, the Expressions of Devotion and Repentance, which are used by dying
Men, are not always sincere. It is much to be feared that their. Repentance is
nothing else but a certain Emotion, which the necessity of Dying, and the
approaches of God's Judgment, must needs raise in the Mind of every Man, who
has his Wits about him, and has some Ideas of Religion. Nothing is more
deceitful, than the judging of a Man by what he either says, or does, when he
is under the effects of Fear or Trouble. It is commonly said of those, who have
given some signs of Piety upon their Deathbeds, that they have made a very
Christian End: But there is often a great Mistake in that Judgment. And to be
satisfied of it, we need but observe what happens to some who have escaped
Death, or some eminent Danger. While the Peril lasted, who could be more humble
and holy than they? They showed so much Devotion; and uttered such Discourses.
that all the Standers by were edisyed by them; their Tears, their Prayers,
their Protestations of Amendment, in a Word, their whole Deportment, had in all
appearance, so much of Christian Zeal in it, that the Beholders were struck
with Admiration. But are there many of these, who when the Danger is over,
continue in the same Dispositions, remember their Promises, or alter any thing
in their former Course of Life? Almost all of them return to their old Habits
as soon as the Calamity is past. These are generally the fruits of that
Repentance which is excited by the fear of Death, in those who Recover; And
what Effects then can it have in respect of those that Dye?

I confess, we ought not to condemn any Body; but I think we should not
pronounce a definitive Sentence, in favor of those who have led an ill Life.
For though Men's Judgment makes no alteration in the State of the Dead; yet it may
have a very pernicious Effect upon the Living, who conclude from it, that a Man
may die well, though he has lived ill. And while I am upon this Subject, I must
say, that nothing contributes more to the keeping up of these dangerous
Opinions, than when the Ministers of Religion commend without Discretion, the
Piety of the Dead. And yet this is frequently done, especially in great Towns,
and in the Courts of Princes. There are to be found in those Places,
mean-spirited and unworthy Preachers, who prostitute their Tongues and their
Pens to the Praise of some Persons, who had nothing of Christianity in their
Lives, and whose Condition should rather make a Man tremble. But if some
remnant of Shame restrains them from carrying their Flattery so far, as to
commend the Lives of those, whose Panegyric they have undertaken; then they
seek the Matter of their Praises, in some signs of Piety, which those Persons
gave, before they left the World Now I dare say, that the most Atheistical
Discourses, and the Corruptest Maxims of Libertines, are not by much so subtle
a Poison as such kind of Elogies, delivered before Men who are engaged in all
the Disorders of the Age, and then dispersed through the World.

3. The Instance of the Converted Thief, who prayed to our Savior upon the
Cross, and was received into Paradise, is seldom forgotten. But this Instance
is generally very ill understood. First, it is supposed, without any ground for
it; that this Thief repented only upon the Cross, and that his Conversion was
the effect of a sudden Inspiration. But who can tell whether his Conversion was
not begun, either before he was taken, or in the Prison, where it is probable
that he was kept for some time, before the Feast of Passover? over? But if his
Conversion, must needs be sudden, and wrought only a few Minutes before his
Death; if we must of necessity ascribe it to a Miraculous Inspiration and to
those singular Circumstances, which he then happened to be in; yet I do not see
what can be inferred from this Instance; since no Man living can assure himself
that any such thing will befall him.

But be that as it will, we should, I think, observe a vast difference between
the state of this Thief, and that of a Christian This poor Wretch had not been
called before, as Christians are; he had never known our Savior; or at least
he had not professed his Religion; he had not had that Ilumination and those
Opportunities, which Grace offers every day, to those to whom the Gospel is
Preached. And so his Repentance though it came late, yet it might be as effectual
to Salvation, as that of the Heathens, who embraced Christianity in their riper
Years, and who happened to die immediately after Baptism.

I shall say a word or two upon the Parable of the Laborers, where we read
Mat. XX.
, that those who went to work in the Vineyard only an hour before Sunset,
received the same Wages, with those who had been at work ever since the
Morning. From this Sinners imagine it may be proved by an invincible Argument,
that those who Repent but a little before Death, will obtain the same Reward
with those whole Life has been Regular. But this is not our Savior's meaning
in that Parable. It signifies only, that those whom God should call last, and
who should answer his Call, were to be received into the Covenant, in the same
manner as those, who had been called to it before, and that the Heathens should
share in the same Privileges with the Jews, though the Jews had been in Covenant
with God, a great while before the Heathens. This our Savior declares in these
Words, which conclude the Parable; so the last shall be first, and the first
last. Here is nothing that can be applied to those Christians, who delay their
Conversion. They are not in the same Case with the Laborers, who were sent but
late into the Vineyard. Those Laborers went no sooner, because no Man had
hired them; but they went as soon as they were sent. I say, Christians are not
in this Case, since they have been called in the Morning, and at all the Hours
of the Day, being Born and having always lived in the Church.

I have been somewhat large in showing how unreasonable and dangerous the
Proceeding of those Men is, who pretend to Repent only at the end of their
Lives. But all those who put off their Conversion, do not put it off so far.
There are many who acknowledge, that it is dangerous to stay till the
extremity, and that it is necessary to Repent betimes; they propose to go about
it in a little time, and they hope that they shall Repent soon enough, not to
be surprised by Death under a total hardening; but in the mean while they do
nothing toward their Conversion.

This way of Delaying, is an Illusion, which does not appear so gross and
dangerous as the former, because it supposes some Inclination to Good. But yet
it is no better than an Artifice of the Heart, a Trick of Self-love, by which a
Man deceives and blinds himself. Nay, in some respects, the State of these
last, is more criminal and dangerous, than that of the first. It is more
criminal, because they do not what they approve of, and because they sin
against the constant Admonitions of their Consciences, and do not perform their
Resolutions and their Promises. But it is likewise more dangerous; for with
this Intention to Repent in a little time, they think themselves much better
than those who are resolved to Repent only upon their Deathbed; they, applaud
themselves for such a sense of Piety as they have; and they judge, that if they
are not quite in a state of Salvation; at least they are not far from it. Now
one may easily see that such an Opinion of themselves, can only lay their
Consciences asleep, and inspire them with Presumption and Security.

But all things considered, they go no farther with these good Dispositions,
than those, who without shuffling, refer the whole matter to the end of their
Lives. All the difference is, that the latter do all at once, what the others
do successively. And therefore all that has been said in this Chapter, may
almost wholly be applied to these last. They run the same Risk with those who
design to Repent only upon extremity, since Death may surprise them before they
have executed their good Resolutions. They have as little love for God, and are
as much addicted to their Lusts: That which deceives them, is, that they fancy,
that there is in them a sincere Purpose of Conversion. But if this Intention is
sincere, how comes it to pass that they do not Repent? When a Man is resolved
upon a thing, when his Heart is in it, when he desires it in good earnest, he
goes about it without losing time.

But when a Man uses Delays, it is a sign that he is not well resolved yet: A
Resolution which no Effect follows, is not a fixed and settled Resolution. This
purpose of Conversion, is therefore but one of those wavering Designs and
Projects, which are formed every Day, but never accomplished. It is no more
than a general and unactive Intention, which may perhaps be found in all Men.
But other sorts of purposes are necessary for a Man who hopes to be saved.
Salvation is not obtained by bare Designs and Projects, but by the actual
Practice of Holiness.

Now Men might easily be undeceived, and Convince themselves of the
un-sincerity of all those Resolutions they make in relation to Repentance; if
they did but reflect upon the time past, and ask themselves whether they have
not been very near in the same Sentiments and Resolutions, for some years
together? And yet these Sentiments have produced nothing, and those Resolutions
have made no Change in them; they are still in the same state, and perhaps
farther from Conversion than ever. Must not Men blindfold themselves, when they
do not see, that it will still be the same thing for the future, and that Life
will slip away in perpetual delays? For what can they promise to themselves
from the time to come, and what ground have they to hope that it will not be
like the time past? Are they more firmly resolved than they were before? When
will this Resolution be put in Practice? Will it be in a Month, or in a Year?
They must confess they do not know when it will be. So that when they promise
to repent, they do not know what they promise; nay, they cannot tell whether
they promise any thing. They will say perhaps, that they hope to confirm
themselves in a good Purpose; but what do they found this Hope upon? What do
they wait for, and what new thing do the imagine will happen to them? Have they
any assurance that God will use for their Conversion, other Means and Motives
than those, which he has used already? Nay, how do they know but that they
shall be deprived of those Means and Helps which hitherto have been tendered
them? How can they tell whether there is a time to come for them, and whether
their Life is not just ready to end? All this is very uncertain. But what is
certainly true is this, that through so many Procrastinations, their Hearts
grow harder, and their return to Virtue becomes more difficult. The Love of Sin
increases by the Habit of sinning, and the Means appointed to work Repentance,
lose something of their force every day.

These Considerations do evidently show, that the deferring of Conversion, is
an Error as gross, as it is dangerous.

I think it will not be useless, to conclude this Chapter, with observing that
the Reason why so many put off their Conversion, is, because they look upon
Repentance as an austere and melancholy Duty. And this Notion must needs put
them upon deferring the Practice of it. It is therefore of the greatest moment,
to destroy that Prejudice; and to show on the contrary, that if there is any
sad and deplorable Condition, it is that of a Man who lives in Sin. For that is
either a State of Fear and Uncertainty, or of Security and Insensibility Such a
Man can have no solid Peace of Conscience during his Life, and what Agitations
must he fall into, when the thoughts of Death and of a Judgment to come happens
to make some lively Impression upon his Mind? For granting that then he may use
some endeavors to dispose himself to Repentance; yet besides the danger of a
late Repentance, it is a sad thing to end one's Life in those Struggles and
Terrors, which must needs accompany such a Repentance. A Man who delays his
Conversion, prolongs his Misery, and makes it greater and more incurable. But
Joy and Tranquillity are the portion of a pure Conscience. There is no Felicity
or Contentment, like that of a Soul which is freed from the bondage of Sin.
Repentance is the beginning of that Happiness, which grows sweeter and more
perfect, according to the progress we make in Virtue. Then it is that a Man is
happy in all the Circumstances of Life, besides that he has the Comfort of
being supported at the approaches of Death, with that Peace and Joy, which flow
from a well grounded Confidence in the Divine Mercy from the Testimony of a
good Conscience, and from a steady hope of Immortality.

CAUSE VII. Men's Sloth and Negligence in Matters of Religion.
IT is natural and ordinary to Men, to be unconcerned about those things, which
they do not know, or of which they do not apprehend the Use and Necessity. And
so we may easily conceive that Men living in Ignorance, and being possessed
with those Notions I have now Confuted, must needs be very negligent and
slothful, in what relates to Religion. But as this Sloth considered in it self,
is a visible Cause of Corruption, so it will be fitting to take particular
notice of it in this Chapter.

I suppose, in the first place, that it is impossible for a Man to attain the
End which Religion proposes to him, without using the proper Means which lead
to that End. In religious as well as in worldly Concerns, nothing is to be had
without Labor and Care. As there are Means appointed for preserving the Life
of the Body, so there are some ordained for maintaining the Life of the Soul;
and th last means, is of the two the more necessary, because there is more care
and forecast requisite in order to Salvation, about preserving the Life of die
Soul, than for supporting that of the Body. It is certain that the more
excellent any thing is, the more it requires our Care; but besides that we see
the Life of the Body is easily preserved; a Natural Inclination prompts us to
those things which are necessary for our Subsistence, and the means of
supplying our bodily Wants, offer themselves to us, as it were of their own
accord. But it is not so with the spiritual Life. Considering our proneness to
Evil, and the present State we are in, we cannot avoid being undone, if we
neglect the necessary Care of our Souls, and if we follow all the Bents and
Propensions of our Nature. Religion obliges us upon many occasions, to resist
our Inclinations and to offer violence to our selves, it requires Self-denial,
Watchfulness and Labor; it lays many Duties upon us and it prescribes diverse
Means, without the use of which, we cannot but continue still in Corruption and
Death: I shall then but just name the Chiefest of those Duties and Means.

Before all things, a Christian ought to be Instructed, he ought to know with
some exactness, both the Truths, and the Duties of Christianity: Now this
Knowledge cannot be acquired, without Hearing, Reading, Meditation, or some
other Care of this Nature. In the next place, as Religion does not consist in
bare Knowledge, but chiefly in Practice; none of those Means should be
neglected, which are proper to divert Men from Vice, and to spur them on
Virtue. These Means are very many, but they are all comprehended under these
two principal Heads; The Exercises of Devotion, and the Circumspections which
every Person ought to use.

The Exercises of Devotion are mighty Helps to Piety and Salvation; I mean such
as Meditation, Reading, and Particularly Prayer, which is one of the most
essential Acts of Religion, as well as one of the most efficacious Means to
advance Holiness. There are on the other hand several methods of Circumspection
and Care, which are of absolute Necessity: As for instance; the foreseeing and
shunning the occasions which may draw us into sin; the seeking those
Opportunities and Aids which promote Piety, the not being overmuch concerned
about the Body, the cherishing good Thoughts, and the resisting evil ones: But
above all, it is a thing of the greatest Importance, that every one should
endeavor thoroughly to know himself, which he cannot do, but by examining his
present state, and by reflecting seriously and frequently upon his Actions and
Words, and upon the Thoughts and Motions of his Heart. All these Cares are
essential and necessary. For without the use of those Means, it is as
impossible to be religious and pious, as it would be to live and subsist with
out Nourishment. A Man who will neither eat nor drink, must needs die in a
little time, And so the Spiritual Life will soon be extinct, if the only means
which can support it, are not used.

Let us see now whether, these Cares and Means which I have shown to be
necessary, are made use of. It is so visible that they are almost totally
neglected, that I need not be very large upon the Proof of it.

Men take little care of being instructed, and of getting Information and
Knowledge about Religion. The far greater Part either cannot read, or never
apply themselves to any useful instructive Reading. Few hearken to the
Instructions that are given them, and fewer yet examine or reflect upon them.
Carnal Lusts and Secular Business, do so engross them, that they seldom or
never give themselves to searching the Truth. They generally have an Aversion
to spiritual Things. Hence it is that in matters of Religion; they will rather
believe implicitly what is told them, than be at the pains of enquiring,
whether it is true or not. And they are every whit as careless about Exercises
of Devotion. Many would think it a Punishment if they were made to read or to
Meditate. They never do those things, but with reluctance and as seldom as they
can. They go about Prayer especially, with a strange Indifference, and a
criminal Indevotion. In short, very few take the necessary care to preserve
themselves from Vice, and to behave themselves with Regularity and Caution;
Very few seek the Opportunities of doing good, and avoid the Temptations, to
which the common Condition of Men, or their own particular Circumstances expose
them; And the greatest Numbers are slaves to their Bodies, and wholly taken up
with earthly things. One of the most sensible and fatal effects of this
Negligence, is that those Persons use no manner of endeavors to know
themselves. It is very seldom if ever, that they reflect upon what passes
within them; upon their Thoughts, their Inclinations, the Motions of their
Hearts, and the Principles they Act upon; or that they take a review of their
Words and Actions. They do not consider whether they have within them the
Characters, of good Men or of wicked and hypocritical Persons. In a word almost
all of them live without Reflection.

Men's carelessness about Religion is there fore extremely great. But they
proceed otherwise in the things of the World, about which they are as Active
and Laborious as they are Lazy and cold in reference to true Piety. They will
do every thing for their Bodies, and nothing for their Souls. They spare no
Industry or Diligence, they omit nothing to promote their Temporal Concerns. If
we were to judge by their Conduct, we would think that the Supreme Good is to
be found, in Earthly Advantages, and that Salvation is the least important of
all things.

I need not say what Effects such a Negligence must produce. The greater part
of Christians, being Ignorant in their Duty, having no Knowledge of themselves,
declining the use of those Means which God has appointed, and without which he
declares that no Man can be saved; and wearing out their Lives in this
Ignorance and Sloth, it is not to be imagined, that they can have any Religion
or Piety; and so there must be a general Corruption amongst them. I say it must
be so, unless God should work Miracles, or rather change the Nature of Man, and
invert the Order and the Laws which he has established.

But because it might be said that Christians do not live like Atheists, and
that their Negligence is not so great as I represent it; Let us consider a
little, what sort of Care they bestow, upon the concerns of their Souls.
Certainly there are some Persons who are not guilty of this Negligence: But
excepting these; what is it which the rest of Mankind do, in order to their
Salvation? Very little or Nothing. They pray, they assist sometimes at Divine
Service, and at the public Exercises of Religion; they hear Sermons, they
receive the Sacrament, and they perform some other Duties of this Nature. This
is all which the Religion of the greatest part amounts to. But first, these are
not only the Duties which ought to be practiced; there are others which are not
less essential, and which yet are generally neglected; such as Meditation,
Reading, Self-examination; to say nothing here of the Duties of
Sanctificatification. So that if some Acts of Religion are performed, others
are quite omitted. The reason of this Proceeding may easily be discovered.
There is a Law and a Custom, which oblige all Persons to some Acts of Religion;
to pray, to receive the Sacrament, and to go now and then to Church: If a Man
should entirely neglect these external Duties he would be thought an Atheist:
But there is neither Custom, nor Law, nor Worldly Decency, which obliges a Man
to Meditate, to examine his own Conscience, or to watch over his Conduct, and
therefore these Duties being left to every ones Direction are very little
observed.

As to the other Duties which Christians form in some measure, the want of
sincerity in them, does most commonly turn them into so many Acts of Hypocrisy.
They perhaps say some Prayers in the Morning; but this is done without
Devotion, hastily, with distraction, and weariness, and only to get rid of it;
after they think no more of God, all the Day, but are altogether busied about
the World and their Passions; and in the Evening they Pray with greater
wandering of Thoughts than in the Morning. If it so fall out, that they go to
Church, or hear a Sermon, they do not give a quarter of an Hours close
Attention, to any thing that is said, or done in the Public Assemblies. In
many Places the whole Devotion of the People, consists in being present at some
Sermons, which are as little Insructive, as they are minded or hearkened to. The
use which is made of the Sacraments, especially of the Eucharist, converts them
into vain Ceremonies, and makes them rather Obstacles, than Helps to Salvation.
As to the mortifying of the Body by reasonable Abstinence, Fasting and
Retirement, it is an unknown Duty. The Indifference of Christians is therefore
but too palpable. What they do upon the account of Religion is very little; and
yet they do that little so ill, that it is not much more beneficial to them,
than if they did nothing at all.

And now what might not be said, if after having thus shown, that what Men do
for their Salvation is next to nothing; I should undertake to prove, that they
do almost every thing that is necessary for their Damnation; and that they are
as zealous and industrious for their Ruin, as they are slothful and negligent
in what is requisite to preserve them. There are means to Corrupt as well as to
Sanctify our selves. The means of Corruption and Perdition, are, Ignorance,
want of Attention, neglect of Devotion, the love of the World, and of the
Flesh, unruly Passions, Temptations, and ill Examples. Now supposing, that a
Man was so monstrously Frantic, as to form the design of Damning himself; what
would such a Man do? He would neglect the Exercises of Devotion, he would not
Pray at all, or he would Pray only with his Lips, he would profane the
Sacraments by an unsanctifyed use of them, he would only mind his Body and this
present Life, he would give loose Reins to his Passions, as much as he might
with Decency and without danger; if he had an opportunity to gratify his
Sensuality, his Covetousness, his Pride, or any other wicked Affection, he
would gladly embrace it. This is what a Man would do to Damn himself: And is it
not what a great many actually do? I confess, no Man is capable of so wild a
Resolution, as to design to Damn himself; but a Man sufficiently Damns himself,
when he takes no care of his Salvation, and when he does those things, which
will infallibly bring his Perdition after them.

The Sloth and Negligence of Men in the Concerns of their Souls, being one of
the Causes of their Corruption, it would be highly necessary to remedy that
Negligence, and to inspire them with Zeal for Religion; but it is hard to
succeed in this. Laziness is attended with a certain sweetness to which Men
give up themselves with Pleasure. The slothful do love and delight in Rest;
they cannot endure to be egged on to Labor. This is one of those Habits which
are most difficult to be conquered; and to say the Truth, there is but little
hope of those, in whom it is grown inveterate: It is a great Task to rouse them
out of that slulggish and lethargick Temper. God must interpose by a particular
Grace, by great Afflictions, or by some other extraordinary Method.

But yet, I do not think it altogether impossible to overcome this sinful and
dangerous Sloth, or to preserve those from it, whom it has not seized as yet.
Serious Reflections upon the importance of Salvation, and upon the Necessity of
working at it, may produce that Effect. Men would not live in this Carelessness,
but that either they do not apprehend of what Consequence it is to be Saved, or
that they imagine, there is not much to be done for the obtaining of Salvation.
These two Prejudices maintain their Laziness, Nothing can therefore be more
useful, than to convince them on the one hand, that nothing in the World is of
greater Moment than Religion, and that Eternal Happiness is the highest of all
Concernments: And to let them see on the other hand, that this Felicity is not
to be attained, but by assiduous Care, and an exact observation of the Duties
of Christianity.

I know it is difficult to make Men seriously enter upon these Reflections; but
yet they ought still to be laid before them, and we should not give over. If
they have no Effect at one time, there are Circumstances in which they will
prove successful. I think, few would continue in this sluggish Disposition, if
they did represent to themselves what Notions and Thoughts they shall have at
the end of their Lives. Every Man is satisfied that he must die one Day, and
that his Condition will then be the Happiest that can be conceived, if he has
made use of the Time and Opportunities he had to secure his Salvation; but that
if he has neglected these Means, he shall find himself in strange Agonies, and
be reduced to dismal Extremities. When Death appears, when the World vanishes,
a Man is then wholly taken up with Religion, he would give then all the World,
if it was in his Possession, to secure to himself a better Life. Now since we
all know that this must one Day be our Case, Wisdom requires, that we should
overcome betimes that Negligence, of which the Consequences will be so fatal;
and that we should apply our selves with earnestness and pleasure to that Work,
upon which our sovereign Felicity depends.

CAUSE VIII. Worldly Business.
NEgligence commonly proceeds, either from Indifference, or from Distraction.
We neglect those things, which we look upon with indifference, but we
frequently also neglect things of Moment, because we are distracted by other
Cares. These are the two Causes of Men's Carelessness in Matters of Religion. On
the one hand, Piety is Indifferent to them, they neither know the Nature nor
the Excellency of it; the Duties which it proscribes, do not appear very
pleasant or necessary to them; they love and esteem only the things of the
World; all this I have Proved, in the foregoing Chapters. On the other hand,
they are distracted by Temporal Cares, which rob them of the leisure and
freedom, that are necessary for the Study and Practice of Religion. Worldly
Business therefore is another Source of Corruption, as I hope to prove it by
the following Considerations.

I reckon among Worldly Employments, all those Cares which relate to the World,
or this present Life, whether they take up the Body or the Mind. There are
Temporal Cares which properly take up the Body; such are the Cares of
Mechanics, or Husbandmen; and there are other S^^ular Cares, which chiefly
employ the Mind, such is the Study of Humane Learning, of Politics, or
Philosophy. These last as well as the first, ought to be counted Worldly
Business. Nay, we may observe that difference between these two sorts of
Temporal Employments; that the Cares which take up the Mind are sometimes the
more dangerous. While the Body is at Work the Mind may be at liberty; but when
the Mind is Employed, when the Heart is distracted and possessed with Temporal
Cares, it is much harder for the Thoughts of Religion to enter, or to make any
Impression upon a Man.

But whether these Employments relate to the Mind or to the Body, we ought not
to think that they are of themselves hindrances to Piety. For this Imagination,
would be a very gross Error. Worldly Business is Lawful and Necessary, and it
were a Sin to neglect it, since that would be contrary to the Order which God
has established in the World. Nay it may be useful to our Salvation, it may
divert ill Thoughts, it may take off Men from trifling and vicious Employments,
and it may serve to mortify the Body, and to banish Idleness which is the
Spring of all manner of Vice.

I make this Remark because some People fancy, that in Order to be saved, it
must be necessary to live in an absolute Retirement, to lay aside all Temporal
Cares, and to give up our selves wholly to spiritual Exercises, to Reading,
Contemplation, Meditation, and Prayer. But those who do thus stretch the
Obligation of renouncing the World, and insist so much upon a Retired and
Contemplative Life, do not I doubt, very well understand the nature of Piety,
nor do any great Service to it. Sometimes by endeavouring-to spiritualize Men
too much, we spoil all, and we make Piety appear ridiculous or impracticable.
We should always remember that Piety is made for Man. Now it is not One in
Fifty that can thus embrace Retirement, and absolutely renounce the World. I am
far from condemning Retirement; it is sometimes very seasonable, and I think it
in some sense necessary to all Men, There are some Persons who for the sake of
their Salvation, or the Edification of the Church, ought to choose a retired
Life, disingaged from Temporal Cares. Others are called to that kind of Life by
the Circumstances which Providence has placed them in. And besides, there is no
Christian, but ought to allow himself some times of Retirement; nay, there are
some Temporal Employments which do not hinder a Man to live in a Retired
manner. But after all, it would be the Ruin of Society, and of most Christian
Virtues, if every one should live apart, and busy himself only in Spiritual
Exercises. God does not require this; he has Created Man to labor in the
World, and those who follow an honest Employment in it, act suitably to his
Will, and sink their Business may prove a Help to their Salvation.

I need not I think advertise the Reader; that I speak here only of lawful
Employments, and not of those which are bad and contrary to the Laws of Nature
or Religion. And yet these last are very common; but because every body may
easily see that such Occupations must unavoidably engage Men in to sin, I will
make it my chief business to show, that lawful and innocent Employments, prove
to many Persons, a hind'rance to Piety and Salvation.

Temporal Employments then being not bad in themselves, they cannot occasion
Corruption but by the Abuse that is made of them. Now there are four Faults
which Men commit in this matter.

1. The first is when they are entirely taken up with Worldly Things. We have
showed already, that Men live in a prodigious Sloth and Carelessness about
Religion, and that they do almost nothing for their Souls and their Salvation.
From this it follows, that they must be employed only about their Bodies and
the Concerns of this Life, And in fact, if we inquire into their Cares, we
shall find that they terminate in the World, and in their Temporal Interest;
and this I think needs not be proved.

2. Their Hearts sink too deep into the things of the World. The Business of
Life is innocent when it is followed with Moderation; but it diverts Men from
Piety, when it is pursued more, and with greater eagerness than it deserves.
That excessive love of the World, makes the unhappiness of Men. Instead of
esteeming Temporal Goods in proportion to their Worth, and as remembering that
they are not able to procure them true Felicity; ins of considering that they
are not made for this life only, and that they cannot long enjoy those
advantages which they court; they give up themselves wholly to the World, they
set their Hearts and Affections upon it, and they act as if this life was the
ultimate end of all their Actions. They labor only for their Bodies, and for
the gratifying of their Appetites. This is the Mark aimed at in all their
Thoughts and Projects: This is what inflames their Desires, and what excites in
them the most violent Passions of Grief or Joy, of Anxiety or Impatience. They
are far from having such a hearty concern for Religion and Piety. In relation
to this, their Affections are faint and languid, and they do nothing but with
Indifference, or by constraint.

3. The Third Fault is when Men are too much employed, and when they overload
themselves with Business. It is a great piece of Wisdom, both in respect of the
Tranquillity of this Life, and the concerns of another; to avoid the excess and
the hurry of Business, as much as possibly we may, without being wanting to the
Duties of our Calling; to confine our selves to necessary Cares, and to wave
all superfluous ones. Men would live happy if they did but know, what their
Profession requires of them, and limit themselves to it, without meddling in
that which does not concern them. But here they observe no bounds. They will
fly at all, they will busy themselves about many things, which do not belong
to their Province. This without doubt is a dangerous Disease, and the occasion
of several Disorders.

4. In the last place, there is one thing more to blame, and that is when
worldly Business, becomes an occasion of Sin, by the abuse that is made of it.
For besides that it is a very ill Disposition in a Christian to be fond of the
World; most Men are so unhappy as to direct all the business of Life to a bad
end, which is to satisfy and to inflame the more their irregular Appetites. And
by this means, many Enterprises and particular Actions of theirs, which in
themselves are innocent, become evil and unlawful, and engage them in all
manner of Sins.

These Considerations is prove already, that the greatest part of Men's Vices
proceeds from their Temporal Affairs; but this will appear yet more clearly by
the following Reflections.

1. This excessive Application to Temporal Concerns, engrosses almost our whole
Time, so that it does not leave us a sufficient share of it, to be spent in
cares of another nature. Men confess this themselves, and plead it for an
Excuse. They allege their Business. A Man who is engaged in the World will
say; I have no time to read, or to perform the Exercises of Religion; I have
too much Business, my Employ or my Calling does not leave me a minute of
leisure. And the Truth is, they are too busy for the most part. If they have
any spare time, some hours or some days of rest, wherein the course of their
ordinary Employments is interrupted; they are not in a condition, to improve to
the best Advantage those short Intervals of Relaxation.

2. And truly, Secular Business does not only take away the best part of Men's
Time, but it does besides distract their Minds and invade their Hearts and
Affections. When for a whole Day or Week the Mind and Body have been in
agitation, a Man is weary and spent, the activity of his Thoughts is exhausted,
his Head is too full to be clear, he is not able to drive away in an instant so
many Worldly Idea's, to calm his Passions, and to turn himself of the sudden,
to Spiritual Exercises. So that he must either absolutely neglect the Duties of
Piety, or perform them very ill When a Man has brought himself to a Habit, of
being employed only in Worldly Affairs, he is no longer Master of his own
Thoughts and Motions. It is with great difficulty, if he can at all apply
himself to Objects that are foreign to him. Those Objects affect him but
weakly; he must make great Efforts, before he can fasten upon them; and if he
fixes there for a few moments, it is a violent state in which he cannot
continue long. Those Thoughts, of which he is constantly full, crowd in upon
him, and he returns immediately to these Things which he loves, and which
commonly take him up.

This is the true reason, why Men love andrelish Spiritual Things so little,
and why they think it so hard to subdue their Minds with Reading, Attention,
and Meditation. This is particularly the main Source of Indevotion in the
Exercises of Piety. Why is the Mind so apt to wander in Prayer? The too great
Application to Temporal Affairs is the Cause of it. As soon as a Man is awake
in the Morning, a throng of Thoughts and a Multiplicity of Designs and Business
break in upon his Mind, and take possession of his Heart; he is filled with
these Things all the day, he follows and plods upon them without Distraction or
Interaction. And how is it to be imagined that admidst all this hurry and
turmoil, he should find that Recollection, that Tranquillity, and that
Elevation, without which the Exercises of Piety are but mere Hypocrisy? Whence
comes it to pass that Men bring so little Attention and Sincerity with them, to
the public Worship of God? Why do Sermons produce so little fruit? Why do the
most certain and important Truths of Religion, the clearest and the most solid
Reasonings, make either no Impression at all, or at least no lasting one upon
the Hearers? What is the reason why in the most solemn Devotions, and
particularly in the Holy Communion, it is so difficult for Men to lift up their
Hearts to God, and to shake off a thousand idle or sinful Thoughts, which come
then to amuse and distract them? And lastly, why do those Vows and Promises
which are made even with some sincerity, prove so ineffectual? why do the best
Resolutions vanish so easily and so soon? All this comes from Men's being too
much taken up with Temporal Cares.

3. These excessive Cares do not only distract the Mind, but they do besides
directly obstruct Sanctification, and lead Men into Sin. For first it is
impossible to love Religion and Virtue, when the Heart is set upon the World.
Our Savior tells us, Mat. VI. 22.
that no man can serve two masters; and St. John declares, John II. 15.
that the Love of God is not in those who love the world. There is such an
Opposition between Bodily and Spiritual Exercises, that those who give
themselves up to the first, are incapable of the others. Worldly Occupations
render Men Carnal, Sensual and Dull; they keep up Ignorance and foment Sloth,
and they weigh down all their Inclinations and Thoughts, to the Earth, so that
they must be Careless and Indifferent, about Spiritual Objects and Heavenly
Concerns. And indeed they are very ill disposed to value those Good thnigs as
they deserve; or to seek them with that Eagerness and Sincerity which they
ought. Can we think that Men, who propose nothing else to themselves, but the
amassing of Wealth, the making their Court, or the Canvassing for Places; and
who live and toil only for such things, should have a due sense of the Concerns
of their Salvation? It is hard to imagine it.

But further, Religion does not allow Christians to love the World, or to
cleave to it. 1 Cor. VII.
It requires that they should possess Temporal Goods as not possessing them,
and that, they should use the World, as not abusing it; because on the one
hand, the Figure of the World passes away, and it would be a Folly to fix their
Hearts upon vain and transitory Enjoyments: And on the other hand, they ought
to aspire chiefly to the possession of solid and eternal happiness. To be
therefore taken up only with earthly Things, and to let them enter too deep
into ones Heart, is a Disposition quite contrary to that, which a Christian
ought to be in.

4. Lastly, An excessive Application to Temporal affairs hurries a Man into
many Disorders. We need but reflect a little, to be satisfied that a Man who is
filled only, with the Thoughts and Solicitudes of this Life, must be a Slave to
his Senses and Passions; and that he lays himself open every Moment to a
Thousand Temptations, which he is not able to withstand. Though his Employments
are lawful in themselves, yet he makes them Criminal, because to him they are
only Means of gratifying his Appetites. And the greatest Mischief, is that when
a Man is once entered upon that Course, he still confirms himself in it, so that
at last he cannot leave it off. On the one hand, his Passions are still
mounting higher, on the other, Business and Toil grow upon him. He first
proposos an End to himself, and then he will bring it about at any rate, as
being engaged in Honor and by Interest not do desist. If he meets with
Obstacles he will do any thing to surmount them. If he succeeds, Success
animates him with new Ardour; he is for going further: In a word, it is an
endless labor, a continual succession of Cares, which are still growing
greater, and which end only with his Life.

From all this we may conclude, that the abuse of worldly Business is most
dangerous, and that if we would not have it obstruct our Salvation, we ought to
observe these three Rules.

The First is, that we should pursue the Things of this World with Moderation.
One of the most useful Directions for a happy Life, is this; to lay nothing too
much to Heart. The way to preserve our Innocence and Tranquillity, is to crave
nothing too eagerly; not to rejoice excessively at any Prosperity, not to be
dejected above measure for any Disasters which may happen, and not to be too
hot and peremptory upon any Design. The Second Caution to be used, is the
avoiding Multiplicity of Business, and Excess of Employments, as much as is
consistent with the Duties of our Calling. Every one should consider what he is
fit for, and what he is called to, and go no farther. In the Last Place, Wisdom
requires, that among all the Affairs of this Life we should reserve the
necessary Time and Care; to pay what we owe to God and to mind our Salvation,
the most important of all Concerns. To this end, it is very useful, to have
certain Times of Retirement and Leisure, and to accustom our selves to make now
and then even in the midst of temporal Employments, such Reflections as may
call us back to our Duty, and be like a Counterpoise to that Bias which
carries us toward sensible Objects. Let us often think that we are mortal, that
we have a Soul, and that there is another Life after this. Let us consider what
all our worldly Cares terminate in, and what Judgment we shall make of them
upon our Deathbeds. These Reflections will put us upon wise and moderate
Courses, and so we shall avoid innumerable Disorders and Miseries which Men
fall into, by their too great application to Temporal Business.

CAUSE IX. Men's Particular Callings.
Though we have seen already that Corruption has its Source in the Abuse of
Worldly Business, yet it may be proper to insist a little more upon this
Matter, and to Consider it with relation to the different States and Callings,
which Men are engaged in. When we speak of Worldly Business, we mean chiefly
those things, about which the greatest part of Life is spent. Now those
Occupations must needs be suitable to the particular kind of Life which a Man
follows. And so every Man's kind of Life, may be a Source, or at least an
accidental Cause of Corruption.

As the World is Constituted, it is necessary that there should be different
Professions among Men, that some should Cultivate the Earth, that others should
apply themselves to Arts and Trades, and that others should exercise Magistracy
or Traffic. The difference of Sex, Age, Condition, and other Circumstances,
creates a great variety in relation to particular Callings. Now this diversity
of Employs and Conditions, is innocent in it self; the World subsists, and
Society is preserved by it. But yet it cannot be denied, but that a great part
of the Disorders, which happen in the World, proceeds from the kind of Life
which Men choose, and from the particular State they are in; and that because
they abuse it, and do not demean themselves in it, with Caution and Prudence.
The Proof of this shall conclude the First Part of this Treatise.

But here we are to use some distinction. There are Callings which are bad in
themselves, and others which are Lawful and Innocent; they are not all
therefore equally dangerous, and some produce Corruption, more necessarily than
others.

All Professions, or Callings are not Lawful, some are Unlawful and Criminal.
The World is full of People, who make Sin it self their Ordinary Calling and
Profession. There are infinite Numbers, who instead of following an honest
Employment, subsist only by the Sins which they commit themselves, or which
they make others commit. This might easily be proved by abundance of Instances.
How many are there, whose Trade is a constant Practice of Obscenity, Lewdness
and Debauchery, of Artifice and Intrigue, Lying and Knavery? How many are
there, who are professed Usurers and Cheats, who are always employed in Acts of
Injustice, Cruelty and Violence? nay, there are Societies Formed for that
purpose; the Trade of Robing* of Punishing the Innocent, and that by committing
Rapine by Sea and Land, is erected into an honorable and lawful Employment.
Many Persons are suffered at this Day among Christians, whose Profession was
formerly counted Infamous: Many are tolerated, who are only Ministers of
Voluptuousness, and whose only Business it is to introduce Licentiousness of
Manners, to corrupt the Youth by training them up to the love of Pleasure, and
to a Luxurious and Effeminate Life; and to furnish those who are inclined to
Debauchery, Sensuality, Idleness, or Gaming; with the Means to gratify their
Inclinations. Now all these Professions are not only inseparable from Sin, but
they likewise make way for all kinds of Vice among Christians.

We ought to pass almost the same Judgment, upon the way of Living of those,
who without making a public Profession of Vice, propose no other end to
themselves in this World, but the pleasing of their Appetites. Some have no
other view, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Life, and they level their whole
Conduct at that Mark. Others desiring to grow Rich, or to raise themselves to
Honors, make no scruple of using all the Means, which Interest, Ambition and
Injustice, have established in the World. They make use of Fraud, Violence and
Extortion; it is their Maxim and their Study to dissemble their Sentiments, and
to do mischief to those who stand in their way. In a Word, they betake
themselves to every thing that may further the success of their Designs. Such a
method of Life, is manifestly contrary to the Spirit of Christianity, and it
must needs be highly sinful, since both the End of it, and the Means used to
obtain that End, are so.

There are other Kinds of Life, which do not seem altogether so bad, and yet
are not much better. This may particularly be said of Idleness. The Profession
of many, is to have none at all, and to be as little Employed as they can. They
think it the happiest of all Conditions, to have nothing to do, and to live at
Rest and free from Action. But yet it is unworthy of a Man, and much more of a
Christian, to be useless in the World. And if this Idleness is shameful and
culpable in it self, it is much more so in its Effects and Consequences. It
betrays Men into frivolous or dangerous Pastimes. For a Man cannot be perfectly
Idle. The want of useful Business must be supplied with Amusements; and those
Amusements are generally sinful. Thus we see Multitudes of People, who
excepting the time which they must needs bestow upon the Necessities of Nature,
and upon some external and indispensable Acts of Religion, consume the best
part of their Lives at Play, or in Diversions, in unprofitable Reading and
Conversations, in meeting Companies, in receiving or returning Visits, or in
other such things, which though they are thought innocent, yet they enervate the
Mind, they devour Time, they enslave a Man to the Opinions and Modes of the
World, and they make him most frequently transgress the Laws of Religion. It
would not be difficult to apply this to professed Gamesters, to those who spend
their time in trifling Discourses and impertinent Visits, and to many other
Persons. I might easily show, if it was necessary, that such a Life has little
of Christianity in it, and that it is a great deal more to blame, than is
commonly believed.

Thus Men follow diverse kinds of Life, which are essentially Bad, and wherein
by Consequence, Purity of Heart, and Innocence of Life, cannot be preserved.

As to those kinds of Life and Occupations which are Lawful, I might observe in
the first place, that for the most part Men are too much wedded to them, and
that they commonly abuse them. But I will not press this Consideration, having
shown already in the foregoing Chapter, that too great application to Temporal
Affairs, robs Men both of the Time, and of that Inclination and Freedom which
are necessary to mind Spiritual Things, and that it makes them Dull,
Earthly-minded, Sensual, and Slaves to their Passions. To speak then only of
what concerns particular Callings, I shall observe these Two general Faults.

1. It is a great Mischief that Men embrace Professions which are not fit for
them. Every Profession requires some particular Qualifications and Talents; and
since all Men have not those Qualifications, it follows that all Men are not
fit for all Employments, and that Distinction and Choice are to be used in
pitching upon a Profession. The Welfare of Societies and of particular Persons,
does in a great measure depend upon that Choice. If no Care is taken of this,
Employments must be ill discharged, and from thence a great many Disorders will
arise both in Church and State.

Now if we take a Survey of the different Callings which Men are engaged in, we
will find that they are often destitute of those Qualifications which are
necessary for the right discharging of them. And the worst of it is, that this
happens in the most considerable Employments, and in those which might
contribute most to the preserving of Order, and the encouraging of Virtue in
the World. As to Professions of lesser Importance, the Choice is much easier;
every body almost is capable of them, and the Faults which may be committed
there are not of great Consequence. If a Husbandman does not well understand
his Business, or a Mechanic his Trade, no great inconveniency will ensue from
thence in relation to Society. But when public Employments are in the Hands of
Men who are not Qualified for them, it is hard to tell how much Mischief is
occasioned by it. Is it not for instance a lamentable thing, that so many
Persons should dedicate themselves to the Church, who want the Talents
requisite for so high a Function; and that so many who might do great Service
in that Profession do not embrace it? By this it happens that some of those who
are placed at the Helm in several Churches, want both Learning and Probity, and
that Religion is very ill administered, so that the People being without
Instruction or Conduct, live in Ignorance and Disorder. The same may be said of
the Office of Magistrates, when it is entrusted to those who are not proper for
it.

2. Lawful Callings may prove great Occasions of Corruption and Disorder, both
in respect of those who embrace them, and of the Public, when they are ill
exercised, when the Duties annexed to them, are neglected; when Men do not
watch against the Temptations which are particular to them, and when they look
upon them only as means to gratify their Inclinations, to get Money, to have a
Rank, to gain Credit, or to humor some other Passion. I might enter here upon
many Particulars, but because this would lead me too far, I shall confine my
self to a few Instances.

It would be very proper to speak here of the Profession of Churchmen, and of
the Office of Princes, Magistrates and Judges, and to show how pernicious both
these Kinds of Life prove often, not only to those who are raised to them, but
likewise to Church and State. But these Two Articles are of too great Moment,
to be touched upon only by the by. They are Two General Springs of Corruption,
which deserve to be purposely handled, and which are to have a Place in the
Second Part of this Book.

The Profession of Military Men, is a kind of Life which corrupts vast
Multitudes. I do not condemn the Profession in general. It is Lawful, a Man may
live in it like a Christian and there are Persons in Military Employments, of a
solid Virtue and an exemplary Piety. But it must be confessed, that the Number
of those Persons is not great; and that for the generality, the Maxims and
Deportment of the Men of that Profession, agree very little with the Rules of
Christianity. Those who follow the Employments of War, are for the most part
Men of loose and vicious Principles. Every body knows, that if on the one hand
some good Men are found to embrace this Profession, on the other hand it is the
Ordinary Receptacle, and the last Shift, of Idle and Debauched People; and of
those who are overwhelmed, with Poverty and Misery. Besides, how do Men live
in that Profession? saving some few Disorders which Military Discipline does
not allow of, every thing is lawful there; I speak of what is commonly
observed. To spend their Life in Idleness and Gaming, is the least Fault of
Soldiers. Lewdness is a thing about which no great Scruple is made among them.
The same might almost be said of Injustice; it is well known that commonly
Officers do not thrive but the Soldiers pay for it. I say nothing of unjust
Wars, nor of the Cruelty and Inhumanity which often attend that kind of Life,
because I will not enlarge upon this Subject. But it is most certain, and every
considering Person will own, that after the rate that Military men live almost
every where; War is the School of Vice, and that the prodigious Number of
those, who follow that Employment, is one of the principal Causes of Corruption
and Debauchery.

Commerce is one of the most Lawful and Necessary Professions of Life. Not only
Society, but Religion it self may reap great Advantages from it. But yet this
Calling has its Dangers and Temptations, and it is exercised by many in a way
which is contrary to good Conscience. As the only End of Traffic is Gain, and
as the Opportunities of getting by unlawful Methods, which may be practiced
with impunity, offer themselves every Day; so it is evident, that if a Merchant
has not a strict and well-informed Conscience, and Virtue enough to resist the
perpetual Temptations to which his Calling exposes him, he will forfeit his
Innocence, and violate every Minute the Rules of Justice and Equity, of
Charity, Truth and Honesty.

There are few Callings more innocent and more suitable to the Order which God
did establish at first, than the Employments of those who Exercise Mechanic
Trades, and get their Livelihood by bodily Labor. And yet this kind of Life
proves to a great many an Occasion to Vice, because they do not arm themselves
against the Temptations and Sins which are ordinary in those Callings. It is
almost the general Character of this Order of Men, to mind nothing but the
World, to labor only for their Bodies, and to do nothing for their Souls.
Hence it is, that they are Ignorant, that they know their Religion very little,
that they are gross, sensual, given to Intemperance, and several other
Excesses. They are apt besides, to be unjust and false. They make no Conscience
of doing their Work ill, of Lying, and detaining what is not theirs. There is a
Thousand petty Frauds and little knavish Tricks, used in every Trade, which are
thought Innocent and Lawful ways of Gain. Now it is plain, that all this does
not contribute a little toward Corruption.

What I have said of the Employments of Life, may be applied to the different
States Men are in, with relation to Age, Condition and their way of Living. All
these are so many occasions and circumstances, which may divert them from their
Duty.

Thus Youth has its particular Temptations. Young People are Vain,
Presumptuous, Sensual, given to Pleasure, violent and bold in their Passions.
They are likewise Imprudent and Fickle, because they want Knowledge and
Experience. Being thus disposed at that Age, they will almost infallibly,
unless prevented by a good Education, Corrupt themselves, and contract ill
Habits, which will stick by them, as long as they live. Daily Experience shows
us, that Youth ill spent is the Source of the Corruption of a great many for
the rest of their whole Life.

Old People are commonly Covetous, Morose, Suspicious, wedded to the Opinions
they have once embraced, and most deeply engaged in their vicious Customs.
Their Passions are not so boisterous, but they are more lasting and harder to
be cured, than those of Young People. And from this we may judge, that if
Reason and Religion do not correct those Faults of Old People; that Age, which
ought chiefly to be employed in preparing for Death, will prove an Obstacle to
Piety and Salvation.

The Rich as St. Paul observes *, 1 Timothy V. 17.
are proud and high-minded; they are apt besides to be slothful, they love to
satisfy their Passions, are full of self-love, minding themselves in every
thing, and being little affected with the Miseries of others. So that Riches
may easily spoil those who possess them, and do actually spoil many.

The Poor are almost all of them Vicious, because they are ignorant, forsaken
from their Infancy, and grown up in Want and Idleness, and among bad Company.
They have little Religion, they will live without Working, they are given to
Stealing and Dishonesty. Envy fills their Hearts, and they only keep within the
bounds of Duty, when they can do no mischief.

Those who live un-confined and much in the World, have for the most part
little of a Christian Character. They lie open to abundance of Temptations, and
what is most dangerous in that kind of life, is, that a Man has no sooner
embraced it, but he thinks it honorable, lawful and necessary; he harkens no
longer to the rules of Religion, he is ashamed of them, and governs himself
only by the Maxims of the World. Others lead a retired Life, they avoid great
Companies, and they seldom appear in Public. That State may have its
advantages, but it has its dangers too. Those who live thus retired, are apt to
think themselves much better than other Men, because their Conduct seems
regular and free from Scandal; and this inspires them with a secret Pride, a
great Opinion of themselves, an austere and imperious Humor, which makes them
apt to speak ill and to judge rashly of other People, and this drives Charity,
Gentleness and Humility out of their Hearts.

I think I have said enough to show, that Men's various kinds of Life, have a
general influence upon the Irregularities of their Deportment. But no make this
Truth yet more evident, I shall add two Reflections to all that has been said.

The first is, That of all the Temptations which are apt to seduce Men, none
are more dangerous than those, which are, 1. Necessary and unavoidable. 2.
Ordinary and frequent. 3. Hidden and imperceptible. Now the Temptations arising
from Men's particular Callings have these Three Characters. 1. They are
necessary and unavoidable, we may withstand them, but we cannot avoid
altogether being exposed to them. 2. They are frequent and constant, those
Employments in which the greatest part of our Lives is spent, offering them to
us perpetually. 3. They are hidden and imperceptible; for besides that Men
reflect little upon what is ordinary and happens every day; those Temptations
are varnished with the specious Pretenses of Example and Custom, and even of
the lawfulness of the Calling and of Necessity. Thus a Tradesman, is
necessarily exposed to the danger of wronging his Neighbor, and of
transgressing the Rules of Justice, Equity or Sincerity: The opportunity of
doing this returns every minute, and as often as he buys or sells; this
Temptation is imperceptible, and except he has a niceness of Conscience, he
will not be sensible of it, by reason that his Profession is innocent, that he
is allowed to get, and that most of the unlawful ways of gain, are Authorized
by Custom.

2. The Second Reflection is, that the greatest and the most insuperable
Obstacles to Piety, proceed, for the most part, from a Man's Calling. It is
that which obstructs more than any thing else, the effect of the Gospel, and
Men's Conversion. We Preach, we Exhort to Repentance, But to whom do we speak?
We speak to Men engaged in Professions, which, considering how they behave
themselves in them, divert them from Piety, and furnish them with a thousand
Opportunities of sinning. We speak to People who have chosen already the Course
of their whole Life; who are resolved to continue in the state they are in, and
to alter nothing in it; and who have formed to themselves, that Scheme of
Employments, which they intend to follow at any rate. We Preach to People who
arc no sooner out of the Church, but they meet at home and in their ordinary
Business, with perpetual hindrances to Holiness, and with Temptations, which it
is certain they will not withstand. Such Hearers may be Preached to long
enough, before they reap any fuit from what they hear. Sermons are presently
gone; but the Temptations arising from the Professions which Men choose, are
continual, and last as long as their Lives. They accompany a Man every where,
he is not jealous of them, he seeks them, he gives up himself to them, and he
fancies he may lawfully do so. This is the visible occasion of the Gospels
having so little Efficacy upon Men's Minds.

I shall conclude this Chapter with two Remarks which may serve for a Remedy
against this Source of Corruption. 1. Every one ought to examine the state and
kind of life he is in; that if this State has something in it that is evil, or
contrary to the Duty of a Christian, he must alter and correct it. If the
Profession is bad in it self, nothing else can be done, but to quit it. If it
is lawful, we must take care not to render it dangerous or sinful, either by
neglecting the Duties to which it obliges us, or by not avoiding the snares and
Temptations that attend it, or by making it an Occasion and Pretense, to
satisfy our inordinate Affections. I confess we may meet here with
difficulties. It is hard for a Man to leave off a Profession, to go out of his
ordinary road of Life, and to renounce some Engagements when they are once
formed. And yet this ought and may be done, if those Engagements are not
lawful. It is better we should offer some violence to our selves, by breaking
them off, or by correcting what is amiss in them, than to run our selves into
infinite Miseries. But the be^way is to obviate the Evil in its beginning.

Therefore, I say, 2ly. That since People use to resolve upon a Profession
while they are young; that Choice requires a great deal of Prudence and
Caution; for no less than Temporal and Eternal Happiness or Misery depends upon
it. But it is a sad thing to see, how rashly and inconsiderately this matter is
gone about. Interest, Chance, Passion, the Humor of Parents or of young
People, are the things which determine so important a choice. It is not much
considered whether a Calling is lawful, or proper for him that embraces it;
little or no care is taken to form the Inclinations of Young Persons; they are
given up to their own Conduct, and to all the Temptations of that Profession to
which they are destined. And thus we need no longer wonder, why Employments are
ill discharged, why most People lose their Innocence in them, and why there is
a general Corruption to be observed, in all States and Conditions. This is the
Ordinary Effect and Consequence of Men's particular Callings.

The End of the First Part.
A TREATISE Concerning the CAUSES Of the Present Corruption of CHRISTIANS, And
the Remedies of it. PART II.
CAUSE I. The Present State of the Church, and of Religion in General.
PIety is always necessary, and the Practice of it is never impossible, to
those who art well inclined. But yet we must confess, that the various
Circumstances of Time, Plate, and of the State of Religion, contribute much to
the progress of Piety or of Corruption in the World. There are some happy
Circumstances, and some Times very favorable to Piety; as on the other hand
there are unhappy Circumstances and Times in which it is like a Stranger upon
Earth, the Means to promote it being then neither so effectual nor so frequent.
The design of this Work, obliges me to consider, what may be thought in this
respect of the time we live in, and whether this Corruption which dishonours
Christianity, does not proceed from the unhappiness of the Times, and from the
present state of the Church and Religion.

But we cannot succeed in this Enquiry, nor pass a sound judgment upon; the
present state of Religion, without running back to its first Origin and Nature,
and without taking a view of those Ages which are elapsed, since its first
Establishment. The Knowledge of the Scripture and of History are here of great
use. The Scripture informs us what the state of Religion should be, and History
shows us the different states through which it has passed. When we examine
Religion by these two Rules, we perceive that it neither has been, nor will be,
always in the state it is now in.

take notice of four Principal Characters in the ^dea which the Scripture gives
us of the Christian Church and Religion; And these are, Truth, Holiness, Union
and Order.

1. The first and the chief Character of this Church and Religion, is the
Knowledge and the Profession of the Truth; this is what distinguishes
Christianity from false Religions.

The Church is the Church of Christ no longer, than while she retains the
Purity of Faith and of Evangelical Doctrine. It would be needless to prove this.

2. The Sacred Writers represent the Church as a Society altogether Holy. They
name her Ephesians. V. 27. Pet II.
The Spouse of Christ, a glorious Spouse, having neither spot nor wrinkle nor
any such thing, but being holy and without blemish. They call her Heb. XII.
The house of the living God, a holy Nation, and the assembly of the first born
which are written in heaven. They give to Christians, the glorious Titles of
Kings, Priests, Saints, Elect, Children of God, and New Men; They speak of
them, as of a People separated from the World and its Vices, dedicated to God
and to good Works, and living in the practice of Piety, Temperance, Justice,
Charity and all other Virtues.

3. Union and Love is the third Character of the Church and of the true
Disciples of Christ. The Scripture does not speak to us of many Churches but of
one, of which all the Faithful are Members, in what place soever they may be.
St. Paul says that there is bu^ one Faith, one Baptism, and one God; the
Apostles enjoin above all things, Union and Charity, and they give many
Precepts to maintain these, and to make them flourish among Christians.

4. As Holiness and Union cannot be preserved, where there is no Order; so the
Church was to be a well regulated Society, in which every thing might be done
in a convenient and orderly manner. And in fact, there are in the Sacred
Writings many Laws to this purpose. We find there several regulations,
concerning the way in which the Church ought to be governed, and concerning the
calling of Bishops and Pastors, and the Principal Functions of their Office.
The Scripture does besides appoint the exercise of Discipline, the manner of
proceeding in relation to scandalous Sinners, and the Administration of Public
Alms. It prescribes the chief acts of Religion and Divine Worship, Prayers,
Fasting, Sacraments, Preaching, and some other Heads. All these Laws are
designed to establish Order and Piety in the Church, and to banish Confusion
and Scandals out of it. And this order cannot be a thing indifferent, since the
Apostles have given us Laws about it.

It is not difficult to show that most Christian Societies are hardly to be
known by these Marks. But before we come to that, it is necessary to observe
the different States through which the Church has passed from her infancy to
this time.

II. If we consider the Church in her infancy, we must acknowledge, that the
first Ages of Christianity were very pure, in Comparison of the following. But
yet must take heed, when we speak of the purity of the Primitive Church, that
we do not form to our selves too advantageous an Idea of it, as if Christianity
had been then in its utmost Purity and Perfection. The Church in her beginnings
did consist of Jews and Heathens. These Men embracing Christianity; did not so
entirely strip themselves of their Prejudices and Customs, but that they
brought with them into the Church, some of the Notions of Judaism, and even of
Gentilism. It is well known that this was the first occasion of those Heresies
which did stain the Purity of the Christian Doctrines, and Morals; and the
cause of several disorders, which happened in the very Times of the Apostles.
Besides, the Apostles and the first Ministers of the Christian Religion, were
not able, by reason of the Persecution and of the obstacles they met with, to
regulate all things as they would have done, if the Church had been in peace.
We need not therefore wonder if we find Imperfections and Defects apparent
enough, in the state of the Primitive Church. And it is of some importance, to
observe this, not only that we may have true apprehensions concerning this
matter, but that we may besides obviate an unhappy Consequence, which might be
drawn in favor of the present Corruption, from what has been known in the
first Ages of Christianity. No doubt but there were Disorders and Scandals at
that time; but we are to remember, that the Church was then made up of Men, who
for the most part were born, and had lived in Paganism, and whose life had been
spent in the thickest darkness of Ignorance and Vice.

Yet for all that the Church was then more holy and pure than she has been
since, or is at this day in most places. This is matter of fact which cannot
reasonably be contested; for besides that it may be verified, from the
Testimony which the Sacred, and some of the Heathen Authors bear to the
Innocence of the Primitive Christians, and that it is probable, that Men were
kept in awe while the Apostles were alive in the time of Miracles, besidesall
this I say, there are two Considereations which prove, that Corrupton could not
be then so great or so general, as it is now.

These Considerations are founded upon two undeniable Facts. 1. That the Church
was then persecuted; And 2. That Discipline was then exercised in it. These
were two powerful Means to remove Vices and Scandals from the Church. We may
easily imagine, that Men who loved the World and their sins, would not have
embraced Christiany at a time, when whosoever became a Christian, did by that
very thing expose himself to Persecution, Torments and Death. This did fright
away the greatest numbers of Wicked and Impious Persons. But if any of these
entered into the Church, Discipline for the most part drove them out, when they
made themselves notorious by a Scandalous life. It is easy to judge, that in
such Circumstances there was more Piety at that time, than we observe now in
the Church. The first Christians were sincere in their Profession. Being
instructed by the Apostles, and apostolical Men, they placed the Christian
Religion chiefly in a good Life, to which they did solemnly engage themselves
by Baptism. They were united among themselves; they governed themselves in
matters of Order and Discipline by the Prescripts of the Apostles, as much as
the Persecution gave them leave; and they did with Courage lay down their lives
for the Truth. Such was the Christianity of the first Ages.

But the Church did not continue long in that State before this Zeal of those
Primitive Christans began to cool. On the one hand Persecution ceased, and on
the other, the Ancient Discipline was slackned. These two Fences being plucked
up, and the Emperors turning Christian, the Corruption of the World broke in
upon the Church. Diverse abuses crept into Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and
Manners, till the Church fell at last, into such a Dismal Darkness of
Ignorance, Superstition and Vice, that Christianity seemed almost quite extinct
and destroyed. All those who had any true sense of Religiion did lament this;
they complained openly of it, and they longed for a good Reformation. This was
the State which the Church and Religion were in, for some Centuries.

It did not please God that those Times of Ignorance should last for ever; that
Darkness began to be dispersed in the last Century. Then it was that Learning
and Languages revived, and that the Holy Scripture, which had been for a great
while, a Book unknown to the People, was rescued out of that obscurity, in
which the Barbarism of former Ages had buried it. Men did perceive that diverse
Errors had been introduced into Religion; they discovered several Abuses, they
went about to redress them, and they succeeded so far, that in this respect,
Christianity was restored to its Purity. But that great Work could not be
finished; so that at this Day they Church and Religion, are not yet brought to
that State of Perfection which they might be in.

III. For to come now to the present State of Religion, it is certain, First
that many Christian Churches are still very near in the same Darkness, Men were
in some Ages ago. I shall say nothing of the sinking of Christianity in Asia
and Africa; there is more Knowledge in Europe; but yet in many Places we may
observe almost all those Disorders, which prevailed in the Times of the
grossest Ignorance. Nay, our Age is more unhappy than the precedent, in that
those Abuses have been consirmed and authorized by Laws, and are now supported
by Force. How many Countries and Churches are there, where the People know
almost nothing of the Gospel, where Religion is reduced to Childish and
Superstitious Devotions and Practices, where the most Ridiculous things are
believed, and the most shameful Errors received; where the looseness of Manners
may almost be paralleled with Heathenism, where the most execrable Crimes are
committed? In a Word, where the Ignorance both of the People and Clergy are
general, excepting only some few understanding Men who are sensible of these
Disorders, but are restrained by Fear from discovering their Sentiments. From
those Places Corruption spreads to others, and it would not be difficult to
show by several Instances, that the Cause of Impiety, Ignorance and Vice, is to
be found in those Places which should be the Fo^^tains of Piety and Religion.

What I have now said, is not to be applied to all Churches; for some there
are, where Religion is not so corrupted, and where a purer Christianity is
professed. But yet let us enquire in the second place, whether there are any
Christian Societies, where nothing is Wanting or to be desired in the State of
the Church and Religion, and where it would not be necessary to make some
Alterations and Constitutions, in order to come nearer to Perfection. This
deserves to be examined with Care, and without Prepossession. We ought here to
lay aside the Spirit of a Party, and ingenuously to acknowledge Defects where
they are. For else if every one is wedded to the Society of which he is a
Member, nothing can ever be remedied. For supposing that there are Defects,
what Remedy can be used, if we are all possessed with This Prejudice, that all
is Perfect in our Society? Is not this the way to Canonize Abuses, and to
prevent the restoring of Order?

And First, we ought not to wonder, if there should still be Imperfections in
the purest Societies. It would be a kind of Miracle, if there were none
remaining. God does not always think fit to finish his Work all at once; unless
he had made use of Inspired Men, such as the Prophets or the Apostles were. It
was impossible so to attain Perfection and to provide for every thing at first
dash, that nothing more should be desired. Besides, Circumstances are so much
altered, that it seem^ necessary, to change several things that were left in
the last Age. It is further to be considered, that though Christians did long for
a good Reformation, yet great Difficulties were to be overcome to bring it
about. Men's Minds were not much enlightened, they were just creeping out of
Darkness, and a long Custom had almost obliterated the true Ideas of Religion.
Almost all those who were in Civil, or Ecclesiastical Authority, did
obstinately defend the Abuses which all Good Men thought it necessary to
Redress. Extreme Severity was used toward those who desired this Reformation
of the Church. All this did terrify a great many well-meaning Persons, and was
the cause, that in several Places, those who had Courage enough to Condemn the
Abuses openly, were not able for want of Means, to do all that the Interest of
Religion required. They were fain in those Places to yield something to the
Iniquity of the Times, and to settle Things as well as they could till a more
favorable Oppotunity. Some Churches came nearer to Perfection than others. But
howsoever, if we would pass a right Judgment upon the present State of the
Church and Religion, we ought to Examine the Thing in it self, and without
Partiality. Upon this I shall offer here some general Considerations, and refer
to the following Chapter some Heads, which will requirean exact and particular
Discussion. I will first resume the Four Characters, which the Scripture gives
us of the Christian Church and Religion; which are, Truth, Holiness, Union and
Order.

1. All Christian Societies boast that they profess the Truth; and that very
thing is enough to show that many of them are in Error, since they do not agree
among themselves about the Articles to be believed. I will not enlarge on this
Head, because it would lead me into many Particulars, and in some respect, into
Controversy. I shall only say, that if we did judge of what is to be Believed
in Religion, by that which ought to be the Principle and Rule of Faith among
Christians, I mean, the Holy Scripture, we would soon perceive on which side
the Truth lies. We might observe in that Society which vaunts it self to be the
purest of all and which even pretends to be Infallible, and the only True
Church exclusive of all other, absurd Tenets and monstrous Doctrines, equally
repugnant to Scripture and Reason, and we should be convinced, that the
Doctrine of those Churches which did separate from that Society, is much more
consonant to the Gospel.

2. We must have a very mean Notion of Christianity, if we can believe that
Holiness, which is the second Character of the Church, is to be found among
Christians at this time. The complaint of the last Ages was, That Religion
wanted to be Reformed, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Manners. It was
reformed in part by the rejecting of those Errors and Abuses, which were crept
into Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; but the Reformation of Manners is still
behind. The People have not as yet been Reformed in this regard, except perhaps
in those Times and Places where they have been Persecuted. As for the rest,
they have scarce changed any thing besides their Belief and Worship; this alone
proves that the State of the Church is yet imperfect. Holiness is the Scope of
Religion, it is the chief Character of Christianity; so that where Holiness and
purity of Manners is not, Religion must be very defective.

III. Union Peace and Charity, as was said before, are one of the essential
Marks of the Disciples and Church of Christ. But where is this Character to be
found? The Church at this Day is Rent into Factions and Parties. We cannot say,
that there is but one Church; we must say, that there are many Religions and
Churches. Christians divide not only upon Lawful Grounds, which make Separation
necessary, but about things of small Consequence. Upon the least diversity of
Opinions, they pronounce Anathema against one another, form different Sects and
Communions. Even those Churches which might have a common Belief and Interest
are not united. Those Men who by their Office should be the Ministers of Peace,
are but too often the Firebrarnds of Division. I desire no other Proof of this,
but that Zeal which most Divines express about the Disputes of Religion, and
that little Disposition which is found among them, to sacrifice some Opinions,
or Expressions, to the Peace of the Church.

I do not condemn all Disputes without distinction, for some are necessary. The
Apostles command the Rulers of the Church, to establish with Care, Pure
Doctrine, and to Confute those who endeavor to corrupt it. They did themselves
on many Occasions Dispute against false Teachers. To desert the Truth when
attacked, were to make but little account of it: This would be a betraying the
Interest of Piety, since Piety is always founded upon Truth. Disputes become
necessary, when Essential Truths are to be defended. Neither would I reduce all
profitable or lawful Disputes, to those only which concern Fundamentals. There
are Errors, which though not Mortal, yet are dangerous, and so it is needful to
oppose them: And there are Truths, which though not Fundamental, are yet of great
use in Religion, and may serve to confirm the Principles of Christianity. It is
fit that such Truths should be Discussed, provided this be done with Moderation
and Honesty.

I only blame useless Disputes, or these, which though they may have their use,
yet are accompanied with those Passions and Disorders, which blind Zeal
inspires. Such Controversies which are but too common, are extremely fatal to
Religion. We are not able to express what Mischiefs they occasion in the
Church, and how prejudicial they are to the progress of Christianity in
general, and of Piety in particular. It may seem at first, that because the
People do not take cognizance of these Contests, they should prove hurtful only
to those Learned Men by whom alone they are managed; but yet the whole Church
feels the ill Effects of them.

1. By reason of these Disputes, the People are destitute of Edification, or at
least they do not receive all the Edification which is necessary. Churchmen
being only full of these, Study and Meditate upon nothing else; in their
Sermons they speak only of these Matters, which take them up, and which seem
capital to them They have neither Leisure nor Inclination to mind things of
another Nature, and to set about Reforming the Manners of Christians; or they
do it but faintly and carelessly. Whilst a Minister is very busy in his Study or
Pulpit, about Confuting an Adversary whom he never saw, or an Error which is
unknown to his whole Flock, his Sheep are lost, his Hearers remain possessed with
mortal Errors concerning Morality, and engaged in the most vicious Habits. This
is the Fruit of most Disputes, they occasion the Ruin, rather than the
Edification of the Hearers.

2. Disputes keep up among Christians false Zeal, Hypocrisy and Licentiousness.
The People learn by the Example of their Teachers, to place their Zeal, not in
opposing Vice, but in understanding Controversy, in adhering to certain
Opinions, and in bearing a strong Hatred to those who dissent from them. They
judge that what makes the ordinary Employment of Divines, what they insist most
upon, what kindles their Zeal, and excites in them the most violent Passions,
must needs be the most important thing in Religion.

3. Sometimes the People take part in the Quarrels of their Teachers, from
whence proceed unavoidable Animosities and Divisions, which extinguish Love,
and the Spirit of Christianity, and which create insuperable Obstacles to the
Peace of the Church, and the Reunion of Christians. Of this we have but too
many Instances.

4. Lastly, the little Union which is in the Church, is one of the great Causes
of the small Progress of Christianity. Christians instead of making their
Religion appear Lovely and Venerable, to Jews and Infidels, expose it to their
Contempt. Instead of endeavoring to Propagate the Christian Faith, and to
destroy Idolatry, they turn their own Weapons against themselves; they mind
nothing but the promoting the Interest of their particular Sects, and they
neglect that of Christianity in-general. On the other hand, Unbelievers, seeing
that Christians are not agreed among themselves, take occasion from thence to
Question every thing, and they judge that there can be nothing but uncertainty
and obscurity in a Religion, where there is nothing but Controversy and
different Opinions.

The want of Union is then, a most considerable Imperfection in the present
State of the Church. It were to be wished, that some Remedy might be applied to
so great an Evil, and that those Controversies which produce and cherish it,
might be turned out of Doors. The way to compass this, would be to endeavor in
good earnest, the Reforming of Manners, and the restoring of Order. This great
and noble Design will no sooner be pursued, but Men will be ashamed of all
these Contentions, they will look upon them as trifling Amusements, and find no
relish in those Disputes, which to say the truth, do only employ such Persons
as are conceited with vain Learning, and narrow-spirited Men, who are not
capable of larger and higher Views.

IV. If we examine the present State of the Church with relation to Order,
there we must ingenuously confess, that great Defects are to be found. In
Matters of Order and Discipline, Christians ought to Regulate themselves, First
by the Laws which Christ and his Apostles have set them; and then by the
Example of the Primitive Church and of the Purest Antiquity, it being evident,
that what has been practiced in the First Ages of Christianity, and does
besides agree with the Rules and the Spirit of the Gospel, should have a great
regard paid to it, by all Christians. Now it cannot be denied, but that most
Churches, have considerably departed from that Ancient Order.

To prove this by some Instances, it is certain in fact, that the
Ecclesiastical Order and Government, which obtains in many Places, is not such
as it ought to be. None ca^n be ignorant of this, but those who are altogether
unacquainted with Antiquity, or who being full of Prejudices find what they
please in Scripture, and Church History. Can it be said, that the Elections of
Bishops or Pastors, are Canonical, as they are managed in many Places, arid
that the Practice and Order, established by the Apostles and the Primitive
Christians, are observed every where? It is certain likewise, that all Churches
are not furnished with a sufficient Number of Persons, to perform
Divine-Service and to Instruct and Edify the People. When we look back upon the
Primitive Church, we find, that though it was poor and persecuted, yet it had its
Bishops, its Priests, its Catechists and its Widows. At this time we see yet in
several Places, that one single Town maintains a great Number of Churchmen,
who indeed, for the most part, are very insignificant; but elsewhere it is
quite otherwise, one single Man does often perform all the Ecclesiastical
Functions; nay, sometimes many Churches have but one Pastor. This Disorder as
well as many others, proceeds partly from the want of necessary Means and
Funds, to supply the occasions of all Churches. Here it might be proper to
speak of the Pastoral Functions, and of the Administration of Discipline; but
these Two Heads being important, I reserve what I have to say about them, for
the Two next Chapters.

We ought here not to omit the want, of Union and Correspondence among
Churches. If they had more Communication and Intercourse one with another,
great Advantages would follow from thence. Right Measures might be taken for
the Edification of the People, and for the Redressing of Abuses and Scandals;
that Uniformity which is so necessary, both in Worship, and in
Church Government and Discipline, might be established: And that would
contribute much to the Honor and Safety of Religion in general. The Church
would appear then like a well-ordered Society, and like One Body, of which all
the Parts should maintain a relation to and a strict dependence upon one
another. On the other hand, it is a great unhappiness, when Churches have
little or no Intercourse or Communication one with another, so that every one
orders its Matters and Customs, the Form of its Worship and Government, within
it self.

Thus in many respects, it would be easy to show, that Things are not
altogether Regulated in the Church, as they ought to be, with relation to
Order. Men are not sensible of these Defects, because they are apt to judge of
Religious Matters, by the Practice of the present Time, and by the Customs of
their respective Countries; besides, that Antiquity is but little known. And
yet these Defects contribute more than is commonly imagined, to the decay of
Piety and Zeal. The want of Order in any Society, does most certainly bring
Confusion and Licentiousness into it.

V. The Worship of God being the end and the essence of Religion, we cannot but
inquire whether all things are well regulated with relation to that. To speak
here only of the public Worship, it would be very necessary, that it should be
performed every where in such a manner, that the People might understand, the
most essential parts of Religion and Divine Worship to be Adoration, Praise,
and the invocation of God; and that the discharging of these Duties is the end
of Public Assemblies. I remark this particularly, because in many places,
Devotion is placed only in the hearing of Sermons. Churches are properly
nothing else but Auditories. People fancy that Sermons are the chief thing they
meet for, and that preaching is the principle Function to be exercised by
Ministers in the Church. The Prayers and the Psalms, are looked upon only as
Preliminaries or Circumstances to a Sermon. This is a dangerous Notion, because
on the one hand it makes Christians neglect Divine Service, and on the other it
renders Religion contemptible, when Sermons are not so edifying as they should
be, which happens but too often. And therefore it would not perhaps be amiss,
if as it is practiced in several Churches, Divine Service was distinguished
from Sermons by some circumstances of times or persons; so that it might be one
thing to celebrate Divine Service, and another, to hear Sermons.

Several Reflections might be offered here concerning the principal things
relating to Public Worship, such as Forms of Prayers, Liturgies, the Manner of
praising God, and Sacred Hymns. It would be a question worth the examining,
whether we ought in Christian Churches, to use only Psalms and Canticles, out
of the Old Testament, among which though some are most edifying and full of
excellent expressions of Piety; yet there are many which relate altogether to
some particular passages of those times; or if they speak of Christ, it is only
in a Prophetical style, very obscure to the People. One would think that
Christian Hymns, which should be sung to the honor of God and Jesus Christ,
chiefly to celebrate the Wonders of our Redemption, might be extraordinary
useful, to nourish Piety and to stir up Devotion, as well as more agreeable to
that, which the Apostles prescribe, and which the Primitve Christians practiced
in their Assemblies. Would it not likewise be necessary to agree about giving
the Holy Sacrament to sick and dying Persons; and to restore the more frequent
use of the Eucharist, acpording to the practice of the Apostles and of the
Primitive Church? Fasting being enjoined by our Savior, and established by the
example of the Apostles, and by the universal practice of the first Christians,
and of all the Churches in the World for several Ages; there is reason to
wonder that in some places this Duty should be almost out of date. For as to
solemn Fasts, which are celebrated from time to time, and seldom enough; those
are not properly the Fasts of which the Gospel speaks, and which were observed
by the Ancients: They are Acts of public Humiliation, designed for times of
Calamity, or of extraordinary Devotion, and the use of these ought not to be
too frequent, because Custom is apt to lessen their effect. But I mean those
Fasts which are helps to Devotition and Holiness, and Means to mortify the
Body, and to dispose Men to Humiliation and Repentance.

Uniformity in Divine Worship would be another very necessary Establishment. It
would show the unity of Faith, it would render Religion venerable, and prevent
those Disorders and Confusions, which are inevitable, when Rites and Practices
quite different, nay sometime contrary to one another, are observed in several
Churches.

Lastly, Care should be taken, that divine Service might be performed every
where, in an orderly grave and decent manner. The exterior of Religion, has a
greater influence than we imagine, upon the essence of it; besides that we save
an express Law, 1 Cor. XIV. 40.
Which says, that all things should be done decently and in order. Indeed,
Pageantry and Pomp, the great number of Ceremonies, and whatever savours of
Superstition, ought to be avoided, as well as every thing which is contrary to
the essence of Evangelical Worship: And it were better to fall into an excess
of Simplicity, than to Clog Religion with too many Ceremonies. But yet under
pretense of Simplicity, we are not to run into Confusion, and to neglect the
externals of Religion and Divine Service. If we should examine by this Rule
what is done in some Churches, with relation for instance, to the Laws and
Forms of Public Assemblies, to the celebration of Divine Worship and the
Sacraments, and to the Persons who receive the Communion, and who officiate; we
might find there several things to be rectified. And it would be very useful to
take this into Consideration, for the want of Gravity and Decency, and a dry
and careless performing of Public Worship, render Religion despicable, and
make the People, who commonly judge of things by their Outsides, to entertain a
mean notion of divine Service; which produces the contempt of Religion, and by
consequence ill Manners.

VI. This contempt of Religon is another Fault, which ought not to be passed
over in silence. It has been always the general sense of Mankind, that Religion
is to be honored and respected. The Heathen Religions, as false as they were,
did attract the Veneration of the People; and the same may be seen at this day,
among the several Nations of Infidels. Certainly then the Christian Religion
deserves all the veneration and respect, which Men are capable of. But it must
be confessed that in many places, it is falling of late, into a very great
outward meanness. Men are accustoming themselves, to look with indifference,
and with haughtiness and scorn upon every thing, which has some relation to the
Church or to Religion. This appears especially in the contempt, which is
expressed toward the Clergy. Though the Scripture represents their Office, as a
most Excellent and Honorable Employment; though it enjoins Christians, to Heb.
XIII. 27. 1 Thessalonians. V. 13.
Honor, Love and Reverence those, who have the rule over them; yet the
Ecclesiastical Order is generally but little honored: And what is more
surprising, it is most depressed and abased, in those Churches which otherwise,
profess a purer Doctrine and Worship, than other Christian Societies. I do not
speak of all Churches in general; but whoever sees what is practiced in many
places, would be apt to think, that it was a part of the Reformation of the
Church, to strip the Clergy of all Ecclesiastical Authority, and of every thing
that might render them venerable to the People, and to set them upon a low and
contemptible Foot. Their Character is become Abject, if not Odious, and it
becomes so more and more every day. That which makes it more despicable, is the
Poverty which many of them are forced to live in.

It is not difficult to find out the Grounds of this Contempt. It may be justly
charged upon the Clergy themselves, their Character is become vile, because
they support; it but it does not follow that Men have a Right to despise them;
all that is to be done, is to endeavor the reclaiming of them. If under
pretense of Persons being unworthy, or of some abuse in Offices, it was lawful
to despise the Professions themselves, would not even Magistracy be often the
vilest of all employments? May we not say besides, that Churchmen do not well
maintain their Character, because they are despised? An Office which is
slighted will never be well discharged; it is seldom that great worth is to be
found in a Post which is little honored, or rather much despised.

The chief Cause of this Contempt was the manner in which things were ordered
in the last Century. Persecution, Poverty and the Opposition of the higher
Powers, were at first great Obstacles to the establishing of good Order.
Princes and great. Men did possess themselves of the Revenues and Authority of
the Church. Nothing was left to Churchmen, but the care of making Sermons, and
of Administering the Sacraments. They were turned into bare Preachers; a
Character which for the most part, is not very fit to create Respect. I say
nothing here of the Discipline and Government of the Church, because I am to
speak of these more largely by and by.

This Abasement of Religion and of the Ministry, is a visible Cause of
Corruption. As soon as Sacred things are disregarded, Impiety must needs
prevail; especially if the Ministers of Religion are despised, then Religion
can have no great force upon Men's Minds. The Master cannot be honored, when
his Servants are slighted. Men, who are without Authority, cannot contain the
People in their Duty, Whatsoever comes from an abject Person, who is neither
beloved nor esteemed, can never be received with submission. The contempt of
Pastors, draws of necessity after it the contempt of Divine Service, of
Preaching, and of other Sacred Functions.

The Poverty of Churchmen, is not much less fatal to the Church, than the
immense and excessive Riches which did formerly corrupt the Clergy. For
besides, that in those times and places in which the Christian Religion is
predominant, and professed by Persons of Quality, Poverty makes the Ministers
of Religion Contemptible to the People, and even to Great Men, it being certain
that in those Circumstances, it is necessary that Ministers should live with
some credit; besides this I say, that Poverty disables them from exercising
Hospitality, from minding their Function as they ought, and from discharging
the Duties of it with Authority and Zeal. It forces them to have recourse to
several mean or unlawful Methods to supply their Necessities, and those of
their Families, and to do many things which do not comport with their
Employment. From thence proceeds likewise the want of able Ministers. A great
many Persons who might have the necessary Talents, Qualifications and Means, to
be very useful in the Church, take a disgust at that Profession, by the fear of
Contempt or Poverty. As long as things are in this state, Religion will be
despised, and Corruption will still be in vogue.

It is not so easy to remove this Cause of Corruption as it is to detest it.
The re-establishing of Order, seems to be a thing extremely difficult. To this
end it would be requisite, that Princes arid Churchmen should act in
Conjunction. But there are few Christian Princes who lay this to heart, and
Divines have quite other things in their thoughts; Their great business is to
maintain what is established, and to dispute with those who find fault with it.
On the other hand, Knowledge or Resolution is wanting, and there is not enough
of honesty or greatness of Soul, to confess the Truth. Few Writers have the
Courage to speak so impartially, as the Famous Author of the History of the
Reformation in England has done, in the Preface to his Second Volume. It is
thought by many Persons, that all would be ruined if the least alteration was
made. Some of those Defects which have been mentioned in this Chapter, are now
become inviolable Customs and Laws. Every body fancies true and pure
Christianity to be that which obtains in his Country, or in the Society he
lives in; and it is not so much as put to the question, whether or not some
things should be altered. As long as Christians are possessed with these
Prejudices, we must not expect to see Christianity restored to an entire Purity.

But yet it is to be hoped from the Grace of God, and the force of Truth, that
Christians will open their Eyes at last, and that Divines will grow sensible of
the necessity of minding these Things. The main Point here is to shake off all
Prejudice, and to consider things in their Nature and Original. Our Savior has
left us an Excellent Rule, when speaking of the Abuses which had been so long
received among the Jews, in reference to Marriage, he tell us, PLACE="foot"
N="*" Mat. XIX.
That from the beginning it was not so. This Maxim is of great use, and a lover
of Truth and Virtue, should always have it before his Eyes. It were to be
wished, that we should still appeal to it, and that instead of Governing our
selves by the Custom of the present Time, we should run up to the Ancient
Constitution, and compare what is done at this Day, with that which has been,
and ought to be done. This would be the true Way to Reform Abuses, and to draw
near to Perfection, and to bring things back into the Natural and Primitive
Channel.

CAUSE II. The want of Discipline.
IT is not my Design in this Chapter to speak of Church Discipline in general.
I shall only insist upon that Part of it, the End of which is to Regulate the
Manners of Christians. And this is an important Matter. The want of Discipline
is one of the greatest Imperfections which have been observed in the present
State of the Church, and one of the most evident and general Causes of the
Corruption of Christians. But because some Men have pretended, that Discipline,
such as I suppose it in this Chapter, was a Humane and Arbitrary Institution,
the observation of which was not absolutely necessary, and might be dangerous;
I think it proper to say something here, concerning the Original and the
Necessity of the Discipline of the Church.

with the welfare of Civil Society, and the Spirit of the Christian Religion,
as will be proved hereafter; so the establishing of it, seems to be equally
lawful and necessary.

II. But further, Discipline is an Order, which has God for its Author. We find
the Institution of it in Holy Scripture, and in the Laws of Christ, and of his
Apostles; I shall recite the Chief of these.

1. In St. Matthews Gospel. Chap. XVIII. 15, 16, 17. We read these Words; If
thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him of his fault between
thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee thou have gained thy Brother; but if
he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the Mouth
of two or three Witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen Man and a Publican. For the right
understanding of these Words, We must know, that our Savior does not enact
here a new Law, and that an Order like that which is here prescribed, was
already observed among the Jews. But here, as upon many Occasions, Our Savior
did comply with the Customs and Practice of that Nation, because he judged that
those Customs were good, and fit for his views and purposes. The first
Christians did the same in matter of Order and Government, they did form the
Christian Church, upon the Model of the Jewish Assemblies, and upon the Method
which was there observed.

This is the Key of the Place I have now quoted. Our Savior approves the
Jewish Practice and enjoins his Disciples to observe the same Order amongst
them. It cannot be doubted but that this was his Meaning. For he speaks to his
Disciples, and it appears by all the circumstances of this Passage, and by the
sequel of his Discourse, that he is giving here a Law, which concerns the
Christian Church. It is true indeed, that he properly speaks of private
differences, but what he says ought to applied to all those disorders, which
may happen in the Church, and particularly to Scandals. And surely it is
evident, that if we may proceed in the Methods here enjoined, when the Case is
only concerning some differences between private Men, we have much more right
to do so relation to with public Sins, since they are Cases which Concern the
whole Church, and that directly, and which do yet more properly belong to her
Cognizance, than the quarrels of private Men. The Meaning of Christ is then,
that there must be an Order in his Church for the removing of Scandals. He
supposes that the Church has a right to interpose upon those Occasions, and he
commands that those who shall refuse to hear the Church, be looked upon as if
they were her Members no longer, and that Communication with them should be
avoided: This is the import of these words, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen
Man and Publican.

2. The V. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, ver. 2, 3, 4.
decides this matter. St. Paul having been informed, that there was a Man among
the Corinthians, who lived in Incest, he writes about it to that Church; and
first he reproves them, for not having cut off from their Communion, the person
who had committed so Infamous an Action. In the next place he does himself
Excommunicate that Man and deliver him up to Satan. I know that perhaps this
Power of delivering up to Satan belonged only to the Apostles, and it is
likely, that this was one of those extraordinary Punishments, which they had a
Power to inflict upon Profane and Rebellious Persons. But as for
Excommunication, it is the common and ordinary Right of the Church. This Right,
or rather this Duty of the Church, is clearly asserted by the Censure which the
Apostle addresses to the Corinthians, because they had not taken that
Incestuous Person from among them, and because they had not observed the Order
he had given them before, not to suffer Fornicators; Ver. 4.
I wrote unto you already not to company Fornicators. He repeats this Order in
these Words, which contain an express and general Law against all Scandalous
Sinners. Ver. 12.
I write it unto you again, not to keep company; if any man that is called a
Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolator, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat. This is positive:
And what the Apostle adds, Do not ye judge them that are within; is a
confirmation that the Church has a Right to do so, with relation to her
Members. Lastly he concludes with these Words, Ver. 13.
Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked Person; for thus this
Verse is to be rendered, as the Drift of the whole Chapter, of which this is the
Conclusion, shows it evidently. I desire the force of this Proof may be
considered. It is not one single Passage which I here produce, it is a whole
Chapter, it is a Thread of Arguments, and of express and reiterated
Injunctions. St. Paul describes those whom the Church ought not to suffer in
her Bosom, he appoints what is to be done in reference to them; which is, that
they ought to be cut off from the Body of Christians, and that their Company is
to be avoided. There cannot be a clear and express Law, if this is not so.

3. There are some other Places which have no ambiguity in them, 2 Thessalonians. III.
6. We command you in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, this Preface is
Remarkable; here is a Law in due Form, which the Apostle is going to deliver,
he proposes it by way of Command, and he interposes the Auhority of our Lord
Jesus Christ, We command you in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received, of us. This Law is repeated ver. 14. If any
man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed.

4. The 1st Epistle to Timothy affords us Proofs unanswerable. The design of
St. Paul in this Epistle is to establish Order and Discipline in the Church. To
this purpose he gives several Precepts to Timothy; he Instructs him exactly how
Pastors ought to proceed about Information, Censures, and the Principal Offices
of Church Government. Chap. V.
Rebuke not an Elder but instruct him as a father, and the younger men as
brethren; the elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity.
1 Timothy I. 20. 2 Timothy III. 5.
Against an Elder or a Priest receive not an accusation but before two or three
witnesses: Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. I charge
thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou
observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality. I might add other Places out of this Epistle and the following, and
out of that to Titus Tit. III. 10.
Here is then again, a whole Thread of Discourse, prescribing the Order
according to which the Church is to be Governed. Here are particular Rules; and
St. Paul uses an Adjuration to oblige Timothy to observe them. These Laws do
not concern Timothy in particular, but St. Paul speaks here of the Episcopal
Function, and of the Duty of the Pastors of the Church in general. We need but
read the Epistles to Timothy, and the beginning of that which he writes to
Titus, to be satisfied that he intends this Order should be settled in all the
Churches.

Either there is nothing plain in Scripture, or it appears from all these
Places, That Discipline is Instituted of God; that the exercise of it is
committed to Pastors; that scandalous Sinners are not to be tolerated in the
Church; that private Men ought to avoid their Company; and that the Governors
of the Church are bound to proceed against them, by private and public
Censures, and even by Excommunication. If the Passages I have cited do not
prove all this, we may wrangle about every thing, and all Arguments from the
Sacred Writings may be eluded. The Institution of the Sacraments is not more
express or positive.

III. But though these Places were not so positive and so clear as they are, yet
we may be asssured that this is their true meaning, because this is the sense
in which the whole Primitive Church understood them. The Practice of the First
Ages, in conjunction with the Laws of Christ and of his Apostles amounts to a
Demonstration, which cannot be withstood; besides that we are to presume, that
what has been practiced from the Foundation of the Church, and in the time of
Her Purity, was settled by the Apostles themselves, or by Apostolical Men, so
that we ought as much as possible to conform our selves to it. Now we know that
Discipline was observed in the Primitive Church, notwithstanding the
unhappiness of the Times and the Perfecution. This is unquestionable matter of
fact, and therefore I shall take it for granted; and only say in short, that
then all those who embraced Christianity were engaged by a solemn Vow to
renounce the Vices of the Age, and to lead a holy Life; that those who were
Baptized were not suffered to live disorderly; that vicious Persons were
debarred the Holy Mysteries; that those who fell into great Sins were
Excommunicated, as well as those who were Contumacious and Incorrigible; that
such were not restored to the Peace of the Church, but after various degrees of
Penance, and a public acknowledgment of their Faults; and that as to those who
relapsed, they were received only at the Hour of Death. Very clear Monuments of
this Practice are still extant, in the Writings of the Ancient Doctors of the
Church, as well as in the Old Canons and Decrees of Councils. This Discipline
must needs have been very severely observed, since St. Ambrose was not afraid
to put it in Practice against the Emperor Theodosius.

I am not ignorant, that the Primitive Church has varied about certain
Circumstances, that the Penitents were treated sometimes with more and
sometimes with less severity, and that the time of their Penance was longer or
shorter: But as to the main or the essence of Discipline, it did always obtain
in the Primitive Church. And it was as little questioned then Whether
Discipline ought to be observed, as whether Christians should be Baptized. This
usage among the first Christians is at least a strong presumption in favor of
Discipline; but it being consonant besides to what we read in the New
Testament, I do not see how there can remain any doubt about this Matter.

IV. In the last place, the Nature of Discipline it self, proves the usefulness
and necessity of it. All those who are not blinded with Prejudice, must own,
that Discipline considered in it self, is altogether agreeable to the Spirit of
Christianity. 1. The honor of Religion, and the promoting of Christ's Kingdom,
require Order in the Church. Who does not see but that if the Church did
tolerate Scandalous Persons and take them into her Bosom, and make no
difference between them and the Faithful; She might justly be charged with all
the Disorders and Scandals, which are observed in the Lives of bad Christians,
and be looked upon by Infidels, as a Profane Society, where Vice is permitted.
But the Exercise of Discipline is an authentic disowning of Vice, whereby the
Church declares publicly that She does not allow of it.

2. Discipline is a most efficacious means, to procure the Conversion of
Sinners. A Man must be very much hardened, when the being removed from the
Communion of Christians, does not reclaim him. But when a Scandalous Person is
suffered to live in the Society of the Faithful, when he is admitted to the
same Privileges with other Members of the Church, this gives him an occasion
to harden himself in Sin, and to think that he is as good a Christian, and that
he has as much Right to Salvation as others, which is a most dangerous, but
withal a most common Imagination.

3. Discipline is useful to the Church in general. Many who may otherwise have
ill Inclinations, are restrained by Example, or Shame, or Fear, or ever by
Conscience: Good Men are thereby doubly Edified; since on the one hand this
Rigor confirms them in their Duty, and that on the other hand, it makes
reparation for the Scandal which other Men's Sins give them.

From all this, I conclude, that Discipline is a Sacred, Necessary and
Inviolable Order. It cannot be said, that it is a Humane, or Arbitrary
Establishment, which may be altered, or which was only to continue for a time.
An Order which has its Original in the express Laws of Christ and his Apostles,
and which is appointed in Scripture as a general Law; an Order which has been
observed in the Primitive and Apostolical Church; an Order which is founded
upon the very Nature of the Church and Religion, and which perfectly agrees
with the Spirit of the Gospel; such an Order certainly ought to be followed, as
being of a necessary and indispensable obligation. I say it again, there is
nothing more positive than this in the Institution of the Sacraments,
Discipline as well as the Sacraments, is founded upon Dvine Institution, and
confirmed by the practice of the Primitive Church; but in Discipline there is
one thing more than in the Sacraments; for whereas the Sacraments considered in
themselves, and without respect to the divine Institution, are things
indifferent and of no use; Discipline in it self is just and useful, agreeable
to the Principles of Christianity as well as to plain reason and sense.

I have perhaps been too large upon this Subject, but it was to be proved in
the first place that Discipline is necessary and instituted by God, since that
is the ground I go upon in this whole Chapter.

appointed, and then Men unhappily began to be more concerned, about the
exterior of Penance, than about what is Spiritual in it, and fit to reclaim
Sinners. This was done at first by a kind of Relaxation or Indulgence; but that
which at the beginning was no more than an exception to the Law, succeeded in
the room of the Law it self; and from thence sprang Indulgences, Satisfactions,
Penance, Auricular Confession, and many other Practices, which are but
Corruptions of the Ancient Discipline. The Bishops on the other hand being
distracted by temporal Cares, after the Conversion of the Emperors to the
Christian Religion began to neglect the essential parts of their Function, and
the Conduct of their Flocks. They were for humouring great Men, who thought it
hard to submit to the public Order. This is a short account, how the purity of
the Christian Religion was considerably adulterated in the point of Discipline.



Let us see then whether this Discipline is to be found any where else. There
are many Churches in the last Age, which did redress those Abuses I now
mentioned. But they ought to have gone further; as these Abuses had succeeded in
the room of Apostolical Discipline, so that should too have been restored, when
these were taken away. But this was not done as it might have been wished. The
Disorder was removed, but order was not re-established; and it is not hard to
apprehend how this came to pass.

It is no wonder that those Abuses should be taken away; they were grown too
intolerable; and they could not hold out against the Learning of an Age more
knowing than the former were. Things were gone so far, that a Turn and a
Revolution were necessary. It is very probable besides, that Interest, Pride,
or Ambition, did move great numbers of Persons, who after all had hot much
Piety, to set themselves against those many and great Disorders, and to shake
off a Yoke under which the Christian World then groaned. But the same
Principles hindered them to submit to the Yoke of Christ, and to bind themselves
to the observation of Evangelical Discipline. We are to consider further, that
the Rules of Discipline and Penance had been disused for several hundred Years,
so that it was not easy to bring the World to submit to an Order, of which the
Notion was lost. Policy had perhaps a large share likewise in this Revolution.
Princes and great Men were easily determined, to pull down the excessive and
usurped Authority of the Clergy, but they did not all express the same Zeal to
restore to the Church, her lawful Authority. In fine, among Divines themselves,
there were many who could not endure that Discipline should be named, and who
disputed and writ against those, who were for excluding scandalous Persons from
the Holy Sacrament, and for making use of Excommuication and Public Penances.
In such Circumstances the restoring of Discipline was a hard Task. It will not
be improper to relate here concerning this matter, the Opinions and the very
Words of those who were then employed about the Reformation of the Church.

They looked upon Discipline as a Capital Point, to restore Religion to its
Purity. They wrote Calvini Epist. and Responsa. Page 337. Disciplinam jure
vocare possumus, optimum, atque adeo unicum retinendae obedientiae vinculum. Et
paulo post. Itaque Ecclesias nostras tum demum rite suffultas arbitrabor, ubi
isto nervo colligatae fuerint. Et page 336. Caeterum non aliter consister
Ecclesiae incolumitas, quam si ad eam purgandam, fraenandas libidines, tollenda
flagitia, Corrigendos perversos mores, vigeat Excommunicatio, cujus moderatum
usum quisquis recusat, praesertim admonitus, se ex Christi ovibus non esse
prodit.
That Discipline was the Best, nay the ONLY MEAN to keep the People in
Obedience. That the Church would never stand upon a firm and solid foundation,
till Discipline and Excommunication were used to purge it, to give a stop to
licentiousness, to banish Vice, and to mend Manners; and that whosoever did
reject the lawful and moderate use of Excommunication, showed himself, by that
to be none of Christ's Sheep.

But we do likewise observe in their Writings, that they had the ill fortune,
of not being able to succeed in their design, they say openly, own that they
met on all hands with insuperable Obstacles. Capito in Calv. Epist. p. 7.
Periciores rerum Ecclesiasticarum, cernunt in Causa (ejectionis vestrae) fuisse
totam Cohortem Ministrorum, Evangelium docentium sine Disciplina, imo ne
scientium an Disciplina sit in Ecclesiam revocanda. Otiosam enim functionem
quidam tueri malunt, quam fructuosam: Quidam licentiam pro Christi liberate
induxerunt, quasi ab Evangelio stent, qui jugum Pontificium abjecerint. Aliqui
vero, id est, plerique omnes, animadvertentes rem Christi indies abire in pejus
optarent quidem restirutam auctoritatem Ministrorum, sed aut veram ejus
reparandae rationem ignorant, aut eam videntes desperant prorsus. Et paulo
post: Auditis enim Tyranni esse voluistis in liberam Ecclesiam, voluistis novum
Pontifica^um revocare, atque id genus Contumeliarum, etc. Et paulo post: Nam
fraenum prorsus excussit Multitudo, quae assuera est and educata propemodum ad
Licentiam, quasi authoritatem Pontificiorum frangendo, vim verbi,
Sacramentorum, and totius Evangelii evacuaremus, etc.
That there was a company of Ministers, who preached a Gospel without
Discipline, and who even questioned, whether the use of Discipline was to be
brought back into the Church: That some introduced Licentiousness instead of
Christian Liberty, and thought that to reject the Pope was enough in order to
be truly Evangelical: That others observing the daily decay of Christianity,
wished that the Authority of the Ministry might be restored, but that either
they did not see the true way of bringing this about, or that if they saw it
they despaired of success: That those who endeavored to revive Discipline were
called Tyrants, who would have usurped the Liberty of the Church: That the
People had shaken off all restraint, and were accustomed to Licentiousness; as
if by taking away the Pope's Authority, the Ministry had been destroyed, and
the word of God and the Sacraments had lost their efficacy. They have said,
that the want of Discipline did produce Corruption. Bucerus de animarum cura,
p. 171. Et quis negare potest, cum omnium peccatorum, quam atrocia etiam illa
sint, adeo nulla increpatio, castigatio aut poenitentia est in Ecclesia, hinc
fieri ut juventus and plebs eo leviores reddantur ad omne malum. Pudor and
dedecus abeunt, homines efferuntur, redduntur (ut Paulus conqueritur) Omnino
impoenitentes; dedunt se libidini, omnique vanitati; denique vita ista
petulanti atque perdita satiari nullo modo possunt. Idem. p. 189. Si crassiora
delicta severiore poenitentia compensarentur, ut sanctus docet Apostolus, utque
in sancto atque salutari usu fuit in Ecclesiis veteribus been constitutis:
Major inde apud omnes Dei Filios peccatorum fuga and detestatio, majorque vitae
Christian Zelus existeret, quam proh dolor! hodie apud nos deprehendimus. Vide
and Buceri Epistolam ad Calvinum, in Epistola Calvini. page 370 and 371.


That because there were neither Censures, nor Corrections, nor Penances, nor
Excommunications in the Church, even for the greatest Crimes, the People and
Youth, did commit all manner of Sins: That no Person was restrained by shame,
and that Men became proud and altogether impenitent: That if the more odious
Sins, were expiated by Penance and a reasonable severity, as St. Paul enjoins,
and as it was anciently practiced, there would be less Corruption and more Zeal
in the Church.

These were the Sentiments of many Doctors in the last Age; they saw that the
want of Order and Discipline, was going to bring Libertinism into the Church.
But yet their endeavors were not altogether useless. Some Churches drew
considerably nearer to the Apostolical Institution, and there are some where
Discipline is not yet quite Abolished: They still make use of some part of
those means prescribed by the Gospel for the Correction of Manners: They do not
admit all Persons indifferently to the Sacrament: They retain the use of
Public Penances, and even, in some places, of Excommunication. But yet there
are still many things wanting in the Order and Government of those Churches, as
will appear by comparing their present practice with that of the Primitive
Church, and with the Canons of the Ancient Discipline. I do not pretend that in
this matter the practice of the first Christians ought to be copied in every
thing, but certainly in many points we ought to conform to it.

If we examine in what manner Discipline is administered now a days, we may
observe several Defects in it which are pretty considerable. For instance we
shall find, Churches where Excommunication is used about Matters of no great
importance; where that which is called Excommunication, is rather a civil
Sentence or Punishment, than an Ecclesiastical Censure, and where, not the
Pastors of the Church, but civil Judges Excommunicate. Another common Fault is,
that Discipline is exercised only upon two or three sorts of Sinners;
Fornicators and Notorious Blasphemers are indeed severely proceeded against,
but a great many persons are suffered in the Church, who have nothing of
Christianity in their Deportment; such as Drunkards, idle People and several
other Sinners; whom the divine Laws subject as much to the rigor of Discipline,
as Adulterers. It would be altogether Necessary to use Discipline against those
who enter into Marriage only to conceal their shame, and yet in most Churches
no satisfaction is demandded of such People: This is a matter of very great
moment. There is no sufficient care taken, to be satisfied about the Sincerity
of Sinners Repentance, when they are to be restored to the peace of the Church.
The Apostolical Precept about avoiding all familiar intercourse with Scandalous
Sinners, is out of use. By all this we may see, that few Churches can boast a
pure Discipline. But supposing that true Discipline might be found in some
places, yet how many defects do creep into the best constituted Churches,
either through the stubborness of Sinners, the opposition of corrupt
Magistrates, or through the fault and carelessness of Pastors? The best Laws are
good for nothing when they are not observed, so that whether those, who ought
to exercise Discipline for the giving a stop to Scandals, do it not; or whether
they have not the power to do it* it is still true that Corruption proceeds
from the want of Discipline.

What must we say then of those Churches, where Discipline is wholly unknown?
where neither Church nor Pastors have any Authority to govern or inspect, where
Ministers dare not exclude any one from the Sacrament, but admit all Persons
indifferently to the Holy Communion; which Abuse would have been thought an
unheard of Profanation in the Primitive Church; and where all public Penances
are out of Doors? I say nothing of Excommunication; if any Man should propose
the restoring of it, his design would be looked upon in many places as an
unpardonable Crime: And the strangest thing of all, is, that this want of
Discipline, is to be found in Churches, which acknowledge the Scripture for the
rule of Religion; and that there are Divines, who instead of promoting the
re-establishment of Discipline, oppose it, and maintain that none are to be
debarred from the Sacrament; who cannot endure the very Name of
Excommunication, and who pretend that where the Magistrate punishes Vice, there
is no need of any other Discipline. Those Divines have not the greater number
on their side, but their Opinion prevails, because it favors Policy and
Licentiousness.

We are to impute to this fatal remisness, the looseness and irregularity of the
Manners Christians. I need not insist more upon this, for every one is sensible
of it. Good Order keeps Men in Duty, but where there is no Order, Vice must of
necessity bear sway. What should restrain People? Excepting some general
Admonitions which are delivered in Sermons every Person is left to himself, and
lives as he thinks fit. Private Men are not bound to give an account of their
Conduct to any Body. Those who lead the most Un-christian Life, Sweaters,
Covetous, Profane, Lewd and Intemperate Persons, all sorts of People, live
peaceably in the Church, they are reputed Members of it, they are mingled among
true Christians, they enjoy with them the same Spiritual Privileges, at least
in all outward appearance, and they are admitted to the same Sacraments. As
long as things are in this state; we must not hope to see any abatement of
Corruption.

But that nothing may be omitted which may contribute to the clearing of this
matter, it is necessary to answer some Objections,

1. Against the restoring of Discipline, some say, (which was objected in the
last Age) that it is sufficient for the Edification of the Church; that the
Gospel should be Preached in it, since that is the ordinary mean which God has
appointed to procure the Conversion and the Salvation of Men. The Gospel no
doubt is sufficient, to teach us all that is necessary to be known in Religion;
but it is not true, that God makes use only of the Preaching of the Gospel, for
the Salvation of Men: For he uses other Means besides, as for instance the
Sacraments; and those means, among which Discipline is to be reckoned, are
prescribed by the Gospel it self, so that whosoever submits to the Gospel, must
likewise submit to that Order we speak of. But further, the Gospel barely
Preached and known is not sufficient to Salvation; nothing but the practice of
the Gospel can save a Man, and it is to little purpose to Preach it, if the
Manners of Christians are not regulated, and if Discipline is not used to that
end, as a Mean appointed of God. As to Preaching it will be shown in the next
Chapter, that Men ascribe more efficacy to it than it has, and that there is a
mistake in the Opinion which they commonly entertain of it.

2. Those who are for Mystical Devotion and Piety will certainly say, That
Discipline is not essential to Religion, that it is a matter of external Order,
and that external things are useful only to carnal and imperfect Christians.
But I desire those who have such Opinions, to speak more reverently of an Order
of which God is the Author, and which the Apostles have so expressly
recommended. It cannot be thought that the Apostles, who did abolish the
Mosaical Ceremonies, would at the same time have burdened the Church with
needless Laws, or that they would have interposed Christ's Authority, for the
observation of an Order, which had not been necessary. They are desired to
consider besides, that Men have Bodies as well as Souls, that among a great
multi^^le there are many Persons of a gross Understanding, who cannot be
restrained but by external Laws, and that it is absurd to pretend, that Men can
be so Spiritualized, as to need no longer outward Aids to Piety. But it is a
gross Error to look upon Discipline, as an Order purely external: For properly
speaking it is an Order altogether Spiritual. Discipline does not touch either
Men's Bodies or their Estates, it uses only Spiritual means, and it is
efficacious no farther, than as it operates upon the Heart and Conscience.

3. But others will cast the Objection I have now Confuted into this form, they
will say, That in external things, among which Discipline is to be ranked,
Churches are at liberty to Regulate themselves as they think good. I grant that
Churches have that Liberty in indifferent things, which are not appointed by a
Divine Authority, but this cannot be applied to the Matter in hand. An
Establishment of Divine Institution cannot be reckoned among things
indifferent. Do we look upon the Sacraments as indifferent Ceremonies, which we
are not bound to observe, under pretense that they are but External Rites and
Ordinances? Churches indeed have a Liberty where there is no Law, though still
that Liberty is to be wisely and discreetly used, for fear of Confusion; but
when God has settled an Order, Churches are not at liberty to choose another, to
make new Laws and to set up a new Form of Government. Such a Liberty would be
mere Unruliness, and a criminal and sac^^egious Presumption. This would be the
way to multiply Sects and Religions infinitely.

4. The same Answer may serve to Refute those, who to justify the Practice of
those Churches, which do not observe the form of Discipline used in the
Primitive. Church, make a distinction between Discipline and the manner of
exercising it. They own that Discipline is necessary, and that there ought to
be Order in the Church; but they think that the way of exercising Discipline
may vary, according to Time, Place, and other Circumstances. This Distinction
may be received, when the Case is only about some indifferent Circumstances,
but it is alleged without Reason when the question is concerning the substance
or the Essence of the thing it self. The Disorder we complain of, is, that what
is essential in Discipline has been taken away, to substitute in lieu of it,
another Order, and to set up a new Discipline of which the Apostles did not
speak a word. Now that which is most essential in Discipline, and which is not
observed in most Churches, is this, That Scandalous Sinners are not to be
suffered in the Church; and yet they are suffered: That they are to be warned
and reproved in private, and even in public; this is seldom done, and in some
Places it is never done: That Christians ought to separate themselves from
those who live disorderly; and this is not observed: That upon certain
occasions, they are to be cut off from the Body of the Faithful; but Pastors
dare not so much as mention this: That the Administration of Discipline belongs
to Pastors, that they ought to preside, proceed and judge in all emergent
Cases; the Scripture gives them that Right, and ascribes to them those Offices;
but they have been divested of them, new Political Bodies have been Erected, in
which there is but one Churchman, or two for form's sake, who often have
neithe Vote nor Authority in them. It is of Divine Right that Sinners should
give real Proofs of their Repentance, as for Instance, by making Restitution,
by Reconciliations, by acknowledging their Fault; but this is not now required
of them; nay, in some Churches it is not so much as enquired into. It is
against all the Laws of Discipline, that none should be excluded from the Holy
Communion, and yet in most Places this is not regarded. Lastly, it is an
Apostolical Order and Practice, That Sinners should not be received to the
Peace of the Church, but after they have fitted themselves for it, by a
sincere, and if the Case requires, by a public Repentance; but now adays
those ancient Rules of Discipline are abolished.

After all this, can it be said that no alteration has happened in the essence
of Discipline, but only in the manner of it? Censures, Suspensions,
Excommunication, and the Authority of Pastors are taken away, the Government
appointed by the Scripture is overturned, another and quite different Form is
brought into the room of it; and yet People will say, that the Question is not
about the thing it self, but the manner* It is not sufficient to have any kind
of Order; the Order which God has prescribed, and no other, ought to be
observed. Some Circumstances may be varied according to the necessities of
Churches, but the substance of the thing it self is unalterable.

5. Many are of Opinion, that the Authority of the Magistrate supplies that want
of Discipline, and that this way is by much preferrable to the other. I
confess, that the Punishments inflicted by the Magistrate upon Scandalous
Livers are of great use; that Magistrates who use their Authority to suppress
Vice are very commendable, and that Discipline is of much greater force, when
it is supported by the Authority of Civil Powers. But still the Divine
Institution is to be preserved entire; it does neither belong to the
Magistrate, nor to any Power to alter that which God has Commanded, and to
deprive the Church of her Right. After all, the Discipline of the Magistrate is
not the Discipline of the Church; these are two distinct things and of a quite
different Nature. The Magistrate uses external and corporal Punishments; Fines,
Imprisonments, Banishments, Force, etc. These Methods are certainly useful,
they may terrify Sinners, and in some respects keep them in Awe and Duty: But
besides this, it is necessary to work upon the Heart, and to bind the
Conscience by those Methods which Discipline uses, or else it is to be feared,
that we shall only make Hypocrites, and that Men will abstain from Evil more
out of the fear of Punishment, and upon temporal Considerations than from
motives of Conscience.

Nay there are People, who if they had nothing to fear but a Fine, or some Days
Imprisonment, would gladly purchase at that rate the liberty of sinning, and
fancy that, provided, satisfaction be made to the Magistrate, there is no more
to be done for the clearing of their Conscience. Besides, what an disorderly
thing is it, that an Offender who is prosecuted, fined, and imprisoned by the
Magistrate, should still be treated like a Member of the Church, and admitted
to the Holy Sacrament? The Magistrate's Authority is therefore a very
efficacious Mean to promote the Glory of God, when it is joined with
Ecclesiastical Discipline; but to think that Civil Laws are sufficient to
Regulate Manners and to reclaim Sinners, is a Conceit almost as unreasonable,
as it would be ridiculous, to proceed against Robbers, or the other Disturbers
of the public Peace, only by Spiritual Punishments. Let no Man then confound
those things which God has set asunder.

6. It is farther said, That these Rules of Discipline were only for a time,
and that the times are altered. But how can it be proved, that the Laws of
Discipline were made only for a time? Is there any ground for this either in
the Scripture, or in the Nature of those Laws? Are the Laws of Discipline like
those of Moses, which do no longer bind us? Did the Apostles make this
distinction? Did St. Paul say upon this Subject as he did in another Case, 1
Cor.
I only give my judgment; I have no Commandment of the Lord? Things, and that
Order ought to be conformable to the Laws of the Apostles. Or else there will
be, as in fact we see there are as many different Customs and Disciplines, as
there are Kingdoms, States, Provinces, nay, Towns and Churches.

7. It is commonly objected; That the Zeal of the Primitive Christians is
extinct, that Men are now very Corrupt, and that it would be impossible to
bring them to a submission to the Discipline of the Church. But that very thing
that Men are corrupt proves the Necessity of Discipline. Order is never more
necessary, than when all is in Confusion, 1 Timothy I. 9.
St. Paul says, that the Law is not made for a righteous Man, but for the
Lawless and Disobedient. Discipline seems more necessary now, than it was in
the first Centuries, because then Persecution kept Corruption out of the
Church, but when the Church is in peace, Vices and Scandals do infallibly
multiply; and then it is, that good Discipline is of excellent use.

But then it is said, that it would be impossible to restore it, considering
the Disposition Men are now in. I confess this design would meet with
opposition. Those who go about to restore Order and suppress Licentiousness,
must still encounter difficulties; but yet this might be compassed if Princes
and Magistrates did not oppose it. If all the Pastors did set about it with a
Zeal accompanied with Prudence and Gentleness, if they did carefully instruct
the People concerning the necessity of Discipline, and if they did apply
themselves to the civil Powers with equal Vigor and Respect, they would carry
the point at Last. After all, the People are not in a worse disposition than
the Heathens were in, before the Apostles preached the Gospel to them; and
there are Christian Princes and Magistrates who have Piety and Zeal. If then
the Heathens of old could be brought under the Discipline of Christ, in the
sight of Heathen Magistrates, should we despair of subjecting Christians to it?
The instance of those Churches where Discipline is observed, at least in part,
and where Excommunication and public Penances are in use, shows that there is
no impossibility to succeed in this design. If the thing was impossible, God
would never have commandded it.

8. In the last place here is an Objection which is commonly urged with great
force, and which seems to have much weight in it. It is said, that we have
reason to fear that Discipline would bring Tyranny into the Church, and that
those who govern it, would then assume too much Authority. Let us see whether
this Fear is well grounded.

And First, if we suppose this Principle, that Discipline is instituted of God,
and that the Apostles did commit it to the Church and her Governors, which I
think has been fully demonstrated, will it not be a kind of Blasphemy, to say;
that Discipline is not to be suffered, lest Pastors should become Tyrants?
Would not this reflect upon our Savior and his Apostles, as if they had
established a dangerous Order, which is apt to introduce Tyranny? At this rate
the Apostles and the Primitive Christians, did incroach upon the Liberty of the
People, and the Authority of Princes. Every Christian will abhor this
Consequence, and yet it results naturally from the opinion of those who reject
Discipline for fear of Tyranny. Besides, supposing that Christ has instituted
the Order we speak of, can we thus argue against it, without shaking off his
Yoke? But Men do not consider this. They fancy that every thing that is granted
to the Church is granted to her Governors, whereas they should remember that it
is paid or yielded to Christ, whose Right it is, and who cannot be despoiled of
it, without Sacrilege. Here we might retort the Charge upon those who bring it.
They talk of Tyranny, and is it not an intolerable piece of Tyranny, to oppose
a Divine Law, and to debar the Church and her Governors of the enjoyment of
those Rights, which God had given them?

But to come closer to the Objection. Nothing can be feared but one of these
two Inconveniences; either an Empire over Consciences, or some Prejudice to the
Public Tranquillity, and to the Authority of civil Powers.

As to the first of these two Inconveniences, there is no great reason to fear
it; since the Apostles, who so expressly recommend Discipline to Pastors, forbid
them at the same time to assume a Dominion over Consciences. Provided
Discipline is used only in those cases, and in that Manner which the Scripture
appoints, and as it was practiced by the first Christians 1 Pet. V. 2. 2 Cor I.
14.
nothing like this is to be feared from it. The Discipline we speak of, does
not meddle with Points of Faith and so Fear in this respect is groundless. As
to those Cases which concern Manners, Injustice can hardly be committed about
them. The Church does not Judge of secret and unknown Facts. She only proceeds
against Notoriously Scandalous and Impenitent Sinners, and she receives them,
as soon as they express their Repentance; And is there any thing of Tyranny or
danger in this? It is proper to observe here especially with reference to
Excommunication, which is thought the severest part of Discipline, that when
the Church proceeds to that extremity, she does not, properly speaking, act by
way of Authority, as if she had an absolute power to punish a Sinner and to cut
him off from her Body: But that Sinner has already by his Life cut himself off
from the Communion of Christ, he is no longer a Member of the Church, so that
the Church only declar^s that, which is done and determined already, though she
should not declare it.

Neither is there any Cause to fear that the Public Peace should be disturbed
by the exercise of Discipline. On the contrary, Society will be the better
Regulated for it. For Discipline does not touch Civil Matters. Excommunication
it self, does not hinder a Man from being still a Member of the Commonwealth,
nor that all the Duties of Justice and Humanity should be discharged toward
him.

As for the Authority of Civil Powers, it is no ways injured by this, as
evidently appears from the first Christians exercising Discipline openly in the
fight of the Heathen Magistrates, without any opposition from them. Christ did
not come into the World to Erect a Temporal Kingdom, nor to draw Men off from
their Submission to the Authority of Kings and Magistrates. It is the Principle
of a true Christian, Mat XXII.
To render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things
which are God's. This Principle will not deceive a Man, and as long as we
adhere to it, all things will be in order. Religion is so far from giving any
just umbrage to Princes, that on the contrary it strengthens their Authority.
Submission to the higher Powers is recommended by the Apostle in the most
earnest manner. The Christians of the first Ages, who were very strict
observers of Discipline, distinguished themselves by their Loyalty to Princes.
Nay, it is observable, that their Discipline which was so severe against
Sinners, was as strict against those who were wanting in the Fidelity and
Respect due to Superiors, witness that Cannon, Can. Apost. 84.
which enjoins the Deposition of those Bishops and Clergymen, who should offer
an Affront to the Prince or his Officers.

Whosoever will take the pains to weigh this Matter, will acknowledge that
Discipline is a distinct thing from the Civil Power. Each of these has its
bounds and limits. The Church does not touch the Body nor Civil Matters, and it
is not the Magistrate's business, to regulate things relating to Conscience and
Salvation. Indeed if Magistrates imagine, that they have a right to Govern the
Church as they think fit, and that they hold the same Rank in it, which they
hold in the Civil Society, so that the Ministers of Religion are but their
Officers; Discipline may seem to them to lessen their Authority: But let those
who entertain such thoughts, see how they can reconcile them with the Gospel,
and with the Nature of the Christian Religion.

Notwithstanding all this it will be said, that Churchmen have been known to
usurp a Dominion over Consciences and over Kings. It is true, Churchmen have
abused their Authority, but because a thing has been abused, is it therefore to
be abolished? Wise Men will rather say, that things ought to be restored to
their natural State and to their lawful Use. Else the whole Authority of Kings
and Magistrates might be pulled down, and we might argue thus. Monarchical
Governments liable to great Inconveniences, Kings have been Tyrants and
Usurpers, therefore there must be no more Kings. Magistrates and Judges have
been unjust, Covetous, Cruel, and therefore no Magistrates are to be endured.
Would not this Argument be extravagant and impious? And yet the like Argument
is used against Discipline. In Church as well as in State Government, there
will be always some inconveniency to be feared; this Evil is almost
unavoidable, there being no Form of Government which the Malice of Men may not
abuse: But those Abuses are without comparison, a less Evil than Anarchy, which
is the most dangerous State of all.

But let us clear the Matter of Fact, upon which the Objection I am now
Confuting, is founded: It is supposed, that Discipline did introduce Tyranny;
but on the contrary, it was upon the Ruins of Discipline, that Tyranny was
erected. This is known to all those, who have any knowledge of Antiquity. When
did Bishop and Clergymen usurp that excessive Authority, over men's Estates,
Persons and Consciences? It was when the Observation of the Ancient Discipline
was slackned, when Discipline began to wear out of use, when Sinners, and
especially great Men, were exempted for Money, when that which should have been
transacted by the whole Church, was referred only to the Clergy, and when
public Confession was changed into a private one. It was by these means, and
not by the due Exercise of Discipline, that Churchmen made themselves Masters
of all.

What we ought to do then is this, First, to enquire what is of Divine
Institution in Discipline, and to restore that; in the next place to consider
what the Salvation of Sinners and the Honor of the Church require, and what
was good and edifying in the practice of the Primitive Church, in order to
conform to it; and lastly, to provide by good Laws, that no Man may exceed the
bounds of his Calling; particularly, that in restoring to the Clergy their
lawful Authority, all just measure may be taken, to prevent their abusing it.
If Christian Princes are bound to preserve the Rights of the Church, they ought
likewise to take care that nothing be done against their own Authority, and to
punish those who oppose it, or who disturb the Civil Society, whether
Ecclesiastics or Laymen. This we are to treat of in another place.

Besides, when we speak for the re-establishment of Discipline, we mean that
Pastors, should be subjected to it as well as their Flocks, and that if there
is an Order in the Church to regulate the Manners of Christians, there should
be one also to regulate the Clergy, and to lay strict Obligations on them to
discharge their Duty in all its parts; And that according to the Ancient
Practice, Discipline ought to be more severe, against the Ecclesiastics who
fail in their Office, than against the People. But as we have complained in
this Chapter of the want of Discipline, with Relation to the Church in general,
so we are going to show in the next, that this want is neither less observable,
nor less fatal, in those things, which concern the Governors of the Church.

I conclude with saying that in Order to remedy the Corruption of Manners among
Christians, it is absolutely Necessary to restore the use of Discipline. This
is what has been and is still heartily wished for, by many Persons of eminent
Learning and Piety, and it is that which I desire all those who have a Zeal for
the Glory of God, to take into their serious Consideration.

CAUSE III. The Defects of the Clergy.
IN searching after the Causes of the Decay of Piety, we cannot but enquire,
whether Corruption does not proceed from the Pastors and Governors of the
Church. Pastors are appointed to oppose the Progress of Vice, and to be public
Fountains of Instruction, Edification and good Example; so that in truth their
Ministry is of most excellent use, when duly exercised. But when Vice reigns,
when Scandals multiply; that general Corruption is, if not a certain Proof, at
least a strong Presumption, that there is some fault in Pastors.

If we would be satisfied about this matter, we need but reflect upon the
Nature of their Office, and upon their way of discharging it. This is what I
design to enquire into in this Chapter: In order to which, I shall consider. 1.
What Functions and Duties are annexed to the Office of Pastors, And 2. What
Qualifications are requisite in them to discharge it worthily.



1. It would be needless to prove that the Office of Pastors obliges them to
instruct the People and to preach the Gospel, for this is beyond all Question.
It will be fitter to observe, that the fruit of public Instructions delivered
in Sermons, depends upon two things; the Matters treated of, and the Way of
proposing them; so that the Faults committed in Sermons are either in the
Things themselves, or in the Manner of handling them

1. The Matters handled in Sermons, are either of Doctrine or Morality. What
has been said in the first Chapter of this Treatise, may serve to discover to
us the Defects in Preaching, with relation to these two Heads. Those who preach
the Gospel do not sufficiently instruct the People, neither in the Fundamental
Doctrines, nor in the Duties of Religion: And as Catechizing is properly
designed for the explication of these Truths and Duties; I think Ignorance and
Corruption chiefly proceed from this, that in most Churches, things are not
well ordered, with reference to Catechizing. They are neither frequent enough,
nor so proper for Instruction as they should be. Besides, Catechizing is almost
every where neglected, if not despised. The common Notion is, that Catechisms
are only for Children and for the meaner sort of People. The Function of a
Catechist, which was anciently so considerable in the Church, is looked upon
now as a Function of no great importance, and it is usually committed to
Persons of the least Knowledge and Experience.

These Faults might easily be remedied. One of the most useful Establishments
in Churches, would be to increase the Number of Catechisms, and to appoint them
instead of the Sermon. But to render them more useful and more frequented, it
would be necessary to establish two sorts of them. In those of the first sorts
the Elements of Religion should be explained in an easy and familiar manner,
for the benefit of Children and of the less-knowing part of Christians. The
other should be for those who have attained a higher degree of Knowledge, and
in these, Matters that had been proposed but generally before, should be more
fully and exactly handled. But if it be thought that an Establishment of this
Nature, and that the multiplying of Catechisings, might meet with Difficulty
and Obstructions, it would be necessary at least, for the instruction of great
numbers of Persons, who never assist at those Exercises, that Ministers should
he obliged to preach upon the same Subjects, which are commonly treated in
Catechisms.

As for Sermons, the Church would reap more benefit from them, if Preachers did
always show true Judgment in the choice of the Matters they handle. We must not
think that all sorts of Subjects are instructive alike, and that in order to
Preach the Gospel, it is enough to speak of God in a Sermon, and to take a Text
out of Scripture. Every Subject ought to be proposed and pressed according to
its importance. To insist upon Matters of lesser Moment, whilst those which it
most concerns Christians to be Informed about are neglected, is to swerve from
the true intendment of Preaching. But because all Preachers have not the
Capacity to make this Choice, it would be fitting, that part of the Matter of
their Discourses, should be appointed and prescribed to them by a Law. For when
they are tied to no Rule, when they are at liberty to Preach upon any Subject,
which they think fit to choose, it happens that many instead of handling the
most important things in Religion, and of consulting the present State and
Necessities of their Flocks, apply themselves to various Subjects which are of
no great Edification.

Preachers for the most part, consult only their own Inclination in the choice
of their Matter; and when they pitch upon a Subject, it is rather because it
pleases them, and because they apprehend a facility in treating it, than out of
a regard to the necessities of their Congregations. Those who are fond of
Mysteries and Allegories, apply their time and studies to the Expounding of the
Prophecies, and to the unfolding of the Types of the Old Testament. Those who
are given to Disputing, fill their Sermons with nothing else but Controversy.
And the same may be said of Speculative Divines, who are conversant in the
Fathers and History, they entertain the People with those things which are the
ordinary Subject of their Meditations and Studies. I do not mean, that such
things ought never to be spoken of; they may sometimes be touched upon,
provided, this be done judiciously: But they have a sorry Notion of Religion
and Preaching, who make those Matters their main Business, and fancy they have
entirely fulfilled all the parts of the Gospel Ministry, when they have
Preached upon Types, or Controversy.

What I have now said, may be applied to the choice of Texts. 2 Timothy III. 16.
All Scripture indeed, as St. Paul says, is profitable for Instruction; that
Divine Book contains nothing but what is useful; but yet the various usefulness
of the several parts of Scripture, is to be distinguished, and it must be owned
that some Places are more useful and instructive than others. Some difference
is to be made between those Books and Chapters, which explain the Doctrine of
Redemption, the Design of Christ's coming into the World, or the Duties of a
Christian Life; and those which serve only to acquaint us with the Order of
Times, and to confirm the certainty of History. These last have their use,
since the Truth of History is one of the main Proofs of the Truth of Religion;
but those Places are more useful which Treat of what we are to believe or to do
in order to Salvation. It is of another sort of importance, to Explain the
Gospel, than to Preach upon the Book of Joshua or Ruth, or upon some Places of
the Prophets. I am not ignorant that some have thought, that the Scripture is
equally Rich every where; that all Doctrines may be drawn from all Texts; that
those Chapters and Verses which seem the most barren, and where there appears
nothing extraordinary, contain Mysteries and Treasures which might exhaust even
the Meditations of Angels; but this Conceit is so absurd and repugnant to
Sense, that I do not think it worth my while to Confute it.

Morals being so Essential a part of Religion, should be very particularly
insisted upon by Preachers, and yet few do it; so that Morality of all things
is that which is the most superficially handled in the greatest part of
Sermons. This Fault in Preachers proceeds from several Causes. Some have a
Prejudice against Morality, and think it ought not to be insisted on.

Others who are conceited with vain Learning, imagine that to Preach Morals,
argues but an ordinary measure of Parts, and little skill in Divinity, and that
it becomes them better to soar after high Speculations, and to dive into the
Mysteries of Faith and of the most sublime Theology. This Custom of insisting
more upon Doctrine than Morals, proceeds also from another Cause, which is,
that in this last Age Divines were fain to be continually Explaining and
Disputing; and so the same Method has been followed ever since.

I am apt to think besides, that many Divines neglect Morality, because the
treating of it is more difficult, than the explaining Doctrinal Matters. Let
those supercilious and speculative Divines say what they will, the right
handling of Morality is the hardest thing in Preaching. It is easy to explain
a Text, or a point of Doctrine; and a Man must be very meanly gifted, if with
the help of a Commentary or a Commons-Place, he is not able to do the feat, and
to furnish out his hour. But to Preach Morals is quite another thing. I confess
that there is a way of Preaching Morality which requires no great pains. If Men
content themselves with delivering Moral Sayings concerning Vice and Virtue,
this may be done without much labor. But when a Preacher pursues true
Morality, when he is to master the Hearts of Men, to reform the Manners of a
whole Congregation, to encounter the Inclinations of his Hearers, and to make
them renounce their Passions and Prejudices; then it is that he meets with many
and great difficulties; this is an inexhaustible Spring of Labor and
Mediation, and a task which few Preachers care (...) take upon them.

In Religion, Doctrine should never be separated from Morality, nor one of
these preferred before the other. But yet it is necessary to insist more upon
Morality than upon Doctrine, not only because the design of our whole Religion
is to make us good Men, but also because Morality cannot effectually be taught,
without being much dwelt upon. It is only by enlarging on matters, and entering
into many Particulars, that the two ends of Morality are to be attained, which
are instructing Men in their Duty, and persuading them to the practice of it.

Morality is of a vast extent, as may appear by considering how many Duties are
comprised under these three Heads of Christian Morals, Piety, Justice, and
Temperance. Besides these Duties which are common to all Men, there are some
Particular ones relating to the different Conditions, Callings, Ages, and
States which Men are in. And how many things are there to be considered upon
all these Heads? This is not all, for these Duties vary infinitely, by reason
of the diversity of Circumstances. There are almost as many different
Dispositions as there are Persons among a great Multitude of Men who are
addicted to the same Vice; there are hardly two who are vicious in the same
degree and manner. It is therefore requisite that Preachers should descend into
particulars, and that they should so characterize Duties, Virtues and Vices,
that every one may know himself in the Description.

And yet this relates only to bare Instruction. Now if in the next place we
intend to engage Men to the Practice of these Duties, there new Difficulties
will arise, and no good Success can be expected but from assiduous Care and
constant Labor. There are in Man's Heart, so many different Dispositions and
Motions, so many Illusions and Prejudices, so many Windings and Artifices, that
a very particular application is required for us to insinuate our selves into
it. When the Truths and Doctrines of Religion are to be Taught, things need not
be so minutely handled, and there is no occasion to use such mighty Endeavors;
nay, the being very particular may be a fault. He that would Instruct, so he is
clear, should rather be short than prolix. The Hearers do easily apprehend the
Truths which are proposed to them, and the most Corrupt Men are able to discern
Truth from Error; a Libertine will find who is in the right or in the wrong, in
a Dispute. But it is not so easy a thing to touch the Heart, or to conquer
inveterate Habits. What Tully says in his Dialogue of the Orator, deserves to
be inserted here, it is this, Cicero de Orat. Lib. 2. Non enim sicut
Argumentum, simul atque positum est, arripitur, alterumque and tertium
poscitur; ita misericordiam aut invidiam, aut iracundiam simulatque intuleris,
possis Commovere. Argumentam enim ipsa ratione Confirmat; quae simul atque
emissa est adhaerescit. Illud autem genus Orationis, non cognitionem judicis,
sed perturbationem requirit, quam consequi nisi multa, and varia, and copiosa,
and simili Contentione orationis nemo potest. Quare qui aut breviter, aut
summisse dicunt, docere judicem possunt, commovere non possunt.
Passions are not to be excited in a moment, as a Proof does presently persuade
so soon as it is proposed. A Proof is confirmed by Reasons, and Reasons clearly
set out, make an impression immediately; but when we intend to raise the
Passions, the success does not so much depend upon the Conviction, as upon the
Perturbation of the Mind; Oratory cannot have its effect then, without
Prolixity, Variety, Copiousness and Vehemence of Discourse. Those therefore who
speak briefly and calmly; are fit to Instruct, but not to move.

From these Reflections it appears, that the Method of those Preachers, who are
large upon the Explication of Doctrines, and succinct upon Morals, is directly
contrary to the true way of Preaching, and that those do very ill understand
what Morality is, who either despise it, or look upon it, as the easiest thing
in Preaching.

We may likewise apprehend from what has been said, what are the most ordinary
Faults of Preachers when they Treat of Morals. I shall observe Three of them.
Their Morality is too general, it is defective, and it is sometimes false.

1. Many Preachers are too general in handling Morality. This is the Head which
is the most slightly touched upon. They spend the greater part of their Sermons
in explaining the Sense of a Text, they sift all the words, and examine all the
Circumstances of it, with the utmost Nicety. In a word, they drain the Subject.
But when they come to the Application, they content themselves with two or
three general Uses; they address to their Auditory some loose Exhortations to a
good Life; even when they are to speak upon a Moral Subject, they confine
themselves for the most part to general Considerations: Nothing is
Particularized, or treated with the necessary exactness Now Generalities are of
no great use in Matters of Morality. To say in general Terms, that Men ought to
be good, and to declaim against Sensuality, or Covetousness, is that which will
convince no Man. It is not bawling or sending Sinners to Hell, that is likely
to win upon them. If should be distinctly shown, what it is to be a good Man;
Virtues and Vices should be Characterized, and their various Kinds and Degrees
observed; particular Rules ought to be given to the Hearers, they ought to be
furnished with necessary Motives and Directions; we are to Confute their
Mistakes, and to obviate their Objections and Excuses. Till we come to this,
Preaching will be attended with little Success.

2. The Moral Discourses of Preachers are often defective; for besides that
they handle Morality in a superficial Manner, there are some essential Articles
which they seldom or never speak of, among which we may reckon Restitution. The
Moralities of Preachers turn almost altogether upon Four or Five Heads, they
attach only some of the grosser Sins, such as Blasphemies, Uncleanness, and
such other Vices. But this is to confine themselves, to the first Elements of
Piety and Morality. True Morality goes a great deal further. Piety does not
only banish the more heinous Sins; it does besides fill the Heart with a
sincere love of Virtue; it softens and rectifies the Inclinations, it produces
in a Man, Gentleness, Humility, Patience, Resignation to the Will of God,
Divine Love, Tranquillity under all Events, Charity toward other Men, and a
Zeal for Justice and Goodness. This is the main of Piety, this is what should
be incessantly laid before Christians, to make them apprehend the Extent and
Perfection of the Morals of the Gospel.

3. The Moral Discourses of Preachers are False. 1. When they are too remiss;
2. When they are too severe, And 3. When they are Contradictory. Their Morality
is too remiss, when it does not propose all the Duties of Holiness in their
full latitude, when it flatters Sinners, or does not sufficiently awaken their
Consciences. It is over-severe, when it raises groundless Scruples in Men's
minds; when it represents as a Sin, that which is not really so; or when it
makes a necessary Duty of any thing, which may be omitted without danger.
Preachers likewise over-do things, in the Pictures they draw for Virtues and
Vices. If they are to speak of Covetousness or forbidden Pleasure, they strive
to make of these the most hideous Pictures they can; they paint out a Covetous
or a Voluptuous Man as a Monster, they affect the most lively Descriptions and
Figures, and their Sermons are loaded with every thing that their Collections
afford upon the subject. But all this is only noise, and so much Breath spent
in vain. Such Morality does not hinder the Voluptuous or Covetous Man, from
pursuing his ordinary course, it is rather apt to harden him in it; because as
he does not see himself in the dismal Picture which is made of these Vices, so
he thinks himself free from them, or at least not very guilty of them. Lastly,
Preachers do sometimes deliver Contradictory Morals. Having not sufficiently
meditated upon the Principles of Religion and Morality, they run themselves
into Contradictions; they say one thing in one place, and the contrary in
another; they lay down Principles which destroy the Consequences they will draw
from them, or they draw Consequences which over-turn the Principles they have
laid down.

II. The Faults I have hitherto observed, relate to the Matter of Preaching;
those which are committed in the manner are not indeed so essential, but yet
they are important enough to deserve some notice here.

It is to no purpose to preach pure Doctrine and good Morality, if this is not
done in a proper way to instruct and to persuade. The most important Truths
lose their force in the Mouth of a Man, who either cannot speak of them in a
suitable manner, or expresses them obscurely. And so likewise the way of
exhorting and censuring, is often the reason why Exhortations and Censures
prove ineffectual. Either they are not accurate or convincing enough, or they
are Gold and Languid, or they are not seasoned with Prudence and Mildness; but
are a kind of Fire, which has more of Anger and Indiscretion, than of true Zeal
in it, and which offends more, than it affects or persuades the Hearers.

Diverse Considerations might be here insisted upon concerning the way of
Preaching; but I think what is most Material to be said on this Subject, may be
reduced to this one thing; that the manner of Preaching is not Simple and
Natural enough. The way of Preaching should correspond with the Design of
Religion and Sermons, which is to inform the Understanding, and to move the
Heart. This End is attained by those, who think and speak clearly and
naturally, when every thing, in Reasoning, Method, Style, and Exterior, is
regulated by Nature and true Sense. But it has been observed long ago, to
Preachers are particularly apt to fail in this respect. False and confused
Ideas, un-accurate Reasonings, strained or impertinent Reflections, forced and
unnatural Expressions, are almost become the Property of that Order of Men. One
would think that most Preachers take pains not to follow Nature; as if a Man
was too sooner in the Pulpit, but he must speak no longer like the rest of
Mankind, as if the part of a Preacher was something like that of a Prophet
among the Jews. Nay this is passed into a Proverb; so that odd Ways and
injudicious Reflections, are called Ways and Reflections of Preachers.

1. If Nature was consulted, and it men did consider the end of Preaching, they
would see in the first place, that the Method which is followed by many, in the
explaining of Scripture and the composing of Sermons, had need be reformed in
some respects, and that it does not agree so well as it should, with the
simplicity of the Gospel. For instance, why should Time be wasted in Exordiums
and Preliminaries? Why should a Preacher dwell upon the explaining of Words and
Phrases which every Body understands, or upon pressing the least Circumstances
of a Text? What signify those needless Digressions, those Objections which no
body thinks of, those citations and stories, which in some Countries fill up
Sermons, and so many other small Niceties, which clog these kind of Discourses.
All this might be let alone, without prejudice to public edification.

2. It is for want of Consulting Nature, that Preachers are obscure. Sometimes
the Obscurity of their Sermons arises from the things they speak of, when they
are obscure in themselves. But at other times this Obscurity proceeds, from
their not having distinct Ideas of the Subjects they treat. Their Style and
Language do also contribute much to make them dark. Some use Scholastical Words
and Terms of Art, which are Arabic to the People; others delight in figurative
and improper Expressions, which present false Ideas to the Mind. Now they might
avoid all these Faults, if they did not forsake Nature and Simplicity. But some
Preachers affect the saying new and singular things, and they would be sorry if
they had made use of simple and common Ideas, Reasonings and Expressions, which
yet are the clearest and the best.

3. False Eloquence proceeds from the same Source. Preachers commonly aim at
Eloquence; and it is to compass this End, that they take such pains in the
composing and delivery of their Sermons, and that they affect a Style, a
Pronunciation and Gestures, which become a Stage Player or a Profane Orator,
much better than a Minister of Jesus Christ. I might remark here, that this
affection of Eloquence, is not very suitable to the Spirit of Piety, which
should animate a Clergyman. but not to moralize upon this, I shall observe
that these Preachers miss their Mark, by making so much work, and by using such
mighty endeavors to hit it. True Eloquence, the force of a Discourse, an
elevated and sublime Style, consists in following Nature. Nothing admits of
greater vehemence and loftiness than the Subjects which Religion affords. Let a
Preacher be well accquainted with these, let him go about them in an easy and
natural way, but especially let him feel and be thoroughly affected with them;
and he needs not trouble himself about any other Helps; he will despise all the
false sparkling, and the vain ornaments of insipid and boyish Eloquence, and he
will not be capable of speaking like a Gramar Scholar, or a Declaimer. All
that which costs Preachers so much Labor, flights of Wit, refined Thoughts,
ingenuous Descriptions, polite Language, all that I say, is very mean. By such
things they may raise at most a vain Admiration, but they will never Instruct
nor Convert a Sinner. One Dram of good Sense is worth more than all that.

4. Some Preachers run into another Extreme, their way of Preaching is
neglected and course; they think to justify themselves, by saying, that they
are simple and popular, that they speak naturally and without Art. But they
swerve as much from Nature as the others, and as it is a Fault to be affected,
it is another to be flat, homely and barbarous: It is as much against Nature,
to use ridiculous and offensive Gestures, Tones and Ways, or to stand without
Motion or Action in the Pulpit, as it is to play the Declaimer there.

I might add other Considerations about the manner in which the Gospel ought to
be Preached, but I should engage too far in this Subject. We may judge now
whether Ignorance and Corruption, do not proceed from the Defects of those who
Preach the Gospel. The People have scarce any Notion of Religion, but what they
gather from Sermons. If Sermons then are not Instructive and Edifying, either
because all the Truths and Duties of Christianity not are proposed in them, or
because they are ill proposed, the People must of necessity be very much in the
dark.

I shall say one Word more concerning the Instruction which Pastors owe their
Flocks. Public Instructions, how useful soever they may be, are not
sufficient. The Edification of the Church requires, that upon certain
occasions, Pastors should likewise Instruct in Private. This necessity of
Private Instructions, may be proved by the following Arguments. 1. If there be
none but Public Instructions and Exhortations, what Instruction can a great
many Persons receive, who either do not frequent, or do not hearken to Sermons?
What will become of those who hear, but do not understand what they hear, or
who understand it, but forget it presently, and so do not practice it? 2. All
things cannot be said in Sermons, how particular soever they may be; yet still
many things remain untouched. Nay, there are Matters which a Preacher cannot
bring into the Pulpit. Can he enumerate all the Cases in which Injustice may be
committed, or Restitution is to be made? Can he specify those infinite Frauds
which are practiced in Men's several Callings and Trades? Can all Cases of
Conscience, about which the Hearers want Instruction, be Decided in a Sermon?
Dare we insist in the Pulpit upon the Head of Impurity? And may not this be one
of the Reasons why that Sin is so common? If Christians then have no
opportunity to be Instructed in Private about these Articles, they will be
ignorant with relation to them as long as they live. 3. In order to good
Instruction it is necessary, that the Teacher, and those who are Taught, should
communicate their Thoughts to one another. For the Hearers may have their
Doubts; they may sometimes be at a stand, by reason of something which they do
not know, or of some Difficulty which starts up in their Minds. Some have been
hearing Sermons for these Twenty or thirty Years, who yet entertain Scruples
and Doubts concerning the Fundamentals of Religiom. If such Persons receive no
other Information, they will not be moved by any thing, that is said in
Public, but they will retain their Scruples to their dying Day.

All this shows that private Instruction is a part of the Pastoral Care: And
the practice of it would certainly be very useful, not only for the Edification
of the People, but also to keep the Clergy from growing remiss, and to make
them more diligent in the discharge of their Office. For when they have nothing
to do but to Preach Sermons, it is much to be feared; considering Men's
Propension to Laziness, that they will become Negligent. It is therefore an
unhappiness, that private Instructions should be almost out of use, and that
there should be so little Communication about Religious Matters, between the
People and their Ministers. We have no Instruction remaining, but what is
delivered from the Pulpit; and that would not be sufficient, even though Sermons
were such as they ought to be. But when private Instructions are wanting, and
when Sermons are defective besides, it is impossible but that the greatest part
of Christians, being destitute of necessary Informations and Aids, must live in
Corruption.

II. The Second Function of Pastors, which should perhaps be named in the first
place, is the Conduct and Government of the Church. Upon this I observe. First,
That those do not understand the Nature of the Pastoral Office, who confine it
to Preaching. There was a time when Preaching was quite laid aside, and when
Churchmen did only perform Divine Service. But now adays in many Churches,
the whole Ministry is placed in the Business of Sermons, and the Ecclesiastics
are looked upon, not as Pastors, but Preachers; as Men whose Office it is upon
certain Days and Hours, to speak in the Church. Preaching is is without
dispute, a part of the Office of Pastors. But it is a great mistake to think,
that God has appointed them only to Preach; for they are entrusted besides with
the Government of the Church, and this part of their Employment is at least, as
essential as Preaching. It is remarkable, that the Scripture speaks of Pastors
in diverse Places, and that the Titles it gives them, and the Functions it
ascribes to them, relate chiefly to the Government of the Church. This is
employed in the Name of Bishops, Priests or Elders, Guides and Pastors: St. Paul
has writ concerning the Duties of the Ministry, if we examine what he says of
the Functions of that Charge, and of the Qualifications of those who are to be
admitted into it; we shall find that he is much larger upon the Government of
the Church, than upon Preaching. To this purpose, the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus may be consulted.

But further, all Churchmen are not called to Preaching. The Apostles
distinguish their Functions; they tell us, See 1 Cor. XII. 4, 5, 6. 28, 29, 30.
Act. VI. 2, etc. Romans XII. 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy V. 17.
That all are not Doctors, that all do not Interpret, that all do not
administer the Word, that all do not Teach and Exhort; that some are appointed
to Instruct, to Exhort, and to Expound the Scriptures, others to Govern, and
others to do works of Charity. Though we should suppose that there is nothing in
this, which relates to the extraordinary Gifts conferred upon the first
Ministers of the Gospel, and to the Order which was then observed; yet it is
plain, that these Places are to be understood, of the Gifts and Functions of
ordinary Pastors.

This is confirmed by the Practice of the Primitive Church. The principal and
the most general Function of Pastors then, was the Inspection and Governing of
the Church. Preaching was not neglected, but all Churchmen were not Preachers,
this Province was committed to those who were fit for it. Would to God this
Distinction was still observed! The Church would be better governed, and the
Gospel better Preached than it is. There are Talents requisite to Preach the
Gospel, which every Body has not, and others are necessary for the Conduct of
the Church; and all these Gifts seldom meet in one Person. If then no regard is
had to different Gifts and Functions if without distinction ever thing is
committed to one Person, it is visible that the Church will be ill Edified.
Besides that I have showed in the First Chapter of this Second Part, that it is
a dangerous Notion, which restrains the Ministry to Preaching But to remove
this Inconveniency it would be necessary, that a competent Number of
Ecclesiastics should be had in every Church.

1. To express my Thoughts more particularly concerning the Office of Pastors,
with relation to the Government of the Church; I observe, First, that
Discipline is worn out of use, as I have shown at large in a Chapter upon that
Subject. It is true, that this Defect is not wholly to be imputed to Pastors.
If they do not Govern the Church by a good Discipline, it is because they have
been deprived of their Authority. Many of them are sensible of this Disorder
and lament it: But what can they do when they Exercise their Ministry in Places
where their Hands are tied up, where they dare not refuse the Sacrament to an
Adulterer, and where they should bring themselves into great troubles, and
perhaps be Deposed, if they took upon them, to observe the Apostolical
Discipline? They are forced to confine themselves to Preaching, which when it
is not backed with Discipline, can never have that Effect which it would
produce in conjunction with it. There was nothing left to Pastors but what
could not be taken from them without abolishing the whole Ministry: All that
remains is only Preaching and Administering the Sacraments. And yet for all
that, a great part of the Clergy, may justly be charged with that Fault we
complain of, and with that Corruption of the People which is a consequence of
it; since there are those among them, who oppose the restoration of Discipline,
and look upon it as an indifferent Order; and others who are placed in
Churches, where some Form of Discipline is left, render the Exercise of it
ineffectual, either through Imprudence and excessive Severity, or through a
shameful Remisness, and a cowardly Indulgence.

2. Beside the Public, there is a Private Discipline, which consists in
Inspecting the Lives of Private Persons, in Visiting Families, in Exhortations,
Warnings, Reconciliations, and in all those other Cares, which a Pastor ought
to take of those over whom he is Constituted. For neither general Exhortations,
nor public Discipline can answer all the Occasions of the Church. There are
certain Disorders, which Pastors neither can, nor ought to repress openly, and
which yet ought to be remedied by them. In such Cases Private Admonitions are
to be used. The Concern of Men's Salvation requires this, and it becomes the
Pastoral Carefulness, to seek the the straying Sheep, and not to let the Wicked
perish for want of Warning. But these are Cares to which some Pastors do not so
much as think themselves obliged; they content themselves with Admonishing
Sinners from the Pulpit. There is very little Intercourse between Pastors and
those who are committed to their Charge. Private Persons live without being
accountable for their Conduct to any Body; and except they commit the greatest
Enormities, they fancy no Man has a Right to enquire into their Actions.
Nothing reaches them but Sermons, and these they mind as much, and as little as
they please; this must needs produce Licentiousness.

The visiting of sick and dying Persons, is one of the most important Functions
of the Office of Pastors; but when it is not performed with exactness and zeal,
it contributes as much as can be imagined to the keeping up of Security. Every
one must needs see, of what Consequence this part of the Ministry is, if he
considers that it is at the end of Life that we are to be judged, and that our
eternal state depends upon the condition we dye in: And if we reflect at the
same time upon what the Scripture tells us, 2 Cor. V. 10.
that we shall receive in the World to come, according to the good or evil we
have done in this; we will easily apprehend, what Ministers ought to do, when
they visit sick and dying Persons. Their chief business should be, to discover
what state those Persons are in, that they may suit their Exhortations to it.
Then is it that they ought to speak to the Conscience of Sinners, and to
persuade them by all possible Means, to examine their Lives, and the
disposition they are in, in reference to their Salvation. And when a Minister
meets, as it happens too frequently, with sick Persons, who are engaged and
hardened in vicious Habits, or whose Repentance may justly be questioned; it is
then that he had need use all his Skill and Prudence all his Zeal and
Endeavors, to save Souls which are in so great danger. Upon such occasions
both the Minister and the sick Person, have need of Time, Leisure and Freedom,
and a hasty discourse or Prayer signifies nothing.

And now we may judge whether a Man discharges the Office of a Pastor, who only
in general exhorts dying Persons to acknowledge themselves miserable Sinners,
and backs those Exhortations with Assurances of the Divine Mercy through Jesus
Christ, or who only reads some Forms of Exhortations and Prayers, as the Custom
is in some places. This method is fitter to lay asleep than to awaken a guilty
Conscience; and this way of ex-exercising the Ministry, overturns the Doctrine
of a future Judgment, and most of the Principles of Religion. A Minister speaks
to a sick Person of the pardon of his Sins, he exhorts him to leave the World
with joy, he discourses to him of the Happiness of another Life, and fills him
with the most comfortable Hopes; And perhaps this sick Person is a Man loaded
with Guilt, a wretch who has lived like an Atheist, who has committed diverse
Sins for which he has made no Satisfaction who has not practiced Restitution,
who never knew his Religion, and who is actually impenitent. Such a Man ought
to tremble, and yet such Consolations from the mouth of his Pastor, make him
think that he dies in a state of Grace.

But if this way of visiting and comforting the sick, betrays them into
security, it has the same effect upon the standers by, who when they hear the
Consolations which are administered to Persons, whom every body knows not to
have led very Christian lives; make a tacit Inference, that the same things
will be said to them, and that their Death will be happy, whatsoever their past
Life may have been.

Besides the want of Ability and Zeal, there are two things which hinder
Pastors from discharging toward dying People, the important Duties to which
their Office obliges them: The one is, that commonly Pastors visit the Sick
only in cases of extremity; and the other is, that they have too little
communication with their Flocks, and no sufficient Knowledge of the Lives and
Conduct of private Persons; so that being ignorant of the State and Occasions
of the Sick, they cannot at the approach of Death, administer to them wholesome
Counsels and Exhortations.

These I think are the most essential Defects of Pastors, both in the
Instruction, and in the Government of the Church.

Having thus far treated of the Duties of the Pastoral Charge; I come now to
consider those Qualifications, with which Pastors ought to be endued. And these
are of two sorts: First, The Endowments of the Mind, by which I mean those
Abilities and Talents, which are necessary for the Instruction and Conduct of
the Church; and Secondly, the Qualifications of the Heart, by which I mean
Probity and Integrity of Life.

1. No Man questions but that Abilities and Talents are requisite in those who
exercise the Office of Ministers in the Church. First, Some are necessary for
Preaching the Gospel, and for the right expounding of Scripture. Preaching
requires a greater extent of Knowledge, than is commonly imagined. To Preach
well, a Man should be well skilled in Languages, History, Divinity and
Morality. He should be acquainted with Man's Heart, he should be of a Sagacious
and discerning Spirit, and above all things he should have a true and exact
Judgment; to say nothing of some other Qualifications, which are necessary to
every Man who speaks in Public.

Neither are these Endowments sufficient* particular Talents are requisite for
the Conduct of the Church. To guide a Flock and to be accountable for the
Salvation of a great number of Souls, is no small Charge, nor an Employment
which every body is fit for. A Man to whom the Government of a Church is
committed, in whose Hands the Exercise of Discipline is lodged, whose Duty it
is both to Exhort and Reprove both in public and in private, and who ought to
supply all the occasions of a Flock, and to be provided for all Emergencies;
such a Man has need of a great deal of Knowledge, Zeal and Firmness, as well as
of much Wisdom and Prudence, Moderation and Charity. That all these
Qualifications are requisite in a Pastor, is evident from the Nature of his
Office; and St. Paul teaches it, when he appoints that none shall be admitted
to this Employment, but those in whom they are to be found.

What Effect then can the Ministry have, when it is Exercised by Men who want
these Qualifications, or perhaps have the quite contrary; who are ignorant, who
know nothing in Matters of Discipline and Morality, who can give no account of
a great many things contained in Scripture, and whose whole Learning is
confined to a Commentary; who can neither reason true, nor speak clearly; who
are either Indiscreet, Negligent or Remiss in the Exercise of their Office? But
I do not wonder, that these Qualifications are wanting in most Clergymen. Vast
Numbers who were not cut out for this Employment, aspire to it. And besides
these Abilities are not to be acquired without Labor and Application. Now many
Churchmen are shamefully idle; they look upon their Profession as a mean to
live easy, so that declining the Duties of their Place, they content themselves
with the Incomes of it. Those who are to Preach are more employed; but their
Sermons are almost their whole Business: Their Work consists for the most part
in copying some Commentaries, and as soon as they have acquired a little Habit
and facility of Speaking in Public, almost all of them give over Study and
Labor. We may almost make the same Judgment of those Ecclesiastics, who though
they Study hard, yet do not direct their Studies to the Edification of the
Church. The Learning and the Studies of Divines, I speak of those chiefly who
have Cure of Souls is often vain, and of no use for the edifying of their
Flocks. They apply themselves to things suitable to their Inclinations, and
their Studies are but their Amusement, or their Diversion. Now he who neglects
the Duties of his Calling, and pursues other Employments, differs very little
from him who does nothing at all.

II. Probity is, not less necessary to Pastors, than Knowledge and Ability; and
this Probity ought to have three degrees.

1. The first is that Pastors give no ill Example, and that their Life be
blameless. This is the first Qualification which St. Paul requires in those who
aspire to this holy Office. 1 Timothy III.
Let a Bishop, says he, be blameless; that is, his Manners ought to be such
that he may not justly be charged with any Vice, or give any Scandal. Then the
Apostle specifies the faults from which a Pastor ought to be free; Tit. I.
Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient; not a
brawler, not covetous, one that rules well his own house, having his children
in subjection with all gravity, and who is not lifted up with pride and
self-conceit.

Every body knows how much might be said, if the Conduct of Clergymen was to
be examined upon all these Heads. Are not many of them scandalous by the
irregularity of their Manners? How gross and shameful soever the Sin of
Drunkenness may be, yet do they never commit it, and is not this Vice very
common among them in some Countries? Are not some of them furious and
passionate in their Actions and Words? Do we never observe in them a sordid
Covetousness, and an excessive study of Self-Interest? Are their Families
always well ordered? Are not Positiveness and Pride very remarkable in some
Persons of that Profession? Is there not often just Cause to complain, that
they are implacable in their Hatred, that they have little Charity; and that
there is less Prepossession, and more of Gentleness and true Zeal to be found
among Laymen, than among Divines? I say nothing of some other Faults which are
not less scandalous in Churchmen; as when they are given to swearing, when
they are dissolute and undecently free in their Words, when they are wedded to
Divertisements and Pleasures, Worldly-minded, Lazy, Crafty, Unjust and
Censorious.

When such Vices appear in the Lives of Clergymen it is the greatest of
Scandals; from that minute the Gospel becomes of no effect in their Mouths, the
Laws of God are trampled upon, the most sacred things are no longer respected,
Divine Worship and the Sacraments are profaned, the Ministry grows vile,
Religion in general falls under Contempt, and the People being no longer curbed
by the Reverence due to it, give up themselves, to an entire Licentiousness. I
confess that Christians ought to follow the Doctrine rather than the Example of
their Guides, and that it is possible to profit by the Instructions of a Man,
who does not practice what he teaches. But every body has not discretion and
firmness enough, to separate thus the Doctrine from the Example, and not to be
shaken by the Scandal occasioned by Churchmen, when their Life and their
Preaching contradict each other. Men are very much taken with Outsides, and
govern themselves more by Imitation than Reason. A great many Persons want
nothing but Pretexts and Excuses, to justify them in ill things; and there is
no pretense more specious, than that which the ill Lives of the Ministers of
Religion affords. When the People see Men who are incessantly speaking of God
and recommending Piety, and yet do not practice themselves what they preach,
they reject all that comes from them, they fancy that the Gospel is preached
only for Forms-sake, and that the Maxims of Religion may be safely violated.

2. But St. Paul requires somewhat more in Pastors, than not to be scandalous;
this is but the first and the lowest degree of Probity. He would have them
besides to be adorned with all manner of Virtues; 2 Timothy III. etc. Tit. I. and
II.
To be vigilant, prudent, grave, modest and given to hospitality, gentle,
charitable, lovers of good men, wise just, holy and chaste, showing themselves
in all things patterns of good works, of purity, gravity, and integrity. And
indeed Pastors are not only appointed to instruct and govern their Flocks, but
they are obliged besides to set them a good Example, and to be their Patterns;
and they do not edify less by their good Examples, than by their Exhortations.
The Purity of their Manners, and the regularity of their Conduct, give a great
Weight, to all the Functions of their Ministry, these make their Persons
venerable, and engage a great many to imitate them. Now whether these
Qualifications are to be found in Pastors, every body may judge. I except those
who ought to be excepted, but for the generality, Wherein do Churchmen differ
from other Men? Do they distinguish themselves by a regular and exemplary Life?
Their Exterior indeed is something different, they live more retired, they
preserve a little Decorum, though ever this is not done by all; but as for the
rest, are they not as much addicted to the World, and taken up with earthly
things, have they not as many humane and secular Views, are they not as much
wedded to Interest and other Passions as the bulk of Christians are?

3. This second degree of Probity is not sufficient. The Life of an Hypocrite
may be blameless and even edifying; by composing his Exterior he may pass for a
Saint. There is therefore a third Degree, and that is the Rectitude of the
Heart, a good Conscience, a great measure of true Piety, Devotion, Humility and
Zeal. Pastor ought to be in private, inwardly and in the sight of God, what
they appear to other Men. And certainly none can have greater Inducements to
Piety, than a Man whose ordinary Business it is to meditate upon Religion, to
speak of it to others, to reprove Hypocrisy and Vice; to perform Divine
Service, to administer the Sacraments, to visit afflicted and dying People; and
to give an account to God of a great number of Souls. I do not know whether
there is a higher Degree of Impiety and Hypocrisy, than when a Man who is in
these Circumstances is not a good Man. Such a Man makes but Sport with the most
sacred things in Religion, he does properly play the part of a Comedian, and of
an Hypocrite all his Life. No Profession damns more certainly, than that of a
Churchman, when it is thus exercised.

It may perhaps be said that all these Moralities are nothing to my purpose;
that this third degree of Probity, is necessary only for the Salvation of
Pastors in particular, and that as the People are unacquainted with the inward
Dispositions of their Teachers, and are not able to distinguish true from
counterfeit Piety, it is enough for their Edification, that the Exterior should
be well regulated. But those who think this, are very much mistaken. This want
of Piety and Devotion is capital, and here we find the main Cause of the
remisness of Pastors, and of the Corruption of the People. From whence do those
Faults proceed which we have observed in Clergymen? How comes it to pass that
some of them are ignorant and lazy* that others apply themselves to
unprofitable Subjects and Studies, that others preach only out of Vanity, and
that their Discourses are languid and jejune? All this, is because their Hearts
are void of Devotion and Piety.

There are some preaching Matters, and those too the most edifying which can
never be well managed, but by a Man animated with sincere Piety. Those
Preachers who describe the Beauty of Virtue, or the happy State of a good
Conscience, the hopes of another Life, or the necessity of working out one's
Salvation, and who are not affected and pierced thorough with what they say, do
but stammer about these things, and they will hardly excite those Motions in
other Men's hearts, which they never felt in their own. We cannot preach with
Success without knowing the heart of Man, and this Knowledge ought to be the
chief Study of those who preach the Gospel. But the surest and the most
compendious way to know Man's heart aright, is to consult our own, to reflect
upon our selves, and to have a spotless Conscience: Without this a Man is still
a Novice and a Bungler in Preaching. And so in the Exercise of Discipline; in
private Exhortations, in the visiting of the Sick, in Prayers, and in all other
Pastoral Functions, there is still something defective, when a Man does not
perform them, out of a Principle of Charity, but only to discharge the outward
Obligations, which his Office lays upon him.

Pious and good Churchmen, who are not on the other hand destitute of Gifts,
fulfill much better the Duties of their Ministry. A Pastor who loves his
Profession, who lays the Functions of it to heart, who is thoroughly convinced
of the Truths of Religion, and who practices the Rules of it; who in private
humbles himself before God, and ardently implores his Blessing; ^ho is ever
intent upon seeking Means to Edify the Church; who turns all his Meditation
that way; who thinks Day and Night of the Necessities of his Flock; must needs
be successful, he has in himself the Principle of all Benedictions and happy
Success. When he is Speaking or Exhorting, it is his Heart that speaks, and the
Language of the Heart, has a kind of Eloquence and Perswasiveness in it, which
is soon discerned by the Hearers, and which always raises a Pious and a Zealous
Preacher, above a Mercenary and Hypocritical one. The want of Piety in Pastors,
is therefore the principal Source of the Faults they commit, and of the
Mischiefs which proceed from their Remisness.

Whosoever will seriously and without Prejudice Consider all that I have now
said, must own, That the Cause of the Corruption of Christians is chiefly to b^
found in the Clergy. I do not mean to speak here of all Churchmen
indifferently. We must do right to some, who distinguish themselves by their
Talents, their Zeal, and the holiness of their Lives. But the Number of these
is not considerable enough to stop the Course of those Disorders which are
occasioned in the Church by the vast Multitudes of remiss and corrupt Pastors.
These pull down, what the others endeavor to build up. Some perhaps, will ask,
Whence do all these Faults of the Clergy proceed? In answer to this Question, I
have Three Things to say.

1. It ought not to be thought strange, that Pastors should not fulfill all the
Obligations of their Office. As things are constituted almost every where with
relation to Discipline, to the Inspection and Authority over Private Persons,
to the Visiting of the Sick, and to some other parts of their Employment, they
cannot if they would discharge their Duties. Neither the Magistrates nor the
People would suffer it. On the other hand, the Defects of Pastors, are the
consequences of the Contempt and Abasement which their Office is brought under,
as well as of the Poverty they live in. This Contempt and Poverty discourage a
great many; who might otherwise considerably Edify the Church; and they are the
Cause why Multitudes, who have neither Education, nor Talents, nor Estates,
dedicate themselves to the Ministry of the Gospel. It is commonly imagined,
that all sorts of Persons are good enough for the Church; and whereas the Jews
did offer their most Excellent Things to God, among Christians, what is least
valued is Consecrated to God and the Church. Some are devoted to the Holiest
and the most exalted of all Professions, who would not be thought capable of an
Employment of any Consideration in the Commonwealth. If then we intend to
remedy the Faults of the Clergy, we should begin with Redressing what is
defective in the State of the Church and Religion in general.

2. Many Ecclesiastics fail in the Duties of their Calling, because they do
not know what it obliges them to; and this they do not know, because it was
never Taught them. There are indeed Schools, Academies and Universities, which
are designed to Instruct those Young Men, who aspire to this Profession; but I
cannot tell whether Schools and Academies, as they are ordered almost every
where, do not do more hurt than good. For first, as to Manners, Young People
live there Licentiously, and are left to their own Conduct. The Care of Masters
and Professors, does not extend to the Regulating of the Manners of their
Disciples. And this Disorder is so great, that in several Universities of
Europe, the Scholars and Students make public Profession of Dissoluteness.
They not only live there Irregularly, but they have Privileges, which gives
them a Right to commit with impunity, all manner of Insolences, Brutalities
and Scandals, and which exempt them from the Magistrates Jurisdiction. It is a
shame to Christianity, that Princes and Churchmen should not have yet
abolished those Customs and Establishments, which smell so rank of the
Ignorance and Barbarism of the Heathens. And yet these Universities are the
Nurseries out of which Pastors, Doctors and Professors are taken. Those
Scholars who neither have Birth, nor sense of Virtue or Honor, and who have
spent their Youth in Licentiousness and Debauchery, spread themselves into all
Churches, and become the Depositaries, and in some measure the Arbitrators of
Religion.

As to the Studies which are pursued at Universities. I observe in them these
Two Faults. The first relates to the method of Teaching. Divinity is treated
there and the Holy Scripture explained in a Scholastical and altogether
Speculative Manner. Common Places are read, which are full of School-Terms, and
of Questions not very material. There Young Men learn to Dispute upon every
thing, and to resolve all Religion into Controversies* Now this Method ruins
them, it gives them intricate and false Notions of Divinity, and it begets in
them Dispositions directly opposite to those which are necessary to find out
Truth.

The other Fault is more Essential: Little or no Care is taken in Academies, to
Teach those who Dedicate themselves to the Service of the Church, several
Things, the knowledge of which would be very necessary to them The Study of
History and of Church Antiquity, is neglected there.

Hence it is that most Divines, may be compared with People, who having never
traveled, know no other Customs or ways of living but those which obtain in
their Countries. As soon as you take these Divines out of their Common-Places,
they are in a Ma^^, and every thing seems new and singular to them. Morality is
not taught in Divinity-Schools, but in a superficial and Scholastic^ manner;
And in many Academies it is no^ taught at all. They seldom speak there of
Discipline, they give few or no Instruction^ concerning the manner of
exercising the Pastoral Care, or of Governing the Church. So that the greater
part of those who are admitted into this Office, enter into it without knowing
wherein it consists* all the Notion they have of it, is that it is a
Profession, which obliges them to preach, and to explain Texts. It were
therefore to be wished, that for the Glory of God, and the good of the Church*
Schools and Universities should be reformed, and that the Manners and Studies
of Young People, should be better regulated in those places. This Reformation
would not be impossible, if Divines and Professors would use their Endeavors
about it. But those kind of Establishments are not easily altered. The Ordinary
Method is continued, and things are done as they were of Old, because Men are
willing to keep their Places, and the Stipends which are annexed to them.

3. The Third and principal Remedy would be to use greater Caution, than is
commonly done, when Men are to be admitted into Ecclesiastical Offices. The
first Qualification to which, according to St. Paul, regard is to be had, is
Probity and Integrity of Life. The Persons therefore who offer themselves,
should in the first place be examined in relation to Manners, and to all those
Moral Dispositions, which St. Paul requires in them, and those should be
excluded in whom they are not found. But this Article is commonly slubbered
over, and a Young Man must have been very dissolute, if he is refused upon the
account of Immorality. So that the most Sacred of all Characters, is conferred
upon many Persons, who according to the Divine Laws, ought to be rejected.

The other Part of the Examination of Canditates, relates to their Ability and
Talents. Now in order to judge of their Capacity, it is not enough to enquire
whether they know their common-Place-Book, or whether they can make a Sermon;
it would be necessary besides, to examine them about the Fundamentals of
Religion, about History, Discipline, the holy Scripture and Morality. All these
are important matters, the knowledge of which is of daily use with reference to
Practice, and in the exercise of the Sacred Ministry. But they are not insisted
upon. The examination turns upon some Trials about Preaching, and upon some
Heads of Divinity, which are Scholastically handled, by Arguments and
Distinctions: After which if the Canditate has satified in some Measure,
Ordination follows.

Now when such Insufficient Persons are once admitted, the Mischief is done,
and there is no Remedy. These Men are afterward appointed Pastors in Churches,
where for 30 or 40 Years, they destroy more than they edify. How many Churches
are there thus ill provided, where the People live in gross Ignorance, where
the Youth are lost for want of Instruction, and where a Thousand Crimes are
committed? The Cause of all this Evil, is in the Ordination of Pastors.

It will no doubt be Objected, That if none were to be admitted but those, who
have all the necessary Qualifications, there would not be a sufficient number
of Pastors, for all the Churches. To which I Answer, that though this should
happen, yet it were better to run into this Inconvenience than to break the
express Laws of God. A small number of Select Pastors, is to be preferred
before a Multitude of unworthy Laborers. We are still to do what God Commands,
and to leave the the Event to Providence. But after all, this Scarcity of
Pastors is not so much to be feared. Such a strictness will only discourage
those, who would never have been useful in the Church, and it is a thing highly
Commendable to dishearten such Persons: But this exactness will encourage
those, who are able to do well, and the Ministry will be so much the more
esteemed and sought after.

CAUSE IV. The Defects of Christian Princes and Magistrates.
IF it had been possible without an essential Omission, not to have detected
this Cause of Corruption, I would have passed it over in silence. We ought not
to speak of the Higher Powers, but with great Discretion and Respect: And
therefore it is not without some kind of Reluctance, that I suppose in the
Title of this Chapter, that one of the Causes of Corruption is to be found in
Christian Princes and Magistrates. But if I had suppressed this, I should have
dissembled a most important Truth, and omitted one of the Heads, which are the
most necessary to be insisted upon in a work of this Nature. By reason of the
Rank which Princes and Magistrates hold, they have always a great share in the
good or ill Manners of the People. And so I cannot excuse my self from showing,
that the Corruption of Christians, may partly be imputed to those, who are
ordained for the Government of Civil Society. In order to this I shall offer
some Reflections upon the Duty of Princes and Magistrates, Considered 1. As
Civil, and 2. As Christian Magistrates.

Although the Institution of Princes and Magistrates does properly relate to
civil Matters; yet the Manner of governing their People, has a great Influence
upon the Things of Religion. This cannot be questioned, if we suppose this
Principle; That God who is the Author of Religion, is also the Author of civil
Society and Magistracy. It is St. Paul's Doctrine, Romans XIII.
That there is no power but of God, and that the Powers that be are ordained of
God. If God is the Author of Religion, and of civil Society, he is also the
Author of those Laws, upon which both Religion, and Civil Society are founded.
Now God being always consistent with himself, the Laws which are derived from
him, cannot contradict one another; and this shows already, not only that there
is no opposition between Religion and Civil Society, but that these two things
have besides, a necessary relation to one another. This will yet more clearly
appear, if we consider, that Religion does not cut off Christians from the
Society of other Men, and that the Church does not constitute a State by it
self, to have nothing to do with Civil Society; but that those who are Members
of the Church, are likewise Members of civil Society, so that the same Man is
at the same time, both a Christian and a Citizen.

But it is chiefly necessary to consider the Nature of the Christian Religion.
1. It was to be preached to all Men, and to be received by all the World,
without distinction of Nations Kingdoms or States. In order to this, two things
were necessary. First, that there should be nothing in Religion, contrary to
the Natural Constitution of States and of civil Society. For else, God by
ordering the Gospel to be preached, would have destroyed his own work,
Christianity could not have taken footing in the World, and the first
Christians would have been justly looked upon, as seditious Persons. But it is
not less necessary on the other hand, that there should be nothing repugnant to
the Christian Religion, in the natural Constitution of States and civil
Society; otherwise God by establishing Society, would have put an insuperable
Obstacle to the planting of the Gospel, unless the civil Order and Government
had been altered. But our Savior has assured us that there was to be no such
thing, by declaring John XVIII.
that his kingdom was not of this world, and by commanding his Followers, Mat.
XXII.
to render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's.

2. One of the Chief Precepts of the Christian Religion is, Romans XIII.
That all Men should obey and be subject to the Higher Powers. Now this Precept
could not possibly be observed, if in the Natural Establishment of Civil
Society, there was something incompatible, with the Profession of Christianity.
Mat. VI.
No man can serve two Masters, when they command contrary things. But St. Paul
goes further, he tells us that the preservation of Kings, and the submitting to
their Authory is a mean for Christians * to lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty.

3. It is remarkable, that whatever is good and just in the Civil, is so
likewise in the Religious Society; and that whatever is prescribed by Religion
is just, and even beneficial to Civil Society. The Law of Nature, which is the
Foundation of Civil Laws, is confirmed by the Christian Religion, and does
perfectly agree with the Principles and Morals of the Gospel. An evident proof
of this, is, that when Christian Emperors and Lawgivers did set about the
making of Laws and Constitutions, they retained the essential parts of the Laws
and Constitutions received among the Romans and the Greeks in the time of
Heathenism. And to this Day the Old Roman Law is followed among Christians,
excepting some Laws which have been altered or abrogated, either because they
were contrary to natural Justice and Equity, or because they were not of a
general and necessary Use.

4. It is certain, that Religion and Civil Society, do mutually support one
another, when both are well Regulated. Religion contributes to the happiness of
Society, by rendering the Authority of Princes more Sacred and Inviolable; and
the good Order of Society, contributes to the welfare and the progress of
Religion. Let us suppose a Magistrate who loves Piety and Justice; it is plain,
that at the same me that he promotes the Interest of Religion, 1 Timothy II.
he strengthens the welfare of Society, and that he cannot procure the good of
Society, without advancing the interest of Religion. If we suppose on the other
hand, a Magistrate who does not Act by the Principles of Religion and Justice;
it is visible, that by suffering Religion to be violated or despised, he shakes
the surest Foundation of his own Authority, and of public Tranquillity, and
that by failing in the Duties of his Office and in the Exercise of Justice, he
makes the People grow Vicious and neglect the Duties of Piety.

From these Considerations it does manifestly appear, that Princes and
Magistrates may either procure great Advantages to Religion, or do it a
considerable prejudice, and that they are in part the Authors of the Corruption
which reigns in the World.

When Civil-Society is well Governed, Men are disposed by that very thing to
practice the Duties of Christianity. In proportion as the People are well
Ordered, they are more tractable and susceptible of the impressions of Piety.
As they are used to be Governed by the Laws of the Magistrate, they do the more
easily submit to the Holy Discipline of Christ; yea, and by Obeying Civil-Laws,
they do already discharge some part of the Duties of Religion. But when Princes
and Magistrates, either through Ignorance, or want of Probity and Virtue, give
way to the violation of Justice and good Order, it is impossible but that
Religion must suffer by it. For besides, that the People cannot break the
Civil-Laws, without violating the Principles of Religion; How can they perform
the Duties of Christianity, when they do not discharge those of Nature? It is
very hard to persuade People to the observation of the Precepts of the Gospel,
who do not submit to the Laws of natural Reason and Justice. It is not to be
expected that Men who do not order their outward Actions aright, should
regulate their Thoughts and resist their Passions; or that being strangers to
the first Elements of Virtue, they should come up to the practice of the most
sublime Precepts of Christian Morals.

Besides, the want of Order in the Administration of Justice and Government,
draws after it all kinds of Disorders with relation to Manners, such as
Dishonesty, and what is most dangerous, a Spirit of Libertinism and
Independence, which makes Men untoward and refractory to good Discipline. We
are to observe here that the greatest part of Men's Lives are taken up with
Civil Matters. All Persons are bound to Obey the Magistrate, and few are
altogether free from Lawsuits and Business; so that when the People are not
well Governed with relation to Civil Things, they do so accustom themselves to
live without Rule of Restraint, that Religion can no longer have any Power over
them. The neglect and remisness of Princes and Magistrates do occasion all this
Mischief.

But if the bare Carelessness of Magistrates is so fatal to Society; how must it
be when they themselves are Vicious and Unjust, either in their own particular
Conduct, or in the Exercise of their Office? The greatest Unhappiness that can
befall any People, is, when those who are invested with the Supreme Authority,
favor Injustice and Vice. It may be said then, That the public Fountains are
poisoned. The whole State is ordered by the Sovereigns; they are those from
whom the Laws receive their Force, who appoint Judges and Magistrates, and who
regulate the Administration of Justice. When inferior Magistrates prevaricate,
this may be remedied by the Sovereign, but when the Sovereign himself fails in
his Duty, no redress can be expected.

Not but that subordinate Officers and Magistrates, may likewise occasion a
great deal of Mischief. If we suppose in a Province, or a Town, Magistrates and
Judges who want Integrity, who consult only their Profit and Interest in the
Exercise of their Office, who are not proof against Bribes, who Administer
Justice from a principle of Covetousness or Passion, who Act by Recommendation
or Favor, and who are full of Artifice and Dissimulation. This is enough to
introduce and authorize Wickedness throughout their whole Jurisdiction, to
pervert Right, to banish Justice and Honesty from all Courts, to make way for
Knavery and Litigiousness, for the protracting of Suits, the abuse and
violation of Oaths, and many other Disorders. Then it is that Vice is in
fashion and repute, that Virtue and Innocence are oppressed, and that the
People grow Corrupt. Now all this being a direct undermining of Religion and
Piety, let any Body judge, whether I have not Reason to say, that the
Corruption of the Age may be imputed to Princes and Magistrates.

But all these Evils are yet more unavoidable, when the Princes or Magistrates
who are the Authors of them, profess the Christian Religion. A Heathen
Magistrate has not by much that influence upon Religion and Manners, that a
Christian has. The Church was purer and more separated from the World, when the
Superior Powers were contrary to it; but as soon as the Emperors had embraced
Christianity, Piety and Zeal did visibly decay. Not but that Religion may
receive, and has actually received great Helps from Christian Magistrates; they
have sometimes contributed very effectually to the promoting of Piety, and
those who do so, deserve immortal Honor. But it must likewise be granted, that
the Vices and ill Examples of Christian Magistrates, Corrupt the Church more,
than if it were under Heathen Governors.

The Duty of Christian Princes and Magistrates, as well as of all the Members
of the Church, is double. They are bound, First, to serve God and to discharge
the Obligations which Religion lays upon all Men; and Secondly to take care,
that God may be served and honored by all those, who are subject to their
Authority.

1. Every Christian ought to serve God and to live according to the Precepts of
the Gospel. That very thing then that a Magistrate is Christian, obliges him to
be a lover of Piety and Virtue. It is a Common Notion especially among great
Men, that Piety and Devotion do not become those who are exalted to Dignities,
and that public Persons ^re not to be ruled by the Maxims of Religion. But
whosoever maintains this Opinion, must deny the Principles of Religion, and be
either an Atheist or a Deist. For supposing the Truth of Christianity, it is
beyond all doubt, that a Christian Prince or Magistrate, has as much need of
Piety as other Men have. He is bound to be a good Man by the same duty and
interest, which engage private Men to be so; he has a Soul to be saved as well
as they; and as he is a public Person, he is to give an account of his conduct
to that Judge, with whom there is no acception of Persons, and before whom the
greatest of Monarchs, is no more than the Meanest of Slaves.

If the eminent Station of a Magistrate makes some difference between him and
Christians of a lower Order, that difference obliges him to a higher degree of
Piety. The Character he bears requires a great stock of Virtue. No small
measure of Probity is requisite to acquit himself worthily in that Calling; to
do no Injustice, not to seek in his Dignities the means to gratify his
Interest, his Vanity, his Pride, or his other Passions. Without a firm and
solid Virtue, he cannot withstand those Temptations which offer themselves
every minute, and which are the more dangerous and subtle, because in those
exalted Posts, ill things, for the most part, may be done with safety. If we
add to all this, that an ill Magistrate is answerable for the greatest part of
the Disorders which happen, and of the Crimes which are committed in Society,
it must be confessed that Magistracy is a kind of Life, wherein Piety is
extremely necessary, and in which, great Circumspection and a sublime Virtue,
are the only Preservatives against a thousand opportunities, of transgressing
the Duties of Conscience, and violating the most Sacred Laws of Religion and
Justice.

II. It is the duty of Christian Princes and Magistrates, to labor for the
promoting of Virtue and the suppressing of Vice among Men. We have shown
already that it is their interest to do so, since Religion is the surest
Foundation of their Authority, and of the Fidelity of their People; but their
Duty does besides indispensably oblige them to this. It cannot be denied but
that this Obligation lies upon them, since every Christian is bound to advance
the Kingdom of Christ, and to edify his Neighbors as much as he can in that
State and Condition he is in. The Duty here is answerable to the abilitry, so
that we may apply to this purpose, that Maxim of the Gospel, Luke XII.
that to whom soever much is given, of him much shall be required. Private Men
cannot do much toward promoting the Glory of God; their Zeal and Good
intentions are for the most part useless; it is not in their power to hinder
general disorders, this ought therefore, to be done by Men of Authority, and
they may do it easily. Besides, a Christian Magistrate is to consider that it
was Providence which raised him to the Post he is in, and that by consequence
he is engaged in Justice and Gratitude, to use his Authority for the Glory of
God. Lastly, Would it not be a strange thing, that Christian Princes and
Magistrates should do no Service to Religion, when Kings and Princes who are
not Christian, can do so much hurt to it? Now they may advance the Kingdom of
God and banish Corruptions, these two ways. 1. By their Example. 2. By their
Care.

1. By their Example. This Method is of great efficacy. Examples are very
forcible, but their effect, depends for the most part upon the Quality and
Character of the Persons they come from. It has been made appear in the
foregoing Chapter, how much benefit redounds to the Church, from the good Lives
and Examples of the Governors of it. But the example of Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates is in some respects of greater weight. When a Churchman recommends
Virtue by an exemplary Life, it is often said that his Profession obliges him
to live so, and this consideration makes his to be example of little force upon
worldly-minded Men. But when Princes and Magistrates are pious, those Men have
no such thing to say. The Splendour and Authority which surround Greatness,
gives much credit to every thing that comes from great Men. They may sometimes
do more good with one word, than a Preacher can do by many Sermons.

I have showed in the first Part of this Work that one of the greatest
Obstacles to Piety, is a false Shame which restrains Men from doing their Duty,
for fear of being observed and despised; and I am to show hereafter, that
Custom has introduced among Christians a great many Maxims and Practices
contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel. These two things occasion Corruption and
till they are remedied, Vice and Impiety must still reign. But the Example of
great Men is sufficient to remove almost entirely, both these Springs of
Corruption. They are the Judges of Honor and Custom; it is in their power to
make any thing which is reputed shameful, to be thought Honorable; and to
abolish that which is generally received. So that how scarce and despesed
soever Piety may be, an Idea of Honor would be affixed to it, if it was
favored and professed by great Men, and that would be respected in them, which
in others, is looked upon with Indifference or Contempt.

That which has happened with relation to Duels is a strong proof of what I
say. To decline fighting a Duel, has been thought for a long time a Disgrace
and an Infamy: A false notion of Honor did then bear down the strongest
Principles of Nature, Reason and Christianity; and drive Men to that excess of
Brutality and Madness, that they would cut one another Throat for a trifle.
But in those places where Christian Princes have abolished D^els, People are
now of another mind, and think it no shame to refuse a Challenge. And thus
Swearing, Drunkenness, and the greatest of other clamorous Sins, might be
suppressed, if great Men pleased. Is it not observed besides, that when a
Prince is devout, Devotion comes into fashion? It may be that this Devotion
which proceeds from the Example of Princes, is not always sincere; but at least
it regulates Manners as to the exterior; and such an outward Reformation, may
be a step toward true Devotion. However this shows that the opinion and
example of Men in Authority, has a great power. And surely if by their credit
they can make Vice it self to be honored, would it not be much easier for
them, to make other Men honor Virtue, since it is honorable in its own Nature?

I am not able to express of what Consequence the Example of great Men is,
either for Good or Evil. A Prince who is vicious, cruel, dissolute, artificious
or unjust, is enough to infect a whole State in a very little time, to banish
Piety from it, and to bring into repute Drunkenness, Lewdnese, Cheating,
Indevotion, and all the other Vices which he allows himself in. This we find by
daily experience. Such as the Prince is, so are those about him; and from
these, the Evil spreads upon the whole People, by reason of the Credit and
Authority to which they were raised, and of the Influence they have upon
public and private Affairs. What might not be said here of the Life which is
led in the Courts of Princes? Excepting some few Courts where Licentiousness is
not suffered. That kind of Life which is followed at Court, for the generality,
agrees little with the Spirit of Christianity. People live there altogether in
a loose and worldly manner, in Luxury, Idleness, Pomp and Pleasure. There, the
strongest and the most enticing Temptations are to be met with, and the most
criminal Intrigues, Adultery it self, are rather a Matter of Railery, than
Reproach. It is almost impossible for a Man to insinuate himself into the
Favor of Princes, and to advance his Fortune at Court, unless he makes it his
Maxim to dissemble his Sentiments, and to speak directly against his own
Thoughts. The worst of it is, that from thence Corruption diffuses it self
almost every where; so that many Disorders which are in Vogue, would be
unknown, or at least very rare in the World, if they had not been introduced by
that Licentiousness, which reigns in the Courts of Princes.

Christian Magistrates ought to use, for the Edification of the Church and the
reviving of Piety; these Endeavors relate either to Civil Matters, or to
Religion.

1. In Civil Matters, it is their Duty to restrain Libertinism and Corruption,
by regulating the Manners of their Subjects, either by repealing the Laws and
Customs which do not agree with Religion, and which engage the People into the
violation of the Precepts of the Gospel, or by reforming the Abuses which are
introduced from time to time, particularly those which creep into the
Administration of Justice. In relation to all these things, there are several
Faults which the Church cannot provide against, and which nothing can remedy
but the Magistrates Authority.

2. The other Care relates directly to Religion. 1. Princes and Kings
professing Christianity, are bound to procure, as much as in them lies, the
Welfare of the Church. They ought to set about the establishing of Truth and
Peace, provided that in order to that, they use no Means but such, as are
suitable to the Gospel. They ought by their Authority to see that the Church and
Religion want nothing of what is necessary, for the maintaining of Order and
Decency; that Divine Service be duly performed; that there be both Places for
that Purpose, and a sufficient number of Persons to take care of the
Edification of the Church; that those Persons may subsist honorably, that they
do their Duty and keep themselves within the bounds of their Calling. They must
not suffer Church Goods or Revenves to be applied to uses merely Civil; and
when these Revenues are not sufficient, it becomes their Piety and Justice, to
allot some part of the public Revenues, for the necessities of the Church. In
fine, as to Manners, I observed before, that they may easily give a stop to
Vice and Impiety, to Luxury, Swearing, and other Scandals which dishonor the
Church. And if they can do this, they ought to do it, every Christian being
bound to do all that is in his Power, to promote the Glory of God.

2. It is certain that Magistrates who are Members of the Church, ought to
protect it, to maintain the Order which God has established in it, and not to
suffer any breach to be made there. So that though they may regulate many things
which concern Religion, and though the Church owes them a great Regard, yet they
cannot without Usurpation and Injustice, arrogate to themselves the whole
Authority, with relation to Ecclesiastical Affairs. They are neither the
Princes nor the Heads of the Church, as they are the Princes and the Heads of
Civil Society. An Authority superior to theirs, has instituted, Religion,
Pastors and Discipline. There is a Law enacted by the KING of Kings, and the
Head of the Church, which clearly determines the Rights and Duties, both of the
Church and of the Governor of it All these are Sacred things, which earthly
Powers are not to meddle with. They are Laws which Princes and Magistrates did
submit to, when they became Members of the Church; with respect to these I mean
still essential things appointed by the Word of God) they have acquired no
Right by embracing Christianity; since he who becomes Member of a Society,
cannot by that acquire a Right to alter the natural Form and Constitution of it.

The Instance of the Kings of Judah, shows that a Prince who professes true
Religion, may interpose in the Affairs of it: But we must take care not to
carry this Instance too far, as those do, who ascribe to the Magistrate, a
supreme Authority in the Church, who allow him a Right to order every thing
there; not excepting Discipline, the calling of Pastors, nor even the Articles
of Faith. For besides that under the Law, Kings were by no means the Judges of
every thing, which concerned Religion; we are not to argue altogether about the
Christian Religion, from what was done in the Jewish Church. Among ^^e Jews the
Church and the State were mixed together, and in some measure undistinguished
from one another. That merely spiritual Society which is called the Church, and
which is confined to no State, or People, or any particular Form of Civil
Government; was properly erected since the coming of Christ. God acted among
the Jews as a Civil Magistrate. The Laws of the Jewish Religion were for the
most part external Laws, which might and ought to be maintained by Force and
Authority. The Rights of Divine Service, and the Functions of Priests, were
very different from the Evangelical Worship and from the Office of Christian
Pastors. After all, if we should go by the practice of the Jewish Church, it
would follow, that the Ministers of Religion are invested with Civil Authority,
and a very great Authority too. The Jewish Priests held a considerable Rank in
the State, as well as in Religion. If upon some occasions Kings have deposed
Priests; upon other occasions Priests have opposed Kings and altered the
Government.

See Chron. XXIII. and XXVI.
So that without pressing too much those Instances out of the Old Testament, the
best way is to consult the New, and to proceed according to the Laws of the
Apostles, and the Nature of the Christian Religion. And whosoever examins
without Prejudice those Sacred Books, which have been writ since the Coming of
our Savior, will acknowledge, that things are now altered, and that
Magistrates have but a limited Authority in Matters of Religion. It is
remarkable, that the Scripture never mentions them, when it speaks of the
Church and of the Government of it.

3, And yet as the Authority of Princes and Magistrates, is derived from God,
it ought still to subsist entire. And therefore they have an unquestionable
Right, to take care that nothing be done in the Church, to the Prejudice of
their lawful Authority, and of public Tranquillity; and that the Ministers of
Religion do not stretch their Authority, beyond spiritual things. The Honor
and the Safety of Religion, require that this Principle should be laid down;
for Religion, as was said before, ought not, to disturb Society, and true
Religion will never disturb it. If then any Christians or Churchmen under
pretense of Religion, should break in upon the Civil Government, and the
public Peace, Kings and Princes have a Right to restrain them, and then they
do not oppose Religion, but those only who abuse and dishonor it.

After these Considerations, I think any Man is able to judge, whether the
decay of Piety and Religion, is not in part to be imputed to Christian Princes
and Magistrates. We need but enquire whether both in Civil and Religious
Matters, they observe the Duties I have now described. I say no more of this,
because every body is able to make the Application.

But I must add, that if the want of Zeal in Magistrates is enough to introduce
Confusion and Vice into the Church; the Mischief is much greater, when not
only, they do not what they ought for the good of Religion, but when they use
their Authority besides, to the prejudice of it. I cannot forbear mentioning
here two great Abuses.

The First is, when Princes and Magistrates assume the whole Authority to
themselves, so that except Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, they will
do every thing in the Church: When they presume to determine Articles of Faith,
to rule the Conscience of their Subjects, and to force them to embrace one
Persuasion rather than another; when they will by all means take upon them to
call Pastors, without regard to that Right of the Church and Churchmen, which
is established in Scripture, and confirned by the practice of the first Ages of
Christianity; when they seize upon Church-Estates, though there is no Reason to
fear that Wealth should corrupt their Clergy, and though such Revenues might be
applied to several pious Uses, and particularly to the Relief of
Country-Churches, most of which are not sufficiently edified, for want of
necessary Endowments and Funds. A great deal might be said about that which was
done in the last Century with relation to Church-Revenues; and it were to be
wished, that People had been a little more scrupulous than they were, when they
invaded the Possessions of the Church, and confounded them with the Revenues of
the State.

Besides this the Magistrates Authority is fatal to the Church, when he hinders
the Exercise of true Discipline, and when he substitutes such Regulations as he
thinks fit, in the room of Apostolical Laws. This is one of the greatest
Obstructions to the restoring of Apostolical Discipline. Though the Church and
her Pastors should be willing to observe the ancient Order, and to oppose
Corruption by those Means which the Gospel enjoins, yet this is not to be done,
if those who have the Authority in their hands will not give way to it. The
Church is not in a Condition to resist, and to make head against the
Magistrate, when he uses Force; and She ought not to do it, if She could.

The second Abuse is, when the Magistrate makes it his business to abase
Religion, in the Persons of its Ministers, by despoiling them as much as he
can, of every thing that might procure them Respect and Authority in the
Church. This Policy is as contrary to the Interest of Religion, and to the
promoting of Piety, as it is common now adays, in several Christian Dominions.
It is well done of the Magistrate to preserve his Authority, and to keep the
Clergy from exceeding the bounds of their Calling; but from thence it does not
follow, that he ought to trample them under foot, to bring them under a general
Contempt, and to vilify their Character, which after all is Sacred and
Venerable. This is to sacrifice Religion to Policy and Pride, and this
Proceeding is a manifest Cause of the Contempt of Religion, and of the
Corruption which necessarily follows that Contempt, since commonly, nothing is
more despised in the World, than that which great Men despise.

I declare it once more, by all that has been said, I do not mean to detract
any thing from the Respect due to Civil Powers, neither do I speak of all
Christian Princes and Magistrates, among whom there are some who have Piety and
Zeal, and who labor with success, for the Good of Religion. But the Glory of
God requires, that we should speak the truth, so that I could not but take
notice of this Cause of Corruption. Upon the whole Matter, it is to be hoped;
that if Christian Magistrates would be pleased to make serious Reflections upon
all these things, we should soon see an end of some of these Disorders; and
that a happier time will come when they will use their Authority, to advance
the Honor of God, and to restore Truth, Piety and Peace among Christians.

CAUSE V. Education.
NOthing is more natural than to look for the Original of Corruption in the
time at which it begins; I mean in the first years of Life. It is not only when
Men have attained to a ripeness of Age, that they are inclined to Vice, but
that Inclination discovers it self from their Youth. The Root of that
Ignorance, of those Prejudices, and of the greatest part of the ill
Dispositions they are in, may be found in their tender years. We had need then
look back upon the beginnings of Life, and seek in Youth, and in Infancy it
self, the Source of Corruption.

When we enter upon this Enquiry, and consider that Men, if nothing restrains
them, will run into Vice from their Youth, out of a propension which is common
to all, we cannot but perceive at first sight, that there must be in them a
certain Principle of Corruption, which makes them thus prone to ill things. But
if we reflect upon this Matter with any attention, we may likewise be
satisfied, that it would not be impossible to rectify at least in part, that
vicious Inclination, and to prevent the fatal Consequences of it, by the means
of Education; and that it is chiefly the wrong Method of educating Children,
which feeds that Disposition to Evil, and which increases and strengthens it.
This is what I intend to show in this Chapter. I hope to make it clearly
appear, that the Corruption of Men, is to be imputed to the Education they had
in their Youth; and that considering how Children are brought up, it is
impossible, but that Ignorance and Vice, must generally prevail in the World. I
shall begin with general Reflections, upon the Education of Children, and in
the next place I shall speak of their Education, with a particular Regard to
Religion and Piety.

My first Reflection is, that the World consists for the most part of People
who have no Education and whose Unhappiness it is to have been wholly neglected
in their youth. This may particularly be observed among Persons of mean Birth.
Every body knows that such kind of People, have no manner of Education; that
from their Childhood they are abandoned to themselves, without either
Instruction, Correction, or any other help, and that living with ignorant gross
and vicious Parents between worldly business and ill examples, they spend their
youth almost like Brutes.

This first Reflection, which may be applied to many Thousand Christians,
discovers to us already a plain reason of the extreme Corruption, which appears
in their Manners. We wonder sometimes that Men are so depraved, and that great
Multitudes of them have almost no Sense at all, either of Religion or
Conscience, or of Reason and Humanity. We think it strange, that there should
be among Christians, Impious Persons, Blasphemers of the Name of God, Thieves,
Poisoners, Men who defile themselves with the most infamous Sins, and who make
Conscience of nothing. One would think Humane Nature were not capable of such
Enormities; and yet they committed by a great many. But we may easily apprehend
how this comes to pass, if we consider what Education those Persons had.
Instead of being brought up like Christians, they have not so much as been
educated like Rational Creatures. The Light of Nature has been extinguished in
them from their very Infancy, so that having scare any Notion of Good or Evil,
they give up themselves to Vice without scruple or remorse, almost in the same
manner as the Heathens did of Old.

II. But as this total Defect of Education is not universal, so we are to
enquire in the Second place, How Children are bred up, and to observe here the
principal Faults which are committed about their Education.

1. The Education of Children is not begun soon enough, nothing is done to them
in the first Years of their Lives. As soon as Children begin to have some kind
of Reason, the first Principles of Virtue should be instilled into them. For
though the Ideas and Actions of young Children are very confused, yet it is in
Infancy that Passions and Habits begin to spring up. At 3 or 4 Years Old,
Children give some signs of what they are to be all their Lives, and from that
time it may be known, what their predominant Inclinations will be. If that time
was well improved, it would be an easy and compendious way to give Children a
good Education. They may then without any great trouble be made to do those
things, which they cannot be brought to without much time and difficulty, when
they are once come to 14 or 15; some little Care and gentle Correction, may
stifle a Passion in its birth, is may cure Anger and Stubbornness in a Child,
it may soften his Inclinations, and make him obedient and towardly. A little
caution used about his Diet, may render him sober and temperate for his whole
Life. But that time which is so precious, is that, wherein Children are most
neglected.

This delay of Education proceeds from Two Causes. 1. That Men have not a true
Notion of the Education of Children, and of the End to be aimed at in it. It is
commonly imagined, that the Breeding up of Children, is the Teaching them
Latin, Learning, a Trade, or some other Things, which are usually Taught them,
in order to sit them for those Callings to which they are designed. And as
Children are not capable of applying themselves to Arts and Sciences before a
certain Age, so their Education is deferred till then. But if Men did well
understand, that the chief design of Education, is to form the Judgment and the
Temper of Children, they would not stay so long before they took care of them.

2. The first Years of Children are neglected, and their Conduct then is not
much minded, because Vice does not then show it self in all its Deformity. All
that they do is then looked upon as innocent, and every thing in them appears
pleasant, not excepting their very Faults. If they are too Lively, or of a
resolute Humor, if they happen to be in a Passion, to Lie, to speak undecent
and filthy Words, to do little sly naught Tricks; all this for the most part,
makes only People laugh, commend and applaud them. It is not considered, that
these are the forerunners of Vice, and that these beginnings call for a speedy
remedy. Young Children are not capable of Crimes: Impiety, Uncleanness, Cruelty
and premeditated Malice, are not to be found in them, but if we narrowly
observe them, we may spy out the seeds and the buddings of those Vices, in
their Actions and Manners. This is not much taken notice of; Passions and ill
Habits are suffered to grow quietly during Childhood, and they are quite formed
and settled before they are observed. At Seven or Eight Years of Age, Innocence
is already lost, and the Heart is corrupted. People begin to think of Educating
their Children when the fittest season for Education is past, and when they
have already those Principles of Corruption in them, which they will never
shake off.

2. There is no care taken to form the Mind and Judgment of Children. Reason
being the most essential Property of Men, is that which ought to be chiefly
cultivated in Young People; and all that they are Taught besides, is of little
use, if they are not accustomed to this. Great labor is used to learn them
Languages and Sciences, their Memory is exercised, they are loaded with several
Instructions, their Heads are filled with a multitude of Words and Ideas; but
it would be without comparison more important, to cultivate their Judgment.
Whatever they may be designed for, no greater good can be procured to them,
than to make them able to pass a sound Judgment upon Things, and to govern
themselves by Reason. True Sense is necessary at all times, and it is of a
general Usefulness in our whole Life. It is therefore an unhappiness for
Children that in this respect they are so much neglected. Men have not the
Patience to reason with them, and to Teach them to Speak and to Act wisely.
They are suffered to be among People who can neither Speak nor Reason, they
converse for the most part, only with Servants or other Children. By this means
they accustom themselves to take up false Notions, to judge of Things only by
their appearances, to resolve rashly and without Consideration, and to be
governed only by their Senses, Passions, or Prejudices. From thence proceed
almost all the Faults which they commit afterward; but this is especially the
Cause of that affection which Men bear to Sin, and to the Things of this World.
The first Quality of a Christian, is to be a Rational Man; it being impossible
that a Man who cannot make use of his Reason, and who has no Sense, should
judge aright of Spiritual Things, curb his Passions, renounce his Prejudices,
and constantly follow the Rules of his Duty.

3. I shall not here enumerate all the particular Faults which are suffered in
Children; but there are two which I cannot but take notice of, because I look
upon them as the cause of most of the Passions and Vices, so which Men are
addicted. First there are no sufficient endeavors used to make Children
tractable, and to subject them to the Will of others. The groundwork of a good
Education is to keep them in Awe and Obedience; and not to let them grow
independent, and obstinate in their own Will and Passions; so that when we
command or forbid them a thing it is by all means necessary to make them obey.
When we observe in them too strong an Inclination to any thing, though the thing
were innocent, yet because they desire it too earnestly, they are not always to
be indulged in it. But care is to be taken, that when we Cross their Will, we
do it with Mildness, and in such a manner, as may give them to understand, that
it is with reason and for their good, we oppose them, and not out of humor, or
only to vex them. When Children are thus dealt with, they may be turned which
way soever we please. It keeps them from stubbornness and Self-love, it teaches
them to overcome their Desires, to submit to Corrections, and to follow the
Advice which is give them. In a word, Tractableness in a Child, is a
disposition to every thing that is good, and the foundation of all Virtues. But
no good can be expected from a Child who is not docile and obedient. If he is
permitted while young to be independent, and to do what he lists, he will be
much more absolute, when he comes to a riper Age.

The other Fault, which it is very necessary to prevent is the love of the Body
and of the Objects of Sense. A carnal Temper, is by the testimony of Scripture
it self, the root of all Vices. But the first rise of that irregular Affection,
which Men bear to every thing that gratifies their Body, is in their Infancy.
For besides, that Children govern themselves only by sense; that Bias they
have toward sensible things, is forfeited by the sensual Education, which is
bestowed upon them. None but gross and Material Objects, are proposed to them;
they are entertained only with those things, which affect the Senses, and no
Ideas but those of bodily Pleasures or Pains, are excited in them. The Promises
and 'Threats, the Rewards and Punishments, which are used to gain upon them,
relate only to Corporeal things. And here it ought not to be omitted, that they
are chiefly spoiled, by being indulged, in Gluttony and the Vanity of Clothes.
These are the two first Passions of Children; the two Inclinations, by which
they begin to grow Corrupt and to love the World; nothing makes so much
impression upon them as that which affects their Eyes or their Palate.

If Children were used to a simplicity of Diet and Apparel, this would preserve
them, from many dangerous Vices and Passions; it would dispose them for those
Virtues, which are the most necessary to a Wise Man and a Christian; it would
inure them to Sobriety, Labor, Prudence, Humility, to the Contempt of
Pleasure, and to Firmness and Patience in Calamities. This would make their
Constitution stronger, and prevent diverse Infirmities, which both afflict and
shorten their lives. But ill Custom prevails against the Maxims of Reason and
Christianity. Little caution is use in relation to their Diet; they are
suffered to eat much beyond that which Nature requires, and they are accustomed
to be liquorish and dainty in their eating. As for Clothes and Decking, Fathers
and more especially Mothers, have that Weakness, that they love to see their
Children fine and spruce. Besides this, the way of breeding up Children of the
better sort, makes them soft, effeminate and lovers of Pleasure. The fruit of
such an Education, is, that Children become Slaves to their Bodies and to their
Senses; they are taken with nothing but bodily Pleasures and worldly Things.
From thence Spring in process of time; Intemperance, Uncleanness, Pride,
Covetousness, and most of the greater kind of Sins. This is likewise the
principal cause of Indevotion, and of the little relish which Men find in
spiritual Things, particularly in Religion and Piety. A sensual Education
occasions all these Evils.

4. It will not be improper to observe here, that frequently the Education
which is given to those Children, who are destined to Sciences? and
considerable Employments, either in the Church or in Civil Society, does but
corrupt their Inclinations. They are sent to Colleges and Universities, where
being trusted with themselves, they live in Independence and Libertinism; and
they are sent thither at an Age, in which without a kind of Miracle, they
cannot fail of being undone. They are as it were emancipated from the
inspection of their Parents; they are exposed without defense to the most
dangerous Seductions, and that at the very time, when they are the most unfit
to regulate their Conduct, and the most susceptible of ill Impressions and
vicious Examples. Children would be much better Educated with relation both to
Sciences and good Manners, if their Parents did not make so much haste, and if
they did not spur them on to Study, till their Judgment was a little formed,
and especially if they took care to confirm them in the Principles of Religion
and Virtue, before they were sent from Home. Some alteration should likewise be
made in Colleges. For the very Studies which Youths pursue there, are
instrumental to Debauch them. They learn Latin and Obscenity together. Authors
are put into their Hands, the reading of whom raises impure Ideas in their
Minds; and as if there was a design to stifle in them all sense of Modesty,
they are made to interpret and to rehearse very undecent things. When all is
well considered, young People acquire but little of useful Learning in Colleges
and Academies, at the rate they live and study in those Places; and there too
they commonly leave their Innocence.

5. The means of procuring to Children a happy Education, are not used as they
should be. These Means are Instruction, Encouragement, and Correction.

Instruction is very much neglected, as I shall more particularly show, when I
come to speak of the Education of Youth with reference to Religion. Parents
seldom give good Directions to their Children, to teach them how they ought to
live. They do worse; they train them up to ill things, and give them bad
Instruction. By the Discourse and the Maxims they utter in the hearing of their
Children, they infuse Sentiments and Principles of Covetousness, Pride,
Sensuality and Dissimulation into them; they teach them to act upon the Motives
of Interest and Passion, or by the Notions of a false Honor. Nay, they do
sometimes directly teach them Vice, they encourage them to Lie and Cheat, to be
Revengeful and Passionate. So that Young People are not only destitute of good
Instructions, but they are besides, infected from their Infancy with several
most pernicious Principles. I need not say, what the Consequences of such an
Education are like to be.

If few Children are formed to Virtue by Instruction, few are made Virtuous by
the good Example of their Parents. It is much when this Example is not bad and
dangerous. In most Families Children see nothing that Savours of Christianity,
except some external Acts of Religion; they observe that every one of the
Family is employed about Temporal things; the discourses they hear, turn
altogether on Interest, or some trifling Subject. They are Witnesses of a great
many Disorders, of the Heats and Quarrels of their Fathers and Mothers, of
their Avarice, their Swearing their Lying, their Intemperance, their Impiety,
and their want of Respect for Religion. These are the Examples which, for the
most part, Children have before their Eyes, and which Corrupt them more than
any thing else. At that Age almost every thing is done by Imitation and
Example; and no Example makes more Impression upon them, than the Example of
their Parents, because it is always in sight; and they think besides they
cannot do amiss, as long as they Copy after it.

It is very useful in educating Children to encourage them. I mean not only
that they should be exhorted and incited to their Duty, and that, from the
Motives of Honor and from the pleasure that attends the doing of it; but that
likewise, we should express our Satisfaction, and our love and esteeem of them,
when they do as we would have them. A Word of Praise, a little Reward, inspires
new Ardor into them. We may do what we please with Children, when we can
prevail upon them with gentle Methods, and win their Love: They then accustom
themselves betimes to do their Duty, out of Inclination, and from noble and
generous Views. But to use always Severity toward Children, and to take no
notice of their Endeavors to do well, is the way to discourage them, and to
extinguish in them the Love of Virtue.

Yet Severity is necessary, and upon some occasions we ought not to forbear
Rigor and Correction. Those indulgent Parents, who being restrained by a false
Tenderness, cannot find in their heart to Chastise their Children, do
infallibly ruin them. But if the want of Correction and Discipline makes
Children unruly; Chastisement ill dispensed produces the same effect. There are
commonly three Faults committed in the Correcting of Children.

The first relates to the Cause for which they are chastised. Correction should
not be used but for those Faults, which have something of Vice in them; as when
Children are guilty of Malice, of some ill Habit, or of great Negligence; and
even then we should not proceed to Chastisement, but after we have tried other
ways to no purpose. But this Rule is little observed. Children are punished for
all sorts of Faults indifferently, and very often for small ones. They will
sometimes be severely chastised, because they can not say their Lesson without
Book, or for some other little disorder they have done in the House through
Imprudence and without Malice; and at the same time Faults against Piety and
good Manners shall be passed over. These Corrections produce several ill
effects, and especially this, that Children form to themselves false Notions of
their Duty. The fancy that the Faults for which they are punished are the most
considerable, and that there is more hurt in spoiling their Clothes, or in
missing a word of their Lesson, that in Lying, or in praying without attention,
which lessens in them the Abhorrence of Vice.

The Second Error, which relates to the Nature of the Correction inflicted upon
Children, is when no other Chastisements are used but those which make the Body
smart. Such Corrections without doubt are useful and necessary, because
Children are chiefly moved by those things which strike the Senses; but they
are not the only Ones to which recourse is to be had. To beat Children every
time they do amiss, is to use them like Beasts. There are other ways of
punishing are mortifying them. The most profitable Corrections are those, which
excite in them Sorrow and Shame for the ill they have done.

Lastly, There is an Error in the Chastising of Children, when they are not
Corrected with Discretion and Gentleness. Prudence and even Justice requires,
that regard should be had to the Nature of their Fault, to the Disposition they
are in, and to other Circumstances; and it becomes that Love which a Father
owes his Children, to Correct them with Lenity and Moderation, and to forbear
excessive Severities. Children should perceive the Tenderness of their Parents,
even in their Corrections, and be made sensible that it is with Reluctance, and
only in order to their Good, that they treat them with some Rigor. If
Chastisements were dispensed with these Cautions, they would at the same time
that they cause Pain, beget in Childrens Minds, a Sorrow for having done amiss,
and they would make them love their Parents, even while they are Punishing
them. But for the most part, Parents, or those who have an Authority over
Children, Chastise them without Discretion, and with a Rigor which borders
upon Cruelty; they punish them rather out of Passion, Spite or Revenge, than
upon wise and sober Consideration. Such a proceeding discourages and provokes
Children, and it makes them hate their Duty. I confess this Method may strike
Terror into them, and Curb them a little, but they grow the more stout and
incorrigible by it, and they will certainly run into Licentiouness, as soon as
they are no longer restrained by the fear of Punishment.

From what has been said hitherto, it is plain that Men's Corruption, is a
consequence of the Education they had in their Youth: But this will yet more
evidently appear, by the Reflections I am now going to make, upon the way of
bringing up Children in Religion and Piety.

We are here to consider Education, in reference to the two Ends of it, which
are the educating of Youth, First in the Knowledgwe, and then in the Practice
of Religion.

I. The Considerations to be insisted on concerning the first Head, relate
either to the Things which Children are to be Instructed in, or to the manner
of Instructing them.

1. As to the Things themselves, there are Two Articles upon which the
Instruction of Youth ought to depend; and those are the Truths, and the Duties
of Religion.

The chief Rule to be observed with relation to the Truths of Religion, is to
insist upon those, which are the most necessary, and to give a distinct Notion
of them to Children. And here Two Faults are committed; The first is, when they
are not Instructed in all the Truths which are to be known in order to be a
Christian; the second is, when such Instructions are proposed to them as are
unsuitable to their Age, or even useless.

To explain my Meaning a little further; I say First, that there are some
essential things, which Children are not at all, or but imperfectly taught.
Among these we may reckon the knowledge of Sacred History. Religion being
founded upon History. Religion being founded upon History and Facts, it would
be requisite that Instruction should begin at the Historical part of Religion,
and at the main Events which are related both in the Old and New Testament: so
that Children might know at least in general, the principal Ages of the World,
and the most remarkable things, which did happen from the Creation to the
coming of our Savior; what the Flood was, what were the Egyptian and the
Babilonish Captivities; what time Moses, David, the Patriarchs and the Prophets
lived in; what sort of People the Heathens and the Jews were, and what kind of
Life our Savior led.

It must not be said that History is above the Capacity of Children; for on the
contrary, it is that, which is to them the easiest part of Religion, which they
hearken to with the greatest pleasure, and which they remember best. Nothing
does more smoothly enter into their Minds than History; all the things I have
no mentioned may be taught them in a Week. And this Knowledge is as necessary
as it is easily acquired. A Man can never understand his Religion well, or be
thoroughly convinced of its Truth, if he does not know the Facts which is
supposes. We see that it was by the Means of History that God chose to instruct
Mankind, and that matters of Fact make up the most considerable part of the
sacred Writings. And therefore it is a strange thing, that in Catechisms and
other Instructions given to Youth, History should be so little insisted upon.
This is visibly one of the Causes of that profound Ignorance, which the
greatest part of Christians live in: This is the reason why they understand
almost nothing of what they read or hear in Sermons, and why the Doctrines
which they are taught make so little impression upon them.

Teaching Children History, gives them beforehand, some Notions of the Truths
and Doctrines of Christianity; but yet these Truths and Doctrines ought to be
proposed to them separately, that they may have a more distinct apprehension of
them. Above all things, great care should be taken, to imprint upon the Minds
of those who are to be instructed, the knowledge and the belief of the
Principles of Christianity. But this likewise is not done as it should be. In
Catechisms, as well as in Sermons, particular Truths are dwelt upon, and the
general ones are touched only by the by. This is a Fault I have observed in the
very beginning of this Work.

Now at the same time that Children are suffered to be ignorant about many
important Articles, they are perplexed with diverse useless, or not very
necessary Instruction. Instead of limiting them to the essential parts of
Religion, their Minds and Memories are filled up with many things which they
may safely be Ignorant of. Some would have them understand the Disputes of
Divines, concerning the most curious and abstruse Questions, and they are made
to get several things by heart, which they do not understand, and which are of
no great use. In the mean time Children learn these things and say them without
Book, and being possessed with the conceit, that they are as many Articles of
Faith, they rank among Divine Truths School terms and Doctrines, of which they
neither apprehend the Certainty nor the use. And thus having none but intricate
Ideas about Religion, they do not perceive the Beauty, the Solidity or the
Excellence of it, and they have neither true Love nor Respect for it.

When Children are once instructed in the Truths of Christianity, it is
particularly necessary to acquaint them with the Duties of it. There are two
distinct sorts of duties in Religion. First the Duties conceming Divine Worship
or Service, and then the Duties of Morality. The First are Adoration, the
Honor which is paid to God, Prayer and Thanksgiving: But as these Duties may
be performed either outwardly or in wardly, it is of very great moment to make
Children apprehend, that Brayer and all the other Acts of Divine Worship, ought
to proceed from the Heart, that John IV.
God will be served in Spirit and in Truth, and that without this the Worship
which is paid to him, either in private or in public, does only provoke his
Displeasure. It is not enough therefore, to tell Children, that they must pray
to God or go to Church, and to teach them some Form of Prayer, to be said at
certain Times and Hours: All this is but external, and if we go no farther, if
we do not carefully inform them, that true Worship is Internal and Spiritual,
we shall make but Hypocrites of them, by tenching them to pray and to perform
Religious Acts. The Faults then which are committed in this point, are of great
Moment, and we may easily perceive, that Hypocrisy and Indevotion are the
Consequences of this Negligence. The Religion of most Christians consists only
in some external Actions; they think they have fulfilled their Duty, when they
have recited some Prayers, or been present at the Public Worship of God, though
in all they do this kind, they have neither Attention nor Elevation of Heart;
but this Error which is so capital, and yet so common, arises chiefly from
hence, that Children are formed only to a mere outside Devotion and Worship.

Young People are not much better instructed in Moral Duties. I shall not enter
here upon all the Consideration which the Subject might afford, because I have
treated of the want of Instruction concerning Morals in several places of this
Treatise, and particularly in the 1 Chap. of the First Part. Yet I must say
that this Defect proceeds, from the Instructions which are given to Youth. Much
greater care is taken to inform them about the Doctrines than about the Duties
of Christianity. The Articles of the Creed, the Questions concerning the
Sacraments, and the other Points of Doctrine, are handled and examined largely
enough in Catechisms, and Controversy is not forgot; but the Ten Commandments
are explained in so succinct and superficial a manner, that we do not find
there so much as the Names of a great many Vices, Virtues and Duties. Children
who should be raised up to Christian Perfection, are only taught the Ten
Commandments, and from the Explication which is given of these, they gather
that they should not be Idolaters, Blasphemers or profane Persons; that they
should neither commit Murder nor Adultery, that they should not steal or bear
false witness. But how many other Duties are there of which they have no manner
of Notion? They are not taught what it is to be Gentle, Humble; Sincere,
Charitable, Pure, Sober and Patient. Many Persons, because they were never
instructed in these Virtues which are the principal Ornaments of a Christian,
do not practice, or so much as know them. We are to impute to these slight and
defective Instructions, that Opinion which is commonly received, That whosoever
is free from those six or seven great sins forbidden in the Decalogue, is a
good Man.

2. The Success of Instruction depends in the second place upon the Method and
way of Teaching. The Method of Teaching, should on the one hand be clear and
proportioned to the Age and Capacity of Children, and on the other, it should
be delightful, and fit to make them love Religion. By this, two Ends which
ought to be aimed at, will be attained; the Mind will be enlightened, and the
Heart moved. What is clear informs the Mind, and what is delightful wins the
Heart, and inspires into it a strong Affection for Religion and for the Duties
of it.

1. Perspicuity is never more necessary, than it is in the Instructing of
Youth. Children having no Ideas as yet of most things, and not being used to
the signification of Words, cannot understand what is said to them, unless it
be delivered with much clearness and simplicity, and unless every thing be
avoided, which may puzzle or seem obscure to them. This Perspicuity results
First, from the things that are taught. It is a certain Truth, is always clear
and easy to be understood; and that on the contrary, Whatsoever is obscure and
difficult, is not very necessary. So that provided Instruction goes no farther
than essential Doctrines and Duties, it cannot be very hard for Children, to
apprehend what is said to them. Secondly, Clear Expressions, and plain and
popular ways of speaking, produce distinct Ideas in the Minds of those who are
instructed; but a dark or too high a Style, figurative or learned Phrases,
spoil the Fruit of Instructions. Lastly, Order and Method contribute mightily
to Clearness. It is not fit that Children should be loaded at first, with many
Doctrines and Precepts. General Instructions, the Principles of Religion, and
the simplest Ideas, ought to go foremost, and then particular Instructions and
more complex Ideas, may be proposed; but still with a due Regard to the Age,
Capacity, and Progress, of Children.

2. Instruction is to be delivered in a delightful manner. This is the way to
insinuate our selves into the Minds of Children. Nothing wins more upon them,
than a sweet and pleasant way of speaking, and nothing gives them so much
disgust, as roughness and severity. If Religion was represented to them with an
attractive Aspect, they would certainly embrace it with eagerness. But for the
most part those who teach or speak to them of Religion, do it with an Air of
Severity, and a dismal Tone, and with those Circumstances, which make them
averse to it. Commands, Threatenings, and Constraint are used, to make them take
their Catechisms or say their Prayers; if they fail to do this, their Teachers
are angry and beat them. When we exhort them to Piety, in stead of going about
this with such a Gentleness as might make Virtue amiable to them, we speak in a
harsh and chiding manner. The Effect of this is, that Children seeing nothing
in Religion that is enticing, take up a Prejudice against it; they look upon
that Instruction, to which they are compelled, as a hard piece of Labor and
Drudgery. Religion is no sooner mentioned, but it damps their good humor, they
do nothing but by Constraint and against their Will; they free themselves from
that Constraint as soon as they can, and they bear during their whole Life an
Aversion, or at least, an Indifference to Religion.

II. I have been discoursing hitherto, of what relates to the Knowledge of
Religion, and I hope I have clearly proved, that generally speaking, Children
are ill instructed. I am now to consider Education with relation to Practice.
For it would be to no Purpose, to infuse into young People, a perfect Knowledge
of the Truths and Duties of Religion, if they were no^ taught to make a good
use of that Knowledge, and to direct it to its true End, which is the Practice
of Virtue and Piety. But it is seldom that the Care of Parents, and of those
who have the instructing of Children, goes so far. If they take some Care about
their Instruction, they generally neglect them as to the practical Part, and
they little enquire whether they live according to the Precepts of Religion.
Now Instructions thus dispensed, do not only prove useless, but they may
likewise make Children doubly wicked, and fill them with the most dangerous
Prejudices. When Children observe that Religion is proposed to them only, in an
Historical and Speculative Manner, and that provided they remember what is told
them, and are able to give an Account of it, they are commended for being well
skilled in Religion; and that as for the rest, they are permitted to live as
they please, and that they are not chid, though they do not practice what they
were taught; they conclude from all this, that Religion consists wholly, in the
Knowledge and Profession of certain Truths, and that it is not absolutely
necessary to frame their Lives according to the Rules of the Gospel. They
accustom themselves besides to slight their Knowledge, and to act against the
Principles of their own Consciences. These pernicious Sentiments are infused
into Children when Instructions are not directed to Practice. To prevent so
great an Evil, these Rules are to be observed.

1. The Design of proposing the Truths and Doctrines of Christianity to
Children, should be to beget in them a love and a respect for them; and in
order to that, we should let them see, their Certainty, their Importance, and
their Use. It ought then to be carefully inculcated to them, that there is
nothing more true and certain, nothing of greater Importance, or that concerns
us nearer than Religion, and that in Comparison with it, all that we see in the
World, is of very little or no Consequence; and lastly, that it was revealed
for no other End, but to make us good, and to conduct us to the highest
Bessedness. By this Method, Instruction will always terminate in Practice. By
teaching Children to know God, we shall excite in them a Love and Reverence
toward that Supreme Being. By speaking to them of Providence, we shall make
them apprehend that God sees every thing, and what Reasons we have to depend
upon, and to fear him. By telling them the History of the Bible, we shall make
them observe in those various Events, the Effects of God's Wisdom, of his
Goodness Power and Justice. In explaining to them the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, we shall chiefly apply our selves to make them understand, what
these sacred Ceremonies oblige Christians to, what an August and Venerable
thing Baptism is, and what Purity is required in those who are baptized: And so
when we speak to Children of Christ and his Sufferings, of the Resurrection and
a future Judgment, of the Punishments and Rewards of another Life, and of all
the other Truths, we should do it in such a manner, as may stir them up to
Piety and Holiness.

2. In the next place we ought to engage Children to the Practice and
Observation of the Duties of Christianity, with relation both to Worship and
Manners. And first it is altogether necessary, to teach them to render to God
the Worship that is due to him. There are few Christian Families, where
something is not done with this Intention. Children are made to learn some
Prayers, to say them Mornings and Evenings, and to be present at the public
and private Exercises of Piety. But the main should be, to bring them to
sincerity in Divine-Service, lest they fall into Impiety and Hypocrisy. The
greatest endeavor should be, to accustom them to Pray with Attention and
Reverence. This may at first seem difficult; we neither see the Heart of
Children, nor can regulate the motions of it. But yet I think, there are ways
to fix their Minds, which might be successfully used: And I hope my Readers
will not think it amiss if I dwell a little upon this Head, considering the
importance of it.

1. I Would not have Children Pray, before they have some knowledge of what
they are doing. There is a Custom established every where, which I look upon as
the first Cause of Indevotion; and that is, to make little Children recite
Prayers, and long ones too. I do not apprehend the use of this, nor where the
inconvenience would be, if Children did not Pray at an Age when they can hardly
speak an articulate Word. It would be time enough to make them Pray, when they
are capable of some Reflection. If we did wait till then, they might Pray with
Attention; and, I make no doubt, but they would do it with Pleasure and
Reverence. Children think it an Honor to do what is done by Men; if therefore
they were not permitted to Pray till they came to a certain Age, they would
look upon Praying as a particular Privilege. But when they are made to Pray
before they have any sense of what they do, it put this Notion into their
Heads, that Praying in nothing else but reciting of Prayers: And besides, that
Obligation which is laid upon them, to perform regularly a Duty, of which they
do not yet understand the Necessity or the Use, makes that they only observe it
out of Custom.

2. I could wish that when we begin to make Children Pray, we should Teach them
plain and short Prayers, wherein they might say nothing but what they
understood. Two or Three Sentences are enough in those beginnings, and as they
grow in Years, longer Prayers may be prescribed them. Brevity is to every Body
a help to Devotion; but Children being not capable of a long attention, it is
certain, that long Prayers are not at all fit for them.

3. It would be very useful to Discourse with them about the Excellency and the
Necessity of Prayer, and to make them apprehend what an Honor it is for us, to
speak to God, and to lay open our Necessities before him.

4. In order to accustom Children, to look upon Prayer with Reverence, and to
go about it with Seriousness; they should not be allowed to Pray when they are
strongly posseffed with some Passion, or Object, or when they have committed a
considerable Fault against Piety.

5. It is particularly necessary to regulate and observe their behavior and
looks, while they are at Prayers, and then likewise to express a Reverence our
selves, and to say or do nothing that may give them any distraction. It is a
Custom as bad, as it is ordinary in Families, to go to and fro, to be busy and
to talk, all the while that Children are saying their Prayers. How is it
possible that amidst all that noise, which would even hinder older People to
Pray as they ought, Children, whose Thoughts are so rambling, should not be
distracted? And what Reverence can be expected from them about the Exercises of
Piety when their Fathers and Mothers who are (...) show none at all? This is
what I have to observe, concerning Prayer, which is the principal part of
Divine Worship.

As to what concerns the Duties of Morality, very particular care ought to be
taken, to make Children observe them. The first mean to be used next to
Instruction, is to exhort them to the Practice of Virtue, and to represent to
them, that Piety and Holiness are the essential Characters of a Christian. But
the Exhortations directed to them will have no great effect, if they are not
dispensed with Prudence. Sometimes Parents spoil all, though they mean well. They
Exhort and Chide at every turn, they are perpetually Admonishing and
Moralizing, by this they give a disgust to their Children, instead of winning
upon them. Exhortations ought to be accompanied with Discretion and Gentleness;
above all, we should endeavor to persuade and to prevail upon Children by
Reason, that so being convinced in their own Hearts of the Justice Beauty and
Usefulness of Virtue, they might practice it of their own accord, out of
Inclination and with Pleasure.

That we may be able to Exhort Children as is fitting, it is requisite to be
well acquainted with their Temper, and to observe which are their predominant
Inclinations; that if those Inclinations are good, they may be cultivated, and
if bad, corrected. And it is easy to know the Temper of Children, because they
deal ingenuously, and have not yet ^^arned the Art of Dissembling. If Men did
make this their Study, if they did take hold of the good Disposition which may
be in Children, if they did apply themselves to oppose the predominant Faults,
to which either their Age or their Constitution inclines them; they would
preserve them from many Vices, and make them great Proficients in Virtue.

Besides this, Parents either by themselves or others, ought to watch over the
Conduct of their Children, and to enquire strictly, whether they practice the
Lessons which are given them, whether they are afraid of doing ill things,
whether they forbear those Faults for which they have been reproved, whether
they resist their vicious inclinations, whether they are gentle, sober, humble
and moderate, in their Discourses, Actions, and Behavior. To this End it is
very proper, that they should not have too much liberty, and that they should
be for the most part under the Eye of some Wise Persons who may observe their
Deportment. I do not enlarge upon these Considerations, because they would
carry me too far; neither do I speak here of Encouragement, Correction, and
Example, nor of some other Means which might be very usefully taken in hand for
regulating the Conduct of Children, because these have been spoken to already.

There is ground enough to conclude from what has been said, that Corruption
proceeds primarily and chiefly from the ill Education of Youth. The ordinary
Education of Children being not Christian, what wonder is it, that true
Christianity and folid Virtue should be so scarce? The first Impressions are
the strongest. The Principles which have been imbibed in the first Years of
Life, do not wear out afterward; and those who had not a good Education, are
not often known to be wise and regular in their Conduct.

Let it not be objected here, what many are wont to allege upon this Subject,
That the Errors of Education are not so considerable, but that they may be
corrected afterward, and that Wisdom comes with Years. Thus those Men reason
who only examine things superficially; but such Persons did never seriously
reflect upon Man's Temper, upon the manner how ill Habits are formed, or upon
Experience. Almost all good or ill Habits begin in Infancy, and they grow
stronger afterward. The Age which succeeds Youth is so far from supplying the
Defects of Education, that on the contrary, the longer a Man lives, the more
difficult it is for him to return to Virtue, if he did not set out well at
first. For besides, that Habits are then stronger and deeper rooted, Business
does also come with Age, and People have no longer that leisure and freedom,
which they had when they were young. Those therefore who do not take right
Measures early, and who lanch into the World with ill Principles, are still
growing worse instead of amending. This is verified by daily experience. Age
seldom alters Men for the better.

I do not deny, but that People who were neglected in their Infancy, or whose
Youth has been unruly, are sometimes known to change their Manners and their
Conduct, when they come to a riper Age. But we are to consider how this Change
happens, and what the Nature of it is. In some it is a thorough Change, and a
sincere return to Virtue. God sometimes works Conversion in the greatest
Sinners; and he does this commonly by Afflictions, Sicknesses and Pains. But
such kinds of Conversion are not very frequent. The Change which we think we
observe both in our selves and others, is not always sincere; it is often no
more than an effect of Age, of the State we are in, or of Custom.

Age does Two Things, it deadens the Passions, and it changes them. In the heat
of Youth Passions are violent, and make a great stir; when the prime of Life is
over, a Man perhaps is no longer a Libertine or a Deboshee; but his Exterior
only is reformed. The same Principle of Corruption remains in his Heart. He
that was Sensual and given to Lewdness, moderates himself; but still his Heart
and his Imaginations are defiled. He that was Profane and Impious, does no
longer profess Libertinism openly, he practices some Duties of Religion. But
for all that, he has no more Devotion, or Faith than before. Age does likewise
change Men's Passions and Inclinations. Young People have their Passions, and
supposing these should abate about Forty or Fifty, or even that they should be
quite left off, which yet happens but seldom; there are other Passions which
succeed those of Youth, and which work the stronger, because they are not so
much mistrusted, and because they make less noise, and are hid under the
pretense of a Lawful Calling. Thus we see often that Libertines and Deboshees,
end with Ambition and Covetousness. The World calls the Change which is
observed in those Men, Conversion and Amendment. A Man is said to be reclaimed
from the Errors of his younger Days, when his Conduct is no longer Scandalous,
or manifestly Criminal; but if he is free from the Faults of his Youth, he is
guilty of others, which he had not then. He is no longer Dissolute, but he is a
Slave to Ambition, he is Covetous, Unjust, and wedded to the World, more than
ever. Nay, all things well considered, he is worse than he was in his youth;
since he has run from one Vice into another, and loaded himself with the Sins
of the several Stages of Life. We are not to imagine, that every alteration
which Age makes in Men's Conduct and Manners is a true Conversion.

The various States, Callings, and Professions of Men do likewise put many of
them upon altering their way of Living, and make them give over those Excesses
to which they have been addicted for some time. As soon as a Man come to be the
Master of a Family, or to be preferred to Places, he must of hecessity grow
more regular in his Conduct, and forsake several Disorders which he al^owed
himself in before. He becomes more ^erious, he applies himself closer to
labor, ^e lives more retired, and he takes leave of ^he Amusements of Youth.
Honor, Decen^y, Interest, the necessity of making a Fami^y, and other
Considerations, oblige him to ^his; but Religion has not always a share in ^his
Change.

Lasty, a Habit of Sinning does often blind and harder Men to that degree, that
they ^magine, there is a sincere Amendment in them, when there is none at all;
nay, when ^hey are more Corrupt than when they were young. Men at first are
sensible of their Faults, Conscience checks them for the sins ^hey commit; but
in process of time they per^eive them no more; Conscience grows seared, and
they Sin without being aware of it. Ha^its seldom fail to produce this Effect
of which we see a Thousand Instances in old Sinners.

All this shows, that the Foundations of the Conduct of our whole Lives are
laid in Youth, and that the chief reason why Men live ill, is because they have
not been well Educated.

I do not think it necessary to mention the Remedies of this Cause of
Corruption: I have observed them all along, in showing the Faults which are
committed in the Education of Youth: I shall only add, before I dismiss the
Subject, that all this does properly concern Masters of Families and Pastors.

It were therefore to be wished, in the first place, that Parents would take
more Care than they do, to Breed their Children well, and that in this, they
would proceed by the Rules which Reason and Religion prescribe. They are
mistaken if they think they may excuse themselves from this Obligation, which
both Nature and Piety lay upon them, and which cannot be neglected without a
Sin. But the Carelessness of Parents in this Point, may very justly be wondered
at; the Education of their Children is generally that of all things, which they
mind the least, and the reason of it is, that they themselves want Religion and
Piety.

It would be requisite in the next place, that Pastors should discharge their
Duty with relation to young People, and that to this end in all Places and
Churches, the necessary Order and Method were established for instructing the
People and particularly Children. I remark this, because in this respect things
are not well ordered, so that in many Places such helps andmeans are very much
wanting. It is well known, that the opportunities of Instruction and the helps
to Piety are mighty scarce in the Country and in Villages. Schools are there
managed at a very ordinary rate, and many Places have no School at all, whereby
it happens that many Persons cannot so much as read. There likewise, Divine
Service is but seldom performed, and very carelessly too. The Ministers who are
appointed in those Places, are generally either Men of little worth, or Men who
do not watch over their Flocks as they ought, and who are remiss in the
Exercise of their Office. These are the essential Defects which should be
remedied, by those who have Authority in Church or State.

Above all, it is requisite that Churchmen should have a strict inspection
over Schools and Families, and that Catechisings were more frequent than they
are. Young People ought to be the chief objects of the care of Pastors; no part
of their Office is more useful, or rewards their Labors with better success
than that. Their endeavors to mend those who are come to Age, are for the most
part to little purpose, but what they do for Children ^s of great benefit. If
therefore they have a Zeal for the Glory of God, and if they wish to see a
change in the face of the Church, let them apply themselves to the instructing
of youth, and make it their Business to form a New Gneration.

Among the particular Establishments which might be made, for the edification
of the Church and the benefit of young People, there is one which would be of
great use, and which seems to me absolutely necessary. And that is that with
relation to Children, who have attained the Age of discretion, the same order
should be observed for their admission to the Sacrament, which was practiced in
the Primitive Church, when Catechumens were to be received into the Church by
Baptism. This admission was very solemn. A long Probation and Instruction went
before it. The Catechumens were required to give an account of their Faith, and
the bound themselves by solemn Promises and Vows, to renounce the World and to
live Holy. No such thing is done at this day in the Administration of Baptism,
because young Children are baptized; but what is not done at the time of
Baptism, should be done when they come to Years of discretion. And truly if
there be not a public and solemn Profession, a Promise in due form on the
Children's part, I do not see how we can well answer what is objected by some
against Infant Baptism, which yet is a good and laudable Practice. A Man cannot
be obliged to profess the Christian Religion, against his will or without his
knowledge, This engagement is a personal thing, is which every bold should act
and answer for himself. When Children are baptized, they know nothing of what
is done to them; it is there fore absolutely necessary that when they come to
the years of Reason, they should ratify and confirm, the Engagements they came
under by their Baptism, and that they should become Members of the Church out
of Knowledge and Choice. Now the fittest time for such a Confirmation and
Promise, is when they are admitted to the participation of the Holy Sacrament.

The Order then which I mean is this: First that when Children desire to be
admitted to the Sacrament, they should be instructed for some Weeks before, and
that at the same time they should be informed of the Sacredness and importance
of this Action, and of the Promise they are to make, that so they might prepare
for it betimes. In the next Place, that they should be examined, and that they
should publicly render an account of their Faith. This Examination being over,
that they should be required, to renew and confirm in a public and solemn
Manner their Baptismal Vow, to renounce the Devil and his Works, the World and
the Pomp of it, the Flesh and its Lusts, and to promise that they will live and
die in the Christian Faith: And then that they should be admitted to the
Communion by Benediction and Prayers.

It will, no doubt, seem to some, that I am here proposing a Novelty, and that
too not very necessary; that there is no occasion for all this Solemnity; that
it is enough to examine and exhort Children in private, and that this
Confirmation of the Baptismal Vow is included and supposed in the admission to
the Sacrament. To this I say, that the order I propose will be thought a
Novelty by none but such as do not know what was anciently practiced, and who
call Innovation every thing, which does not agree with the Custom of their
Country or their Church. This is an imitation of the Ancient and the
Apostolical Order; and besides, this Establishment being altogether suitable to
the Nature of the Christian Religion, as I have just now made it appear, it
ought not to be rejected.

As for what is said, that it is sufficient if Children are examined and
admitted in Private: I answer, that the Corruption of the Age we live in is so
great, that in many Churches this Admission, and the Examination which precedes
it, is but three or four hours Work, and sometimes less. Pastors and those to
whom this Function is committed, do often go about it very negligently, they
content themselves with some Questions, which for the most part relate only to
Doctrine and Controversy; the address to Chidren general exhortations to Piety,
but they take no care to instruct them in Morals, or to examine their Conduct;
they do not require of them an express Ratification of the Baptismal Vow. I
know there are Pastors who do their Duty, but the best thing would be, to have
this Form of Examination and Admission regulated in such a manner, that it
might not be in the Breast of every Minister to do in this Matter as he thinks
fit. And that all this might be done the more orderly, it would be fitting,
that according to the Practice of the Primitive Church, some Persons should be
appointed on Purpose to instruct Young People and Catechumens. What Care soever
may be taken of Children, and whatever may be done for them in private
Instructions, it is certain that public and solemn Exhortations on the one
hand, and Promises on the other, would make a much greater Impression upon
them. They would then look upon their Admission with Respect, they would
remember it all their Lives, and this Solemnity would prove as useful and
edifying to the whole Church as it would be to young People. I offer this with
the greater Confidence, because an Order like this has been settled of late in
some Churches, and is there observed with extraordinary Success.

CAUSE VI. Example and Custom.
THere is no doubt to be made, but that Birth, Education, and Imitation, are
three general Principles of the Irregularities of Mons Conduct. The State in
which they are born gives them a Bias toward Vice. Education, as has been
shown in the foregoing Chapter, cherishes, and maintains in most Men that
vicious Inclination: But Custom and Example give the finishing Stroke to Men's
Corruption, and make Vice reign in the World with a Sovereign Sway. This Third
Principle is so general and so powerful, that some have thought it the chief
Cause of Corruption, and that we cannot better explain how Sin is propagated
and transmitted from the Parents to the Children, than by saying that this
happens through Imitation. And indeed it cannot be denied but that Men are
particularly drawn into Evil by Example and Custom. If this be not the primary
or the only Spring of Corruption, it is at least one of the principal Sources
of it. And therefore I thought it proper to consider this Matter here with some
Attention.

All that I am to say in this Chapter is founded upon these two Suppositions.
1. I suppose that Men love to act by Imitation, and that Example is one of
those things which have the greatest Force upon their Minds. But when the
Example is general, and supported by Custom and Multitude, they are yet more
inclined to follow it. They not only conform to Custom, but they think it
besides just and lawful to do so. General Use is to them instead of Law, by
which they judge of what is innocent and forbidden. And that which does yet
more forcibly determine them to follow Example and the greater Numbers, is that
they think it a Disgrace to do otherwise. So that the Fear of Contempt added to
their Inclination makes them perfect Slaves to Custom. If some Remnant of
Knowledge and Conscience does not suffer them to imagine that there is no Hurt
in complying in all things with Custom, however they comfort themselves with
the Thought that the Evil they do is not very great, and that if they are not
innocent, they are excusable at least, when they can plead Example and common
Practice in their own Behalf.

I suppose 2ly. That Example and Custom are bad for the most part. This I think
needs not be proved; and if it did, this whole Treatise might afford us
sufficient Proofs of it, since Ignorance, Prejudices, false Maxims and all the
other Causes of Corruption I have mentioned, are so many Dispositions,
Sentiments and Practices, which are grown Customary, and are established by the
most general Use.

But it is not so needful to prove that the Multitude of ill Examples is very
great, and that Custom is generally vicious, as it is to show that under the
Shelter of Example and Custom, Corruption is still spreading farther in the
World and in the Church.

In order to this, I shall consider the Power of Custom and Example, in these
three Respects. With relation, 1. To Matters of Faith. 2ly. To the Order of the
Church. And, 3ly. To Manners. What I am to say upon these three Heads will
discover the Source of those three great Imperfections which are observed in
the Christian Church, I mean Error, want of Order, and the bad Life of
Christians.

1. Matters of Faith should not be subjected to the Tyranny of Custom. Religion
does not depend upon Men's Fancies and Opinions: The Truths of it are eternal
Truths, it is founded upon an immutable Principle, and it is not more liable to
change than God who is the Author of it. And yet we see but too frequently,
that in Religion as well as in worldy Affairs, Example is more prevalent than
either Reason Justice or Truth. Men do scarce ever examine things in their own
Nature, but Custom is the Rule of their Faith and Sentiments; by this Rule the
determine what is true of false, what they are to believe or to reject. And
this Prejudice is so strong and Men have carried it so far, that Multitude and
Custom, are looked upon as a Proof and Character whereby Christians are to
distinguish Truth from Error, and to judge what side they are to Choose in
Matters of Religion.

What is the Reason why so many People do not perceive, that certain Doctrine
are palpable Errors, and Monstrous Tenets? We wonder how it is possible in so
learned and refined an Age as this is, that the grossest Fables and
Extravagances should still go down with Men of Parts, for Divine Truths and
Adorable Mysteries. A Time will come, when Posterity will hardly believe, that
ever such Opinions were received, or that ever Men did in earnest dispute for
or against such or such a Tenet. It is only the Prejudice of Example and
Multitude, which do blind Men at this day: They have been nursed up and
Educated in those Persuasions, they see them obtaining among Numerous
Societies, and that is the occasion of their Obstinacy in Error.

Nothing but this Inclination of Men to follow Custom, keeps up in the Church
those Disputes which rend it into so many different Sects. The Principle and
Design of most Disputes is no other, but that Men will maintain at any rate,
the Sentiments of their Party; and by this means those who are in Error,
instead of being undeceived, are more and more Confirmed in it. Every body
swallows without Chewing, all that is professed in the Society or Communion in
which he lives, and Condemns without Examination the Opions which are
maintained by small Numbers, or by Persons of another Country or Society. Those
who are prepossessed do not so much as make it a Question, whether they may not
be mistaken, and whether the Truth may not be on the other side. It is to no
purpose to allege to such People the most invincible Reasons, to press them
with express Declarations of Scripture, or with un answerable Objections; for
either they do not attend to all this, or if they Examine those Reasons and
Objections, it is with a Mind full of Prejudices, and resolved beforehand to
think them frivolous, and not to alter their Sentiments. They satisfy
themselves with some sorry Argument, or wretched Answer. If any Scruples and
Difficulties remain, they shake them off in a trice, and set their Conscience
at rest, with this Consideration, that they follow the common Opinion; they
make no do doubt but that they are safe, as long as they side with the greater
Number. Besides, the Advantages of the World which may be obtained by the
adhering to the general Opinion, would fully determine them, if they were not
determined before, and they easily persuade themselves, that their Spiritual
Welfare and the Truth are to be found in that Party, which agrees best with
their Temporal Interest.

2. Custom is likewise, the chief Obstacle to the restoring of Order in the
Church. I could here make a long Article, if I would mention all the Defects,
which may be observed in the State of the Church and of Religion, with relation
to Order. But having done this already in the beginning of this Second Part, I
shall only say in general, that nothing contributes so much to the maintaining
of Disorder as Custom does. The most beneficial Laws and Institutions are
looked upon as dangerous Innovations, when they are not Authorized by Practice:
Men dare not so much as attempt to introduce them. On the other hand, useless
or ill Practices, are thought Sacred Establishments, as soon as they are
confirmed by Time and Custom. If Men do but endeavor to lay aside some
Ceremony, to make some alteration in a Liturgy, or in the Form of
Divine-Services; It seems to many, that the very essence of Religion is struck
at. Thus it happens that Abuses which are palpable, and acknowledge by all Men
of Sense, subsist for whole Ages and cannot be Reformed.

The difficulty of reviving the Apostolical Discipline, and of restoring
Church Government and the Ministry of Pastors, to the State they ought to be
in, proceeds from the same Cause. Because a certain Form of Ecclesiastical
Government and Discipline, obtains in a Country, it is pretended to be the best
and most perfect, in which nothing is to be altered, and those are not so much
as heard, who propose the establishing of another. If any one thinks it a Fault
to suffer Scandalous Sinners in the Bosom of the Church, if he thinks that they
ought to be Excommunicated, and that Christians ought to maintain no familiar
Intercourse with them; though such a Man has the Laws of the Apostles on his
side, yet he shall be called an Innovator. Though he should plainly show the
Inconveniences of the ordinary Practice, and the necessity of Discipline, from
Scripture, from the Pattern of the first Christian Ages, and by the most
convincing Arguments; yet Custom will still be urged against him; the Divine
Laws shall give place to common Usage, and the present Practice shall prevail
above that of the Primitive Christians.

III. Example and Custom have a great force, especially in those things which
concern Manners. Men are not altogether such Slaves to Custom in Matters of
Opinion about Religion, because Opinions are shut up within the Heart, but in
Practical Things and in Manners, there are few Men who are not carried away by
the Stream of the Multitude. People think themselves excused from the
Observation of the plainest and the most Sacred Duties, as soon as they cannot
observe them without departing from Custom, and so, they conform to the common
Use how bad soever it may be. Those who Condemn the vicious and corrupt Manners
of the Age, and practice the Rules of the Gospel, who for instance abstain from
Swearing, and reprove those who do it, who make scruple of Lying and of
transgressing the Rules of their Duty; are looked upon in the World as
Homoursome People, and stigmatized with Odious Names and Imputations. If they
plead the express Commands of Christ and his Apostles; instead of giving up the
Cause, Men will strain the Scripture, and by force Explications and impious
Glosses, endeavor to fix a Sense upon it which may favor the ordinary
Practice. While Piety dares not show it self, Vice is respected and bad Men
carry it boldly every where, because the Numbers are of their side. Maxims
directly opposite to the Moral Precepts of our Savior, are not only received
and tolerated, but they are defended as innocent for this single Reasons, That
the generality of Men approve and practice them. This might be confirmed by
innumerable Instances.

We can hardly imagine any thing more contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel,
than that worldly Life which is led by many Christians. They spend their whole
time in the Cares of the Body, they wear out their Lives in Idleness, Gaming,
Pleasures and Divertisements; they deny themselves nothing, they make it their
study to live Luxuriously and to gratify themselves. This kind of Life is
inconsistent with Piety, but because it obtains among Persons of the higher
Rank, it is very hard to persuade those who follow it, that they ought to quit
it. It is by alleging common Practice, that Men defend a soft and effeminate
Life, Fashions contrary to Chastity and Modesty, the too great familiarity of
the Young Persons of both Sexes, the reading of ill Books, the Plays which
would Honesty and Religion, scandalous Diversions, and those Assemblies where
the most enticing baits and allurements to Vice are to be met with, and where
the Minds of Young People receive the most dangerous Impressions: All these
Things, I say, are defended by Custom.

So that when Luxury, and expensiveness and state in Apparel, Eating, or
Furniture, are once established; we endeavor to no purpose to bring Men to
Christian Moderation, and to banish that multitude of Scandals and Vices, which
must needs attend such kind of Excesses. Thus in some Nations where Drunkeness
is in Vogue, it is in vain to oppose so vicious a Custom. In spite of all that
can be said against Drunkenness and Intemperance, People are so far from
parting with that Vice, that they fancy there is no sin in being Drunk.

To put up no Injuries, to indulge Revenge, to be tender and nice upon the
Point of false Honor, to stick at nothing that can promote one's Fortune, to
assume all Shapes, to disguise one's Sentiments, and to supplant others: All
these are Maxims which are followed without scruple, because they are
authorized by Use, and by the false Opinions of Men. It would signify nothing
to allege to those who are possessed with such Sentiments, what the Gospel
enjoins us concerning Patience, forgiving of Injuries, Humility, Sincerity,
Justice and Charity; such Morals will not be so much as hearkened to, because
these Matters are otherwise determined by Custom* By the same reason it it
pretended, that in Offices, in Trade, in Arts and in the various Professions of
Life; every thing which is usually practiced by Men in those several Callings,
may Lawfully be done. Nay, even an Oath is not sufficient to undeceive People;
most Men explain their Oaths and regulate their Consciences by the Example of
others; they use all the Methods of Gain which Custom has introduced, without
enquiring whether they are justifiable or not.

When I speak here of Custom and Example, I do not only mean that which is
established by general Use, but that likewise which is authorized by Men in
Credit. The Quality of Persons produces the same effect that great Numbers do;
one single Example has sometimes as much force, as the united Examples of a
Multitude. All that is done and approved of by Princes, great Men, Magistrates,
and Persons of Quality, is a Law to a great many People. A small Number of
Considerable Persons, who join their endeavors to bring a Practice into
fashion, is enough to make it in a little time to be generally followed, how
bad soever it may be. This is so commonly seen, that I think it needless to
give Instances of it.

I shall add Three Considerations, which deserve a very particular Attention; I
have already touched them by the by, but I will propose them more distinctly
here.

1. That common Opinion, That it is necessary to embrace the Sentiments and the
Ways of Living which are received in the World, is that which makes Corruption
spread and insinuate it self every where. Men make it a Law to themselves, and
repute it honorable to comply with Custom. It is laid down for a Maxim, That
we must live as other do, and accommodate our selves to the Fashions which are
established, and that it would make us ridiculous, if in Behavior and Manners
we should differ from the Age and the Place we live in. I do not absolutely
reject this Maxim, because it is capable of a very good Sense. A Christian
should not profess an unsociable Piety: He may lawfully observe certain
Decences, and comply to a certain degree with the Opinions and Manners of those
he converses with; nay, he ought to do this for the Interest of Religion and
Piety. But such a Compliance and such regards become Criminal, when they engage
him to act against Duty and Conscience. If the Custom be bad, he ought to
depart from it, and to do in spite of it, whatsoever God commands; he does not
deserve the Name of a Christian, who has not the Courage to do this.

And yet few People are capable of this Resolution, the greatest part is
overcome by the temptation of the Multitude; the regard they bear to the
Example and Judgment of others, produces in them a false shame which hinders
them from doing their Duty, and prompts them to Evil notwithstanding all the
checks of Conscience. And nothing is so fatal and pernicious in the state of
those who thus comply with Custom, as that they become such habitual Slaves to
it, that they are no more able to alter their conduct. When a Man is once got
into a certain Course of Life in the World, he pursues it, and he is still
engaging deeper into it, till at last he comes under a kind of impossibility of
leaving it though he would; because in order to that, he must break off those
Ties and Engagements, which he has been contracting for a great while; he must
withdraw from diverse Companies, and enter quite upon another way of living; now
it is very seldom, if ever, that People can resolve upon all this.

2. Even those Persons who are well disposed, are shaken by Example and Custom:
I said something of this in the Chapter of False-shame. A great many are
satisfied, that the side of the Multitude is not the best, and that the Manners
of the Age do not agree with Religion; but they dare not swerve from Custom,
the fear of being hated, reproached, or despised, restrains them, and
frequently extorts sinful Compliances from them.

I shall take notice to this purpose of what happens every Day to Young People,
whom Parents have endeavored to breed up to Piety and good Manners. When they
first go out of their Father's House, they are ashamed and afraid of doing ill
things, Sin raises some kind of horror in them. With these Dispositions they
lanch into the World, they are placed either in the Army or at Court. And there
they do not find those Maxims of Piety practiced which have been infused into
them, but they have only ill examples before their Eyes. They see there Persons
who have been recommended to them for behave themselves, upon whom their
promotion and fortunes depend, and who are reputed honest Men; they see such
Persons I say living in a licentious manner. This at first surprises and
troubles them, their Conscience holds out for a while, but example does
insensibly lessen in them the Aborrence of Vice, their good Dispositions vanish
in a little time, and at last they swim with the Stream, they embolden
themselves in ill things, and they become finished Libertines. They do in like
manner drink in the Atheistical Sentiments, which commonly are in fashion among
Persons of Quality. If they are but told that Men of Wit and Quality do not
believe a thing, or, that they entertain any Opinion, that is enough to make
them embrace that Opinion, and question the Truths of Religion.

3. In the last place Men are apt to think that if Custom does not justify, it
does at least excuse Vice, and that if they do amiss in the following the
general practice, it is but a sin of Infirmity which God will not take notice
of. This is the last refuge of a great many Persons; they will own that Men's
Manners are very much depraved, and that there is little of true Piety among
them, but they will say; this is the fashion now adays, this is the way of the
World, and he cannot be very guilty, who does only what others do. Nay several
Men who are not Libertines, and who see what should be done for the good of the
Church, and the promoting of Piety, fancy themselves under no Obligation to
oppose Custom. Their excuse is, that it signifies nothing to strive against a
torrent. So that sloth and timorousness together; magnifying the difficulties
which their imagination represents to them, they make no efforts, and they let
things go on at the usual rate. While Custom corrupts and blinds some, it
intimidates and discourages others; and thus Vice and Disorder are still taking
deeper roots.

Now two sorts of Remedies may be applied to this Cause of Corruption, to wit
particular and general Remedies.

The particular Remedies are those cautions, which every body ought to use, to
prevent his being seduced by Example and Custom. There are Two principal means
for a Man to keep himself free from this Seduction; the first is to avoid ill
Examples as much as possible, to withdraw from those Conversations, and to
abstain from those Employments which draw Men into Sin, and to choose a kind of
Life which may not engage us too far into the World; and on the contrary to
seek after good examples, and to be conversant with virtuous Persons.

See Part. I. Cause. III. Artic. II. 4. etc. Cause V. Art. II, about the end.
But as notwithstanding all these Circumspections, we cannot avoid being often
temptted by ill Example. so we ought in the second place to arm and fortify
our selves against this Temptation; by strongly possessing our Minds with the
Sentiments which Religion inspires. I have showed elsewhere, what Judgment a
Christian ought to make of Custom and Men's Opinion. It is evident, that God
having set us a Law, by which he will judge us, and having give us the
knowledge of that Law, and powerful Encouragements to make it the Rule of our
deportment; neither Example nor the Judgment of the World, can any ways excuse
us from doing what God commands, or deliver us from the Punishment which our
Disobedience deserves. Those who have a greater Regard to Custom than to their
Duty, are so much the more inexcusable; because the Gospel expressly forbids us,
to govern our selves by the Practice or Example of the Men of the World. St.
Paul exhorts Christians Romans XII. Ephesians. II, and IV. Tit. II. Mat. VII. XIII. XIV
Not to be conformed to this present world, not to walk after the course of
this world, not to follow other men's way of living; to renounce the world and
the lusts of it. Our Savior enjoins his Disciples, To avoid the wide gate and
the broad way of the multitude, and to strike into The narrow path which is
walked in but by a few. These are Reflections, which every Man who believes the
Gospel, would frequently and seriously make, and which should serve him for
Remedies against the Temptations arising from Example and Custom.

There are other general Remedies, which tend to lessen the number of bad
Examples, and to alter the Customs and Usages which are contrary to the
Christian Religion. For though it may seem, that to go about the abolishing of
that which is established, by a general Custom and a long Use, is to attempt
and impossibility; and though we cannot expect that this Cause of Corruption
should be entirely removed, yet the difficulty is not so great, but that it
might in some measure be overcome.

This we might have Reason to hope for, if First, those who know and love their
Duty would discharge it with Courage, and if they did add to their Knowledge a
Zeal supported by Prudence and Firmness. How great soever the Degeneracy of Men
may be, there is still something in Virtue, which attracts their Respect and
their Love. The Endeavors of good Men against Vice, are always attended with
some Success: If the benefit of their Exhortations and good Examples does not
reach far, they may at least be useful to their Families and their Acquaintance.

But something more than this is requisite to reform general Customs and
Practices; and none can do this more easily and effectually, than those who are
raised above other Men, and who are in public Stations. I say therefore
Secondly, that if Christian Princes and Magistrates, would use their Authority
to this End, and be exemplary themselves, the Corruption of the World would
considerably abate, and bad Examples would neither be so frequent nor so
forcible as they are. It is in their Power to banish the greatest part of those
Customs which are commonly received, and to establish contrary ones. The Care
and Example of Pastors are likewise a most efficacious Remedy. If they did
instruct Christians as they ought, if they did oppose the Corruption of the Age
with the pure Maxims of the Gospel, if they did set themselves against Abuses,
if they did endeavor in public and in private, to bring all those that err
into the way of Truth, if they applied themselves to the instructing of Youth,
and if their Manners were edifying and exemplary, there is no doubt but that
they would soon stop the Current of Vices and Scandals. It should be their
chief Care to oppose Abuses and ill Customs in their beginnings; because when
they have once taken Root, the Remedy is much more difficult. In fine, as
Customs are established by degrees, so they are not abolished all at once, and
therefore those who do not succeed at first in so good a Design, ought not
presently to be discouraged and to grow weary.

CAUSE. VII. Books.
THIS is the last Cause of Corruption which I shall mention, but without
question, it is one of the most generaland of the most remarkable. Books are as
many public Fountains, from which vast numbers of Notions and sentiments which
are commonly received among Men, and which are the Principles of their actions
diffuse themselves into the World: And as it is impossible but that among an
infinity of Books, a great many must be bad, so it is certain that Books
contribute very much to the keeping up of Corruption. If Men, as we have showed
in the precedent Chapters, are ignorant and full of Prejudices, if they have
loose and impious Notions concerning Religion, if great Defects are observable,
both in the Lives of Christians and in the state of the Church in general; if
the People are ill instructed, and Children are ill educated, the cause of all
these Disorders is partly to be found in Books. It is therefore a most
important subject which I am to handle in this Chapter, but it is likewise a
very large one by reason of the prodigious Multitude of Books, which I might
have an opportunity to speak of here. But I must confine my self to that which
is most material to be said upon this Head. I shall speak 1. of Ill Books and
2. of Books of Religion.

The number of bad Books is infinite, and it would be very hard to give a
Catalogue of them; but I think that among all the sorts of ill Books none do
greater Mischief in the World, than either those which lead to Irreligion and
Impiety, or those which are impure and filthy. The first attack Faith, and the
other corrupt Manners.

1. The most dangerous of all Books are those which attack Religion, such are
not only all the Books of Atheists and Deists, but such are likewise all those
Works which tend to overthrow, either the Authority of the Holy Scripture, or
the Facts and Doctrines of Christianity, or the difference between Virtue and
Vice, or any other Principle of Religion. Frank also in the same Order the
Books which introduce Skepticism, and the design of which is, to render the
Principles of Faith or Morality uncertain and dubious.

Those Books in which Impiety appears barefaced, are not the most pernicious.
Few Persons ever durst maintain Atheism openly, or deny directly the
Fundamentals of Religion. And besides avowed Atheists and Deists have not many
Followers. Their Opinions raise horror, and a Man's Mind rebels against them.
But those Men, who though they do not openly espouse the Cause of Impiety, but
pretending all the while that the acknowledge the existence of a God and a
Religion, do yet shake the principal Truths of Faith; those Men I say, diffuse
a much more subtle and dangerous Poison; and this may be particularly said of
the Scepticks. In the main they drive at the same thing with the Atheists, they
assault Religion with the same Weapons, and make the same objections. There is
only this difference, that the Atheist decides the Question and denies; whereas
the Sceptick after he has mustered up all the Objections of the Atheist and
started a thousand Scruples, leaves in some manner the Question undetermined;
he only insinuates that there is no solid Answer to those difficulties, and
then he concludes with a false Modesty, and tells us, that he dares not embrace
either side, and that which way soever a Man turns himself, he meets with
nothing but Obscurity and Uncertainty: This differs little from Atheism, and it
does naturally lead to incredulity.

It is an astonishing thing, that Books containing such pernicious Principles
should have been published, and that Libertinism in Opinions about Religion,
should have grown up to that pitch which we now see it at. The Enemies of
Christianity did never oppose it with so much Subtlety and with such vigorous
Efforts, as some Christians do at this day. Some Books appear from time to
time, which are only Collections of all the Objections of Heathens and Atheists
against the Existence of God, against Providence, the Divinity of Scripture,
the Truth of sacred History, the Foundations of Morality, and many other
important Heads; so that Impiety is now arrived at its greatest height. It
might be more general, but we cannot imagine how it could rise higher.

And this occasions a very considerable objection. It may be asked how it comes
to pass that Incredulity and Sceptism, should appear in so knowing an Age as
this is, and that Men of Parts and Learning should entertain such impious
Sentiments? It is necessary to dwell a little upon the examining of this
difficulty, because it it so apt to perplex Many. The Infidels urge it with
great assurance, and they pretend to infer for it, that Religion cannot and a
Philosophical and Learned Age, and that none but the Mob and the credulous part
of Mankind believe it. They say that ignorant Ages were the most favorable
times to Religion, that then every thing was believed, but that since Men have
begun to examine Matters a little more narrowly they are become incredulous.

But any reasonable Man who does not love wrangling, may easily be satisfied
upon this Point. First Infidels have no ground to suppose, that Men had more
Faith, in the Ages of ignorance than they have now; for this supposition is
altogether false. There was but little Faith in those Ages, for we are not to
call by the name of Faith, a silly Credulity which made the grossest impostures
to pass the Current for certain, and even for Divine Truths. The Infidels do
likewise suppose falsely that the Learning of an Age more enlightened that the
precedent, is prejudicial to Religion; for on the contrary it has done great
Services to it. If some subtle Spirits have attackt it, a great many knowing
and judicious Persons of extraordinary erudition and eminent worth have
illustrated and proved the truth of it, with greater Solidity of Arguments,
than ever was known before. This must be acknowledge to the Honor of God, and
for the credit of the Christian Religion.

But it will be said that those who make Objections against Religion, are
learned; that the are Philosophical Men, who in all other things reason true,
and can distinguish truth from error. Let it be so; but then I ask those who
urge this Objection how it happens that we see every day Men of parts and
sense, who yet will obstinately maintain palpable Errors, and refuse to yield
to the Evidence of some Truths, which are clear as the Sun? To this nothing
else can be said, but that such Men are not so knowing and perspicacious as
they should be, or that they do not make that use which they ought of their
Parts and Judgment. I confess that indeed a Man must have some Parts and
Subtilty to be able to find difficulties every where. But that Man makes a
wretched use of his Parts, when they serve him only to wrangle about the most
certain Truths.

Those which the Infidels call strong Objections against the Truths of Faith,
are but for the most part vain Subtilties and mere Slights of Wit, which may be
used alike upon all sorts of Subjects. That we may be convinced of this, I
shall only name here some or those Truths of Matters of Fact, which are thought
unquestionable, and which no Man, though he had a Mind, can doubt of. It is
certain that the same Objections by which the Infidels attack Religion, may be
turned against such Truths or Matters of fact. The Subtilties of Skepticism may
puzzle a Man, who shall maintain, that there was heretofore an Emperor at Rome
called Augustus, or who shall believe with all Mankind that Parents ought to
love their Children, and that it would be a sin to murder a poor Wretch who is
begging an Alms; I say a Man, who maintains these Truths, may be hard put to
it, before he can get rid of all the questions of a Captious Sophister, But
does it follow from thence that this Man is mistaken? It is to be imagined that
a Man can doubt in good earnest whether or not there was ever at Rome an
Emperor named Augustus, or whether Parents ought to love their Children? Will
any ever be so extravagant as to believe seriously, that it is indifferent
whether we cut a poor Man's Throat, or give him an Alms? The Subtilties of
Arguments signify nothing against facts which are well averred, or against
those natural Sentiments, which are common to all Mankind. Now Religion is
founded upon Facts, and its Principles are in part natural Truths and
Sentiments, which we must needs feel and believe at all times. He that would
destroy Religion must confute those Fact and Sentiments, and Infidelity will
never be able to do it,

Philosophical Knowledge is very much extolled by the Infidels; they pretend
chiefly to a great exactness in Reasoning, and yet they visibly run counter to
right Reason, and transgress the Rules which true Philosophy prescribes. It is
contrary to Reason, to judge that a thing is false or dubious, because there
are some difficulties in it; it ought to be considered, that no Man knows all
Things, or is able to answer all Objections, and that what seems obscure to one
Man, will appear very clear to another. When we have Reasons on the other hand
to believe that a thing is true, when its Proofs are stronger and more numerous
than its difficulties, and when there are Proofs which upon other occasions are
sufficient to determine our Judgment, true Sense requires that we should yield
to such an Evidence. This Method is particularly to be followed, when the Matter
in question is of some moment. In such things we are wont to govern our selves
by the greater Evidence, and to choose the safer side. What can be therefore
more Irrational, than to hazard Eternity, and to question the Truth of
Religion, up on such Considerations as would have no weight with us, and as
would not stop us a Minute in the Ordinary Affairs of this Life?

Further, it is contrary to the Rules of good Sense, to pass a judgment upon
those things of which we have no distinct Idea, or which we do not thoroughly
know. Men who can give no account of the Operations of their Souls, or of a
hundred things, they see before their Eyes, will yet talk at random about the
manner in which God Acts, or foresees future evants, about what God ought or
ought not to have done for the Orderly disposing of all things, about the ends
which that Supreme Being proposes to it self, and about the Means which may
conduce to those Ends. This is the height of Extravagance and Temerity, and yet
it is at this rate, that the Infidels Reason.

I must add besides, that Men of Parts are subject to the same Passions with
the Vulgar, and that those Passions hinder them from discerning the Truth.
These Makers of Objections who pretend to Politeness and Wit, are not generally
sound at Heart, but they love Licentiousness; they are not addicted perhaps to
a gross and shameful, but to a more refined Libertinism; they observe a little
Decorum, but they do not relish the Maxims of Devotion and Piety, and they
cannot endure to be tied to them. Vanity has likewise a great share in their
Conduct. A great many imagine, that it is for their Credit to distinguish
themselves from the Vulgar, and not to believe the things which are believed by
the People: And when they have once embraced this way and set up for Scepticks
in the World, they think themselves bound in point of honor, to maintain that
Character.

Men of Knowledge are sometimes governed by many Prejudices, and false Motives.
A preconceived Notion or a mere Circumstance is sufficient to determine them to
the embracing of an Opinion. What has been said of the Conduct of Princes, may
be applied to the Opinions and Hypotheses of the Learned. Wars and such other
great Events, upon which the Fate of Nations depends, and which make so much
stir in the World, do not always proceed from Wise and Mature Deliberation;
sometimes they are but the effect of a Passion, of a Humor, or of some
particular Circumstance. Thus it is with the Learned: We think too well of
them, if we fancy that they are always determined by the greater Weight of
Reason. The Motives which prompt them to maintain certain Opinions, are often
very slight. They are not sensible of this, they think themselves guided by
Reason, and they do not perceive the true Principle of their Actions or
Judgments. If Infidels did strictly examine themselves, they would find
perhaps, that their Scruples were first raised and have been maintained since,
either by some Book they read when they were Young, or by the Love they had for
some Persons, or by their Aversion to others, or by some ill treatment they
have met with, or by the Praises which have been given them for their Wit, or
by some Prejudice they have conceived against Religion in General when they
heard it ill defended, or against certain Tenets which are particular to the
Society they live in and manifestly absurd; or by some other Motion of this
Nature.

If we call to mind in the last Place, what has been said in the beginning of
this Treatise, to wit, that few Christians apply themselves sincerely to the
study of the general Truths, and of the Principles of Faith; we shall not
wonder that among so many, who never inquired into the Proofs of Religion, some
should be inveigled by the Objections of Libertines, and fall into Infidelity.

I have in a manner stepped out of my way; but this Digression is not
impertinent, since these Considerations may serve as a remedy, against
Incredulity and Skepticism, which some Authors would fain establish by their
Writings.

One would think that every body should abhor those Impious Books, but yet they
are read and liked by many Persons. Young People especially, who for the most
part love Novelty, and are inclined to Vanity and Licentiousness, do easily
imbibe the Principles which are scattered through such Books: They are imposed
upon by the Genteelness, the Wit, and some kind of Learning which they commonly
find there: Being not well grounded in Religion, they are struck with the
Reasonings of Infidels; they very first Objection puzzles them; they begin to
doubt of many things, and in a little time they become thorough-paced
Scepticks. I leave any one to judge, what effects this may produce in an Age so
prone to Vice as this is, and if Young People can avoid being Corrupted when
they are no longer restrained by Religion and Conscience. There is no Condition
more remediless, nor is there any State more deplorable, than when Incredulity
is joined with dissoluteness of Manners. People then are hardly to be
reclaimed; Age and ill Life fortify their Doubts and Scruples, and they
continue in that State to their dying Day. This is the fruit which many reap
from the reading of those pernicious Books, but it is not all the Mischief
which is occasioned by such Writings. They may fall into the Hands of many who
have no great compass of Knowledge, and beget several Scruples in the Minds
even of good Men. After these Reflections, I make no doubt but it will be
granted, that no Books are more dangerous than these, and that to have the
Confidence of Publishing them, is a superlative Degree of Impiety.

II. The Books I have now spoken of assault Religion and Piety in general, and
by consequence open a door to all manner of Disorders and Vices. There are
others which though they do not attack the Principles of Faith, do yet introduce
Licentiousness of Manners. It would be a long Work, if I should specify here
their several sorts, which are as many as there are Vices, Passions, or
received Errors among Men: This is a Detail which I cannot enter into. Being
then forced to stint my self, I shall only speak of impure Books: And I choose
this particular Species of ill Books, because the number of these is not only
very great, but because they are those likewise, which do most generally
Corrupt Men.

Their Number is prodigious. First we have the Obscene Books of the Heathen,
which are not only read by Men, but are put likewise into the Hands of Youth.
Some People are so infatuated with these Books, that they fancy a Man cannot be
a Master of Greek or Latin, unless he has read all the Obscenities written in
those Two Languages; which is as extravagant an Opinion, as if a Man should
pretend that whosever designs to acquire a thorough Knowledge of the French, or
of any other living Language, and to be able to speak and write elegantly in
it, must read all the lewd Poems, and all the scandalous Books which this Age
has produced.

Secondly; Besides impure Books of Pagan Authors, we have those that are writ
by Christians. The World is ove-run with Books of this Stamp, their Number
increases every Day, and their amazing multitude is one of the strongest Proofs
of the extreme Corruption of the Times. It is the last degree of Impudence to
write in that Style, and then to disperse it in the World by the Press: The
Dissolution must need be very great, when this is done so freely and so often
as it is in this Age. Nothing can be imagined more lascivious or execrable than
some Books which have been, and still are Published from time to time: Paganism
did never produce any thing more abominable upon the Head of Impurity than
several Works which were hatched in the very Bosom of Christianity; so that in
this respect Christians have no cause to reproach Heathens.

These Detestable Books are not the only Impure ones, nor perhaps the more
dangerous; vast Numbers of others are current in the World. What are so many
Books of Love and Gallantry, so many Scandalous Novels either feigned or true,
and so many Licentious Pieces of Poetry, but the productions of that Spirit of
Impurity and Dissoluteness which prevails in this Age? Nay, even Books of
Learning which Treat of serious Subjects, have a mixture of Impurity. This
Infection is diffused through all sorts of Books, and appears every Day in some
new Shape.

As the number of Impure Books is great, so their effect is most pernicious;
and none ought to wonder that I should assign these Books as one of the general
Causes of Corruption. No bad Books are more generally read than these, none can
with more reason be called Public Fountains of Vice and Dissoluteness. The
Mischief they do in the World cannot be imagined. They prove to an infinity of
Persons, but especially to Young People, Schools of Licentiousness. It is by
the reading of them, that Youth learn to know and to love Vice. That Age is
prone to Pleasure and to every thing that gratified Sense; and that Inclination
is so much the stronger, because it is cherished and fortified by an Education
altogether sensual, and because Young People for want of good Instruction, have
not much Piety, nor any great Aversion to Vice. From whence we may easily
judge, that they are susceptible of those Passions which gratify Sensuality;
and that it is hard for them to resist those Impressions. which the reading of
impure Books conveys into their Minds. We see in Fact, that Uncleanness is
commonly the first Sin and the first Passion which seduces Men in their Youth,
and which engages them into Vice, for their whole Life: For it seldom happens
but that all the Ages of Life, retain a spice of the Irregularities of Youth.

And yet for all that, these Books have their Advocates. Many Persons reckon,
that there is no harm either in reading, or even in publishing them. If we
believe some Authors, who infect the public with Books full of Obscenities;
none but fantastical People, posseffed with a ridiculous and precise Devotion
find fault with those who write upon this Subject. And in defense of their
Opinion, they allege this Maxim, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure; as if St. Paul who does not allow Christians
so much as to speak an undecent word, did permit them to read and write things
which are contrary to Modesty and may occasion Scandal: From this Maxim they
conclude, that there is nothing is those Books that offends Modesty or
Religion; and they protest that for their part, the reading of them does not
defile their Imagination. I do not know the particular Frame of those Men's
Hearts; perhaps impure. Idea's and lascivious Objects, are grown so familiar to
them, that they do no longer perceive, that such Idea's and Objects make any
impression upon them. But it is unconceivable how People can preserve a chaste
Heart, when they delight in Writing or Reading filthy things. After all, though
they reading of such Works should have no ill effects upon some Persons, there
are a great many more who will make an ill use of them; And this is enough to
make every Many who has any Sense of Religion to detest impure Books.

What I have now said will be granted by many, but it will be thought, that to
rank Books of Love and Gallantry among impure Books, and to condemn the reading
of them, is something to severe. I confess that all those Books are not equally
bad, and that some do not hurt Modesty so visibly as others do. But yet there
are not many, in which a Spirit of Impurity and Licentiousness may not be
observed. That Love which makes the Subject of so many Books, is nothing else
at bottom, but an impure and irregular Passion, of which the Gospel obliges us
to stifle the very first Motions. What the World calls a mere Intrigue of
Gallantry, is sometimes a pretty large step toward the Sin of Adultery. Sin
indeed may be disguised in those Books under another Name, and may be dressed
in a modest Garb, but that makes it slide the more easily into the Mind. It is
dangerous to dally with things, which deserve the almost aversion of a
Christian; and it is almost impossible but that the horror of Impurity and of
every thing that comes near it, must insensibly abate, in any one who is
addicted to such Readings. There are two Maxims in the Gospel which decide this
Matter; the one is, That we are to abstain from the appearance of evil; the
other, that in things indifferent, we ought to avoid whatsoever may prove a
Scandal or an occasion of falling to any body, especially when the Scandal may
be foreseen. Now here is at least the appearance of Evil; it is certain that
diverse Persons will make an ill use of those Books, and by consequence the
reading arid publishing of them cannot be excused.

But as if it were not enough to maintain, * 1 Theff. V. XXII. See Romans XIV. 1.
Cop. X. etc.
that the Books in Question may be read without Sin, it is pretended besides
that the reading of them is useful and necessary to open the Minds of young
People. I do not deny but that it is a valuable Quality to have quick and
well-fashioned Parts, but there are other Books which may be read without
danger, and which are much fitter to form the Minds and Judgments of young
People, than Books of Gallantry, the reading of which, every body knows, has
often spoiled the Minds of those who were given to it The greatest Mischief
that attends this kind of reading, is that it corrupts the Heart and sullies
the Imagination, at the same time that it opens the Mind. Now it were better to
have a little less of that fashionableness and politeness of Parts, which is so
much esteemed in the World, than to acquire it at the expense of one's
Innocence.

But some People do not stop here. They proceed so far as to say, that these
Books are useful even in reference to Religion, and that they are proper to
restrain Youth from Vice; because we see in them the Follies and Misfortunes
which irregular Passions betray Men into. I can hardly think that this is
alleged in earnest. It is a strange sort of Remedy against Impurity, to make
agreeable Pictures of Love, and to represent minutely, and in a natural and
insinuating manner, all the Motions which that Passion excites in those who are
possessed with it. We must be very ill acquainted with the Tempers of Men, and
particularly of young People, if we can fancy that the reading of such Books,
will put them upon Moral Reflections, and inspire them with an aversion to
Vice. Daily experience shows that nothing is more vain or false than such an
Imagination.

It will be said, that at least those Books ought to be excepted, in which
among Love-Matters and licentious Subjects, the Reader meets with fine
Moralities; which may however serve for a Preservative. But these Books are not
much better than the others; nay, I cannot tell whether they are not more
dangerous. Those Moralities are very ill placed, and few People are the better
for them. It is a very suspicious kind of Morality, which comes from the Pen of
those Authors, who write indifferently upon Matters of Love, and religious
Subjects, who sometimes seem to be Libertines and sometimes devout; who after
they have said a hundred licentious things, given you the History of a great
many Disorders, and related several scandalous Passages; entertain you with
Devotion and Piety: This is a monstrous Mixture. If those Authors were truly
religious, they would forbear writing those things which Religion condemns, and
which scandalize the public. Such Books are particularly fit to confirm
worldly Men in their Opinion, that Gallantry, provided it does not proceed to
the highest degree of Crimes is no great Sin, and to persuade young People that
they may easily grow devout here after, though they now spend their Youth in
Libertinism. From all these Confiderations I infer, that let People say what
they will, all the Books which present their Readers with Impurity, either
barefaced, or under some Veil, are extremely pernicious.

Having thus discoursed of ill Books, I come now to the Books of Religion. It
may seem at first, that I should rather seek in these the Remedy, than the
Cause of Corruption. Indeed the end of religious Books should be to banish
Corruption and to establish Piety in the World, and there are many of them
which attack Ignorance and Vice with Success, and which may prove excellent
Preservatives against the Corruption of the Age. But I hope no body will take
it amiss if I say that there are Books of Religion, which do not conduce much
to the promoting of Piety, nay that some prove a hindrance to it.

This I shall now endeavor to show. I shall not speak of any particular Book,
I will only offer some general Considerations, which my Readers may apply as
they see Cause. It is not my Design to rank among bad Books all those Works, to
which some of the following Reflections may be applied. Some indeed are
downright bad, but may are in several respects good and useful, though they have
their Faults; and as good Books ought to be distinguished from bad ones, so it
is not less necessary, to discern what is good in every Book, from what is
naught or useless.

The Books of Religion which I think ought here to be taken notice of, are of
four sorts. 1. Those which explain the Scripture. 2. The Books of Divinity. 3.
The Books of Morality. 4. The Books of Devotion.

1. It cannot be denied but that among the Books of the first sort there are
some very good ones, and that we have at this Day great Helps for the
understanding of the Holy Scripture. But it ought likewise to be granted, that
some of those Books which are designed for the expounding of Scripture, do only
obscure and perplex the Sense of it. It would be tedious to mention here all
the Defects of that kind of Writing, I shall therefore observe only the
Principal.

1. The First and the most Essential is the not Expounding of Scripture,
according to its true Meaning; and this Fault, which is but too frequent in
Commentaries, proceeds chiefly from two Causes: 1. That Expositors do not
apprehend the Scope of the Sacred Writers: and, 2. That they enter with
Prejudices upon the Reading of Scripture.

The true way to understand the Scripture, is, to know the Scope of it, and
never to swerve from that. Good Sense and Piety, joined with the Study of
Languages, History, and Antiquity, are here very serviceable. A Commentator
ought in a manner to transport himself into those Places and Times in which the
Sacred Authors lived. He should fancy himself in their Circumstances, and
consider what their Design was when they spoke or writ, what Persons they had
to deal with, and what Notions, Knowledge, or Customs did then obtain. But
those who, being ignorane of these things, set about Expounding the Scripture,
can hardly do it with Success. It is a Wonder if they do not miss the true
Mark; and if they do not obtrude forced, and very often false, Glosses upon
their Readers.

On the other hand, many Authors apply themselves to the examining of Scripture
with a Mind full of Prejudices. They explain in by the present Notions of the
World. Nothing is more usual with Commentators than to make the Faithful under
the Old Testament speak as if they had been as well acquainted with the Truths
of the Gospel as Christians are; and as if those Questions and Disputes, which
are treated in Common-Places of Divinity, had been agitated at that time. When
those Expositors, for Instance, meet with the World Righteous or Righteousness
in the Psalms, they fancy that David had in his Thoughts all that Divines have
vented concerning Justification; and upon this Supposal, what do they not say,
or what do they not make Preachers say? It has been observed, that almost all
Commentators are partial and endeavor to put upon the Scripture a Sense that
favors the Opinions of their respective Sects. This Spirit of a Party is
chiefly remarkable in some of those Commentaries which these last Centuries
have produced.

2. The second Rule of a Commentator should be, to expound clearly and
familiarly the literal Sense of Scripture, and never to have recourse to a
mystical Exposition, but in those Places where the Spirit of God directs us to
look for it: And yet a great many Authors do almost entirely forsake the
literal Sense, to pursue mystical Explications. In their Opinion, every thing
is mystical in the Holy Scripture, especially in the Old Testament. They are
not contented with unfolding the true Mysteries and Prophecies which manifestly
relate to the Times of the Gospel, but they turn all things into Figure. They
find Mysteries, Allegories, Types and Prophecies every where, even in the
plainest Discourses. This they call searching and diving into the Scriptures.
But this way of expounding the Word of God is a Fountain of Illusions: For as
the Holy Ghost does not explain those pretended Mysteries, so they must be put
to their Guesses and beholden to their Imagination for the Discovery of them;
and he that is the most copious or lucky in his Conjectures, is the greatest
Man. Now I leave any one to judge, whether Commentators, who follow no other
Guide but their Imagination, can avoid being very frequently mistaken, and
giving a great many handles to Libertines and Infidels.

3. We are not to forget here the School-Commentators. The Holy Scripture
should be expounded in a simple and popular manner; and this cannot be denied,
if we consider that it was given for the Instruction and the Salvation of all
Men, and that the Discourses of Christ and his Apostles were addressed to the
Common People, and to such Persons as were far from being Philosophers. Nothing
therefore seems more repugnant to the Design of Scripture, than to explain it
Philosophically, and, which is worse, according to the Principles of a false
Philosophy, as diverse Commentators do. They make use of the Method, Notions,
and Terms of the Schools, to find out the Meaning of the Sacred Writings. They
apply to all Subjects the Rules prescribed by the Schoolmen. They carefully
distinguish in a Text those Things which are called in the Schools Materia,
Forma, Causa efficiens, Finis, Subjectum, Adjunctum, etc. They seek in all
Reasonings the Major, the Minor, and they Conclusion, as if the Holy Ghost, in
inspiring the Sacred Authors, had followed the Scheme of Aristotle's Logic,
and had intended to make Syllogisms in Mood and Figure. I say nothing here of
that Spirit of Dispute and Wrangling which run through the Scholastical
Commentaries, nor of the false Senses and metaphysical Explications, which they
put upon the Scripture. Such Books are Obstacles rather than Helps to the
Understanding of the Word of God; they are fit only to perplex what is clear,
and to spoil Divines and Preachers, by taking away from them that Qualification
they have most need of, I mean Good Sense.

4. Another very different way from that Simplicity with which the Scripture
should be handled, is the Method of those Authors, who without Necessity insist
upon all the Circumstances of a Text, who sift all the Terms of it, as if a
Mystery did lurk in every Word; who descend to the minutest Things, and weary
themselves in Conjectures and Questions. This Exactness is very useless and
insipid. It may be sometimes necessary to clear a Difficulty, to unfold an
intricate Meaning, and to observe the critical Signification of Words: But when
the Sense is natural and easy, and when the Words are clear, to what Purpose
should a Man insist upon all those Illustrations? What need is there for him to
be always pressing the Signification of Words, to remark all their different
Acceptations, and to explain what is to be understood by the Words, Death,
Faith, Just, every time that these Terms occur. The true Method is to pursue
the Things themselves and the Meaning of a Text, without criticizing upon
Worlds and Circumstances.

5. It is the Fault of many Commentators to be prolix and too large. From every
Verse, nay, from every Word, they take occasion to run into a Commonplace, and
to vent a multitude of Notions, so that they really give us Sermons,
Dissertations, or Lectures of Divinity, under the Title of Commentaries. I do
not absolutely condemn diffused Commentaries; we meet sometimes with good
things in them, but we find there likewise a great many which signify nothing.
When all is done, Brevity, Clearness, and Exactness, are infinitely to be
preferred in a Commentary before Prolixity and Copiousness: Such Length breeds
Obscurity and Confusion, it makes Preachers lazy, it tempts them to fill their
Sermons with a hundred needless things, it brings them to a Custom of being
tedious, of making Digressions, and of passing by that which is essential and
solid: All which is very far from promoting the Edification of the Church.

Besides, it is evident that the Defects of Commentaries contribute very much
to the Corruption of Christians. The Holy Scripture is the Foundation of
Religion and Piety; but Commentaries are the Stores from which the Sense of
Scripture is drawn, and from which Preachers commonly take the Matter of their
Sermons. Few of them endeavor to find out the Sense of a Text by their own
Industry; they consult their Commentaries like Oracles, and they blindly follow
their Decisions. It is therefore highly requisite that these Books should not
lead into Error those who have recourse to them. When a bind Man leads another,
they both fall into the Ditch. If then the Guides, to whose Conduct Preachers
give up themselves, are deceitful and false, the Word of God will neither be
well understood, nor well preached, and both Preachers and People will err.

II. It is with Divinity-Books as with Commentaries; some are good, and others
bad. The Diversity of Opinions which we see among Authors, is a Proof of what I
say: Some maintain, as Divine Truths, Things which others reject as false and
pernicious Sentiments; so that there must be no small Error on one side or the
other. All Divines will own the Truth of this Remark; but it is here of no use,
because it does not decide which Books of Divinity are good, and which are bad.
Every body will pretend that the bad Books are those which teach a Doctrine
contrary to that, which obtains in the Society to which he belongs. In order to
know who is in the Right, or in the Wrong, it would be necessary to judge here
upon the Merits of the Cause, and to enter into the Examination of all the
Controversies which divide Christians. But this I will by no means take upon me
to do: It will be fitter for me to take notice of those Faults which are common
to the greatest part of Divinity-Books. I shall say nothing but what must needs
be owned by all the sensible Divines of any Party; and the Reflections I am to
make, though General, may perhaps be of some use to direct our Judgment
concerning the Doctrine it self contained in those Books.

1. Almost all the Authors who have writ of Divinity, have made of it, upon the
Matter, a Science of mere Speculation. They establish certain Doctrines, they
deliver their Opinions, they prove them as well as they can; they treat of
Controversies, and confute their Adversaries; but they do not seem to have
meditated much upon the Use of the Doctrines they teach, with relation to Piety
and Salvation. They are very short upon this Head, which yet is the chiefest of
all; they are not by half so solicitous to assert the Duties, as they are to
maintain the Truths of Religion. Now this is not teaching Divinity. The Design
of Religion is to teach Men how they ought to serve God, and to make them Holy
and Happy. If this was considered in the handling of Divinity, and if Care was
taken to show what Relation all the Parts of Religion have to the Glory of God,
and to the Holiness and Felicity of Man, there would be much more Piety than
there is now among Christians. Those who study Divinity would learn betimes to
direct it to its true End; and this would likewise be a means to distinguish
material from insignificant Points and Questions, and to ease Religion of all
those needless Disputes, which are one of the main Causes of the Corruption of
Christians.

2. What I have now said leads me to a second Observation; which is, That as
several things might be left out of Divinity-Books, so other things are
wanting, which it would be necessary to add to them. For the Purpose,
Common-Places do not insist much upon on the General Truths and Principles of
Religion. They scarce give us any Instruction about Church Discipline and
Government, or about the Belief and Practice of the First Ages of Christianity:
As for Morality, it is there touched but very superficially. And yet these are
essential Articles in Divinity, the Knowledge of which is necessary to those
who are called to preach the Gospel, to guide a Church, or to direct Men's
Consciences.

3. Divinity-Books are, for the most part, too Scholastical. The Method of the
Schoolmens way of handling Divinity may justly be looked upon as a Defiance to
Sense and Religion, yet that Method has prevailed to that degree, that for some
Ages it was not lawful to swerve from it. Of late Years indeed the School men
have lost a great deal of heir Credit; and in Divinity, as well as in
Philosophy, many Persons have no longer that blind Deference for them which was
paid heretofore. Yet, for all that, a great Number of Divines do still set up
that Method for their Rule, and it is still as it were sacred in Colleges and
Universities. Common-Places to this Day savor too much of the Barbarism of the
Schools, and we find there but too many Remainders of that dry and crabbed
Theology, which had its Birth in the Ages of Ignorance. Instead of those simple
and clear Ideas, which render the Truth and Majesty of the Christian Religion
sensible, and which satisfy a Man's Reason, and move his Heart, we meet with
nothing in several Bodies of Divinity but Metaphisical Notions, curious and
needless Questions, Distinctions, and obscure Terms. In a word, we find there
such intricate Theology, that the very Apostles themselves if they came into
the World again, would not be able to understand it, without the help of a
particular Revelation. This Scholastic Divinity, has done more mischief to
Religion, than we are able to express. There is not any thing that has more
Corrupted the Purity of the Christian Religion, that has more obscured Matters,
multiplied Controversies, disturbed the Peace of the Church, or given rise to
so many Heresies and Schisms. This is the thing which confirms so many
Ecclesiastics in their Ignorance and Prejudices, and which keeps them from
applying themselves to the solid Parts of Divinity, and to that which is proper
to sanctify Men.

Now all these Defects are visible Causes of Corruption, which may be proved by
this single Consideration; that it is in Common-Places that Churchmen learn
their Divinity: Supposing then that those Books do not give them a true Idea of
Religion, what Religion or what Divinity can such Men Teach their People? One
scholastic and injudicious Author who is in Credit in Country, and who is
patronized by a Professor, is enough to spoil the Minds of Young Divines, and
to bring into repute the most absurd and dangerous Opinions and Systems.

Though Catechisms are not usually reckoned among Divinity-Books, yet it will not
be useless to say something of them here. Some great Men have bestowed their
pains upon Works of this kind to very good purpose; and yet in this respect
there is stall something to be desired for public Edification. 1. It is to be
wished that those Subject should only be treated in Catechisms, which ought to
be handle there, and that all the Matters and Questions which are above the
reach of the People and of Children, or which are not necessary to Salvation,
should be banished from thence. 2. That some essential Articles, about which
Catechisms are very jejune should be added to them, and particularly these
Three; A general Idea of the History of the Bible; the main Proofs of the
Fundamental Truths of Religion; and an exact Explication of the Duties of
Morality. This last Article is for the most part extremely neglected in
Catechisms; nothing can be more dry and superficial than what they say upon the
Decalogue. 3. It would be fitting to make some alteration in the method
observed in Catechisms; for they are not all familiar enough: School Terms or
figurative Phrases are used in them, which either the People do not understand,
or to which they affix false Ideas. For instance, I would not have it said,
That the Eucharist is the symbol of our spiritual Nourishment, and of our Union
with Jesus Christ: For besides that this is not an exact Definition, this Style
is not proper for a Catechism. These Words Symbol, spiritual Nourishment, Union
with Jesus Christ, are figurative and obscure Terms. Would not the thing be
plainer both to Children and to every Body, if we should say, That the
Eucharist is a sacred Action and Cerremony, wherein Christians eat Bread and
drink Wine, which are distributed in remembrance of the Death of Christ, and of
the Redemption wrought by him? In those Works which are intended for Youth and
for the Common People, it concerns and Author to be clear and accurate, to omit
nothing that is essential, to say nothing that is needless, to use plain and
proper Expressions, and to propose nothing but what is natural and easy to be
apprehended. Catechisms are designed to give Children the first Tinctures and
Ideas of Religion: Now those Ideas, we know, commonly stick by them as long as
they live; if then they are not clear and true, it is not possible for them
ever to be well acquainted with their Religion.

III. The third sort of Books are those of Morality. This important Part of
Religion which regulates Manners, has been treated with a great deal of
solidity and force in several Excellent Works. Nay, it is observed that
Morality is more cultivated of late than it has been heretofore. But it were to
be wished that the good Books of Morality we have at this Day, were of a more
general Usefulness than they are. The best Works of this kind, are above the
Peoples Capacity. There are various things in them, relating either to the
Reasoning part, the turn of Thoughts, or the Style, which cannot be understood,
but by knowing and discerning Persons. Almost all the Able Men who write upon
Morals have this Fault, that they speak too much like Ingenuous Men, and do not
accomodate themselves enough to the Capacity of the Readers. They do not
consider that they ought to be useful to every body, that what seems clear to
them, is obscure to the greatest part of those who peruse their Writings, and
that a Book of Morality, which is only understood by Men of Parts of Learning,
is of a very limited usefulness. They should therefore, at least in some of
their Works, endeavor to speak in a popular manner, and to handle Matters with
all possible clearness and simplicity. This would be no disparagement to them,
and the doing it well would, I think, require all the Abilities, Parts, and
Talents, of the best Writers: It is more difficult than is seems, to speak or
write in such a manner, as that a Man shall say all that is proper to be said,
and at the same time be intelligible to all sorts of Persons.

But if there are good Books of Morality, there are many on the other hand,
which have considerable Faults in them, and those Faults are of great
Consequence, because Morality ill Explained, is capable of doing more hurt than
good.

1. An Author who Treats of Morality, should always have these Two Rules in his
view. 1. To explain exactly the Nature of the Duties which it prescribe. And 2.
to pers^^de Men to the practice of those Duties. Now these Two Rules have not
been sufficiently observed by all those who have published Moral Books. 1. They
do not always represent with due exactness the Nature of Vice or Virtue. Either
the Notions they give of them are not true, or they are too general. On the one
hand, they are not accurate enough, in describing the true Characters of each
Virtue and Vice; and on the other hand, they do not distinguish their various
Kinds and Degrees, which yet ought to be done if they intend that Men should
know their own Pictures. 2. They do not press Men enough to the practice of
Virtue. The End of Morality, is to work upon Man's Heart and Passions. In order
to compass this End Two things are necessary. 1. That all those great Motives
which the Gospel affords, should be strongly urged: And 2. that the false
Reasons and Motives which engage Men into the Love of this World and give them
any Aversion to Holiness, should be Confuted. Morals cannot be usefully handled
without the observation of these Two Maxims, the second especially: for the
Reason why many are not prevailed upon by the Arguments and Motives which are
offered to them is, because they are hindered by other Arguments and Motives. A
Reader frames in himself a Hundred Objections against what he reads in a Book
of Morality; Man's Heart is no sooner inclined to any Vice, but it grows
fertile in Evasions, Reasons, and Pretenses. Every Sinner has his Excuses and
his Shifts. If these who Teach Morality do not obviate those Objections and
destroy those Excuses, they can never obtain their Design; but this is a
trouble which few Authors care to take upon them.

2. Books of Morals would produce more fruit than they do, if the Morality they
Teach was neither too much relaxed, nor too severe. Morality is relaxed, when
it does not propose the Duties of a Christian Life in their full extent, or
when it does not assert the absolute necessity of the observation of those
Duties. It is strained and too severe, when it imposes Duties which God has not
Commanded, or which cannot possibly be practiced; and when it ranks among Sins
things which are innocent. I touch this only by the by, because I have spoken
already in some other Places of this Treatise, both of the remiss and over
severe Notions which Men form to themselves about Religion. See Part I. Cause
I. Art. II. and Cause II. Art. V, VI. and Part II. Cause III. Art. I.

3. Some of the Authors who handle Morality are guilty of another Fault, and
that is a want of accuracy and exactness in their Ideas and Reasonings. They do
not consider enough whether every thing they advance is strictly solid and
true, whether the Principles they lay down will hold, whether their Maxims are
not stretched too far or absurd, whether they do not contradict themselves,
whether they do not make use of frivolous Reasons, whether nothing is false or
mean in the Motives they urge, in a word whether or not their works will be
able to stand the Censure of a Judicious Reader. Moralists as well as the
generality of Preachers, are a little too much carried away by the heat of
their Imagination and Zeal, and they do not reason enough. They often go about
to move People with Rhethorical Figures, rather than by dint of reasons. And
this is a very ill Method. In Matters of Morality, it chiefly concerns a Man to
speak and to argue close; without this it is impossible that he should either
convince the Mind or produce a solid and diserning Piety.

4. The World is full of Books of Morality, and yet there are several important
subjects which have not hitherto been treated as they ought, or if they have,
it was in Works which are not read by the People. Those who study Morality are
often sensible of this defect, and complain justly that they do not find in
Books, all the light and helps they look for there: It is but of late that any
thing has been writ with exactness in French, upon Restitution. Who can doubt
but that a good Book concerning Impurity would be highly useful? This sin is
exceeding common, but it is one of those about which the People are the least
instructed. If Christians understood the Nature of this Vice, its Consequences,
and the duties of those who have fallen into it, they would certainly avoid it
more carefully than they do. I might say the same of Injustice, of Swearing,
and of some other Subjects.

IV. I come in the Last place to Books of Devotion: It is very necessary to
make a right Choice of them, because of all the Books of Religion they are
those which are the most read.

1. I cannot help saying in the first place that there are Books of Devotion
which are capable of introducing Corruption of Manners, and diverting
Christians from the study of Holiness. We may easily apprehend how there should
be Books of this kind, if we confider that many, even among Divines, think it
dangerous to insist upon good Works, and to press Morality: And there are Books
of Devotion, which were made on purpose to maintain so strange an Opinion. Some
Authors have taught that true Devotion and solid Piety, is not that which
consists in the Practice of Good Works; they have writ that the Doctrine which
represents good Works as a necessary condition in order to Salvation,
overthrows the Doctrine of Justification by Faith; that Works cannot be looked
upon as the way to Heaven; that all we have to do now under the Gospel
Covenant, is to receive and to accept of the Salvation purchased for us, and
that the Gospel requires Works, only from the Motives of Gratitude and Love.
Nay those Authors enter into dispute; they refute the Arguments drawn from the
Exhortations, Promises and Threatenings of Scripture, which might be urged
against them, and they tax with Pharisaism or Pelagianism those who are of an
Opinion Contrary to their. I cannot think the Authors of such Books did publish
them with ill intentions, but I could wish they had abstained from, ^riting
things which gives such mighty advantages of Libertines, and which may blast
the fruit of all the Books of Morality, and of all the Exhortations which ^^e
addressed to Sinners. And yet these Books are Printed, and which is more
surprising, those Divines who are so rigid and scrupulous in point of Books and
Sentiments, do not oppose the publishing of such Works, but they suffer them
quietly to pass for Current in the World.

2. The Books of Mystical Devotion are likewise most dangerous: and their
number is greater than we imagine. For to say nothing of those in which
Mystical and Fanatical Principles are openly proposed, many Works which are
otherwise full of good things are sprinkled with that Spirit of Fanaticism. I
shall not stand to give here the Character of those Books, nor to show the
mischief they may do in relation to Libertines, or to those Persons who want
either Knowledge or a discerning Judgment; because I will not repeat what I
have said of Mystical Piety. Part I. Cause II. Art VIII.

3. Some Authors who have put out Books of Piety have made it their whole
Business to administer Comfort. Those who read their Works, may easily see that
they looked upon the Comfortable side of Religion, and that their principal
design was, to fill their Readers, with Confidence, Hope and Joy. Without doubt
it is a laudable and pious Design, to use ones endeavors to Comfort the
Afflicted, and particularly good Men; and I confess that we find in the Books
which have been composed with that view, many edifying things and noble
Sentiments of Piety; but for all that, those Books may easily inspire Men with
security, when the Consolations which they dispense, are not attended with
great Circumspection and Prudence.

I could wish that all those who have published Books of this kind, had well
considered these two following Truths. The first is, that the Comforts which
Religion affords, belong only to true Christians; so that it is an essential
part of the Duty of Comforters, carefully to distinguish Persons, and to mark
clearly who those are that have aright to Religious Comforts. The Second is,
that it is as necessary to Sanctify, as it is to Comfort Men; Nay, That the
Sanctifying them is the more necessary of the two, because Holiness is more
essential to a good Man, than Consolation and Joy; and also because Men are
much more inclined to presume than to condemn themselves; besides that there
are but few who want Comfort, in comparison with those who ought to be
te^tified.

The Consolations of which the Books of Piety are full, are intended either for
Afflicted Persons or for Sinners. As for the first, it is better to teach them
how to make a good life of their Afflictions, and to bring them to examine and
amend their Lives, than to discourse to them upon some general Topic of
Comfort, which perhaps will only lay them faster asleep in security, and which
is besides generally misapplied. For all that the Gospel says of Afflictions is
commonly laid together, and that too with no great Judgment; and what is said
only of the Afflictions of the Faithful who suffer for Christ's sake, is
applied to the Afflictions which are common to all Mankind. It is much more
necessary to teach Men how to die well, than to fortify them against the fear
of Death; Nay, we cannot give them a more substantial Comfort, than if we
persuade them to live well, since a good Life will most certainly bring them to
a happy Death.

But we ought to be particularly cautious when we comfort Sinners, and give
them assurances of the Divine Mercy; for if this is not done with great
circumspection, we may easily harden and ruin at the same time, that we are
comforting them. This is the mischief of those Books, which speak but little of
Repentance and insist much upon Confidence, whose only design it is to
encourage the greatest Sinners, and to exhort them to a bold reliance upon
God's Mercy, without fearing either the heinousness, or the Multitude of their
Sins. Such Consolations are capable of a good Sense; but if they are not
proposed with due explication and restrictions, vast numbers of People will
abuse them. That which has been writ by some Authors in Books of Devotion,
concerning Sin and Good Works, is apt to lead Men into this fancy, That good
Works signify nothing in order to Salvation, and that Sin does not obstruct it.
Under pretense of answering the Accusations of the Devil and of the Law, these
Authors enervate the strongest Arguments for the necessity of Good Works, they
confute the Declarations of Scripture concerning Sanctification, and they
destroy as much as in them lies, the Sincerity and Truth of the Precepts and
threatenings of the Gospel. For what they call the Accusations of the Devil and
of the Law, is sometimes nothing else but the just apprehensions of a guilty
Conscience which are inspired by the Gospel, and which should be cherished and
fortified to bring Sinners to Repentance, instead of being removed by ill
dispensed Consolations.

It is said to this, that Sinners are not to be driven to Despair. But do we
make Sinners desperate, by saying that they are not in a State of Salvation,
when really they are not? Do we not comfort them enough, when we exhort them to
have recourse to God's Mercy and to repent? What if we should by unseasonable
Consolations, fill them with a vain and groundless Confidence; would not that
security ruin them more certainly than Desperation? To make Men fearless is the
ready way to undo them. After all, I cannot imagine, why People should talk so
much of Despair, and seem so hugely afraid of it. By the endeavors used in
Books and Sermons to keep Sinners from it, one would think that we had great
reason to fear on that hand, and that nothing were more ordinary than for Men
to despair of the Divine Mercy; and yet there is nothing more unusual. For one
Sinner who is terrified with his Sins, thousands are undone by Security. It is
remarkable than the Scripture speaks but seldom of Despair, and when we have
well examined all the places which are thought to mention it, we shall not find
many that speak positively of it. Many Churchmen who have Cure of Souls,
confess that they never saw any Person afflicted with Despair. And as for the
Instances which are alleged to this purpose, it is certain that what is called
Desperation is commonly nothing else but a Fit of the Spleen and an effect of
Grief and Melancholy. So that those who make long Discourses to prevent Sinners
falling into Despair, take great pains to little purpose, and do for the most
part fight with a shadow.

4. There is another Fault in some Books of Devotion quite contrary to this I
have now observed, which is, that they terrify their Readers without reason. If
Authors, otherwise Pious and Learned, had not spoken in their Writings of the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, of Reprobation, Despair, the Power of the Devil,
and of some other Matters, many People would have been free from those terrible
Frights which the indiscreet handling of those Subjects did throw them into.
The reading of such Books has occasioned, and does still produce great
Mischiefs, when they are read by Men of weak Heads, that are inclined to
Melancholy; and the Number of such Persons is very considerable. Some have
fancied they had committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost; and being possessed
with that dismal Thought, they have spent their Lives in dreadful.
Apprehensions, of which nothing could cure them. Others have imagined, that
their Case cure them. Others have imagined, that their Case was desperate, and
that they were in a State of Reprobation, and Damnation. Others have conceited,
that they were given up to the Power of Satan; and they have taken the
Disorders of Imagination, for certain Signs of their being possessed with an
Evil Spirit: And the worst of it is, that such indiscreet Discourses are more
apt to alarm good, than wicked Men. In fine, I reckon among the Books which
fright Men without Cause, all those which contain too rigid and austere Maxims
of Devotion and Morality.

5. Piety would be better known, and more esteemed than it is, if Books of
Devotion were always writ with Judgment, and Good Sense; and if there was
nothing in them, but what, upon a severe Examination, would appear to be
strictly true. Those who set about Works of this nature, do generally make it
their Business to move the Heart, and to excite Sentiments of Piety. This is a
good Design; but we ought to know, that it is the Force of Reasons, the
Evidence of Proofs, the Greatness; of the Objects proposed, and the Clearness
and Solidity of what a Man says, which does truly affect the Heart. This is
what Judicious Authors chiefly mind; and thereby many have had good Success in
those excellent Works which they have enriched the Public with. But other
Writers do not consider this; they rather choose to say tender and pathetical
Things, than to think, or speak, with exactness: They consult Imagination more
than Good Sense, they pour out every thing, which is in the Heat of Meditation,
or in the Fervency of their Zeal, seems to them proper to move, to melt, to
comfort, or to terrify. Hence it is, that there are weak places in their Books
and Thoughts; which appear mean, and even false, to discerning Readers;
Contradictions, and such like Defects: For on the one hand, they produce only a
confused, and not a very rational Devotion, in those who read and relish them:
And on the other hand, they expose Religion to the Flouts, and Contempt, of
Libertines. We are often troubled, and scandalized, to find, that some Men of
Parts express but little Esteem for Books of Piety: We hear it said every Day,
that those Books are only good for Women, and for the Vulgar. This Contempt
chiefly proceeds from a profane Humor, and from Libertinism; but it springs
likewise from the want of Exactness and Solidity, which is observable in some
Books of Devotion.

6. Diverse Considerations might be offered here about those Books which contain
Forms of Prayers and Devotion; but I shall confine my self to these two, which
appear to me the most material. The first is, that those kind of Forms, make
all sorts of Persons indifferently, and even good Men say things, which cannot
agree, but to the greatest and the most notorious Sinners; which gives People
this dangerous Notion, That all Men, without excepting the Regenerate, are
extremely corrupt. In diverse Prayers we plainly see, that those who composed
them, had no other Design, than to draw the Picture of the most heinous
Sinners, and that they supposed all Men engaged in a deep Corruption, and in
the most criminal Disorders. Exaggerations, and Hyperboles, are so little
spared by some People upon this Head, that they utter Absurdities and Falsehoods
in their Prayers; as when they say, That ever since we were born, we have been
continually, and every moment, offending God, by Thoughts, Words, and Deeds.

I do not deny, but that such Prayers may have their use, provided nothing be
said in them that is extravagant, or contrary to Truth and Common Sense; they
fit great Numbers of Persons: There are but too many of those wretched
Christians, who can never sufficiently bewail the Enormity of their Sins, and
the Irregularities of their Conduct. I know besides, that all Men are Sinners,
and that the best of them have Reason to humble and abase themselves in the
sight of God, out of a sense of their own weakness and unworthiness.
Nevertheless, since the Scripture makes a difference between Good and Bad Men,
it is at least a great piece of Imprudence, to appoint the same Language for
both, and to make them all speak as if they were guilty of the most horrid
Crimes, and as if there was not one good Man in the World. This takes away the
Distinction between the Sinners and the Righteous; for if these Prayers are
proper for all sorts of Persons, if all that is said in them is true, it is a
vain thing to distinguish a good Man from a bad; and, it is to no purpose to
pray to God for his Converting Grace, or to make any Promise of Amendment to
him: All those Lessons of Holiness which the Gospel gives us, are but fine
Idea's; all Men are upon the matter equally bad, and they may all be the
Objects of God's Mercy, how irregular soever their Deportment may be. These are
the Inferences which may be drawn from those Forms of Devotion I have
mentioned, and which Sinners do actually draw from them. From all this, I
conclude, that in such Works it is necessary to distinguish Persons and
Conditions: And this accordingly has been judiciously observed by some Authors.

The other Consideration relates to the Form of Prayers; these are not always
plain enough. They are sometimes studied Discourses, which have more of Art and
Wit than of Affection in them. And we may easily discern how far most Prayers
are removed from a due Simplicity, if we compare them with those which are
contained in Holy Scripture, or with the ancient Way of Praying which was
received in the Church, and of which we may judge by the Liturgies which are
now used, or which have reached to us. Prayers were neither so intricate then,
nor so long as they are now. Long Preambles were not used in the beginning of
Prayers, and Men did not them by so many Windings approach the Throne of Grace,
to confess their Sins, and to beg Pardon for them. Prayers then were short,
simple and natural, much fitted to excite Devotion, to lift up the Heart to
God, and to nourish Piety and Zeal, than many Forms which obtain at this day.

7. Of all the Books of Piety, none are more carefully read; and none perhaps
have a greater Influence upon the Conduct and Manners of Christians, than the
Books of Preparation for the Holy Communion. The use of the Sacrament is one of
the most important Acts of Religion, and one of the most efficacious Means to
promote Piety; and it is certain that the Books which People read, in order to
prepare themselves for that sacred Action, contribute very much to the good or
bad use of the Eucharist, and by Consequence to the good or ill Life of
Christians, Now what I have said of the other Books of Devotion may be applied
to these. Some Books of this kind are extraordinary good, but there are others,
in which among many good things some Defects are observable, and particularly
these three.

1. All the Books of Preparation for the Holy Communion, are not instructive
and solid enough. We find nothing else in some of them, but a heap of Thoughts,
which have no dependence upon one another, of Rhetorical Figures, Allegories,
and Comparisons fetched from the Old Testament, or from profane History. These
things may have their Use, they may be place in a Sermon: But not to say that
sometimes, those Thoughts and Comparisons are not very apposite or suitable to
the Subject; I shall only observe, that something more than this is necessary,
to stir up Devotion in the Communicants. I do but just name this, because I
have delivered my Opinion more at large concerning this Defect, in my three
Reflections upon Books of Morality, and in the 5th upon Books of Devotion.

2. Other Books of Preparation are too general. They only consider in the lump
the Duties of Christians in reference to the Communion; they speak of
Self-Examination, Repentance, Faith and Charity: But all this is of no great
use to many gross and ignorant Christians, who neither know those Duties, nor
how they ought to be performed. Besides, all those who come to the Sacrament
are not in the same Condition, some being good Men, and others impious and
hypocritical Persons. There are likewise several degrees of good Men as well as
of Hypocrites and ungodly Persons, and the same Man may be better or worse at
one time than he is at another. Therefore it would be fitting that Books of
Preparation, were composed in such a manner, that every Reader may be led by
them, into those Reflections which are suitable to the State he is in. It is a
gross Error to imagine, that a general Preparation or Discourse concerning the
receiving of the Sacrament, is proper for all sorts of Persons. I confess that
this is not the Fault of all the Books of Preparation, some we have, which are
particular enough. The true Characters by which every Man may know his own
State, are very exactly described by some Authors; but it is an unhappiness
that such Works, are not better calculated for the use of the common People.

3. I think I may safely say in the third place, that the too severe Notion
which some Books give of the Communion, is one of the Causes, why so many
People do neither live, nor receive the Sacrament as they ought. It is a sad
thing that the Minds of Christians should be filled with so many Scruples in
relation to the Sacrament, by inconsiderate Discourses and over-strained
Maxims; Writers and Preachers do sometimes speak of the Holy Sacrament, as if
every thing in it was full of Snares, and as if Hell and Damnation, were
constantly waiting about it. They represent the Communion, as so extraordinary,
so difficult and so dangerous an Action, that those who read or hear those
Discourses, are tempted to keep off from the Holy Table, and despair of
partaking of it as they ought. So that whereas there should be nothing but Joy,
when the Eucharist is celebrated in the Church, many are then agitated with
extreme Perplexities and Terrors.

By this indiscreet Severity it happens, that many good Men receive the
Sacrament without Comfort; because their Consciences are disturbed with diverse
Scruples, which proceed from the reading of those Books. There is a great
number of pious Christians, who never receive the Sacrament but with strange
apprehension and dread, in so much that several think they receive it to their
Condemnation. Nay this discourages likewise many Sinners who have some
inclination to Good, and some desire to set about the Work of Repentance.
Indeed we must take heed not to flatter Sinners in their Vices, nor to propose
to them too easy a Devotion and Morality. It is very fit in my Judgment, to
give them a great Idea of the Purity which is required in so Holy and Solemn an
Action as the Communion is, and of the State which a Christian ought then to be
in. But as this State of Purity and Holiness is attained only by degrees; that
Idea, how true soever it may be, is apt to fright a Sinner, in the beginning of
his Conversion, because he does not find in himself at first, all the
Characters of true Repentance and sincere Regeneration. He ought therefore to
be informed, that the beginnings of Repentance are weak, that it has its
Degrees and its Progress; and so that he ought not to be disheartened; that God
will accept of his Devotion and Endeavors, provided his Repentance increase
afterward and he forsake his Sins honestly. The Matter is over done in point
of Devotion and Morality, not only when we propose Rules which are too rigid,
but also when we say things, which though true and consonant to the Gospel, are
not sufficiently accomodated to the State of those we speak to.

These are the principal Reflections I thought fit to bestow, both upon Books
of Religion and upon bad Books. All that remains now is to enquire, what
Remedies are to be applied to the Cause of Corruption. The surest of all would
be to exterminate all the ill Books, and to take care that none such should be
made for the time to come. But as this is not to be hoped, the only Remedy
which can be tried, is on the one hand, to prevent as much as we can the Effect
of bad Books, and on the other, to engage Men to read and to make a good use of
good Books.

The Books which are contrary to Religion and good Manners may easily be known;
but how to keep Men from reading and being corrupted by them is the Difficulty:
And in all probability this is a Point which will never be entirely gained. Yet
I think it is not impossible to prevent in some measure the Mischief which
those Books occasion in the World. In order to this it would be requisite, to
take care in the first place, that young people might not read Books which
inspire Libertinism. To this end, the Authors who have writ things repugnant to
Modesty and Honesty, should be expelled the Schools. It is a surprising thing
that the Ecclesiastics, who have the direction of Academies and Colleges, and
who are bound by their Character to redress this Abuse, have not done it yet.
In the next place it would be necessary that in Families, Books which are apt
to corrupt Youth should be taken out of their way, and that they should not be
indulged in dangerous Readings. As for the rest I see no other Remedy, but that
Preachers should strongly insist in their Sermons, upon the Reasons which ought
to make Christians averse to the reading of ill Books. I I know that all these
precautions, will not wholly suppress those Books, nor prevent their being read
by diverse Persons; but we may however gain thus much, that ill Books shall not
be so freely and so commonly read as they are, and that they shall do less hurt.

As for Books of Religion, every one should endeavor to discern those which
are good, and to make a good use of them. Indeed the discerning and the Choice
of Books of Religion, is attended with some difficulty. The general Rule is to
choose those which are instructive and edifying. Every body will own this to be
a good Rule, but all Men do not agree in the Application of it. What seems
edifying to some, appears quite otherwise to others. In point of Religion all
Men should be of the same Mind, since they are all bound to believe the same
Truths, and practice the same Duties, but their Tastes are different, because
many of them have a vitiated Palate.

To speak my Mind upon this Subject, I think that Christians should chiefly
stick to those Books, which prove the Truths of Religion, and which establish
by solid Arguments the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, and to
those which give a clear and exact View of the Duties of Morality: To these it
may be useful to add the Works, in which we find the Examples of Persons
eminent for their Piety and Virtue. Such Examples are very efficacious to
excite Men to the Practice of what is good, and they prove a great Preservative
against the Scandal occasioned by bad Example, and against the Corruption of
the Age. But not to enlarge further upon the Choice of Books, I refer the
Reader to what has been said in this Chapter.

A judicious Choice of Books being once made, the next thing is to make a good
use of them. And here two Rules are to be observed. 1. A Man should read with
Judgment; And 2. he should read in order to Practice.

1. What Book soever we read, it is absolutely necessary to read it with
Discretion and Judgment. We are commanded in Scripture, 1 These. V. XXI. 1 John
IV. I.
To prove all things and to hold fast that which is good; to try the Spirits
and the Doctrines whether they are of God. This Caution is to be used lest we
fall into Errors, since every Author is a Man, and by consequence may sometimes
be mistaken. The common People do particularly need this Advice, because they
are very apt to believe, that whatsoever is read in Books, especially in Books
of Devotion, is true. But though a Book should contain nothing but what is good;
Discretion is necessary to make a just Application of the Contents of it to out
selves, because that which is proper for some is not suitable to others. The not
observing this Rule is the Reason why some Readers, who have a pure, but a
timorous and short-sighted Conscience, are terrified without Cause, and apply
to themselves what is said only of wicked Men, when on the other hand, hardened
Sinners deceive themselves with vain hopes, by adapting to themselves, what
related only to good Men.

2. We ought to read, in order to practice, and that we may grow better; this
is the more important Rule of the two, and that which distinguishes true from
hypocritical Devotion. Many are very regular and constant in Reading, and they
seldom fail to do it Mornings and Evenings: But the Deportment of those Persons
who are so assiduous in the perusing of good Books, is not always agreeable to
the Rules of Devotion and Piety. When they are but just come from their
Reading, we find them often sour, peevish, and passionate; after they have read
in the Morning, they spend the Day in Slandering, Gaming, or Idleness, and they
avoid only the grosser, and the more noisie Sins. There are Readers of another
Character; they read, and even delight in the Reading of Books of Religion:
They like well enough those Works which prove the Truths of the Christian
Religion, or treat of Morals; they speak of them advantagiously, and they will
say fine Things concerning the Abuses which are crept into Religion, and upon
the Necessity and the Beauty of Morals; but all this terminates only in a vain
and fruitless Approbation, which they give to the Truths and Duties of the
Gospel; for after all, they reform nothing in their Lives: Such Readings are
but mere Amusements, and they are good for nothing but to rock Conscience into
a most dangerous Sleep. The End of Reading, as well as that of all Religion,
ought to be the Practice of Holiness.

I. shall here observe, last of all, that Christians have a Book, which alone
might suffice to preserve them from the Danger of ill Books, and to secure them
against the Corruption of the Age, if they did use it as they ought; I mean the
Holy Scripture: It is the best of all Books, a Work divinely inspired, which
contains nothing but what is most excellent and true, and wherein we find every
thing that is necessary to instruct, and to sanctify Men. But it were to be
wished,

1. That the Translations of Scripture, which are in the hands of the People,
should be rendered more perfect, so that they might express the Sense of Sacred
Authors with all possible Exactness. All those who have studied the Original
Text of the Bible, will own, that this is a necessary Work, and that the
Translations need some Amendments. And so we see accordingly, that now and
then, Divines and Translators, apply themselves to the correcting of them.

2. It would be to no purpose to have exact Translations of Scripture, if Men
could not read it: I have already remarked it elsewhere, as a crying and
shameful Abuse, that a great part of Christians should not be able to read.
This Abuse should have been reformed long ago; and this might easily be done,
if every Pastor did endeavor it in his own Church, and if the Magistrates did
lend a helping Hand toward it.

3. The Holy Scripture should be read more than it is, and Men should make that
use of it for which it was given. Other Books are only Streams, but when we
read the Scripture, we drink at the very Fountainhead. Humane Books have their
Faults, and therefore they ought to be read with great Discretion: But this
Divine Book is most perfect, it is a Guide to whose Conduct we may give up our
selves without fear or danger: This being certain, is it not strange that the
best of all Books should be the most neglected? In many Countries the Bible is
a Book unknown to the People. In other places the reading of it is permitted
but with great Cautions, as if it were dangerous for Christians to reveal a
Book, by which God was pleased to reveal his Will to Men. In those places where
Christians have an entire Liberty to read the Scripture, great multitudes make
no advantage of that freedom. Many that are addicted to reading leave the Word
of God for other Books. In a word, very few read it with suitable Dispositions,
and with a sincere Design of learning the Will of God and of growing the better
by it. And thus the far greater part of Mankind, is destitute of the most
efficacious mean and remedy, which the Divine Goodness has afforded to Men, to
preserve them from the Contagion of Sin, and to make them happy. And so we need
not wonder that the Corruption of Christians should be such, as it has been
represented in this Work.

The Conclusion of this Treatise
THis is what I had proposed to say concerning the Causes of Corruption. I
might have been larger upon these Matters, and have added many things which I
have not touched. This is a very copious Field, and a Subject which can hardly
be exhausted, yet I think I have observed what is most material.

But it will be to little purpose to have detected the Causes of Corruption, if
those Cause do still subsist; and therefore I conclude this Work with an
earnest entreaty to my Readers, that they will make serious Reflections upon
it, and that if they find that in Fact, Corruption proceeds from those Causes I
have mentioned, they will strive to remove them. The Undertaking will no doubt,
appear very difficult to many. They will own the Truth of what I have said, but
they will look upon the design of opposing the Corruption of the Age, as vain
and chimerical. They will say that all this is very fine in the Theory, but
that the Practice of it is impossible. I confess here is some difficulty, but
yet I am persuaded, that what I have proposed might successfully be done, at
least in some respects.

But the general Causes of Corruption can scarce be remedied but by public
Persons. I therefore apply my self here particularly to Divines and to the
Pastors of the Church, and I conjure them to make it their serious Business, to
discover and to stop the Springs of Corruption. Let them turn all their
Endeavors that way; let them labor to dispel the Ignorance and Prejudices
which so many Christians live in, and to confute those Maxims and Sentiments
which feed Security and Libertinism; let them press with Zeal the restoring of
Order and Disciplines; let them incessantly lay before the People and the
Magistrates, the necessity of redressing several Abuses which are now in vogue;
let them inculcate these things and insist upon them with Zeal, but at the same
time with Prudence and Charity; let them concert Measures among themselves. let
them act unanimously in so noble a Design. Above all things let them take care
to season young People with good Instruction, and to inspire them with
Sentiments of Religion and Virtue. These are the Solicitudes which become the
Ministers of Jesus Christ. These are Enterprises worthy of their Character and
their Zeal, and the things which ought chiefly to be considered in the
Assemblies of the Clergy. But let them not be discouraged by the Difficulties
they are like to meet with. They will still gain something, even when they may
fancy they labor in vain. If they do not obtain all that they desire, if they
do not cure the whole Evil, they will remove at least some part of it. So holy
an Enterprise will sooner or later be fortunate in the Issue, and God will pour
down a Blessing upon those Means, which he himself has appointed.

One would think that Providence is at work to bring about happier Times, and
that things are tending that way. This is an Age of Knowledge, and Religion is
now better proved and explained, than ever it was. There is a considerable
number of judicious and learned Divines, and Pastors, who are deeply grieved to
see the present Face of things, and who are sensible how necessary it would be
to oppose Corruption. So many Books which are writ on purpose, to revive true
Christianity, and to bring Men to Holiness, seem to bode some blessed
Revolution, and to argue a general Disposition toward it. God who presides
over all things, and particularly over that which concerns Religion, bless the
Designs and Endeavors of all those, who have good Intentions, and grant that
we may quickly see Truth, Piety, Peace and Order, entirely restored among
Christians.

FINIS.
Book Printed for R. Chiswell.
SCRIPTORVM ECCLESIASTICORVM, Historia Literaria facili and prespicua methodo
digesta, in 2 Vol. Fol. Authore GVL. CAVE. S. T. P. -- His Primitive
Christianity. 5th Edit. 8o -- His Dissertation concerning the Government of the
Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans and Pati^^ons. 8o Archbishop
Tenison's Conference with Pulton the Jesuit. -- His Nine Sermons on several
Occasions. Seven Volumes of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons; Published from the
Originals by Dr. Barker. -- Vol. 1st. of Sincerity and Constancy in the Faith
and Profession of the True Religion. 3d Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Vol. 2d and
3d On several Occasions. Second Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Vol. 4th Of Natural
and Instituted Religion, etc. Second Edition Corrected. 1700. -- Vol. 5th
Proving Jesus to be the Messiah, etc. Second Edition, Corrected. 1700. --
Volumes 6th and 7th. Upon the Attributes of God. Second Edition Corrected.
1700. Ten Sermons on several Occasions, by Bishop Patrick. -- His Hearts Ease,
or Remedy against all Troubles. The 7th Edition. 1699. -- His Commentary on
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers, in Four Volumes. -- His Commentary on
Duteronomy, 1700. Valentine's Private Devotions. The 26th Edition. 169^.
Wharton's Sermons in Lambeth-Chappel, in 2 Vol. 8o with his Life. The Second
Edition. 1700. Dr. Conant's Sermons, in Two Vol. 8o Published Bishop Williams.
Dr. Wake of Preparation for Death. The 6th Edition. 1699. Dr. Fryer's Nine
Years Travels into India and Persia, Illustrated with Copper Plates. Fol. School.
Bishop Willams, Of the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the Common Prayer. With
several other Discourses. Mr. Tulley's Discourse of the Government of the
Thoughts. The 3d Edition 12o 1699. The Life of Henry Chichele, Archbishop of
Cant^^^ury, in which there is a particular Relation of many Remarkable Pas^^^^
in the Reigns of Henry V. and VI. Kings of England: Written in Latin by Arthur
Duck, L. L. D. Chancellor of the Diocese of London, and Advocate of the Court
of Honor; Now made English, and a Table of Contents annexed. 8o 1699. The
Judgment of the Ancient Jewish Church against the Unitarians, in the
Controversy upon the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of our Blessed Savior.
With a Table of Matters, and a Table of Texts of Scriptures occasionally
explained, by Peter Alix, D. D. Short Memorials of Thomas Lord Fairfax, Written
by Himself. Published. 1699. The Life of John Whitgift Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the time of Queen Elizabeth and King James I. Written by Sir
Geo. Paul, Comptroler of his Grace's Household. To which is annexed a Treatise
entitled, Conspiracy for pretended Reformation, Written in the Year 1591. By
Richard Cousin L. L. D. Dean of the Arches, and Official Principal to
Archbishop Whitgift. 8o. 1699. An Exposition of the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, by Dr. Burnet Bishop of Sarum. Fol. 1700. -- His Sermon to the
Societies for Reformation of Manners. March 25. 1700. A Practical Discourse of
Religious Assemblies; By Dr. William Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's. The 3d.
Edition. 1700.
Several Discourses of Repentance, by the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson late
Archbishop of Canterbury, being the EIGHTH VOLUME. Published by Dr. Barker.
1700.

In the Press.

The Fourth and Last Part of Mr. RVSHWORTH's Historical Collections. Containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the beginning of the Year 1645.
(where the Third Part ended) to the Death of King Charles the First, 1684.
Impartially Related: Setting forth only Matter of Fact in Order of Time,
without Observation or Reflection. Fitted for the Press in his Lifetime. To
which will be added, Exact Alphabetical Tables.


