THE Humble and Healing Advice of Colonel Robert Overton Governor of HVLL.

TO CHARLES LORD FLEETWOOD, And General MONCK, And all other inferior Officers
of both Armies in England and Scotland.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Liverwell Chapman at the Crown in Poper-Head
Alley, 1659.

TO His Excellency Charles Lord Fleetwood, and the Right Honorable General
Monck, and all other Inferior Officers of both Armies in England and Scotland.
The Humble Cautionary Christian Exortatory, seasonalle, Healing and unbyassed
Representation and Address of ^ollonel Robert Overton, Governor of Kingston
upon Hull, a fellow servants with you in the Cause of God and his Country, and
one who desires to shun the effusion of blood amongst those who (in the midest
of many enemies) are imbarqued together in one Public and Christian Concern.
Right Honorable and beloved Brethren and fellow servants,
WHatever are our particular affection, inclinations and judgments, in respect
of Forms and Constitutions, Civil and Ecclesiastic; yet the mark we all aim
at, and the race we profess to run, is to serve the Lord, and to submit to his
Scepter, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the only Lawgiver (by
the Decree and determination of Heaven) throughout the world; but alas,
darkness is so intermixed with our light, and self is so interwoven with all
our public assaies and attempts, that Babel-like, our buildings are
accompanied with nothing but confusion and contempt, which makes the Nations
abroad to scoff and scorn, and our enemies at home to rejoice in hopes of our
ruin: and the Lord himself who waited to be gracious (but must be exalted in
righteousness, (is forced to shake and shake, overturn and overturn; and yet in
much mercy to his people) because no foundation is laid that either bears any
proportion with what we profess, or otherwise answer the ends of God, in that
new Creation he is about to form throughout the whole Universe, by restoring of
Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, that
righteousness may run down is a mighty stream, our Officers become peace, and
our Exactors righteousness: In order to this, it has pleased the Lord in the
prosecution of his own purpose to pour us from Vessel to Vessel, and according
to the prophecy of the last times (writ for our instruction; especially, upon
whom are the ends of the World) has been overturning and overturning, and will
overturn, till he come whose Right it is: How this alarm of the son of David
has been sounded in your ears by a faith full Remnant, I need nor reminde you;
but what has been the plain and positive providence of Jehova. I beseech you
seriously collect and review; there has not one of the many changes we have
passed through, ^ut it has conveyed in it, either more directly or indirectly
something of special and effectual tendency to the decay of the old, and
increase of the new world; all the designs and contrivements of men, either of
opposite principles or of opposite interest, the last (having rather wanted
love to the Lord, then light in his work) have Dagon-like fallen before the
interest of Christ and his people; and no wonder, for no weapon formed against
either can prosper; upon this account, I will be hold to ascert in the light of
the Lord, that the Thrones of Bishops, of the King, Parliaments and Protectors
have been thrown down, and other principles and Interests wherein many good men
have been engaged) have also obviated a directing doom; the Lord had once
raised up a generation of men after some overturning, who in a measure of the
power and spirit of Elias, were upon laying the foundation (a glance there was
at least of the glory which shall be revealed,) of this restitution spoken of
in scripture; but an Apostasy like the sun under an Eclips interposed us, and
the practical prosecution of that Reformation: I will not determinately
ascertain the cause, possibly that Assembly* had more the name and the show
than the substance and reallity of Christ's Government: (for I judge as their
convening together, respected the designs of some Instruments, they were
mischievously mixed for other ends) and probably we were not fitted and
spirited for such a dispensation under that Apostasy; the displeasure of the
Lord faced the followers of it in all their undertakings, till that ruin and
destruction so threatened the revenge of Justice, that necessity forced us to
face about, but like bewildred Israel of old, we knew not where to pitch our
Tents; at last, by the most general concurrance, the former famous long
Parliament, in their best reduced capacity were judged the most apt expedient,
at least toward present security if not settlement; who were a while beating
about the bush; but though there be many pious, prudent and public Patriots
and spirits amongst them; yet they were so intermixed with the late Court
Creatures and Kingling Champions, with persons of very opposite principles;
that neither Christ, his Peoples, nor the Nations ends were likely to be
answered: And I fear some were so misled by principles of a persecuting
tendancy (though they may not otherwise have that hellish seed in their heart)
for I cannot but honor the memory of many in that Assembly for the works sake,
wherein they have been made Isntrumental; that endeavors were not closely
wanting to bring all to bow to their ^aal; and in order thereunto to wrest the
Sword forth out of their hands, who I hope, more than accidentally, or
necessituously are sure gaurd to Gods people against the spirit of these
Nations; which otherwise like an inundation, would break in upon them; upon
this account (respecting his end, as in all other Changes) is the Lord pleased
to pass them by either as useless or obstructors in his Work: What may be the
designs or ends of any who are the Instruments of this last dessolution; I
shall leave to the Lord to find out, who will cause the righteousness of the
righteous to shine forth as the sun at noon day, and will reward the workers of
iniquity, according to the evil of their doings: Now having taken the short
survey of these providence and appearances of God, with incurrance with
scripture (may be of use to direct us in this dark day. I shall apply my self
more particularly to you, and from my heart do wish for Sion and these poor
Nations sakes, that we may meet with such an expedient in righteousness, as may
reconcile d^fferences, and prevent the effusion of blood:

And therefore, Right Honorable and dear Friends, the Council of the Officers
of the Army in England, you are they who more especially then others, have been
actually engaged in the great and various turns of State; by you instrumentally
the foundations are put out of course, and the price of the blood and treasure,
spilt an^ expended in the late Wars, lies now in your hands; Christ calls upon
you for his right, as the son of David, which your power has possessed you of;
The Saints (for whose sakes the Lord has reproved all before you) expect that
you should not keep them from their purchased possessions; they are the true
royal heirs and are now at age; the fullness of time is coming, wherein they
must take the Kingdom and possess it; the poor peild people of these
Nations, who have fed you with the bread of their Tables, they groan under
those burdens which you were hired to take off them, and are waiting for the
travel of their bodies, and the return of their treasures: Take heed therefore,
I beseech you, that you make not this an opportunity of advantaging and
greatning your selves; have a care that no remainder of the spirit of Apostasy
raise you up to your ruin, as it has done others before: You are plucked as
brands out of the fire, and are in some manner made whole; sin then no more
least a worse thing befall you; for the tree that is twice dead must be plucked
up by the roots, being fit for nothing but the fire; This I will aver to you
from the Lord that you have now an opportunity, either (in mercy) of recovering
the glory you had lost by your Apostasy or (in judgment) it is an occasion for
your final fall:

Consider that God is not mocked, his arm has been bared in Judgment against
the hypocrites of these times, and woe will befall you if you return with the
dog to the vomit; you see there is few that can fasten any faith upon you.
Beware that your practices Justify not the proceedures of those in Sco^land,
for the blood that may be spilt will then lie at your doors, and the Lord will
avenge it upon you, take heed of proportioning your choice rather to your turns
then truths; a little leaven leavens the whole lump; you know what Spirit has
been the bane of your apostasy, and the brand of all your practices and
Professions, if you intermix politic time serving trucklers, with those who
are Public spirits, your Council will prove abortive; look but a little
back, and see how the Lord is cutting his work short in righteousness, as it
was well observed by one, you can now Deceive none but your selves; I wish you
may deceive them by well doing, all the Promises Professions and protestations
you can make, will signify nothing, it is only your actions that will honor
you

A word to General Monck and the Officers under his Command in Scotland: Your
Letters and Declarations I have seen and seriously considered, and am heartily
sorry for any just occasion, that either may be given you, or which through
misprisions you may have taken, to make such a breach in the body of the Army*
I am very much afraid that in this matter you are under a bad influence, though
you have a plausible pretense, and although I wish, and shall press after a
right understanding betwixt you and the Army in England, yet in this your
undertaking, I cannot bid you good speed; because by the observations I have
already made, whatever you may pretend to the Church of Christ; you are
unbargued with that Spirit and Interest which more Diametrically opposes the
design of God, in the Exaltation of his Son and Sunts; then the present
posture of the Army in England protends. And therefore (though for my part I
cannot altogether excuse them) they have a prevail^ng advantage against you,
and though possibly not for their own, yet for Sions sake they will be inebled
to foil you; I beseech you there fore to take heed of a pai^ted design, and
drive not so furiously against the dispensation of God, though it be clouded
with the weakness and failings of the instruments, we have great cause of
jedousies that there was a faction prevaling in Parliament which would have
proved pernicious to that which must prevail: And although I did not concur
with the Armies proceed in their proposals for General Officers; yet I could
neither well approve of their laying some honest members of the Army aside, nor
of the new conduct appointed; though I was one my self: The worst of men
imbargued with the dispensation of God, (though they have also designs of
their own) will prevail over those who may be more innocent then themselves,
but in conjunction with an opposite interest, I will not make this the case in
respect of persons, though it may as relating to things; this is a shaking
overturning dispensation as I have premized, and you may observe, and it is of
very dangerous consequence, to endeavor upholding any thing that God is
throwing down* I shall therefore conclude with an interpository word to both
Counsels, and begin between you; As Abraham did to Lot. You are brethren, why
should you disagree by a good meditation between you the designs on either side
might receive a check, which Conquest would Crown their mediums; wherein you
might better meet at blows, you can play no other then your Common Armies gaim
by your contests; however take heed of any union from the rock of Ages, all
confederacies short of or against that will be shattered to pieces; comply with
the best expedient to that end, and the hearts and hands of the faithful will
be with you, otherwise you may be assured from the Lord, that another overturne
will suddenly overtake you, and I question then whether ever you will have an
opportunity to cause the Nations following to praise you; the binding up of
this breach is that I very much breath after, I fear there is not so much
sincerity on either side as can ballest the blood that may be spilt, if you
proceed against each other, for my own part in persuance of that trust
committed to me, I shall, endeavor to secure the peace of this place, and be
ready to comply with and countenance that, which has most of the image and
superscription of Christ upon it; and in the mean time, mourn over your
sinful selfish spirit which provokes the Lord thus to rend and tear us in
pieces.

The Heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing,

Psalm. 2.1. But kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish from the way,

Psalm. 2. and last.
FINIS.

