A Brief VINDICATION Of The Non-conformists From the Charge of SCHISM.

As it was Managed against them in a Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor; by
Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's.

Coitio Christianorum merito sane illicita, si illicitis par; merilo damnanda,
si quis de ea queritur eo titulo quo de factionibus querela est. In cujus
perniciem aliquando convenimus? Hoc sumus congregati quod and dispersi; hoc
universi quod and Singuli; neminem laedentes, neminem contristantes; quum
probi, cum boni coeunt, cum pij, cum casti congregantur, non est factio
dicenda, sed Curia. Tertul.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in the
Poultry, over against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

IT was no small Surprise unto many, first to hear of, and then to see in Print
the late Sermon of the Reverend Deun of St. Paul's Preached at Guildhall, May 2.
1680. being the first Sunday in Easter Term, before the Lord Mayor, etc.

Whatever there might be of Truth in it, yet they judged the time both of the
one and the other, the Preaching and Printing of it, to be somewhat
unseasonable. For, they say, that this is a time wherein the Agreement of all
Protestants, so far as they have attained, is made more than ordinarily
necessary. And whereas the Nonconformists do agree in Religion with all the
sober Protestant People of the Nation, which is the Church of England, they do
suppose that ordinary Prudence would advise unto a forbearance of them in those
few things wherein they dissent; not indeed from the Body of the Protestant
People, but from some that would impose them on their Consciences and
Practices. Who knows not that the present danger of this Nation is from Popery,
and the endeavors that are used both to introduce it and enthrone it, or give
it Power and Authority among us? And it is no part of the Popish Design to take
away and destroy those things wherein the Nonconformists do dissent from the
present Ecclesiastical Establishment, but rather to confirm them. Their
contrivance is to ruin and destroy the Religion of the Body of the Protestants
in this Kingdom, wherein the Nonconformists are one with them, and equally
concerned with any of them. Wherefore it cannot but be grievous unto them as
well as useless unto the common Interest of the Protestant Religion, that at
such a time and season, they should be reflected on, charged and severely
treated on the account of those lesser differences, which no way disenable them
from being useful and serviceable unto the Government and Nation in the defense
and preservation of the Protestant Religion. And that it is their resolution so
to be, they have given sufficient evidence, equal at least with that given by
any sort of People in the Nation; yea, of their Diligence in opposition unto
Popery, and their readiness to observe the direction of the Magistrates
therein, whilst the Plot has been in agitation; they suppose the Honorable
Person unto whom this Sermon is dedicated, can and will bear them witness.

In these Circumstances, to be required severely to change their Judgments and
Practices, as it were Momento Turbinis, immediately and in an instant; or else
to be looked on and treated as Adversaries; many do think as unseasonable, as
to command a good part of an Army when it is actually engaged against an Enemy,
to change all their Order, Postures, Discipline and Advantages, or immediately
to depart out of the Field. And they do withal suppose that such a sudden
change is least of all to be expected to be wrought by such severe Charges and
Reflections, as are made on all Nonconformists in this Discourse. Such like
things as these do men talk concerning the season of the Preaching and
Publishing of this Sermon: But in such things every man is to be left unto his
own Prudence, whereof he may not esteem himself obliged to give an Account.

For my part I judge it not so unseasonable as some others do. For it is well
that honest men should understand the state of those things wherein they are
greatly and deeply concerned. Nonconformists might possibly suppose that the
common danger of all Protestants had reconciled the minds of the Conforming
Ministry unto them, so as that they were more than formerly inclined unto their
forbearance, and I was really of the same judgment my self. If it be not so, it
is well they are fairly warned, what they have to expect, that they may prepare
themselves to undergo it with patience. But we shall pass by these things, and
attend a little unto the consideration of the Sermon itself.

The Design of this Discourse seems to consist in these three things, or to aim
at them.

(1) To prove all the Nonconformists to be guilty of Schism, and a sinful
Separation from the Church of England.

(2) To aggravate their supposed Guilt and Crime, both in its Nature, and all
the pernicious Consequents of it that can be imagined.

(3) To charge them, especially their Ministers, with want of Sincerity and
Honesty, in the management of their Dissent from the Church of England, with
reference unto the People that hear them. What there is of Truth in these
things, or what there may be of mistake in them, it is the Duty of
Nonconformists to try and examine. But some few things must have a previous
consideration, before we come to the Merits of the Cause itself.

1. The Reverend Author of this Discourse affirms, that in the Preaching of
this Sermon he was far from intending to stir up the Magistrates and Judges
unto a Persecution of Dissenters, as some ill men have reported. Epist. Ded.
Without this Information I confess I could not but judge it would have been as
liable unto a supposition of such a Design, as the actings of the
Nonconformists in the management of their Cause are unto that of Insincerity in
the judgment of this Reverend Author. For,

(1) It was not preached unto Nonconformists, perhaps not one of them present;
so that the intention of Preaching it, could not be their Conviction. They were
not likely either to hear the Charge, or the Reasons of it.

(2) It was preached unto them, who were no way guilty of the pretended Crime
reproved; but peculiarly such as were entrusted with the execution of the penal
Laws against them that were supposed guilty, Magistrates and Judges, which in
another would have but an ill aspect. If a Man should go unto a Justice of the
Peace, and complain that his Neighbor is a Thief, or a Swearer, or a Murderer;
though he should give the Justice never so many Arguments to prove that his
Neighbor did very ill in being so and doing so, yet his business would seem to
be the execution of the Law upon him. But let the Will of God be done,
Nonconformists are not much concerned in these things.

We are likewise informed in the same Epistle, that there are no sharp and
provoking Expressions on the Persons of any. It is indeed beneath the Gravity
and Dignity of this Reverend Author, to bring reviling or railing Accusations
against any; neither will he, I am sure, give countenance to such a practice in
others, which is seldom used but by men of very mean consideration. But I am
not satisfied that he has not used even great severity in Reflections on a
whole Party of Men, and that unprovoked: Nor do I know how Persons on a
Religious account can be more severely reflected on, and that not only as unto
their Opinions and Practices, but also as unto the Sincerity of their Hearts,
and Honesty of their Designs, than the Nonconformists are in this Sermon.

I have seen a Collection made of such Reflections by the hand of a Person of
Honor, a Member of the Church of England, with his judgment upon them; wherein
they appear to me not to be a true resemblance or representation of Christian
Love and Charity.

2. A great part of this Discourse being such as became a Popular Auditory,
consisting in Generals on all hands acknowledged, as the good of Union, the
evil of Schism, and causeless Separation, etc. which will indifferently serve
any Party until it be determined where the original fault and mistake does lie;
I shall not at all take notice of it, though it be so dressed, as to be laid at
the door of Nonconformists in a readiness for an application unto their
disadvantage: But nothing that by way of Argument, Testimony or Instance is
produced, to prove the Charge mentioned, and the Consequents of it, shall be
omitted.

3. Some few things may be taken notice of in the passage of the Author unto
his Text; of that nature is his complaint, p. 2. There is just cause for many
sad Reflections, when neither the Miseries we have felt, nor the Calamities we
fear; neither the terrible Judgments of God upon us, nor the unexpected
Deliverance vouchsafed unto us, nor the common Danger we are yet in, have
abated Men's Heats, or allayed their Passions, or made them more willing to
unite with our established Church and Religion: But instead of that, some stand
at a greater Dastance, if not Defiance. It is acknowledged willingly by us,
that the warnings and calls of God unto this Nation have been great and
mavelous, and yet continue so to be. But it is worthy our enquiry, whether
this be to be looked on as the only End and Design of them, that the
Nonconformists do immediately in all things comply with the Established Church
and Religion, and are evidences of God's displeasure because they do not so;
when he who searches their hearts, does know that they would do it, were it
not for fear of his displeasure? What if it should be the design of God in them
to call the Nation and so the Church of England unto Repentance and
Reformation, which when all is done, is the only way of reconciling all
Protestant Dissenters? What if God should in them testify against all the
Atheism, Profaness, Sensuality, that abound in this Nation, unto the Public
Scandal of it, with the dread and terror of those by whom they are duly
considered, the persons guilty of them, being no way proceeded against by any
Discipline of the Church, nor any Reformation of the Church itself from such
horrible pollutions once attempted? Every man who knows any thing of Christ, of
his Law, Gospel, Rule and Discipline, of the Nature, End, and Use of them, with
the Worship of God to be performed in them and by them, and does with consider
the Terror of the Lord unto whom an account is to be given of these things,
must acknowledge that both in Persons and Things there is a necessity of
Reformation among us, on the utmost perils of the displeasure of Christ Jesus;
yet no such Reformation is so much as endeavored in a due manner. It is no
Encouragement unto Conscientious Men, to unite themselves absolutely and in all
things, unto such a Church, as does not, (...), or as cannot Reform itself, in
such a degenerate state as that which many Churches in the world are at this
day openly and visibly fallen into. And to deal plainly with our Brethren, (if
they will allow us to call them so) that they may know what to expect, and, if
it be the Will of God, be directed into the only true way of Uniting all
Protestants, in the only Bands of Evangelical Union, Order and Communion,
unless those who are concerned, will endeavor, and until they are enabled in
some measure to effect a Reformation in the Ministry and People, as unto their
Relation to the Church, as also in some things in the worship of God itself, it
is vain to expect that the Nonconformists should unite with the Church, however
established. And may we not think that those many Warnings and Calls of God,
may have some respect unto these Abominations that are found in the Nation,
yea, such as without a due Reformation of them will issue in our Desolation? I
do know that with the Nonconformists also, there are Sins against the Lord
their God; and it will be a great addition unto their sins, as also an
aggravation of their guilt, if they comply not with the warnings of God, as
they are here expressed by this Reverend Author, so as to Reform whatever is
amiss in them, and return wholly unto God, from all their wanderings. But as
unto those things which are usually charged on them, they are such as Interest,
Hatred, and the desire of their Ruin suggest unto the minds of their
Adversaries; or are used by some against their Science and Conscience to
further that end, without the least pretense to be raised from any thing in
them, their Opinions, Practices, or Conversation in the world. Does Atheism
abound among us? it is from the Differences in Religion made by Nonconformists.
Is there danger of Popery? it is because of the Nonconformists. Are the
Judgments of God coming on the Nation? it is for Nonconformity. So was it of
old with the Christians; Si Tybris ascendit in maenis, si Nilus non ascendit in
arva, si Coelum stetit, si Terra movit, si Fames, si Lues; statim Christianos
ad Leonem.

4. The immediate Introduction unto the opening of his Text, is an account of
the Differences and Divisions that were in the Primitive Churches, occasioned
by the Judaizing Christians, who contended for the observation of the
Ceremonies of the Law; but some things may be added unto his account, which are
necessary unto the right stating of that Case, as it may have any respect unto
our present Differences. And we may observe,

(1) That those with and concerning whom the Apostle deals in his Epistle,
were principally those of the Jewish Church and Nation, who had owned the
Gospel, professed Faith in Christ Jesus, had received (many of them) spiritual
Gifts, or tasted of the powers of the world to come, and did join in the
worship of God, in the Assemblies of the Christians. I only mention this,
because some places quoted usually in this matter, do relate directly unto the
unbelieving Jews, which went up and down to oppose the Preaching of Christ and
the Gospel in rage and fury, stirring up Persecution everywhere against them
that were employed in it.

(2) This sort of Persons were freely allowed by the Apostle to continue in the
use of those Rites and Ceremonies which they esteemed themselves obliged unto
by virtue of Moses Law, granting them in all other things the privilege of
Believers, and such as wherein they would not in any thing offend: so do James,
and the Elders of the Church declare themselves, Acts 21. 21, etc.

Yea, (3) Out of tenderness unto them, and to prevent all offense to be taken
by them at the liberty of the Gentiles they did order that the Believers of the
Gentiles, should forbear for a season the use of their natural liberty in some
few things, whereby the other were, in their common meetings, as in eating and
drinking together, usually scandalized; giving them also unto the same end,
direction concerning one thing evil in it self, whose long usage and practice
among the Gentiles had obliterated a sense of its guilt, wherewith they could
not but be much offended.

(4) With this determination or state of things thus settled by the Apostles,
(no doubt but that) a multitude of the Jewish Believers did rest content and
satisfied. But certain it is, that with many of them it was otherwise. They
were no way pleased that they were left unto the freedom of their own judgment
and practice, in the use and observance of the legal Ceremonies, but they would
impose the observation of them on all the Churches of the Gentiles wherever
they came. Nothing would serve their turn, but that all other Churches must
observe their Ceremonies, or they would not admit them unto communion with
them. And in the pursuit of this design, they prevailed for a season on whole
Churches, to forego the liberty wherein Christ had made them free, and to take
on them the yoke of bondage which they imposed on them, as it was with the
Churches of the Galatians.

I have mentioned these things only to show how remote we are from any access
unto those Opinions and Practices which caused the first Divisions in Christian
Churches, and among all sorts of Believers. We agree with our Brethren in the
Faith of the Gospel, as the Gentiles did with the believing Jews; we have
nothing to impose in Religion, on the Consciences or Practices of any other
Churches or Persons; we are not offended that others, be they many or few,
should use their own choice, liberty and judgment, in the Government,
Discipline, Worship and Ceremonies of pretended Order, nor do envy them the
advantages which they have thereby; we desire nothing but what the Churches of
the Gentiles desired of old, as the only means to prevent division in them,
namely, that they might not be imposed on to observe those things which they
were not satisfied that it was the mind of Christ they should observe; for he
had taken all the Churches under his own power requiring that they should be
taught to do and observe all that he commanded them, and nothing else that we
know of. We desire no more of our Governors, Rulers, Brethren (if they think
so) in the Ministry, but that we be not with outward Force, and destructive
Penalties, compelled to comply with and practice in the Worship of God, such
things, as for our Lives, and to save our selves from the greatest Ruin, we
cannot conceive that it is the mind of Christ that we should do and observe;
that whilst we are peaceable and useful in our places, firmly united unto the
Body of the Protestants in this Nation, (which, as this Author tells us, is the
Church of England) in confession of the same Faith, and common Interest, for
the maintenance and preservation of that one Religion which we profess, we be
not deprived of that Liberty, which God and Nature, Christ and the Gospel, the
Example of the Primitive Churches, and the present Protestant Interest of this
Nation do testify to be our due.

These things being premised, because I have no design to except against any
thing in the Discourse of the Reverend Author of this Sermon, wherein the Merit
of the Cause is not immediately concerned; nor to seek for advantages from
Expressions; nor to draw a Saw of Contention about things not necessary unto
that defense of our Innocence which alone I have undertaken, (as is the way of
the most in the management of Controversies) I shall pass on unto the Charge
itself, or the consideration of the Arguments and Reasons, whereon all
Nonconformists are charged with Schism, etc.

But yet because there are some things insisted on by the Author, in the
progress of his Discourse, according as he judged the method to be most
convenient for the managing of his Charge, which I judge not so convenient unto
the present defense, I shall speak briefly unto them, or some of them, before I
proceed unto what is more expressly Argumentative. As,

1. He charge the Nonconformist Ministers, for concealing their Opinions and
Judgments from the People, about the Lawfulness of their Communion with the
Church, and that for Ends easily to be discerned, (that is, their own
advantage;) that is, they do indeed judge that it is Lawful for the People to
hold Communion with the Church of England, but will not let them know so much,
lest they should forsake their Ministry.

Page 19, 20. I do not intend to speak of the terms upon which Persons are to
be admitted among us to the exercise of the Function of the Ministry, but of
the terms of Lay-Communion, i. e. those which are necessary for all Persons to
join in our Prayers and Sacraments, and other Offices of Divine Worship. I will
not say, there has been a great deal of Art to confound these two, (and it is
easy to discern to what purpose it is;) but I dare say the Peoples not
understanding the difference of these two Cases, has been a great occasion of
the present Separation. For in the judgment of some of the most impartial men
of the Dissenters it this day, although they think the case of the ^^^^sters
very hard on the account of Subscriptions and ^^^^rations required of them; yet
they confess very little (...) be said on the behalf of the People, from whom
none of those things are required. So that the People are condemned in their
Separation, by their own Teachers; but how they can Preach lawfully to a People
who commit a fault in hearing them, I do not understand.

And the same thing is yet managed with more severity, Page 37, 38. in words
that I shall at large transenbe.

I dare say, if most of the Preachers at this day in the Separate Meetings were
soberly asked their judgments, Whether it were lawful for the People to join
with us in the Public Assemblies, they would not deny it, and yet the People
that frequent them generally judge otherwise. For it is not to be supposed,
that Faction among them should so commonly prevail beyond Interest; and
therefore if they thought it were lawful for them to comply with the Laws, they
would do it. But why then is this kept up as such a mighty Secret in the
breasts of their Teachers? Why do they not Preach to them in their
Congregations? Is it for fear they should have none left to Preach to? that is
not to be imagined of mortified and conscientious men. Is it lest they should
seem to condemn themselves, whilst they Preach against Separation in a
Separate Congregation?

This, I confess, looks oddly, and the tenderness of a man's mind in such a
case, may out of mere shamefacedness keep him from declaring a Truth which
flies in his face while he speaks it.

Is it that they fear the Reproaches of the People? Which some few of the most
Eminent Persons among them have found they must undergo, if they touch upon
this Subject, (for I know not how it comes to pass, that the most godly People
among them, can the least endure to be told of their faults.) But is it not as
plainly written by St. Paul, If I yet serve men, I should not be Gal. 1. 10.
the servant of Christ; as Woe be unto me if I Preach not the Gospel? If they
therefore would acquit themselves like honest and conscientious men, let them
tell the People plainly that they look on our Churches as true Churches, and
that they may lawfully communicate with us in Prayers and Sacraments; and I do
not question but in time, if they find it lawful, they will judge it to be
their Duty. For it is the Apostles command here, Whereto we have already
attained let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same things.

A Crime this is which if true, is not easily to be expiated: Nor can men give
greater evidence of their own Hypocrisy, Insincerity, and Government by
corrupt Ends and Designs, than by such abominable Arts and Contrivances. So if
it should prove not to be true, it cannot but be looked on as animated by such
an evil Surmise as is of no small provocation in the sight of God and men.

This Reverend Author makes a distinction about Communion with the Church, Page
20. between what is required of Ministers, and that which is called
Lay-Communion, which is the foundation of this Charge.

I do not confound bare suspending Communion in some particular Rites, which
Persons do modestly scruple, and using it in what they judge to be lawful; with
either total, or at least ordinary forbearance of Communion in what they judge
to be lawful, and proceeding to the forming of separate Congregations, i. e.
under other Teachers, and by other Rules than what the established Religion
allows. And this is the present Case of Separation which I intend to consider,
and to make the sinfulness and mischief of it appear.

But he knows that by the Communion, and uniting our selves unto the Church,
which is pressed either on Ministers or People, a total submission unto the
Rule as established in the Book of Canons, and Rubric of the Liturgy, is
required of them all. When this is once engaged in, there is no suspending of
Communion in particular Rites to be allowed; They who give up themselves
hereunto, must observe the whole Rule to a tittle. Nor is it in the power of
this Reverend Author, who is of great dignity in the Church, and as like as any
Man I know to be inclined thereunto, to give Indulgence unto them in their
abstinence from the least Ceremony enjoined. Wherefore the Question about
Lay-Communion, is concerning that which is absolute and total, according unto
all that is enjoined by the Laws of the Land, or by the Canons, Constitutions,
and Orders of the Church. Hereby are they obliged to bring their Children to be
baptized with the use of the Aerial Sign of the Cross; to kneel at the
Communion; to the Religious observation of Holy Days; to the constant use of
the Liturgy in all the Public Offices of the Church, unto the exclusion of
the exercise of those Gifts which Christ continues to communicate for its
Edification; to forego all means of Public Edification, besides that in their
Parish-Churches, where, to speak with modesty, it is often times scanty and
wanting; to renounce all other Assemblies wherein they have had great
experience of spiritual advantage unto their souls; to desert the observation
of many useful Gospel-duties, in their mutual watch that Believers of the same
Church ought to have one over another; to divest themselves of all interest of
a voluntary consent in the Discipline of the Church, and choice of their own
Pastors; and to submit unto an Ecclesiastical Rule and Discipline, which not
one in a thousand of them can apprehend to have any thing in it of the
Authority of Christ or Rule of the Gospel; and other things of the like nature
may be added.

This being the true state of Lay-Communion, which will admit of no Indulgence,
if the Rule be observed, I must say, that I do not believe that there are Six
Nonconformist Ministers in England that do believe this Communion to be lawful
for the People to embrace. And on the other hand, they cease not to instruct
them wherein their true Communion with the Church of England does consist,
namely, in Faith and Love, and all the fruits of them, unto the glory of God.

I heartily wish these things had been omitted, that they had not been spoken;
not to cover any guilt in the Nonconformists, whose Consciences are unto them a
thousand witnesses against such Imputations: But whereas the ground of them is
only Surmises and Suspicions, and the Evil charged of the highest nature that
any men can involve themselves in the guilt of, it argues such a frame of
spirit, such an habit of mind, as evidenceth men to be very remote from that
Christian love and charity, which on all hands we sometimes pretend unto. Of
the same nature is another Charge of the like want of sincerity page 46. Those,
says he, who speak now most against the Magistrates Power in matters of
Religion, had ten substantial Reasons for it, when they thought the Magistrates
on their own side. For which is quoted an Answer unto two Questions, 1659. that
is, they change their Opinions according to their Interest. I know not directly
whom he intends. Those who are commonly called Independents, expressed their
apprehension of the Magistrates Power in and about Religion, in their
Confession made 1659. That any of them have, on what has ensued, changed their
Opinion therein, I know not. And for my part. I have on this occasion perused
the Answer unto the two Questions directed unto, and do profess my self at this
day to be of the same judgment with the Author of them, as it is expressed in
that Paper. There are things not easily to be numbered, wherein we acknowledge
the Magistrates Power and Duty in matters of Religion, as much as ever was in
the godly Kings of Judah of old or was at first claimed by the first Christian
Emperors. Yet are there some, who, although they are fed and warmed, promoted
and dignified by the effects of the Magistrates power in and about Religion,
who will not allow that any thing is ascribed unto him, unless we grant that it
is in his rightful Power, and his Duty, to coerce and punish with all sorts of
Mulcts, spoiling of Goods, Imprisonments, Banishments, and in some cases Death
itself, such Persons as hold the Head, and all the fundamental Principles of
Christian Religion entire, whose Worship is free from Idolatry, whose
Conversations are peaceable and useful, unless in all things they comply with
themselves; when possibly some of them may be as useful in and unto the Church
of God, as those that would have them so dealt withal. And it may be common
prudence would advise a forbearance of too much severity in Charges on others
for changing their Opinions, lest a provocation unto a Recrimination on them
that make them should arise, of changing their Opinions also, not without an
appearing aspect to their own interests: But we have some among the
Nonconformists, who are so accustomed not only unto such undue Charges as that
here insisted on, but unto such unjust Accusations, false Reports, malicious
Untruths, concerning Them, their Words, Doctrine and Practices, which being
invented by a few ill men, are trumpeted abroad with triumph by many, as that
they are come to a resolution never to concern themselves in them any more.

2. As unto the state of the Question we are told, That he speaks not of the
Separation or distinct Communion of whole Churches from each other, which
according to the Scripture, Antiquity and Reason, have a just Right and Power
to Govern and Reform themselves. By whole Churches, I mean the Churches of such
Nations, which upon the decay of the Roman Empire, resumed their just Right of
Government to themselves, and upon their owning Christianity, incorporated into
one Christian Society, under the same common Ties and Rules of Order and
Government, Page 16.

I do suppose that particular Churches or Congregations are hereby exempted
from all guilt of Schism, in not complying with Rules of Communion imposed on
them by other Churches; I am sure according unto the Principles of
Nonconformists they are so. For they judge that particular or Congregational
Churches stated with their Officers according to the Order of the Gospel, are
entire Churches, that have a just Right and Power to Govern and Reform
themselves. Until this be disproved, until it be proved, either that they are
not Churches, because they are Congregational, or that although they are
Churches, yet they have no Power to Govern and Reform themselves, they are free
from the guilt of Schism in their so doing.

But the Reverend Author seems in the ensuing Discourse to appropriate this
Right and Power unto National Churches, whose Rise he assigns unto the
Dissolution of the Roman Empire, and the Alteration of the Church Government,
into that of distinct Kingdoms and Provinces. But this is a thing that fell out
so long after the Institution of Churches, and Propagation of Christian
Religion, that we are not at all concerned in it; especially considering, that
the occasion and means of the Constitution of such Churches, was wholly Foreign
unto Religion, and the Concerns of it.

The Right and Power of Governing and Reforming themselves here spoken of, is
that which is given by Christ himself unto his Churches, nor do I know else
where they should have it. Wherefore those National Provincial Churches which
arose upon the Dissolution of the Roman Empire, must first be proved to be of
his Institution, before they can be allowed to have their Power given them by
Jesus Christ. In what Kings, Potentates and other Supreme Magistrates might
do, to accommodate the outward Profession of Religion unto their Rule, and the
Interest thereof, we are not at all concerned; nor will give interruption unto
any of them, whilst they impose not the Religious observation of their
Constitutions unto that end, upon our Consciences and Practice. Our sole
enquiry is, what our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained, which if we are compliant
withal, we shall fear neither this nor any other Charge of the like nature.

But to give strength hereunto, it is added; Just as several Fam^^^^^ united
make one Kingdom, which at first had a distinct and independent Power, but it
would make strange confusion in the World, to reduce Kingdoms back again to
Families, because at first they were made up of them. page 17. Which is again
insisted on, page 31. But the case is not the same. For if indeed God had
appointed no other Civil Government in the World but that of Families, I should
not much oppose them who would endeavor peaceably to reduce all Government
thereunto. But whereas we are certain, that God by the Light of the Law of
Nature, by the Ends and Use of the Creation of Man, and by express Revelation
in his Word, has by his own Authority appointed and approved other sorts of
Civil Government, in Kingdoms and Common-weals, we esteem it not only a madness
to endeavor a Reduction of all Government into Families, as unto the
possibility of the thing; but a direct opposition unto the Authority, Command,
and Institution of God. So if these National Churches were of the immediate
Institution of Christ himself, we should no more plead the exemption of
particular Churches from any Power given them by Christ as such, than we do to
exempt private Families from the lawful Government of public Magistrates. And
we must also add, that whatever be their Original and Constitution, if all
their Governors were as the Apostles, yet have they no power but what is for
Edification, and not for Destruction; If they do or shall appoint and impose on
men what tends unto the Destruction of their Souls, and not unto their
Edification, as it is fallen out in the Church of Rome; not only particular
Churches, but every individual Believer is warranted to withdraw from their
Communion; and hereon we ground the Lawfulness of our Separation from the
Church of Rome, without any need of a retreat unto the late Device of the Power
of Provincial Churches to reform themselves. Let none mistake themselves
herein, Believers are not made for Churches, but Churches are appointed for
Believers. Their Edification, their Guidance and Direction in the Profession of
the Faith and Performance of Divine Worship in Assemblies according to the Mind
of God, is their use and end; without which they are of no signification. The
end of Christ in the constitution of his Churches, was not the moulding of his
Disciples into such Ecclesiastical shapes, as might be subservient unto the
Power, Interest, Advantages and Dignity of them that may in any season come to
be over them; but to constitute a way and Order of giving such Officers unto
them, as might be in all things useful and subservient unto their Edification;
as is expressly affirmed; Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.

As it should seem an Opinion opposite unto this Notion of National Churches,
is examined and confuted, Page 17. ibid it is a great Mistake to make the
Notion of a Church barely to relate to Acts of Worship; and consequently that
the adequate Notion of a Church, is an Assembly for Divine Worship; by which
means they appropriate the Name of Churches to particular Congregations.
Whereas, if this hold true, the Church must be dissolved as soon as the
Congregation is broken up; but if they retain the nature of a Church, when they
do not meet together for Worship, then there is some other bond that unites
them; and whatever that is, it constitutes the Church. I am far from pretending
to have read the Writings of all men upon this Subject; nay I can say, I have
read very few of them; though I never avoided the reading of any thing written
against the way and order which I approve of. Wherefore there may be some, as
far as I know, who have maintained this Notion of a Church, or that it is only
an Assembly for Divine Worship; but for my part I never read nor heard of any
who was of this Judgment. Assemblyes for Divine Worship we account
indispensably necessary for the Edification of the Churches; but that this is
that which gives them their Constitution and forms that which is the bond of
their Union, none of the Nonconformists as I know of, do Judge. For it will not
only hence follow, as the Reverend Author observes, that the Church is
dissolved when the Congregation is broken up, (on which account Churches at
this time would be dissolved almost every Week whether they would or no;) but
that any sort of Persons who have no Church-Relation unto one another, meeting
occasionally for Divine Worship, do constitute a Church, which it may be within
an hour, they cease to be. It is not therefore on this account that we
appropriate the Name of Churches unto particular Congregations; There is quite
another way and means, another Bond of Union whereby particular Churches are
constituted; which has been sufficiently declared. But if the meaning of the
appropriating the Name of Churches unto particular Congregations be, that those
Societies which have not, or which cannot have Assemblies for divine Worship
are not Churches properly so called, it is a thing of another consideration
that need not here be insisted on. But when such Societies as whose bounds and
limits are not of Divine Institution, as were those of the National Church of
the Jews; no nor yet of the Prudence and wisdom of men, as were the
distribution of the ancient Church into Patriarchates and Diocesses; but a mere
natural and necessary consequent of that prevailing Sword, which on the
Dissolution of the Roman Empire erected distinct Kingdoms and Dominions, as men
were able; such Societies as are not capable of any Religious Assemblies for
Divine Worship, and the ministration of Christian Discipline in them; such as
are forced to invent and maintain an Union by ways and means, and Officers and
orders, which the Scripture knows nothing of, are proved to be Churches of
Christ's Institution, I shall embrace them as such; In the mean time let them
pass at their own proper rate and value, which the Stamp of Civil Authority
has put upon them. What is further discoursed by the Author on this Subject,
proceeding no further but why may it not be so and so, we are not concerned in.

3. Page 23, 24. There is a Distribution of all Dissenters into two Parties;
(1.) Such as say, That although they are in a state of Separation from our
Church, yet this separation is no sin. 2. Such as say, That a state of
Separation would be sin, but notwithstanding their meeting in different places,
yet they are not in a state of Separation. The Difference of these two Parties
seems to me, to be only in the different ways of expressing themselves, the one
granting the use of the word Separation in this case, which others will not
admit. For their Practice, so far as I can observe, is one and the same, and
therefore their Principles must be so also, though they choose several ways of
expressing them. Both sorts intended, do plead, that in sundry things they have
communion with the Church of England, and in some things they have not, nor can
have it so. Some knowing the word Separation to be of an indifferent
signification, and to be determined as unto its sense by what it is applied
unto, do not contend but that if any will have it so, the state wherein they
are, should be denominated from their dissent unto those things wherein they
cannot hold communion with the Church of England; and so are not offended if
you call it a state of Separation; how best this hinders not but that they
continue their Communion with the Church of England, as was before mentioned.
Others seem to take Separation in the same sense with Schism, which is always
evil. Or at least they pretend it is their Right to have the Denomination of
their state taken from what they agree in with the Church of England, and not
from their dissent in other things from it. And therefore they continue in a
Practice suitable unto that dissent. Wherefore I judge that there is no need of
this Distinction, but both parties intended are equally concerned in the Charge
that is laid against them for their dissent in some things from the Church.

These things being premised, that we may not be diverted from the substance of
the cause in hand, as they would otherwise occur unto us in our progress, I
shall proceed unto the consideration of the Charge it self laid against the
Nonconformists, and the arguings whereby it is endeavored to be confirmed.

The Charge is, That all the Nonconformists of one sort or another, that is,
Presbyterians and Independents, are guilty of sin, of a sinful Separation from
the Church of England; and therefore as they live in a known sin, so they are
the Cause thereby of great evils, confusions, disturbances among our selves,
and of danger unto the whole Protestant Religion; whence it is meet, that they
should, etc.

The matter of Fact being thus far mutually acknowledged, that there is such a
stated Difference between the Church of England and the Nonconformists, the
next Enquiry naturally should be on these two Heads.

1. Who or what is the cause of this Difference or Distance; without which we
cannot judge aright, on whom the blame of it is to be charged. For that all men
are not presently to be condemned for the withdrawing from the Communion of any
Church, because they do so, without a due Examination of the causes for which
they do it, will be acknowledged by all Protestants. In plain terms, our
Enquiry is, whether the cause hereof be on the one hand, the Imposition of
terms of Communion without any Obligation in Conscience to make that
Imposition, so much as pleaded or pretended from the nature of the things
imposed; or the refusal of compliance with those Impositions, under a
profession that such a compliance would be against the Light of Conscience and
the best understanding in them who so refuse, which they can attain of the Mind
and Will of God in the Scripture.

2. Whereas the parties at difference do agree in all substantial Parts of
Religion, and in a common Interest as unto the preservation and defense of the
Protestant Religion, living alike peaceably under the same Supreme Authority
and Civil Government; whether the evils and inconveniences mentioned, are
necessary and inseparable Effects of such a difference; or whether they do not
wholly owe themselves unto passions, corrupt affections, and caernal Interests
of men, which ought on all hands to be mortifyed and subdued. For as, it may
be, few wise men who know the nature of Conscience, how delicate and tender it
is, what care is required in all men to keep it as a precious Jewel, whose
preservation from defilements and affronts, God has committed unto us, under
the pain of his Eternal Displeasure; how unable honest men are to contravene
the Light of their own minds, in things of the smallest importance, for any
outward advantages whatever; How great care, diligence and accuracy ought to be
used in all things relating unto the Worship of God, about which he so
frequently declares his Jealousy, and Displeasure against those who in any
thing corrupt or debase it; with sundry other things of the like nature, will
admire that these differences are not ended among us, by an absolute
acquiescency of the one party in the Judgments, dictates and impositions of the
other; so upon the Supposition before mentioned, of an Agreement in all the
foundations of Religion, in all things from themselves and Gods appointment
necessary unto Salvation; of that Union of Affections, which our joint Interest
in the Unity of the Faith does require, and of that Union of Interest which
both parties have in the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and that of
Obedience and Subjection unto the same Civil Government; and on the
Satisfaction which the dissenting parties have, in that the other do enjoy all
those great advantages which the public profession of Religion in this Kingdom
is accompanied withal, not in the least pretending to or contending for any
share therein; Many wise men do and cannot but admire, that the Inconveniences
and evils pretended should ensue on this Difference as it is stated among us,
and that the Dissenters should be pursued with so much vehemence as they have
been, even unto their ruin. But we must proceed in the way and Method here
proposed unto us.

1. The foundation whereon the Reverend Author manageth his charge of Schism
with all its consequents against the Nonconformists, is taken from the words of
his Text, and declared, page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. of his Book. I shall not
transcribe his words, principally because I would not oblige my self to take
notice of any thing that is (...), which in such Discourses do commonly
administer occasion of unnecessary strife. The force of the Argument unto the
best of my Understanding consists in the things that follow. (1.) That all
Churches and the members of them, by virtue of the Apostolical Precept
contained in the Text ought to walk according unto Rule. (2.) That the Rule
here intended is not the Rule of Charity and mutual forbearance in the things
wherein they who agree in the foundation, are differently minded or otherwise
than one another. But (3.) This was a Standing Rule for agreement and
Uniformity in Practice in Church order and Worship, which the Apostles had
given and delivered unto them. (4.) That this Rule they did not give only as
Apostles, but as Governors of the Church; as appears from Acts 15. Wherefore
what the Apostles so did, that any Church has power to do, and ought to do,
namely, to establish a Rule of all Practice in their Communion. (6.) That not
to comply with this Rule in all things is Schism, the Schism whereof
Nonconformists are guilty. This to the best of my Understanding is the entire
force of the Argument insisted on, and that proposed unto the best Advantage
for the apprehension of its force and strength, etc.

Let us therefore hereon a little inquire whether this will bear the weight of
so great a charge as that which is built upon it and resolved into it, with all
the dismal consequents pretended to ensue thereon; and we shall not pass by in
so doing, any thing that is offered to give an especial enforcement unto the
charge it self. But in our entrance into the consideration of these things, I
must needs say, it is somewhat surprising unto me, to see a Charge wherein the
Consciences, Reputations, Liberty, etc. of so many are concerned, founded on
the Exposition of a Text, which no sober Expositor that I know of, did ever
find out, propose, or embrace. But if it be true and according unto the mind of
the Holy Ghost, this ought to be no disparagement unto it, though it be applied
unto such an end. This is that which we are to examine. I say therefore,

(1.) We no way doubt but that the Apostles did give Rules of Faith, Obedience
and Worship, not only unto private Christians, but to whole Churches also,
which we find recorded in the Scripture. Unto all these Rules we do declare our
assent and consent, with an entire conformity; and do hope that with
indifferent unbiassed Persons this is enough to free us from the charge of
Schism. (2.) For the Rule here intended, some take it to be the Rule of Faith
in general or Divine Revelation; Some to be the Rule of Charity and Brotherly
condescension; Some to be the particular Rule here laid down of walking
together in the different Measures of Faith, Light and Knowledge, which we do
attain unto. The Apostle in the foregoing Verses having given an account of the
glorious Excellencies of the Mysteries of the Gospel, and of his own endeavor
after the full attainment of them, yet affirms that he had not attained unto
that Perfection in the comprehension of them, which he designed and aimed at.
Herein in the instance of himself he declares the condition of the best
Believers in this Life, which is not a full measure and perfection in the
comprehension of the Truths of the Gospel, or enjoyment of the things
themselves contained in them. But withal he declares their Duty in pressing
continually by all means after that measure of Attainment which is proposed
unto their acquisition. Hereupon he supposes what will certainly ensue on the
common pursuit of this design, which is, that men will come unto different
Seize, have different measures of light and knowledge, yea and different
conceptions or opinions about these things; some will be otherwise minded than
other some will be, in some things only. Hereupon he gives Direction how they
should walk, and behave themselves in this state and condition. And unto those
who have attained that measure, whence in comparison of others they may be
styled perfect, that they press on unanimously toward the end proposed. And as
for those who in any things differed from others, he encourages them to wait
on the teachings of God in that use of the means of Instruction which they
enjoyed. And having prescribed to each supposed Party their especial Duties as
such, he lays down the Duty of them both in common; which is, that in and with
respect unto what they had attained, they should walk by the same Rule, namely,
which he had now laid down, and mind the same things as he had before enjoined
them. Wherefore these words of the Apostle are so far from being a foundation
to charge them with Schism who agreeing in the substance of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, do yet dissent from others, (probably the greater part of the
Church are intended) in some things; that it enjoins a mutual forbearance among
those who are so differently minded. (4.) But our Author affirms that it cannot
be a Rule of Charity and mutual forbearance that is intended, because the
Apostle had spoken of that just before. But it is apparent that he speaks these
words, with reference unto what he had said just before; and if this be that
which those who are otherwise minded are not obliged unto, then are they not
obliged at all to walk by the Rule intended, which is not the mind of the
Apostle; so himself declares out of Cajetan, that the Apostle subjoins the last
words to the former, least the Persons he there speaks unto should think
themselves excused from going as far as they can in the same Rule. Page 37.

But a Rule, he says, it is limiting and determining the Practice, requiring
Uniformity in observing the same standing Rule. The Nonconformists hereon do
say, that if the Apostles, or any one Apostle did appoint such a Rule as this
intended, let it be produced with any probability of proof to be theirs, and
they are all ready to subscribe and conform unto it. On supposition that any
Rule of this nature was appointed by the Apostles, and declared unto the
Churhes, as the Reverend Author I suppose does intimate that it was, (though I
dare not affix a determinate sense unto his words in this place) all that can
be required of us, is that we do conform, and walk according unto that Rule, so
appointed and declared by them. This we are always ready to do. Sundry
general Rules we find in the Scripture given unto us, relating unto the
constitution and Edification of Churces, to their Order and Worship, and
Government; sundry particular Rules for Ministers and others, how they should
behave themselves in Church Societies and Assemblies, are also laid down
therein; all which we embrace and submit unto the Authority of Christ in them.
And if any other Government or particular Rule can be produced, given by them,
which is not recorded in the Scripture, so it can be proved to be theirs, we
will engage to conform unto it.

5. If the Rule pretended to be given by the Apostle be of any use in this
case, or can give any force unto the Argument in hand, it must be such an one
as appointed and required things to be observed in the Worship of God that were
never divinely appointed, imposing the observation of them on the Consciences
and practices of all members of the Church, under Penalties spiritual and
temporal; a Rule constituting National Churches, with a Government and
Discipline suited unto that constitution; with Modes and Ceremonies of Worship
no where intimated in the Scripture, nor any way necessary in the Light of
Reason. Such a Rule I say, it must be; since although I should grant, (which
yet I do not) that the consequent is good, that because the Apostles made Rules
for the practice of the Church that Believers were bound in conscience to
submit unto, therefore other ordinary Governors of the Church may do so also;
yet it will by no means follow that because the Apostles appointed a Rule of
one sort, present Church Governors may appoint those of another. We know full
well, and it is on all hands agreed, what is the Rule that our conformity is
required unto. If this be done from any Rule given by the Apostles; it must be
a Rule of the same nature or to the same purpose; otherwise by a pretense of
their pattern or example, Rules may be made directly contrary unto and
destructive of all the Rules they ever really gave, as it is actually fallen
out in the Church of Rome. But

6. We deny that the Apostles made or gave any such Rules to the Churches
present in their days; or for the use of the Churches in future Ages, as should
appoint and determine outward modes of Worship, with Ceremonies in their
Observation; stated Feasts and Fasts, beyond what is of Divine Institution,
Liturgies or forms of Prayer, or Discipline to be exercised in Law Courts,
subservient unto a National Ecclesiastical Government. What use then they are
or may be of, what benefit or advantage may come to the Church by them, what is
the Authority of the Superior Magistrate about them, we do not now enquire or
determine. Only we say that no Rule unto these ends was ever prescibed by the
Apostles. For,

(1.) There is not the least intimation of any such Rule to be given by them in
the Scripture. There are in it as was before observed many express Rules both
general and particular, about Churches, their Faith, Worship, and men's walking
in them, thoroughly sufficient to direct the Duty and Practice of all Believers
in all cases and occurences relating to them. But of any such Rule as that here
pretended, there is no mention; which certainly if it had been given, and of
the importance which now it is pleaded to be of, such as that without it,
neither Peace, nor Unity, nor Order can be preserved in Churches, some
intimation at least would have been made of it therein. Especially we may judge
it would have been so, seeing sundry things (every thing so far as we can
understand) wherein the Edification of the Church is any way concerned, are
recorded in it, though of little or no use in comparison of what so great and
general a Rule would be of Besides there is that Doctrine delivered, and those
Directions given by them in the Scripture, concerning the Liberty of Believers
and forbearance of Diffenters, as is inconsistent with such a Rule and the
Imposition of it.

(2.) The first Churches after their times knew nothing of any such Rule given
by them, and therefore after they began to depart from the simplicity of the
Gospel in any things, as unto Worship, Order and Rule or Discipline, they fell
into a great variety of outward Observances, Orders, and Ceremonies, every
Church almost differing in some thing or other from others, in some such
observations; yet all keeping the Unity of the Faith in the bond of Peace. This
they would not have done if the Apostles had prescribed any one certain Rule of
such things that all must conform unto, especially considering how scrupulously
they did adhere unto every thing that was reported to be done or spoken by any
of the Apostles, were the report true or false.

(3.) In particular when a Difference fell out amongst them, in a business of
this nature, namely, in a thing of outward order, no where appointed by the
Authority of Christ, namely, about the Observation of Easter, the Parties at
variance appealed on the one side to the Practice of Peter, on the other to the
Practice of John; both vainly enough; yet was it never pretended by any of them
on either side, that the Apostles had constituted any Rule in the cafe; and
therefore is it not probable that they esteemed them to have done so in things
of an alike nature, seeing they laid more weight on this, than on any other
instance of the like kind. (4.) It is expressly denied by good and Sufficient
Testimony among them, that the Apostles made any Law or Rule about outward
Rites, Ceremonies, Times, and the like. See Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.

However then the Apostles might by their Epistles and Presence with the
Churches reform abuses that were creeping or crept in among them, and set
things in order among them, with renewed Directions for their walking; and that
all Christians were obliged unto the Observation of those Rules, as all those
still are unto whom they are applicable in their circumstances; yet all this
proves nothing of their appointing such a general Rule as is pretended, and
such a Rule alone would be pleadable in this case; and yet not this neither,
until either it were produced in a Scheme of Canons, or it were proved because
they had power to make such a Rule, so others may do the like, adding unto what
they prescribed, leaving place unto others to add to their Rule by the same
Right, and so endlesly.

The Truth is, if God would be pleased to help us on all hands, to lay aside
Prejudices, Passions, Secular Interests, Fears, and every other distempered
Affection, which obstruct our minds in passing a Right Judgment on things of
the nature treated on; we find in the Text and Context spoken unto, a sacred
Truth divinely directive of such a Practice as would give Peace and Rest unto
us all. For it is supposed that men in a sincere endeavor after acquaintance
with the Truths and Mysteries of the Gospel, with an enjoyment of the Good
things represented and exhibited in them, may fall in some things, into
different apprehensions about what belongs unto Faith and Practice in Religion.
But whilst they are such as do not destroy nor overthrow the Foundation, nor
hinder men from pressing toward the Mark for the Prize of the High calling of
God in Christ Jesus, that which the Apostle directs unto them, who are supposed
to be ignorant of, or to mistake in the things wherein they do differ from
others; is only that they wait for divine Instruction in the use of the Means
appointed for that end, practicing in the mean time according to what they have
received. And as unto both Parties the Advice he gives them is, that whereunto
they have attained, wherein they do agree, which were all those Principles of
Faith and Obedience which were necessary unto their Acceptance with God, they
should walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things; that is, forbearing one
another in the things wherein they differ; which is the substance of what is
pleaded for by the Nonconformists.

And that this is the meaning and Intention of the Apostle in this place, is
evident from the Prescription of the same Rules in an alike case, Romans 14. This
the Reverend Author saw, namely, that the Rule there laid down, is such as
expressly requires mutual Forbearance in such cases, where men are unsatisfied
in Conscience about any Practice in Religion; which seems in the same case to
be quite another Rule, than that which he supposes to be intended in this
place to the Philipians. But hereunto he answers, That the Apostle did act like
a prudent Governor, and in such a manner, as he thought did most tend to the
propagation of the Gospel, and the Good of particular Churches. In some
Churches that consisted most of Jews, as the Church of Rome at this time did,
and where they did not impose the necessity of keeping of the Law on the
Gentile Christians (as we do not find they did at Rome) the Apostle was willing
to have the Law buried as decently, and with as little noise as might be; and
therefore in this case he persuades both parties to forbearance and Charity, in
avoiding the judging and censuring one another, since they had an equal regard
unto the honor of God in what they did. But in those Churches where the false
Apostles made use of this pretense, of the Levitical Law being still in force,
to divide the Churches and to separate the Communion of Christians; these the
Apostle bids them beware of them and their Practices, as being of a dangerous
and pernicious consequence. Page 14, 15. (1.) No man ever doubted of the
Prudence of the Apostle as a Governor, though in this place he acts only as a
Teacher divinely inspired, instructing the Churches in the mind of God, as unto
the Differences that were among them. (2.) The Difference then among the Romans
was about the Observation of the Mosaical Ceremonies and Worship, that is, so
far as they might be observed, in the Countries of the Gentiles out of the
Limits of the Church, the Land of Canaan: It could not be therefore concerning
such things as whose Discharge and Practice was confined unto the Temple or
that Land, which yet the Jews of Jerusalem adhered unto, Acts 20. 21, 22, 23,
24. Their controversy therefore was principally about Meats and Drinks, days
of Feasting or Fasting, and the like; all founded in a supposed necessity of
Circumcision. (3.) It is well observed by our Author that the Judaizing
Christians (which in all probability at this time were the greatest number at
Rome, the Gentile Church not making any great increase before the coming of the
Apostle thither) did not impose the necessity of keeping the Law on the Gentile
Christians, at least not in that manner, as was done by the false teachers, who
troubled the Churches of the Galathians and others, so as to reject them who
complied not with them out of Church communion, and from all hopes of
Salvation. But yet both Parties continued in their different Practices, which
through want of Instruction what was their Duty in such cases, produced many
inconveniences among them; as judging or despising one another, contrary to
the Rule of Christian Love and Charity. In this state the Apostle prescribes
unto them the Rule of their Duty; which is plainly, to bear with one another,
to love one another, and according to the nature of Charity to believe all
things, to believe that each Party was accepted with God, whilst they served
him according unto the Light which they had received. And as it is to be
thought that upon the giving of this Rule and Direction, they utterly laid
aside all the animosities in Judging and despising one another, which they had
been guilty of; so it is certain that they continued in their different
Practice a long time after without any rebuke or reproof. Yea some Learned men
do Judge, and that not on Grounds to be despised, that the parties who differed
were gathered into distinct Churches, and so continued to walk, even to the
days of Adrian the Emperor, when the last and final destruction of the whole
Nation of the Jews did befall them; after which, those who were not hardened to
the utmost, gave off all expectation of any respect to be had with God, of
their old Institutions.

I do not know how tho present Case between the Church of England and the
Non-conformists, could have possibly been more plainly and distinctly stated
and exemplified in any thing that the Churches were capable of or liable unto
in those days, then it is in this Case here stated and determined by the
Apostle; in whose Direction, Rule, and Determination we do fully acquiesce. But
(5) It is true also (which this Reverend Author observes) that when the False
Apostles (or any other Judaizing Teachers, pretending to Authority) did impose
the Observation of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Levitical Law on any
Churches unto their Disturbance and Division; the Apostle looks hereon, as that
which so far altered the Case, that he gives other Rules and Directions about
it. And if such Impositions might be yet forborne in the like Case, especially
as accompanied with the severe Supplement and Addition of all sorts of outward
Penalties to be inflicted on them who cannot comply with them, an open Door
would appear into all that Agreement, Peace and Quietness among us, which are
desired.

I have treated thus far of these things, not to manage a Controversy with
this Author or any other, but only to show that there is no ground to be taken
from this Text or its Context, to give countenance unto the severe Censure of
Schism and all the evil Consequents of it, as maintained by ill Arts and
Practices, upon the Non-conformists.

The Procedure of our Author in the management of his Charge, is in a way of
proving from the Assertions and Concessions of the several Parties whereinto he
has distinguished Non-conformists, that they have no just Cause to withold
full Communion from the Church of England, especially in its Parochial
Assemblies. And as unto the first Party whom he affirms to grant that they are
in a State of Separation, he quotes some Sayings out of a Discourse of a
Nameless Author, Concerning Evangelical Love, Church Peace and Unity. And
together with some Concessions of his, he adds his Judgment, that Communion in
Ordinances must be only in such Churches as Christ himself instituted by
unalterable Rules, which were only particular and Congregational Churches. As I
remember that Author has at large declared in his Discourse, what Communion
Believers ought to have with the Church, or all Churches, the Church in every
sense wherein that Name is used in the Scripture. But I shall not trouble my
self to inquire into his Assertions or Concessions; nor at present can I do so,
not having that Book with me where I now am. My business is only to examine on
this occasion what this Reverend Author excepteth against or opposes unto his
Assertion about Congregational Churches and the answering his Charge of
Schism, notwithstanding this Plea of the Institution of particular Churches
for the Celebration of Divine Ordinances. This he does page 25. Granting this
to be true, how does it hence appear not to be a sin to separate from our
Parochial Churches; which according to their own Concessions have all the
Essentials of true Churches. And what ground can they have to separate and
divide those Churches, which for all that we can see, are of the same nature
with the Churches planted by the Apostles at Corinth, Philippi, or Thessalonica?

Ans. We will allow at present that the Parochial Churches, at least some of
them in this Nation, are true Churches; that is, that they are not guilty of
any such heinous Errors in Doctrine or Idolatrous Practice in Worship, as
should utterly deprive them of the Being and Nature of Churches. Yet we suppose
it will not be made a Rule, That Communion may be withheld or withdrawn from
any Church in any thing, so long as it continues as unto the Essence of it to
be so. This Author knows that Testimonies may be produced out of very Learned
Protestant Writers to the contrary. (2.) We do not say, it is not pleaded, that
because Communion in Ordinances must be only in such Churches as Christ Himself
has Instituted, etc. that therefore it is Lawful and Necessary to Separate
from Parochial Churches; but it may be pleaded thence, That if it be on other
Grounds necessary to so separate or withold Communion from them; it is the
Duty of them who do so, to join themselves in or unto some other particular
Congregations.

The Reasons why the Non-conformists cannot join in that Communion with those
Parochial Churches which were before described, are quite of another Nature,
which are not here to be pleaded; however some of them may be mentioned, to
deliver us from this Mistake, that the Ground of Separation from them is the
Institution of particular Congregational Churches. And they are such as these.

1. There are many things in all Parochial Churches that openly stand in need
of Reformation. What these are both with respect unto Persons and things, has
been before intimated, and shall be further declared if occasion require. But
these Parochial Churches neither do, nor indeed can, nor have Power in
themselves to reform the things that ought by the Rule of the Scripture to be
reformed. For none among us will plead, that they are entrusted with power for
their own Government and Reformation.

In this case we judge it lawful for any Man peacoably to withdraw Communion
from such Churches, to provide for his own Edification in others.

2. That there are many things in the constant total Communion of Parochial
Churches imposed on the Consciences and Practices of Men, which are not
according to the Mind of Christ. The things of this nature I shall not here
mention in Particular.

3. There is no Evangelical Church Discipline administered in such Parochial
Churches, which yet is a necessary means unto the Edification of the Churches
appointed by Christ himself, and sacredly attended unto by the Primitive
Churches. And we dare not renounce our Interest in so blessed an Ordinance of
Christ in the Gospel.

4. The Rule and Government which such Parochial Churches are absolutely under
in the room of that Rule and Discipline which ought to be in and among
themselves, namely, that by the Courts of Bishops, Chancellors, Commissaries,
etc. is unknown to the Scriptures, and in its Administration is very remote
from giving a True Representation of the Authority, Wisdom, Love, and Care of
Christ to his Church; which is the Sole end of all Church Rules and Discipline.
The Yoke hereof many account themselves not obliged to submit unto.

5. There is in such Churches a total Deprivation of the Liberty of the People
secured unto them by the Rules and Practices of several Ages from the Beginning
of choosing their own Pastors; whereby they are also deprived of all use of
their Light and Knowledge of the Gospel, in providing for their own Edification.

6. It cannot be denied, but that there is want of due means of Edification in
many of those Parochial Churches, and yet provision is made by the Government
that those Churches are under, that none shall by any way provide themselves of
better means, for that great end of all Church Society.

It is on these and the like Reasons that the Non-conformists cannot join in
total Communion such as the Rule pleaded for requires, with Parochial
Churches. In this state, as was said, the Lord Christ having Instituted
particular Congregations requiring all Believers to walk in them; it is the
Duty of those who are necessiated to decline the Communion of Parochial
Churches, as they are stated at present, to join themselves in and unto such
Congregations, as wherein their Edification and Liberty may be better provided
for according unto Rule.

But hereon the Reverend Author proceeds to oppose such particular
Congregations or Churches, I think, as unto their original and necessity; for
so he speaks, page 25, to page 26. But I must needs say further, I have never
yet seen any tolerable proof, that the Churches Planted by the Apostles were
Limited to Congregations. Howbeit this seems to be so clear and evident in
matter of Fact, and so necessary from the nature of the thing it self, that
many wise Men, wholly unconcerned in our Controversies, do take it for a thing
to be granted by all without dispute. So speaks Chief Justice Hobart, page 149.
In the Case of Colt and Glover cont. Bishop Coventry and Litchfield. And we
know well that the Primitive Church in its greatest Purity, was but Voluntary
Congregations of Believers, submitting themselves to the Apostles and after to
other Pastors, to whom they did Minister of their Temporals as God did move
them. Of the same Judgment are those who esteemed the first Government of the
Church to be Democratical; so speaks Paulus Sharpius, In the beginning the
Government of the Holy Church had altogether a Democratical Form, all the
faithful intervening in the chiefest Deliberations; thus we see that all did
intervene at the Election of Matthias unto the Apostleship, and in the Election
of the six Deacons, and when St. Peter received Cornelius an Heathen Centurion
unto the Faith, he gave an account of it to all the Church: Likewise in the
Council celebrated in Jerusalem, the Apostles, the Priests, and the other
Faithful Brethren, did intervene, and the Letters were written in the name of
all these three Orders. In success of time, when the Church increased in
number, the faithful retiring themselves to the Affairs of their Families, and
having left those of the Congregation, the Government retained only in the
Ministers, and became Aristocratical, saving the Election which was Popular.
And others also of the same Judgment may be added.

But let us hear the Reasoning of this Learned Author against this
Apprehension; this he enters upon, page 26. It is possible, at first, there
might be no more Christians in one City than could meet in one Assembly for
worship; but where does it appear, that when they multiplied into more
Congregations, they did make new and distinct Churches, under new Officers,
with a separate Power of Government? Of this, I am well assured there is no
marks nor footsteps in the New Testament, or the whole History of the
Primitive Church. I do not think it will appear credible to any considerate
man, that the 5000 Christians in the Church of Jerusalem made one stated and
fixed Congregation for Divine Worship; not if we make all the allowances for
Strangers which can be desired: but if this were granted, where are the
unalterable Rules that as soon as the Company became too great for one
particular Assembly, they must become a new Church under peculiar Officers and
an Independent Authority? It is very strange that those who contend so much for
the Scriptures being a perfect Rule of all things pertaining to Worship and
Discipline, should be able to produce nothing in so necessary a point.

I Answer (1) It is possible that an impartial account may ere long be given,
of the state and ways of the first Churches after the Decease of the Apostles;
wherein it will be made appear how they did insensibly deviate in many things
from the Rule of their first Institution; so as that though their mistakes were
of small moment, and not prejudicial unto their Faith and Order, yet occasion
was administered to succeeding Ages to increase those Deviations until they
issued in a fatal Apostasy. An eminent instance hereof is given us in the
Discourse of Paulus Sharpius about matters Benificiary, lately made public in
our own Language. (2) The matter of Fact herein seems to me evidently to be
exemplified in the Scripture. For although it may be there is not express
mention made that these or those particular Churches did divide themselves into
more Congregations with new Officers; yet are there Instances of the Erection
of new particular Congregations in the same Province, as distinct Churches with
a separate Power of Government. So the first Church in the Province of Judea
was in Jerusalem: But when that Church was complete, as to the number of them
who might Communicate therein unto their Edification, the Apostle did not add
the Believers of the adjacent Towns and places unto that Church, but Erected
other particular Congregations all the Country over: so there were different
Churches in Judea, Galile, and Samaria; that is many in each of them; Act. 9.
31. So the Apostle mentions the Churches of God that were in Judea; 1 These 2.
14. And no where speaks of them as of one Church, for Worship, Order, and
Government. So he speaks again, that is constantly, Gal. 1. 22. I was unknown
by face unto the Churches of Judea. And that these Churches were neither
National nor Diocessans, but particular Congregations, is as I suppose
sufficiently evident. So was it in the Province of Galatia; there is no mention
of any Church therein, that should be comprehensive of all the Believers in
that Province. But many particular Churches there were, as it is testified
chap. 1. ver. 2. So was it also in Macedonia, the first Church planted in that
Province was at Philipi, as it is declared, Act. 16. And it was quickly brought
into complete Order, so as that when the Apostle wrote unto it, there were in
it the Saints whereof it was constituted, with Bishops and Deacons; Phil. 1. 1.
But that Church being so complete, the Apostle appointed other particular
Congregational Churches, in the same Province, who had Officers of their own,
with a Power of Government; these he mentions and calls the Churches of
Macedonia; 2 Cor. 8. 1. 23. Wherefore we need no more Directions in this
matter, then what are given us by the Apostles Authority in the Name and
Authority of Jesus Christ; nor are concerned in the Practice of those who
afterward took another course, of adding Believers from other places unto the
Church first planted, unless it were in case of a disability to enjoy
Church Communion among themselves elsewhere: Whatever therefore is pretended
unto the contrary, we have plain Scripture evidence and practice, for the
errecting particular distinct Congregations, with Power for their own Rule and
Edification, in the same Province, be it as small as those that were of Samaria
or Galile. It cannot surely be said that these Churches were National, whereof
there were many in one small Province of a small Nation, nor yet Metropolitical
or Diocesan; nor I suppose will it be denied but that they were entrusted with
Power to Rule and Govern themselves in all ordinary cases; especially when in
every one of them, Elders were ordained, which the Apostles were careful to see
done; Act. 14. 22. This is the Substance of what we plead as unto particular
Congregations.

(3.) It is not probable, that any of the first Churches did for a long time
increase in any City unto such a number, as might exceed the bounds of a
particular Church or Congregation. For such they might continue to be,
notwithstanding a Multiplication of Bishops or Elders in them, and occasional
distinct Assemblies for some Acts of Divine Worship. And it seems if they did
begin to exceed in number beyond a just proportion for their Edification; they
did immediately erect other Churches among them or near them. So whereas there
was a mighty increase of Believers at Corinth; Act. 18. 10; there was quickly
planted a distinct Church at Cenchrea, which was the Port of the City. Romans 16.
1. And notwithstanding the great number of 5000 that were Converted at
Jerusalem, upon the first Preaching of the Gospel; yet were they so disposed
of or so dispersed, that some years after this there was such a Church only
there, as did meet together in one place as occasion did require, even the
whole multitude of the Brethren, who are called the Church in distinction from
the Apostles and Elders who were their Governors; Act. 15. 4, 12. Chap. 21.
22. Nor was that Church of any greater Number, when they all departed
afterward, and went out unto Pella a Village beyond Jordan, before the
Destruction of the People, City and Temple. And though many Alterations were
before that time introduced into the Order and Rule of the Churches, yet it
appears that when Cyprian was Bishop of the Church at Carthage; that the whole
Community of the Members of that Church, did meet together to determine of
things that were for their Common Interest, according unto what was judged to
be their Right and Liberty in those days; which they could not have done, had
they not all of them belonged unto the same particular Church and Congregation.
But these things may be pleaded elsewhere if occasion be given thereunto. But
yet,

(4.) I must say, that I cannot discern the least necessity of any positive
Rule or Direction in this matter, nor is any such thing required by us on the
like occasion. For this distribution of Believers into particular
Congregations, is that which the nature of the thing it self and the Duty of
men with respect unto the end of such Churches, does indispensibly require. For
what is the end of all Churches for which they are instituted? Is it not the
Edification of them that do believe? They will find themselves mistaken, who
suppose that they were designed to be subservient unto the secular Interest of
any sort of men. What are the means appointed of Christ in such Churches for
that end? Are they not Doctrines and Fellowship, breaking Bread and Prayer,
that is, the joint Celebration of the Ordinances of Christ in the Gospel, in
Preaching the Word, Administering the Sacraments, Mutual Watchfulness over one
another, and the exercise of that Discipline which he has appointed unto his
Disciples? I desire to know whether there be any need of a new Revelation to
direct men who are obliged to preserve Churches in their use unto their proper
End, to take care of such things, as would obstruct and hinder them in the use
of means unto that end of their Edification? Whereas therefore it is manifest
that ordinarily these means cannot be used in a due manner, but in such
Churches, as wherein all may be acquainted with what all are concerned in, the
very Institution it self is a plain Command, to plant, erect and keep all
Churches in such a state, as wherein this end may be attained. And therefore if
Believers in any place are so few, or so destitute of Spiritual Gifts, as not
to be able of themselves jontly to observe these means for their Edification;
It is their Duty not to join by themselves in a Church State, but to add
themselves as Members unto other Churches; and so when they are so many as that
they cannot orderly communicate together in all these Ordinances, in the way of
their Administration appointed in the Scripture, unto the Edification of them,
it is their Duty by virtue of the Divine Institution of Churches, to dispose of
their Church State and Relation into that way which will answer the Ends of it;
that is, into more particular Churches or Congregations.

I speak not these things in opposition unto any other Church State, which men
may erect or establish out of an opinion of its usefulness and convenience;
much less against that Communion which ought to be among those particular
Churches, or their Associations for their common Rule and Government in and by
their Officers; but only to manifest, that those of the Non-conformists, which
are supposed to adhere unto the Institution of particular Churches in a
peculiar way; do not thereby deserve the Imputation of so great and intolerable
a Guilt as they are here charged withal. And whereas I have hereby discharged
all that I designed with respect unto the first sort of Non-conformists, as
they are here distinguished, I might here give over the pursuit of this
Argument. But because I seek after Truth and satisfaction alone in these
things, I shall a little farther consider what is offered by this Reverend
Author unto the same purpose with what we have passed through. So therefore he
proceeds; page 26. to page 27. If that of which we read the clearest Instances
in Scripture, must be the standard of all future Ages, much more might be said
for limiting Churches to private Families, then to particular Congregations.
For do we not read of the Church that was in the House of Priscilla and Aquila
at Rome; of the Church that was of the House of Nymphas at Colosse; and in the
House of Philemon at Laodicea? Why then should not Churches be reduced to
particular Families, when by that means they may fully enjoy the Liberty of
their Consciences, and avoid the Scandal of breaking the Laws? But if
notwithstanding such plain Examples, Men will extend Churches to Congregations
of many Families; why may not others extend Churches to those Societies which
consist of many Congregations?

I Answer; (1) Possibly a Church may be in a Family, or consist only of the
Persons that belong to a Family. But a Family as a Family neither is nor can be
a Church. For as such it is constituted by Natural and Civil Relations. But a
Church has its Form and Being from the Voluntary Spiritual consent, of those
whereof it consists, unto Church Order; They gave, says the Apostle, their own
selves to the Lord, and unto us by the Will of God; 2 Cor. 8. 5. Neither is
there any mention at all in the Scripture of the constitution of Churches in
private Families, so as that they should be limited thereunto.

(2) What is spoken of the Church in the House of Aquila, Nymphas, and
Philemon, does not at all prove that there was a particular Church in each of
their houses consisting only of their own Families, as such; but only that
there was a Church which usually assembled in their respective houses. Wherefore

(3) Here is no such Example given of Churches in private Families in the whole
Scripture, as should restrain the extent of Churches from Congregations of many
Families. And the enquiry hereon, that if men will extend Churches to
Congregations of many Families, why may not others extend Churches unto those
Societies which consist of many Congregations, has not any force in it. For
they who extended Churches unto Congregations of many Families, were the
Apostles themselves, acting in the Name and Authority of Jesus Christ. It
cannot be proved that ever they Stated, Erected or Planted any one Church, but
it was composed of Persons out of many Families; nor that ever they confined a
Church unto a Family; or taught, that Families, though all of them Believers
and baptized, were Churches on the account of their being Families. So others
may extend Churches unto those Societies which consist of many congregations;
yet not so, as that those who cannot comply or join with them, should thereon
be esteemed Schismatics; seeing such Societies were not appointed by Christ
and his Apostles. If such Societies be so constituted, as that there is but a
probable Plea that they are ordained by Christ; there may be danger in a
dissent from them, merely on this account, that they consist of many
congregations; but this is not our case, as has been before declared.

The Remainder of this Section consists in an account of the Practice of the
Churches in some things in following Ages. This though of Importance in itself,
and deserving a full enquiry into, yet belongs not unto our present case; and
will, it may be, in due time be more fully spoken unto.

Those supposed of the first way and judgment, who grant a separation from the
established form of the Church of England, are dismissed with one charge more
on, and Plea against their Practice, not without a mixture of some severity in
expression; page 30. But suppose the first Churches were barely congregational,
by reason of the small number of Believers at that time, yet what Obligation
lies upon us to disturb the Peace of the Church we live in, to reduce Churches
to their Infant State^* Which is pressed with sundry considerations in the two
following Pages; But we say; (1) That the first Churches were not
congregational by reason of the small number of Believers, but because the Lord
Christ had limited and determined, that such a state of his Churches should be
under the New Testament, as best suited unto all the ends of their Institution.
(2) That which is called the infant state of Churches, was in truth their sole
perfect estate; what they grew up unto afterward most of them, we know well
enough. For leaving, as it is called, their infant state by degrees, they
brought forth at last the Man of Sin. (3) No Obligation lies upon us from hence
to disturb the Peace of any Church; nor do we do so, let what will be pretended
to the contrary. If any such Disturbance do ensue upon the Differences that are
between them and us, as far as I know the blame will be found lying upon them,
who not being satisfied that they may leave the first state of the Churches
under a Pretense of its Infancy, and bring them into a greater Perfection, then
was given them by Christ and his Disciples; but compel others also to foregoe
their Primitive Constitution, and comply with them in their Alteration thereof.

The Remainder of the Discourse of this Section, so far as I can understand,
proceeds on this Principle, that the sole Reason and cause of our
Nonconformity, is this Persuasion of the Divine Institution of particular
Churches; But all men know that this is otherwise. This of all things is least
pleaded, and commonly in the last place, and but by some, among the causes and
Reasons of our withholding Communion, so far as we do so, from the Church of
England, as unto the way and manner wherein it is required of us. Those Reasons
have been pleaded already, and may yet be so farther, in due time. For the Rest
of the Discourse, we do not, we cannot believe, that the due and peaceable
Observation of the Institutions of Christ, does of it self give any Disturbance
unto any Churches or Persons whatever; Nor that a peaceable endeavor to
practice our selves according unto those Institutions, without imposing that
Practice on them, can be justly blameable; We do not, we cannot believe that
our Refusal of a total Compliance, with a Rule for Order, Discipline, Worship
and Ceremonies in the Church, not given by Christ and his Apostles, but
requiring of us sundry things either in themselves, or, as required of us,
directly contrary unto or inconsistent with the Rules and Directions given us
by them unto those ends, (as in our Judgment and Light of our Consciences is
done in and by this Rule) is either Schism or blameable Separation. We do judge
our selves obliged to preserve Peace and Unity among Christians, by all the
means that Christ has appointed for that End, by the exercise of all Grace,
the performance of all Duties, the observation of all Rules and Directions
given us for that end; but we do not, we cannot believe, that to neglect the
means of our own Edisication, appointed unto us by Christ himself, to cast away
the Liberty wherewith he has made us free, and to destroy our own Souls for
ever, by acting against his Authority in his Word, and our own Consciences
guided thereby, in a total complying with the Rule proposed unto us, is a way
or means for the attaining of that End. And we do believe that in the present
state of the Differences among us, an issue whereof is not suddenly to be
expected in an absolute Agreement in Opinion and Judgment about them, that the
Rule of the Scripture, the Example of the first Churches, the nature of
Christian Religion, and the present Interest of the Protestant Religion among
us, does call for mutual forbearance, with mutual Love, and Peaceable walking
therein. And we begin to hope, that whereas it is confessed that the
Foundations of Christian Religion are preserved entire among us all; and it is
evident that those who dissent from the present Ecclesiastical Establishments,
or any of them, are as ready to do and suffer what they shall be Lawfully
called unto, in the Defense and for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion; wise Men will begin to think that it is better for them, to take up
quietly in what the Law has provided for them, and not turmoil themselves and
others, in seeking to put an end unto these Differences by force and
compulsion, which by these ways they will never whilst they live attain unto.
And we do suppose that many of them who do cordially own and seek the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion in this Nation; Men I mean of
Authority, Power and Interest, will be no more instrumental to help one Party
ruin and destroy another; unduely weakening the whole Interest of
Protestantisme thereby; but considering how little the concern of themselves,
or their Posterity can be in these lesser differences, in comparison of what it
is in the whole Protestant cause; will endeavor their utmost to procure an
equal Liberty, (though not equal outward Advantages) for all that are firm and
stable in their Profession of that Protestant Religion which is established by
Law in this Kingdom. I know that Learned and Eloquent men, such as this Author
is, are able, to declaim against mutual forbearance in these things with
probable Pleas and Pretenses of evil consequents which will ensue thereon. And
I do know that others, though not with equal Learning or Eloquence, do declare
and set forth the Inequality, Unrighteousness, and Destructive Events of a
contrary course, or the use of force and compulsion in this cause. But it must
be granted that the Evil consequences pretended on a mutual forbearance, do
follow from the corrupt Affections and Passions of Men, and not from the thing
it self; but all the evils which will follow on force and compulsion, do
naturally arise from the thing it self.

I shall close this part of my Discourse with an Observation on that wherewith
it is closed by this Author, in his management of it. Says he, to withdraw
from each other into separate congregations, tempts some to spiritual Pride and
Scorn and Contempt of others, as of a more carnal and worldly Church then
themselves; and provokes others to lay open the follies and indiscretions and
immoralities of those who pretend to so much Purity and Spirituality above
their Brethren; page 32, 33. If there be any unto whom this is such a
Temptation as is mentioned in the first place, and being so, does prevail upon
them; it is their sin, arising from their own Lusts, by which every Man is
tempted, and is not at all occasioned by the thing it self; and for the other
part, let those who delight in that work proceed as they shall see cause. For
if they charge upon us things that are really Foolish, Indiscreet, and Immoral,
as in many things we sin all, we hope we shall learn what to amend, and to be
diligent therein, as for other Reasons, so because of our Observers. But if
they do what some have done, and others yet continue to do, fill their
Discourses with false Malicious Defamations, with Scorn, Contempt, Railing, and
Revilings, Scandalous unto Christian Religion; like a Sermon lately preached
before my Lord Mayor, and since put in Print, (I intend not that under
consideration) we are no way concerned in what they do or say; nor do, as we
know of, suffer any disadvantage thereby; yea such Persons are beneath the
offense and contempt of all Men, pretending unto the least of Wisdom and
Sobriety.

For what remains of this Discourse, I esteem not my self concerned to insist
on the Examination of it. For I would not so express my Judgment in these
things, as some are here represented to declare themselves. And I know that
those who are principally reflected on, are able to defend both their
Principles and Practices. And besides I hear (in the Retirement wherein I live,
and wherein I dye daily) that some of those most immediately concerned, have
returned an Answer, unto this Part of the Discourse under consideration. I
shall therefore only observe some few things that may abate the Edge of this
Charge. For although we judge the Defense of the Truth which we profess, to be
necessary when we are called thereunto; yet at present for the Reasons
intimated at the entrance of this Discourse, we should choose that it might not
be brought under debate. But the Defense of our Innocence, when the charge
against us is such as in it self tends to our Distress and Ruin, is that alone
which is our present Design; and which wise men, no way concerned in our
Nonconformity, for the sake of Protestant Religion and Public Peace of the
Nation, have judged necessary.

The Principal Strength of this Part of the Reverend Authors Discourse,
consists in his Application of the Reasons of the Assembly against those who
desired forbearance in distinct Communion from the Rule sought then to be
established, unto those who now desire the same forbearance from the Church of
England. I will not immerse my self in that controversy; nor have any
contention with the dead. This only I say, that the case then between the
Presbyterians and those who dissented from them, is so vastly different from
that now between the Church of England and the Non-conformists, and that in so
many material Instances and circumstances, that no Light can be communicated
unto the right determination of the latter, from what was pleaded in the
former. In brief, those who pleaded then for a kind of Uniformity or Agreement
in total Communion, did propose no one of those things, as the condition of it,
which are now pleaded as the only Reasons of withholding the same kind of
Conformity from the Church of England; and the Non-imposition of any such
things, they made the Foundation of their Plea, for the compliance of others
with them. And those on the other side, who pleaded for Liberty and forbearance
in such a case as wherein there were no such Impositions, did it mostly, on the
common Liberty, which as they judged, they had with their other Brethren, to
abide by the way which they had declared and practiced, long before any Rule
was established unto its Prejudice. And these things are sufficient to give us,
as unto the present case under debate, an absolute inconcernment in what was
then pleaded on the one side or the other, and so it shall be here dismissed.

The especial charge here managed against the Non-conformists, is, that they
allow that to live a state of Separation from such Churches, as many at least
of ours are, is a Sin; yet that themselves so do; which is manifest in their
Practice. But it may be said, (1) That this Concession respects only Parochial
Churches, and that some of them only. But the conformity in general required of
us, respects the Constitution, Government, Discipline, Worship and Communion of
the National Church and Diocesan Churches therein. (2) Persons who thus express
themselves are to be allowed the Interpretation of their own Minds, Words and
Expressions. For if they do judge that such things do belong unto a state of
Separation from any Churches, as namely, a causeless Renouncing of all
Communion with them; a condemnation of them as no Church, and on that ground
setting up Churches against them, which they know themselves not to be guilty
of, they may both honestly and wisely deny themselves to be in a state of
Separation, nor will their present Practice prove them so to be. And on the
other hand, those who do acknowledge a Separation as unto distinct local
presential communion with the Church of England, yet do all of them deny those
things, which in the Judgment of those now intended, are necessary to
constitute a state of Separation. But on this Account, I cannot see the least
contradiction between the Principles and Practice of these Brethren, nor
wherein they are blameworthy in their Concession, unless it be in too much
earnestness to keep up all possible communion with the Church of England;
forgive them that wrong. Yet I say not this, as though these who are here
supposed to own a state of Separation, were not as Zealous also, for Communion
in Faith, Love and Doctrine of Truth with the body of Protestants in this
Nation, as they are. (3) That which animates this part of the Discourse, and
which is the Edge of this Charge, is, that the Ministers do conceal from the
People what their Judgment is about the Lawfulness of Communion with the Church
of England. How this can be known to be so, I cannot understand; For that it is
their Judgment that they may do so, is proved only, so far as I know, from what
they have Written and Published in Print unto that purpose. And certainly what
men so publish of their own accord, they can have no design to conceal from
any; especially not from them who usually attend on their Ministry, who are
most likely to read their Books with Diligence; But this has been spoken unto
before.

In these things we seek for no shelter nor countenance from what is pleaded by
any concerning the obliging Power of an erroneous Conscience, which the
Reverend Author insists on; page 42, 43, 44. For we acknowledge no Rule of
Conscience in these things which concern Churches, their State, Power, Order
and Worship, but Divine Revelation only, that is, the Scripture, the written
Word of God; and sure enough we are, that we are not deceived in the choice of
our Rule, so as that we desire no greater Assurance in any concerns of
Religion. And by the Scripture as our Rule we understand both the express words
of it, and whatever may by just and lawful consequence be educed from them.
This Rule we attend unto, and enquire into the Mind of God in it, with all the
Diligence we are able, and in the use of all the means, that are usually and
truly pleaded as necessary unto the Attainment of a right understanding
thereof. And if any one can inform us of any thing required of us thereby,
which yet we have not received, we shall with all readiness comply therewithal.
We have no prejudices, no outward Temptations, that should biass our Minds and
Inclinations, unto those Principles and Practices on them, which we judge our
selves guided and directed unto by this Rule; but all such considerations as
might be taken from the most moderate desires, even of Food and Raiment, do lie
against us. We are hereon fully satisfied, that we have attained that knowledge
in the Mind of God about these things, as will preserve us from Evil or Sin
against him, from being Hurtful or Useless unto the rest of Mankind, if we
submit unto the Light and conduct of it, Wherefore we seek no relief in, we
plead no excuse from the Obligation of an Erroneous Conscience; but do abide by
it that our Consciences are rightly informed in these things; and then it is
confessed on all hands, what is their Power, and what their force to oblige us,
with respect unto all humane commands.

I know not of any farther concern that the Non-conformists have in the
Discourse of this Reverend Author; unless it be in the considerations which he
proposes unto them, and the Advice which he gives them in the close of it. I
shall only say concerning the one and the other, that having weighed them
impartially unto the best of my Understanding, I find not any thing in them,
that should make it the Duty of any man, to invent and constitute such a Rule
of Church Communion, as that which is proposed unto the Non-conformists for
their absolute compliance withal; nor any thing that should move the
Non-conformists unto such compliance, against the Light of their Consciences,
and understanding in the mind of Christ; which alone are the things in debate
between us. But if the Design of the Author, in the proposal of these
considerations and the particulars of his Advice, be that we should take heed
to our selves, that during these differences among us, we give no offense unto
others, so far as it is possible, nor entertain severe Thoughts in our selves
of them from whom we differ, we shall be glad that both he and we should be
found in the due Observance of such Advice. One head of his Advice I confess,
might be, if I am not mistaken, more acceptable with some of the
Non-conformists, if it had not come in the close of such a Discourse, as this
is; And it is, that they should not be always complaining of their hardships
and Persecution; page 54. For they say, after so many of them have died in
common Gaols, so many have endured long Imprisonments, not a few being at this
day in the same Durance; so many driven from their habitations into a wandering
condition, to preserve for a while the Liberty of their Persons; so many have
been reduced unto Want and Penury, by the taking away of their Goods; and from
some the very Instruments of their Livelihood; after the Prosecutions which
have been against them in all Courts of Justice in this Nation, on
Informations, Endictments, and Suits, to the great charge of all of them who
are so Persecuted, and ruin of some; after so many Ministers and their
Families have been brought into the utmost outward streights which Nature can
subsist under; after all their perpetual Fears and Dangers wherewith they have
been exercised and disquieted, they think it hard they should be complained of
for complaining, by them who are at Ease. It may be remembered what one speaks
very gravely in the Comoedian.

Sed, Demea, hoc tu facito; cum animo cogites,
Quam vos facillime agitis; quam estis maxume
Potentes, dites, fortunati, nobiles;
Tum maxume vos aequo animo aequa noscere
Oportet, si vos vultis perhiberi probos.
Indeed, Men who are encompassed with an affluence of all earthly enjoyments,
and in the secure possession of the Good things of this Life, do not well
understand what they say, when they speak of other men's Sufferings. This I dare
undertake for all the Non-conformists; Let others leave beating them, and they
shall all leave complaining. She is thought but a Cursed mother who beats her
Child for crying, and will not cease beating until the Child leaves crying,
which it cannot do whilst it is continually beaten. Neither do I know that the
Non-conformists are always complaining of their Sufferings; nor what are their
complaints that they make, nor to whom. Yea I do suppose that all impartial
men, will judge that they have borne their Sufferings with as much patience and
silence, as any who have gone before them in the like state and condition. And
they do hope, that men will not be angry with them, if they cry unto God for
Deliverance from those troubles which they judge they undergo for his Sake.
Thankful also they are unto God and Men, for any release they have received
from their Sufferings; wherein their chief respect amongst Men hitherto is unto
the King himself. But that they should be very thankful to those, who esteem
all their past and present Sufferings to be light, and do really endeavor to
have them continued and increased (among whom I do not reckon this Reverend
Author, for I do not know that I can truly do so,) is not to be expected.

I shall add no more, but that whereas the Non-conformists intended in this
Defense, are one, or do completely agree with the Body of the People in this
Nation that are Protestants, or the Church of England, in the entire Doctrine
of Faith and Obedience, in all the Instances whereby it has been publicly
declared or established by Law; which Agreement in the Unity of Faith, is the
principal foundation of all other Union and Agreement among Christians, and
without which every other way or means of any such Union or Agreement is of no
worth or value, and which if it be not impeached is in it self a sufficient
bond of Union, whatever other Differences may arise among men, and ought to be
so esteemed among all Christians; And whereas they are one with the same Body
of the People, that is, in its Magistracy and those who are under Rule in one
common Interest for the Maintenance and Preservation of Protestant Religion,
whereunto they are secured by a sense of their Duty and Safety; and without
whose orderly and regular concurrence in all lawful ways and actings unto that
end, it will not be so easily attained as some imagine; And whereas also they
are one with them in all due legal Subjection unto the same Supreme Power
amongst us, and are equally ready with any sort of Persons of their respective
Qualities or Condition in the Nation, to contribute their Assistance unto the
Prefervation of its Peace and Liberty; and whereas in their several capacities,
they are useful unto the public Faith and Trust of the Nation, the Maintenance
and Increase of the Wealth and Prosperity of it; Considering what Evidences
there are, of the Will of God in the Constitution of our Natures under the
Conduct of Conscience in immediate Subordination unto himself, the different
measures of Light, Knowledge and Understanding, which he communicates unto men,
as also of the Spirit, Rule and Will of Jesus Christ, with the Example of the
Apostles and the Primitive Churches, for mutual forbearance, in such different
apprehensions of and Practices about Religion, as no way entrencheth on the
Unity of Faith, or any Good of Public Society; I cannot but judge (in which
persuasion I now live, and shall shortly dye) that all Writings tending to
Exasperate and Provoke the dissenting Parties one against another, are at this
day highly Unseasonable; and all endeavors of what sort soever, to Disquiet,
Discourage, Trouble, Punish or Distress such as dissent from the Public Rule,
in the way before described, are contrary to the Will of God, obstructive of
the Welfare of the Nation, and dangerous unto the Protestant Religion.

FINIS.
Erata.
PAge 2. Line 23. for well read meet. page 7. l. 23. for wherein read whom.
page 34. l. the last, for may be read may not be.

An Exposition of the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th. Chapters on the Hebrews, being a
third Volum of that Exposition. By John Owen, D. D. Sold by N. Ponder at the
Peacock in the Poultrey.


