THE GLORY and INTEREST OF Nations professing the GOSPEL.

Opened in A SERMON Preached at a private Fast to the Commons Assembled IN
PARLIAMENT.

Published by their Command.

By John Owen, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded Lion in St. Paul's Church
yard, 1659.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Commons of England Assembled in Parliament.
I Need not give any other account of my Publishing this ensuing short
discourse, then that which was also the ground and reason of its preaching,
namely your command. Those who are not satisfied therewith, I shall not
endeavor to tender further grounds of satisfaction unto, as not having any
persuasion of prevailing if I should attempt it. Prejudice so far oftentimes
prevails even on good soyls, that satisfaction will not speedily thrive and
grow in them. That which exempts me from solicitousness about the frame and
temper of men's minds and spirits in the entertainment of discourses of this
nature, is the annexing of that injunction unto our commission in delivering
the word of God: it must be done whether men will hear or whether they will
forbear. Without therefore any plea or Apology, forwhat ever may seem most to
need it in this Sermon, I devolve the whole account of the rise and issue it
had, or may have on the providence of God in my call, and your command. Only I
shall crave leave to add that in my waiting for a little leisure to recollect
what had I delivered; out of my own short notes and others (that I might not
preach one Sermon and print another) there were some considerations that fell
in exciting me to the obedience I had purposed. The desire I had to make more
public at this time and season the Testimony given in simplicity of spirit to
the interest of Christ in these nations, and therein to the true real interest
of these Nations themselves, which was my naked design openly managed and
persued with all plainness of speech as the small portion of time allotted to
this exercise would allow) was the chief of them. Solicitations of some
particular friends, gave also warmth unto that consideration. I must further
confess that I was a little moved by some mistakes that were delivered into
the hands of report, to be managed to the discountenance of the honest and
plain truth contended for, especially when I found them without due
consideration exposed in Print unto public view. That is the manner of these
days wherein we live. I know full well, that there is not any thing from the
beginning to the ending of this short discourse that does really interfer with
any form of civil Government in the world, administered according to
righteousness and equity: as there is not in the Gospel of Christ or in any of
the concernments of it. And I am assured also that the truth proposed in it
enwraps the whole ground of any just expectation of the coutinuance of the
presence of God amongst us, and his acceptance of our endeavors about the
alotment and just disposal of our civil affairs, let other lay what weight
they will or please, upon the lesser differences that are amongst us on any
account what ever; if this shield be safe, this principle maintained and
established, that is here laid down, and the just Rights of the Nation laid in
a way of administration suited unto its preservation and furtherance I, shall
not easily be cast down from my hopes, that amongst us poor unprofitable
unthankful, creatures as we are, we may yet see the fruit of Righteousness to
be peace, and the effect of Righteousness quietness and assurance for
evermore. For those then who shall cast their eye on this paper, I would beg
of them to lay aside all those prejudices against persons or things which their
various contexture in our public affairs may possibly have raised in them. I
know how vain, for the most part expectations of prevailing in such a desire,
by naked requests, are But sick men must be groaning though they look for no
relief thereby. Wherefore commiting it into that hand, wherein lie also your
hearts and mine, I shall commend it for your use unto the Sovereign grace of
him who is able to work all your present works for you, and which is more, to
give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

So prays Your servant in the work of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Gospel. J.
O.

A Sermon Preached within the Commons-House of Parliament, at a Fast by them
solemnly held upon the 4. of February, 1658.
Isa. 4. 5. -- Upon all the Glory shall be a defense.
THe design of this Chapter is to give in relief against outward perplexing
extremities from Gospel promises, and the presence of Christ with his people in
those extremities.

The next intendment of the words in the Type, seems to relate to the
deliverance of the People of the Jews from the Babilonish captivity, and the
presence of God amongst them upon their return; God frequently taking occasion
from thence, to mind them of the Covenant of Grace, with the full ratification
and publication of it by Christ, as is evident from Jer. 31. and 32. and sundry
other places.

As to our purpose, we have considerable in the Chapter, the Persons to whom
these promises are given; the condition wherein they were; and the promises
themselves, that are made to them for their supportment and consolation.

The persons intended are the Remnant, the Escaping, the evasion of Israel; as
the word signifies, ver. 2. they that are left, that remain, ver. 3. who escape
the great desolation that was to come on the body of the People, the furnace
they were to pass through. Only in the close of that verse, they have a farther
description added of them, from the purpose of God concerning their grace and
glory; they are written among the living, or rather written unto life; every
one that is written, that is designed unto life in Jerusalem.

As to the persons in themselves considered, the application is easy unto this
Assembly: Are you not the remnant, the escaping of England? Is not this a brand
plucked out of the fire? Are you not they that are left, they that remain, from
great trials and desolations; the Lord grant that the application may hold out,
and abide to the end of the Prophecy.

2. The condition that this remnant or escaping had been in is laid down in
some figurative expressions concerning the smalness of this remnant, or the
paucity of them that should escape, and the greatness of the extremities they
should be exercised withal. I cannot insist on particulars; it may suffice that
great distresses and calamities are intimated therein; and such have the days
of our former trials and troubles been to some of us.

3. The Promises here made to this People, thus escaped from great distresses
are of two sorts. 1. Original or fundamental, and then consequential thereon.

1. There is the great spring or fountain promise, from which all others as
lesser streams do flow; and that is the promise of Christ himself unto them,
and amongst them; ver. 2. He is that branch of Jehovah, and that fruit of the
earth, which is there promised. He is the bottom and foundation, the spring
and fountain of all the good that is or shall be communicated unto us, all
other promises are but rivulets from that unsearchable ocean of Grace and love,
that is in the promise of Christ; of which afterward.

2. The promises that are derived and flow from hence may be referred unto
three heads. I. Of beauty and glory, ver. 2. 2. Of holiness and purity, ver. 3,
4. 3. Of preservation and safety, ver. 5, 6.

My Text lies among the last sort, and not intending long to detain you, I
shall pass over the other, and immediately close with that of our present
concernment.

Now this promise of v. 5. is of a comprehensive nature, and relates to
spiritual and temporal safety or preservation; Godliness though it be not much
believed, yet indeed has the promises of this life, and that which is to come.

I shall a little open the words of the verse, and thereby give light to those
which I have chosen peculiarly to insist upon It is, as I have said safety and
preservation both spiritual and temporal that is here engaged for; and
concerning it we have considerable;

1. The manner of its production; I will create it says God. There is a
creating power, needful to be exerted, for the preservation of Sions remnant.
Their preservation must be of Gods creation. It is, not only, not to be educed
out of any other principle or to be wrought by any other means; but it must, as
it were by the Almighty power of God, be brought out of nothing; God must
create it. At least, as there were two sorts of Gods creatures at the
beginning, that dark body of matter, whose rise was merely from nothing; and
those things which from that dark confused heap, he made to be other things,
then what they were therein; it is of the last sort of creatures if not of the
first. If the preservation of this Remnant be not out of nothing, without any
means at all; yet it is for the most part from that darkness and confusion of
things, which contributes very little or nothing toward it; I will create it
sath God; and whilst he continues possessed of his creating power, it shall be
well with his Israel.

2. For the nature of it, it is here set out, under the terms of that eminent
pledge of the presence of God with the people in the Wilderness, for their
guidance and protection, in the midst of all their difficulties and hazards,
by a pillar of cloud, and a flaming fire; this guided them through the Sea, and
continued with them after the setting up of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness
40. years. The use, and efficacy of that pillar, the intendment of God in it,
the Advantage of the people by it, I cannot stay to unsold. It may suffice in
general that it was a great and signal pledge of Gods presence with them for
their guidance and preservation; that they might act according to his will, and
enjoy safty in so doing. Only whereas this promise here respects Gospel times,
the nature of the mercy promised is enlarged, and thereby somewhat changed. In
the wilderness there was but one Tabernacle; and so consequently one cloud by
day, and one pillar of fire by night was a sufficient pledge of the presence of
God with the whole people: there are now many dwelling places, many Assemblies
of mount Sion; and in the enlargement of mercy and grace under the Gospel, the
same pledge of Gods presence and favor is promised to every one of them as was
before to the whole. The word we have translated a dwelling place, denotes not
a common habitation, but a place prepared for God; and is the same with the
Assemblies and Congregations in the expression following. The sum of all is;
God by his creating power, in despite of all opposition will bring forth
preservation for his people, guiding them in paths wherein they shall find
peace and safty.

Only ye may observe the order and dependence of these promises; the promise
of holiness v. 4. lies in order, before that of safety v. 5. Unless our filth
and our blood be purged away, by a spirit of judgment, and a spirit of
burning; its in vain for us, to look for the pillar and the cloud. If we are
not interested in holiness, we shall not be interested in safety; I mean as it
lies in the promise, and is a mercy washed in the blood of Jesus; for as for
the peace of the world, I regard it not. Let not men of polluted hearts, and
defiled hands, once imagine, that God cares for them in an especial manner. If
our filth and our blood, our sin and our corruption abide upon us, and we are
delivered, it will be for a greater ruin; the way unto the cloud and pillar,
is by the spirit of judgment and burning.

The words of my Text are a recapitulation of the whole verse; and are a Gospel
promise given out in Law terms, or a New Testament mercy, under Old Testament
expressions.

I shall then briefly show you these tow things; 1. What is here expressed as
to the Type and Figure. 2. What is here intended as to the Substance of the
mercy promised.

1. For the Figure; by the Glory and defense, a double consort, or two paires
of things seem to be intended; 1. The Ark and the Mercyseat. 2. The Tabernacle
and the pillar of fire.

For the first; the Ark is oftentimes called the Glory of God; Psalm. 78. 61. He
gave his strength into Captivity, and his Glory into the hand of his enemies.
Where he spakes of the surprisal of the Ark by the Philistines; which when it
was accomplished, Phineas his wife called her son Ichabod, and said the Glory
is departed. 1 Samuel 4. 21.

2. The word which we have rendered a defense properly signifies a covering; as
was the mercy seat, the covering of the Ark. So that upon the Glory shall be a
defense, is as much as unto you, the mercy seat shall be on the Ark, or you
shall have the mercy represented and intimated thereby*

2. The Tabernacle and cloud, or pillar of fire, are also called to mind; so
the words are expressive, of that figure of Gods gracious presence with his
people, which we have recounted, Exodus 40. 34. Then a cloud covered the tent of
the congregation, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. So it
continued, the Glory of God was in the tabernacle, and the cloud upon it, or
over it; as the word here is; and so upon all the glory there was a defense.

I need not stay to prove that all those things were typical of Christ; he was
the end of the law, represented by the Ark, which did contain it, Romans 10. 3,
4. he was the mercyseat; as he is called and said to be, Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2.
2. Covering the law from the eye of justice, as to those that are interested in
him; he was the tabernacle and temple wherein dwelt the Glory of God, and which
was recompensed with all pledges of his gracious presence.

Apply then this promise to Gospel times, and the substance of it is
comprehended in these two propositions.

1. The presence of Christ with any people, is the Glory of any people. This is
the glory here spoken of, as is evident to any one that will but read over the
second verse, and consider its influence into these words. The branch of the
Lord shall be to them beautiful and glorious, and upon all the glory shall be a
defense.

2. The presence of God in special providence over a people, attends the
presence of Christ in grace with a people; if Christ the glory be with them, a
defense shall be upon them; what lies else in allusion to the mercy-seat, not
drawn forth in these propositions, may be afterward insisted on.

For the first; what I pray else should be so. This is their Glory or they have
none; is it in their number, that they are great, many, and populous? God
thinks not so, nor did he when he gave an account of his thoughts of his People
of old, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. The Lord did not set his love upon you nor chose you,
because you were more in number then any people, for you were the fewest of all
people. God made no reckoning of numbers; he chose that People that was fewest
of all. He esteemed well of them, when they were but a few men in number, yea
very few and strangers; Psalm. 105. 12. You know what it cost David in being
seduced by Satan into the contrary opinion. He thought the glory of his People
had been in their number, and caused them to be reckoned; but God taught him
his error, by taking off with a dreadful judgment no small portion of the
number he sought after. There is nothing more common in the Scripture then for
the Lord to speak contempt of the multitude of any people, as a thing of
naught; and he takes pleasure to confound them by weak and despised means. Is
it in their wisdom and counsel, their understanding for the ordering of their
affairs? Is that their glory? Why, see how God derides the Prince of Tyrus, who
was lifted up with an apprehension hereof; and counted himself as God, upon
that account; Ezekiel. 27. 3, 4, 5. 6. etc. The issue of all is; Thou shall be a
man and no God in the hand of him that slays thee; God will let him see in his
ruin and destruction, what a vain thing that was, which he thought his glory.
Might I dwell upon it I could evince unto you these two things.

1. That whereas the end of all humane wisdom, in nations or the Rulers of them
is, to preserve humane society in peace and quietness, within the several
bounds and alotments that are given unto them by the providence of God, it so
comes to pass for the most part through the righteous judgment and wise
disposal of God, that it has a contrary end, and brings forth contrary
effects throughout the world. Do not the inhabitants of the earth, generally
owe all their disturbance, sorrow, and blood to the wise contrivances of a few
men, not knowing how to take the Law of their proceedings from the mouth of
God, but laying their deep counsels and politic contrivances in a subserviency
to their lusts and ambition. And what Glory is there in that which almost
constantly brings forth contray effects to its own proper end and intendment?

2. That God delights to mix a spirit of giddiness, error, and folly in the
counsels of the wise men of the world; making them reel and stagger in their
way like a drunken man, that they shall not know what to do, but commonly in
their greatest concernments, fix upon things, as devoid of true reason and
sound wisdom, as any children or fools could close withal. He takes the wise
in their own craftiness, and the Counsel of the froward is carried headlong;
Job 5. 13. 14. so at large Isa. 19. 11. 12, 13, 14. and now where is their
glory? I could give instances of both these, and that plentifully in the days
and seasons that have passed over our own heads.

The like also may be said of the strength, the power, the armies of any
people; if their number and wisdom be vain, be no Glory, their strength which
is but the result or exurgency of their number and wisdom, must needs be so
also. But you have all this summed up together. Jer. 9. 23. 24. Thus says the
Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might, let no^ the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the
Lord: It is neither Wisdom nor might nor riches, that is our Glory; but our
interest in Jehovah only.

This I say is in the presence of Christ only: Now Christ may be said to be
present with a people two ways.

1. In respect of the dispensation of his Gospel amongst them, the profession
of it, and subjection to the Ordinances thereof. The Gospel of Christ is a
blessed Gospel, a glorious Gospel, in its self, and unto them that embrace it.
But yet this profession separated from the Root from which it ought to spring,
is not the Glory of any people; Christ is not their glory who are his shame.
Empty profession is the shame of Christ in the world; and shall not be others
glory. The Apostle tells us that this may consist with a litter of unclean
lusts, making them in whom it is abominable to God and man. 2 Timothy 3, 4. etc.
If the bare profession of the truth, would render a nation Glorious, Oh how
glorious were this nation. So would have been the people of old, who cried the
temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. But when men profess the truth of
Christ, but in their hearts and ways maintain and manifest an enmity to the
power of that truth, and to all of Christ that is in reality in the world, this
is no Glory.

2. Christ is present with a people in and by his spirit, dwelling in their
hearts by his spirit and faith, uniting them to himself: I do not distinguish
this from the former as inconsistent with it; for though the former may be
without this, yet where this is, there will be the former also. Profession may
be without union, but union will bring forth profession. There may be a form of
Godliness without power: but where the power is, there will be the appearance
also. Now when Christ is thus present with a people, that is, they are united
to him by his spirit, they are members of his mystical body, that is, their
glory. Be they few or many in a nation that are so, they are the Glory of that
nation, and nothing else: and where there is the most of them, there is the
most glory: and where they are diminished, there the glory is eclipsed. Christ
mystical, the Head, and his body is all the glory that is in the world. If any
nation be glorious and honorable above others, it is because of this presence
of Christ in that nation. Christ is the glory of his Saints. Isa. 4. 2. In him
they glory: Isa. 45. 25. And the Saints are Christ's glory, 2 Cor. 8. 23. They
are the glory of Christ: and he glories in them, as God of Job, to Satan,
See thou my servant Job, Chap. 1. 8. He does as it were glory in him against
the wickedness of the world; and Christ in them, and they in him, are all the
glory of this world.

So Zech. 2. 8. Christ was in the pursuit of the collection of his people from
their dispersion: what seeks he after; what looks he for? he goes after the
glory. Even to find out them who are Gods* glory in the world.

Now this is the Glory of any people upon a three fold account.

1 This alone makes them honorable and precious before God. So says God of
them Isa. 43. 1. I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou are
mine; those are they of whom I spoke: what then, v. 4. thou art precious in my
sight, thou art honorable, I have loved thee; how does God manifest his
valuation of them v. 3. Why he will give all the world, the greatest,
mightiest, wealthiest nations for them. v. 5. all is as nothing in comparison
of them, who are his portion and the lot of his inheritance. The Lord keep this
alive upon your hearts, that, that may be in your eyes the glory of this
nation, on the account whereof, it is precious to God, and honorable in his
sight.

2. Because this presence of Christ makes men comely and excellent in
themselves, with what eye soever the world may look upon them. The whole world
out of Christ lies in evil, under the curse of God, and defilement of sin: in
all the glitering shows of their wealth and riches, in the state and
magnificence of their governments, the beauty of their laws and order, (as they
relate to their persons) they are in the eye of God a filthy and an abominable
thing, a thing that his soul loatheth. Curse and sin will make any thing to be
so: but now Christ is to them and in them beautiful and glorious. Isai. 4. 2.
Christ is so in himself, and he is so unto them: and makes them to be so. There
is through him beauty and excellency and comeliness, every thing that may make
them lovely and acceptable. That the world looks not on them as such, is not
their fault, but the worlds misery: it looked on their master Christ himself,
the brightness of his fathers glory, who is altogether lovely, the chiefest of
ten thousand, with no other eye. Isa. 53. 2. They are so in themselves, and are
so to Christ; being exposed indeed to many temptations, oftentimes they are
made black and sully by them: but yet they are comely still. Cant. 1. 5. The
ways whereby they are made black for the most part, we have expressed v. 6.
when the Sun shines on them, and they are made keepers of the Vineyard it comes
upon them. Prosperity, and public employment oftentimes so sully them, that
they are made black to the reproach of the world: but yet to Christ who
forgives, and washes them, they are comely. Yea this is all the excellency that
is in the world. Sin with honor, with wealth, with power, with wisdom, is a
deformed and contemptible thing: it is grace only that is beautiful and
glorious: it is the gracious only that are excellent in the earth. Psalm. 16. 3.

3. This alone makes any truly useful unto others; and that either for
preservation, or prosperity.

1. Here lies the preservation of any nation from ruin. Isai. 65. 8. 9. Thus
says the Lord, as the new wine is found in the cluster, and one says, destroy
it not, for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants sake, that I may
not destroy them all. This is the blessing in the cluster, the hidden and
secret blessing, for the sake whereof, the whole is not destroyed. The remnant
left by the Lord of hosts Isa. 1. 9. that keeps the whole from being as Sodom
or Gomorrah.

If Elisha a servant of the Lord told the King of Israel in his distress, that
if he had not regarded the presence of Jehoshaphat the King of Judah he would
not so much as have spoken to him; how much more will the Lord himself let a
people know in their distress, that were it not for the regard he has to his
secret ones, he would not take the least notice (as to relief) of them or their
concernments. Sodom could not be destroyed until Lot was delivered. The whole
world owes its preservation and being, to them, whom they make it their
business to root out of it: they are as the foolish woman, that pulls down her
own house with both her hands. It is not your counsels, you know how they have
been divided, entangled, ensnared, it is not your Armies, as such; what have
they been to oppose against the mighty floods that have risen up in this
nation; and they also have been as a reed driven to and fro, with the wind,
(Mankind is no better; John the Baptists says it of himself) but it is this
presence of Christ in and with his, that has been the preservation of England,
in the midst of all the changes and revolutions that we have been exercised
withal. Mich. 5. 5.

2. Not only preservation but prosperity is from hence also. Mich. 5. 7. And
the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from the
Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, that waits
not for the sons of men. It is the Remnant of Jacob, of whom he speaks, that
is, this people of Christ, with whom he is so present as has been manifested;
and where are they; they are in the midest of many people, in their inside, in
their bowels; they are woven by their Relations and employments into the bowels
of the nations; and on that account there is neither this nor any Nation about
us, but shall spin out their mercies or their misery from their own bowels;
their providential fates lie in them; as is their deportment toward this
remnant, such will their issue be. But what shall this remnant do? why it shall
be be as dew from the Lord, and as showers, on the grass. It shall be that
alone which makes them fruitful, flourishing and prosperous; it may be it will
be so, provided there be good assistance, counsel and strength, to carry on
their affairs: yea blessed be God for counsels, and for armies, he has made
them useful to us: but the truth is, the blessing of this dew depends not on
them, it tarrieth not for man it waits not for the sons of man: it will be a
blessing, let men do what they will; it depends not on their uncertain and
unstable Counsel, on their weak and feeble strength. This Remnant is as the Ark
in the house of Obed Edom, as Joseph in the house of Potiphar, all is blessed
and prospered for their sakes. It is not the glorious battlements, the painted
windows, the crouching Anticks, that support a building, but the stones that
lie unseen in, or upon the earth. It is often those who are despised and
trampled on, that bear up the weight of an whole nation. All the fresh springs
of our blessings are in Sion.

It were easy to manifest that in all our late Revolutions we have turned on
this hinge. According as the presence of Christ with his people, in the power
of his spirit has received entertainment in these nations, so has our state
and condition been. For many years before the beginning of these troubles the
Land had been full of oppression, I mean in respect to the people of God.
Poverty, imprisonment, dangers, banishment, reproaches were their portion. God
was long patient; at length the height of their Adversaries came to this, that
they set not themselves so much against their persons or ways, as against the
spirit of Christ in and with them: that was made their reproach, that the
byword wherewith they were despised in the mouths of their adversaries, and
the profane multitude: when things were come to this, that the very presence
of Christ with his people, was made the direct object of the hatred of men, the
Lord could bear it no longer; but swear by himself, that time should be given
them no more: in this very house he raised up Saviors and deliverers on mount
Sion to judge the mount of Edom; and how did he carry on his work, not by
might, nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord of hosts: as Zac. 4. 6. Even
by that very spirit which had been reviled and despised. Give me leave to say,
the work of judging this nation was carried on by the presence of the spirit of
Christ with his in faith and prayer: it was not by prudence of counsels, or
strength of Armies above that of our enemies, that we prevailed, but by faith
and prayer; and if any one be otherwise minded, I leave him for his resolution
to the judgment of the great day, when all transactions shall be called over
again: The Adversaries themselves I am sure acknowledged it, when they openly
professed, that there was nothing left for them to overcome, or to overcome
them, but the prayers of the fanatic Crew.

After some years contending, when the Lord had begun to give us deliverance by
breaking the power of the enemy, at least in this nation, besides those bitter
divisions that fell out among the people of God themselves, and the backsliding
of some, to the cause and principles they had opposed, this evil was also found
rising again amongst us; slighting, blaspheming, contemning under several
pretenses, of the Spirit and presence of Christ in and with his Saints: You
know what ensued; what shakings, what revolutions, with new wars, bloodshed,
and desolation, over the three Nations. And give me leave to remember you as
one that had opportunity to make observations of the passages of providence in
those days, in all the three Nations, in the times of our greatest hazards,
give me leave I say, to remember you, that the public declarations of those
employed in the affairs of this Nation, in the face of the enemies, their
addresses unto God among themselves, their prayers night and day, their private
discourses one with another, were, that the preservation of the interest of
Christ in and with his people was the great thing that lay in their eyes; and
that if it were not so, they desired that God would stop them in their way, yea
rather cause their carcases to fall in the high places of the field, then to
prosper them in that which should be contrary thereunto: and we know what
ensued. How we have used our mercies is another matter: this was the Principle
that prevailed with God and man.

Use. 1. If you desire the Glory of these Nations, labor to promote the
interest of Christ in these nations; I am not speaking unto you about
disputable things, differences among the people of God themselves, nor am I
interposing my advise in your civil affairs, but I speak in general about
those with whom Christ is present, by his spirit, his chosen ones, against whom
there is an old enmity in Satan and the world. The glory of these nations is,
that there is a people in them, that have Christ in the midst of them; let it
be your business to take care for that Glory. But how shall we do it?

1. Labor personally, every one of you to get Christ in your own hearts. I am
very far from thinking that a man may not be lawfully called to magistracy, if
he be not a believer; or that being called, he should be impeded in the
execution of his trust, and place, becanse he is not so; I shall not suspend my
obedience whilst I enquire after my Lawful Governors conversion; but yet this I
say considering that I cannot much value any good, but whar comes in by the way
of promise, I confess I can have no great expectation from them whom God loves
not, delights not in; if any be otherwise minded, I shall not contend with him;
but for this I will contend with all the world, that it is your duty to labor
to assure Christ in your own hearts, even that you may be the better fitted for
the work of God in the world. It is the promise of God to Sion; that her
officers shall be peace, and her exactours righteousness, Isa. 60. 17. and then
shall she call her walls salvation, and her gates praise: v. 18. It will be
little advantage to any, to have the work of God raised in the world, and not
to have the foundation stone laid in their hearts: If there should be in any of
you an enmity unto Christ, and the power of Godliness, and hatred and contempt
of the people of God, an evil heart of unbelief, an evil course of life,
worldliness, oppression, vanity of mind, etc. would it advantage you to be
entrusted with power in these nations? Would it not hasten your destruction,
and increase your account? It is a noble promise that we have. Isai. 32. 17.
And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. It is a Gospel
righteousness that is spoken of; and that not of the cause as such only, but
of the Persons; the Persons being righteous, and that with the righteousness
of Christ, the effects mentioned, shall follow their righteous undertakings; we
have peace now, outward peace; but alas, we have not quietness; and if any
thing may be done that may give us quietness, yet perhaps we may not have
assurance; we may be quickly shaken again; but when the righteousness of the
Persons, and cause meet, all the rest will follow.

2. Set your selves to oppose that overflowing flood of profaneness, and
opposition to the power of Godliness, that is spreading it self over this
Nation. Know you not that the Nation begins to be overwhelmed by the powrings
out of a profane, wicked, carnal spirit, full of rage and contempt of all the
work of Reformation that has been attempted amongst us? Do you not know that
if the former profane principle should prove predominant in this Nation, that
it will quickly return to its former station and condition, and that with the
price of your dearest blood; and yet is there not already such a visible
prevalency of it, that in many places, the very profession of Religion is
become a scorn; and in others, those old forms and ways taken up with
greediness, which are a badge of apostasy from all former engagements and
actings; and are not these sad evidences of the Lords departing from us; if I
should lay before you a comparison between the degrees of the appearances of
the Glory of God in this nation, the steps wereby it came forth, and those
whereby it seems almost to be departing, it would be a matter of admiration and
lamentation; I pray God we loose not our ground faster then we won it. Were our
hearts kept up to our good old principles on which we first engaged, it would
not be so with us; but innumerable evils have laid hold upon us; and the
temptations of these days have made us a woeful prey, gray hairs are here and
there, and it will be no wonder if our ruin should come with more speed, then
did our deliverance. O then set your selves in the gap; by all ways and means
oppose the growth of an evil, profane, Common, malignant spirit amongst us.
But I have.

3. Value, encourage, and close with them, in and with whom is this presence of
Christ. They are the Glory of the Nation; it is peace, safety and prosperity
will be found wrapped up in them. I know there lie diverse considerable
objections against the practice of this duty; I shall name some few of them,
and leave the exhortation unto your considerations.

1. Who are those persons in whom is this presence of Christ? are they such as
profess indeed Religion, but neglect all Rules of righteousness; that would
be accounted Godly, but care not to be honest? the marks of whose miscarriages
are written on their foreheads; are not these so far from being the Glory, that
they are the shame of any nation. I pray give me leave to endeavor the rolling
away of this great stone of offense, in these few ensuing considerations.

1. Then I shall willingly lay this down for a principle, that he is not
Religious, who is not also Righteous; as also I shall not much value his
Righteousness, who is not Religious. He that is righteous does righteousness;
he does so, in the bent of his spirit and course of his ways and walkings. If
a man be froward, heady, highminded, sensual unjust, oppressive, worldly,
selfseeking, a hater of good men, false, treacherous, let him pretend to what
he will; that man's religion is in vain; he may have a form of Godliness, but
he has not the power of it. This principle we shall agree upon;

2. There have been in the days wherein we live, many false professors,
hypocrites, that have thought gain to be Godliness, by reason of whose wicked
lives, ways and walking, the name of God has been evil spoken of; and woe to
them by whom these offenses are come; but yet also woe to the world because of
offenses; if these offenses turn off men, from an esteem of the Remnant of
Christ in whom is his presence, woe to them also. I acknowledge these days
have abounded with offenses; but woe to them who are turned aside by them, from
owning the portion and inheritance of Christ.

3. It cannot be denied, but that many of them who do belong unto Christ, have
woefully miscarried in these days. O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in
Askelon; Oh that our souls could mourn in secret on that account, that we could
go backward, and cover the nakedness and folly of one another; but alas,
this has been far from being our frame of spirit; we have every one spread the
failings of his brother, before the face of men and devils; but yet not
withstanding these miscarriages, those that are the people of Christ, are his
people still; and he loves them still. whether we will or no; and commonly
those who are least able to bear with the miscarriages of others, have must of
their own.

4. That differences of judgments in civil affairs, or Church matters ought
not presently to be made Arguments of men; not being Righteous. Some men think
that none are Righteous that are not of their principles; then which principle
there is nothing more unrighteous. Let men that differ from them walk never so
holily, profess never so strictly; yet if they are not of their mind, they
are not Righteous. If men are offended on such accounts, it is because they will
be so.

5. This has ever been the way of the men of the world; that when any have
been unblamable and zealous upon the account of Religion, they will attempt
their Reputation, though without any ground or color, upon the account of
righteousness. So suffered the Christians of old; and so the Puritans of
former days, unjustly and falsely, as God will judge and declare. The world
then in this matter is not to be believed; the common reports of it are from
the devil, the accuser of the brethren; who accuses them in the same manner
before God night and day. These are but pretenses, whereby men ignorant of the
mystery of the Gospel, and the power of Grace, harden themselves to their ruin.

6. This remnant of Christ with whom his presence is, who are the glory of a
nation, is to be found only amongst the professors of a nation. For although
of those who are professors, there may be many bad, yet of those that are not
professors, there is not one good. Where there is faith there will be a
profession. If I should not know well where to find them; I am sure I know
where I cannot find them; I cannot find them, in the ways of the world, and
conformity to it; in darkness, ignorance, neglect of duty, and utter
unacquaintednesse with Gospel truths, the gifts and graces of the spirit; there
I cannot find them; I shall not say of them, behold the Lords anointed, let
their outward worldly appearance be what it will. now by the help of these
considerations, those who have in themselves principles of life and light in
Christ, will or may be, seting aside their temptations enabled to discover this
generation of the Lords delight; and for others, I cannot take down the enmity
that God has set up. So then notwithstanding this objection I shall certainly
esteem this remnant of Christ to lie among those, who having received Gospel
light, and gospel gifts evidently, do make also profession of Gospel grace,
union and communion with Christ, separation from the world, and the ways of
it, in a conversation acceptable unto God in Christ; and to this portion shall
I say as Ruth to Naomi. Let what will be glorious, or uppermost in the world,
whether thou go I will go, where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall
be my people, and thy God my God; the Lord do so to me and more also, if ought
part thee and me; with them let my portion be, and the portion of my family,
whatever their lot and condition in this world shall be; and the Lord say Amen.

Obj. 1. But it will be said secondly, we are still at a loss; for what woeful
divisions are there amongst this gegeneration of professors? some are for one
way, and some for another; some say one sort are the people of God, some
another; some say the Prelatists are so, some the Presbiterians, some the
Independents, some the Anabaptists, some the fifth Monarchy men, some others,
and on whom should the valuation pleaded for be cast.

Ans. 1. Some do say so, and plead thus, it cannot be denied; but the truth is,
the greater is their weakness and folly. It is impossible men acquainted with
the spirit of Christ and the Gospel, should say so, unless they were under the
power of one Temptation or other. But it is no party, but the party of Christ
in the world, and against the world, the seed of the woman, against the seed of
the serpent that I am pleading for; that men as to their interest in Christ
should be judged from such denominations, as though they make a great noise in
the world, yet indeed signify very little things in themselves, is most
unrighteous, and unequal; nor will men find peace, in such rash and
precipitate judgments.

2. There may be many divisions amongst the people of God, and yet none of them
be divided from Christ the head. The branches of a tree may be entangled by
strong winds, and stricken against one another, and yet none of them broken off
from the tree its self; and when the storm is over every one possesses its own
place in quietness beauty and fruitfulness. Whilst the strong winds of
temptations are upon the followers of Christ, they may be tossed and entangled;
but not being broken off from the root, when he shall say to the winds, peace,
be still, they will flourish again in peace and beauty.

3. Let not Satan cheat you of your duty, by this trivial objection. If he can
keep you from duty, whilst he can make divisions; he has you sure enough. They
of whom I speak, be they under what reproach or obloquies soever, they are all
true men, all the children of one father, though they are unhappily fallen out
by the way.

Use. 2. Of encouragement to those that have the presense of Christ with them
in the manner declared; they shall be safe; In vain it is for all the world to
attempt their security; either they shall not prevail, or they shall mischief
themselves by their own prevalency. Mich. 5. 8. As they shall be a dew where
they are appointed for a blessing, so as a Lion, where they are oppressed.
Destruction will come forth on their account, and that terribly like the
destruction of a Lion, speedily, in passing through it shall be done. And
whence is it that this feeble generation shall be as a Lion? It is from the
presence of Christ among them, who is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and to
honor them, he assigns that to them, which is his own proper work; let men
take heed how they provoke this Lion: for the present (Genesis 49. 9.) he is gone
up from the prey, he stoopeth down, he coucheth as a Lion and as an old Lion,
who shall rouse him up? He has taken his prey in these Nations, in the
destruction of many of his enemies: he seems now to take his rest, to couch
down, his indignation being overpast, but who shall rouse him up? Why what if
he be provoked? what if he be stirred up? why he will not lie down, until he
eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the slain. Numb. 23. 24. There is no
delivery from him: No, but what if there be a strong combination of many
against him, will he not cease and give over? Isa. 31. 4. Be they who they
will, the sheaperds of the people, be they never so many a multitude of them,
let them lift up their voice and rage never so much, all is one, he will
perform his work and accomplish it: until you have him in the condition
mentioned, Isai. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Blessed are the people that are under
his care and conduct, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of other Books published by Dr. OWEN, and sold by Philemon
Stephens, at the Gilded Lion in St. Paul's Church yard.
1. A Display of the Errors of the Arminians, concerning the old Palagian Idol
Free will, the new Goddess Contingency, etc. in 14. Chapters, 4.

2. Salus electorum Sanguis Jesu. A treatise of the Redemption and
reconciliation that is in the blood of Christ, with the merit thereof, and the
satisfaction wrought thereby; wherein the whole controversy of Universal
Redemption is full dicussed, in four Books, with an Apendex upon occasion of a
late Book published by Mr. Joshua Sprigge, containing erroneous doctrine.

3. The Duty of Pastors and people distinguished, touching the means to be used
by the people (distinct from Church Officers) for increasing of Divine
Knowledge.

4. Eshcol, or rules of Direction, for the walking of the Saints in fellowship,
According to the order of the Gospel,

5. A fast Sermon to the Parliament. April 29. 1646. on Acts 16. 9. A vision
appeared to Paul in the right etc. with an appendix touching Church Government.
(...)

6. Eben ezar, being an exposition on the first ten verses of the third Chapter
of the prophecy of Habbakkuck, in two Sermons, one at Colchester, and the
other at Rumford, in memorial of the Deliverance of Essex County and Commit.
1648.

7. A Fast Sermon to the Parliament. Jan. 31. 1948. on Jer. 15. 19. 20. Let
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them, with a discourse about
Toleration, and the duty of the Civil Magistrate about Religion.

8. A Fast Sermon to the Parliament. April 19. 1649. on Heb. 12. 27. And this
word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things, etc.

9. The glory of the Church in its Religion to Christ, in two Sermons, one at
Barwick, the other at Edenbrough, on Esaias. 56. 7. For mine house shall be
called an house of Prayer for all People.

10. The laboring Saints dismission to rest. A Sermon at the Funeral of H.
Ireton, Lord Deputy of Ireland, on Daniel 12. 13. But go thou thy way, till the
end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in the lot, at the end of the days.

11. A Sermon to the Parliament at their Solemn Fast held October 30. 1656. on
2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And he went out to meet Asa, the Lord is with you etc.

12. A Treatise unfolding the Saints Fellowship with God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, each person distinctly.

A Commentary on the 12. small Prophets by Mr. John Trap.

A Practical Exposition on these four Psalms viz. The 27. 84. 85. 87. by Mr.
Thomas Pierson.

Mr. George Herberts Poems reprinted, with an alphabetical Table, together with
the Synagoue, being divine Poems the third time enlarged, in imitation of Mr.
Herbers Poems.

Paralipomena Orthographiae, Etymologiae prosodiae, una cum Scholiis ad eanones
de genere substantivorum de Anomalis praeteritis et supinis verborum Syntaxi
carminum ratione, et figuris, collecta ex optimis autoribus in quatuor libris,
per Joh. Danes, 4.

The holy life, and happy death of J. Bruen, of Bruen Stapleford in Cheshire
Esquire exhibiting variety of memorable passages, useful for all sorts of people,
as a pathway to Piety and Charity, By W. Hind.

Five books published by Mr. Robert Abbot. viz. 1. A Mothers Catechism, wherein
chief principles of Christian are Religion briefly propounded, fully expounded
usefully applied, with 3. Sermons: 1. on Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his
error. 2. on Mat. 13, 45. 46. A Merchant seeking pearl. etc. 3. Psalm. 31. 5.
Into thy hand etc.

2. The young man's warning piece, at the burial of W. R. with a History of his
sinful like, and woeful death, with a discourse of the use of such examples.

3. 4. Sermons: 1. On Judge. 11. 27. The Lord the Judge. etc. 2. Mat. 7. 12.
Whatsoever you would men should do to you, etc. 3. and 4. 1 Timothy 1. 19 Holding
faith and etc. 4. A trial of Church forsakers, prooving the Church of Eng. to
be a true church, has a true Ministry and true worship. Heb. 10. 25. Not
forsaking the assembling.

5. A Christian Family, Builded by God a Treatise directing all Governors of
Families how to act, on Psalm 127. 1.

Mr. E. Wingates Arithmetic the 3 Edition digested into a more familiar method
and very much augmented by John Kersey.


