THE CHURCH OF ROME NO Safe Guide: OR Reasons to prove that no Rational man,
who takes due care of his own Eternal Salvation, can give himself up unto the
Conduct of that Church in matters of Religion.

By John Owen, D. D.

JEREM. 7. 4, 9, 10. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. Will ye steal,
murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn Incense unto Baal, and
walk after other Gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in this
house which is called by my Name? LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the
Peacock in the Poultry, over against the Stocks Market. 1679.

Imprimatur, March 5. 1679.

PREFACE.
THE Ensuing Discourse was the Subject and Substance of two Sermons Preached
unto a Private Congregation. The Author of them had no design or purpose ever
to have made them Public. The importunity of many, who judged they might be of
use unto others, because they found them so unto themselves, gave occasion unto
this Publication of them. Yet had they not so prevailed, but that he judged it
was neither unmeet for him, nor unseasonable for others. In publico discrimine
omnis homo miles est; No man is to be forbidden to bring his Bucket to help
allay the flames of a raging Fire. And it is the Pretense of the Church of Rome
to be the only Guide of all Christians in Religion, which is here examined; a
work which a concurrence of all sorts of circumstances renders seasonable. For
as this Pretense is the sole Foundation of the whole Papacy, with all the Power
and secular Advantages that it has obtained unto it self; so it is that alone
which gives countenance and warranty unto the Factors and Agents of that
Church, to design and prepetrate such things as are destructive of all that is
praiseworthy or desirable among Mankind, and unspeakably scandalous unto
Christian Religion. Remove the sand or rubbish hereof, and the whole Fabric
will dissolve of it self, and fall to the ground. This small Discourse is an
Attempt unto that end, whose success is humbly recommended unto the care of God
over his Church. If there seem to be any severities of expression used toward
some of the Church of Rome, the Reader is to consider that hard things cannot
well be represented in soft and pliant words. And if there be nothing of this
nature found, but what has the appearance of severity, from the things
themselves which are expressed, there is no blameable excess. However the
Author is one who heartily desires and prays for the outward Peace and
Tranquillity of all men in this world, whose Principles will allow them to live
peaceably with others.

THE CHURCH of ROME NO SAFE GUIDE.
THE Foundation of the small ensuing discourse, shall be laid in a Position,
wherein as I suppose, Persons of all sorts who are concerned in the things
treated about, are agreed; namely, that it is the Duty of every man who takes
care of his own eternal Salvation, to betake himself into some Guide or
Conduct, that may safely lead him unto the Knowledge of the Truth, and the
Practice of Christian Obedience. The Nature of Religion, the State of our own
Minds in this World, with the eternal Importance of a safe unerring Guidance in
things Spiritual and Supernatural, do require that the utmost of our Diligence
and Prudence, be used in the discharge of this Duty, in the choice of this
Guide. No man of himself is sufficient by his own Reason al^ne to be his own
Guide. They who thinking themselves wise have attempted so to be, have waxed
vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish hearts have been darkened. Romans 1.
21. The warning and instruction given by Solomon, do principally respect this
case; He that trusts in his own heart is a fool; but whosoever walks wisely
shall be delivered, Prove. 28. 26. But the Knowledge of, and Adherence unto such
a Guide, are eminently necessary, when there are great Differences and
Divisions amongst men about Religion; especially if they are managed in ways
and by means not only scandalous unto Religion it self, but pernicious unto
Humane Society, in their consequents. When men not only say and contend that
here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, Matthew. 24. 23. but also on the account
of these differences engage into ways and practices, ruinous unto the souls of
men, and destructive unto all that is praise worthy in this World, those who
are not careful to choose and adhere unto a faithful Guide and conduct, are no
less defective in Wisdom, than negligent in their Duty.

Were a man in a Wilderness where are a multitude of cross paths, all
pretending to lead unto an inhabited City, whither he must go or perish; if he
see men not only contending some for one way, some for another, but killing and
destroying one another, about the preference of the several ways they esteem
best and safest; he deserves to wander and perish, if he refuse a Guide that is
tendered unto him with sufficient evidence of his Truth and Faithfulness. That
there is such a one ready in our present case shall be immedately evinced.

The differences in Religion that are at present among us, are of two sorts.
First, Such as comparatively are of small moment, as unto the principal ends of
the Life of God. The measure of these differences is, that which way soever
they are determined in the minds of men, they neither overthrow the Foundation,
nor obstruct the due exercise of Faith and Love. For this is our great Duty,
with respect unto Doctrines in Religion, that we hold fast the form of sound
words, in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 13. And if any of
them are so small as that it cannot be pretended that they overthrow the
Foundations of Faith and Love, yet if they hinder them in their operations and
due exercise according unto the Rule of the Gospel, they are pernicious unto
the souls of them in whom they have that effect. But such differences which
comply with this measure, tend unto nothing in themselves that is obstructive
unto the Glory or Power of Religion, whatever they may be pressed and wrested
unto, by the Lusts, Prejudices, and carnal Interests of men. For there is no
ground to be taken from them, for severe thoughts concerning the state and
condition of them who so differ, as unto their Interest in present Grace and
future Glory. To live in a neglect of Love, in all the effects and fruits of it
toward such on any pretenses, to design their hurt and evil, is to live in
open contradiction unto all the Rules of the Gospel.

Such severe thoughts are the principal causes and occasion of all pernicious
evils in Religion; especially those which are most scandalous unto it; and most
inconsistent with that good of Mankind, which Christian Religion is designed to
promote. For things are come to that pass among the generality of Christians,
that when once Persons begin to damn others in their minds for their dissent
from them, they judge themselves at liberty, and count that it is their Duty,
to do them all the mischief they can in this World. They first make themselves
their Judges that they must go to Hell, and then would be their Executioners,
to send them thither as fast as they can. Whether this be a Representation of
Christ or of the Devil, is not hard to determine. Sure I am, it is not
compliant with the advice given unto all Guides of the Church of an attendance
whereunto they must give an account, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. And the Servant of
the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient; In
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth. And that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his Will.

Hence it is that those who have a strong inclination to oppress and destroy
other men, which their Interest prompts them unto, do endeavor to make every
the least dissent from themselves, on one pretense or other, by Sophistical
arguments and strained consequences, to be a fundamental error, and such as
makes them incapable of Life eternal. But no men can give a greater evidence of
their disintrest in Christian Religion, of their unacquaintedness with the
virtues and Powers of it, wherein the glories of it do consist, and what is of
real price with God, than those who are so minded. Blessed be God, that Christ
will not leave his seat of Judgment unto such Persons, neither here nor
hereafter.

But such differences as those mentioned, will probably continue among
Christians, so long as they continue in this World. For although all those
among whom these differences are, do choose the same Guide, yet they do not in
all things equally hear and understand his voice. Perfection in Light and
Knowledge are required unto a perfect agreement in all the conceptions of our
minds about spiritual things. Wherefore it is reserved for Heaven where every
thing that is imperfect shall be done away. Here we have different measures; We
know but in part, and therefore prophesy in part, Romans 13. 9. It is Love or
Charity alone that supplies this defect; and gives such an Harmony unto the
different parts of the Mystical Body of Christ, which is the Church, as renders
them all useful, and the whole beautiful, 1 Cor. 13. Col. 3. 14.

But these are not the differences which at present I intend. There are those
which in their Nature are of greater Importance; such as are about the
Fundamentals of Christian Faith, Worship and Obedience; such as upon whose
determination the eternal welfare and misery of the souls of men do depend. And
not only so, but they are such also, which on that wretched mannagement of
Religious concerns that late ages have embraced, have an influence into the
Peace or Disturbance of Humane Society, the Tranquillity, the Liberty and Lives
of men. Yea they are by some promoted and pursued, by all ways of fraud and
violence, with that height of Impiety as is utterly destructive of all
Religion. Many we have who plead themselves to be Christians, which might be
allowed them, if they pleased themselves, would they not do such things as
Christian Religion abhors. But this is the least part of their claim; they
will also be the only Christians; all others who differ from them, however
falsely so called, being only a drove of unbelievers, hasting unto Hell. Now
although this be intolerable presumption, yet because they hurt none by it,
but themselves, if they will not be awakened from this pleasing dream, they may
be suffered to sleep on. But they rest not here; these Christians who only are
so, and so alone know truly what is in Christian Religion, will do such things
under a pretense of it, will perpetrate such execrable crimes, avowing them to
be the dictates and commands of that Religion, that if men were not sure that
their former pretenses are presumptuously false, it would be a sufficient
warranty for them, whereon to question the whole Truth of the Gospel. And these
things are done in the pursuit of these differences in Religion which abound
among us. Wherefore if we would not contribute unto that intolerable scandal
against the Gospel, that the Religion it teaches is pernicious to the peace of
Mankind, and all that is praise worthy in the World, which must be accounted
for; if we have any care about our own eternal Salvation, we ought to use our
utmost diligence to arrive unto a safe conduct through all these difficulties.

This being our present case, there being such differences in, and divisions
about Religion among us; the mannagement of them, being grown incurably
scandalous and perilous; our enquiry is, what Guide or Conduct a man that takes
care of his own Salvation, that would know the Truth, and have the benefit of
it, that would please God here, and come unto the eternal Enjoyment of him
hereafter, ought to betake himself, and firmly adhere unto, as that which will
safely lead and direct him unto all these ends. For if the blind lead the
blind, both will fall into the ditch.

Two things are pleaded to be this safe and infallible Guide; to have that
conduct committed unto them, which every one who takes care of his Salvation is
obliged to betake himself unto.

The first is the Church of Rome. She it is who at this time, lays a most
vehement claim to be the only Authoritative infallible Guide of all Christians,
as unto their Faith, Worship and Obedience. We enquire not after a ministerial
Guide and the benefit which we may receive thereby. This they regard not, as
that which leaves men the exercise of their own understandings, and use of all
Divine Aids and Assistances, as unto the Information, Direction and
Determination of their Minds in all that they are to believe and practice in
Religion. But such a Guidance as whereunto, by virtue of its Authority and
Infallibility we are entirely and absolutely to resign our understandings and
consciences, what ever it leads us unto, is that which this Church claims,
and without which she is nothing, nor can stand one moment. This is that which
those who plead the cause of that Church at present, do wholly betake
themselves unto the promotion of, declining what lies in them, all other
Differences and Controversies between them and us. Such a Guide, they say,
there must be of all Christians, and this Guide is their Church. And they do
wisely consult their own Interest therein. For if they can once gain this
point, all other things which they aim at, will follow of their own accord; and
they may satisfy the desires of their hearts on the consciences of men.

Wherefore this claim of theirs consists of these three parts, or may be
reduced unto these three Heads.

1. That they, and they alone, are the Church of Christ; All others who are
called Christians in the World, are Heretics and Schismatics, who belong not
unto it, nor have any Interest in it. Howbeit if the description given us of
the Church of Christ in the Scripture be right and good, it is almost
impossible there should be any Society or combination of men on a religious
account, more unlike it than that which is called the Church of Rome. This
therefore must be taken upon their own credit, and vehement Affirmation, by
them who have a mind so to do.

2. That this Church which they alone are, is entrusted with Authority over the
souls and consciences of all Christians, and all that would be so, to be their
only Guide in all that they are to know, believe and do in Religion; so that
whoever gives not themselves up unto their conduct, must perish eternally. It
were no hard task to manifest that a supposition hereof, is destructive unto
the Nature of Evangelical Faith and Obedience, as also of all the Directions
and Precepts given by Christ and his Apostles for the discharge of our Duty
with respect unto them. But this they must obtain, or the whole present Popal
Interest falls unto the ground. Yet neither will a supposition that there is
such a Church, secure them; their own pretenses to be this Church being openly
contradictory to the Scripture. Nor is the Power claimed herein derived from
the Apostles who professed themselves not to be Lords of the Faith of
Believers, 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 3.

3. They plead that hereon, no more is required of any man, who takes care of
his Salvation; but that he give up himself absolutely and entirely unto the
conduct of their Church, believing what it proposes, and that on this ground
alone, that it is proposed by it, and obeying all its commands; whereby they
seem to set this pretended Guide in the Temple of God, showing him that he is
God.

This is the claim of the Church of Rome; these are the Principles whereinto it
is resolved, which whether they have any thing in them of Truth or Modesty,
will immediately be made to appear.

Secondly, The Holy Scripture with the Divine Aids and assistances for the
understanding thereof, which God has promised unto all that diligently seek
him, is pleaded to be the only Rule and Guide that men ought to betake
themselves unto, in case of those important differences in Religon, which are
under consideration And the plea on the behalf thereof is reducible unto these
five Heads.

1. That this Scripture is a Divine supernatural Revelation of God, his Mind
and his Will. This Foundation is unquestionable, and will never fail them that
build upon it. Those of the Roman Religion will propose ensnaring Questions
about it, unto them on whom they design. They will be asking how they know the
Scripture to be the Word of God, laboring to disprove the evidences they
produce to prove it so to be. But this bold artifice is of no use in this case;
for themselves confess it so to be; only they prefer the Authority of their
Church testifying it so to be, as more safely to be rested in and trusted unto,
than that of God himself, which cannot be unto the advantage of their cause,
with any considerate Persons.

2. That it is a Divine Revelation of the whole Mind and Will of God, as unto
all things that are necessary unto his Glory and our Salvation. This it
frequently testifies of it self; and on the former supposition of its being
such a Divine Revelation, its Testimony must be granted to be infallibly true.
Both these Assertions the Apostle expressly conjoyneth, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
Somewhat they except here in respect of their unwritten Traditions, but dare
not positively deny that the Scripture is a sufficient Revelation of all things
absolutely necessary unto Salvation. Indeed to do so will leave no assurance
unto any man that he can ever know what is necessary unto salvation. But they
have a reserve whereunto they betake themselves on a concession hereof; namely,
that whatever be contained in it, it cannot be understood, but as the sense of
it is declared by their Church. But this is a bold unproved presumption,
contrary unto the design of God in giving us his Word, and the experience of
all who have been exercised in it.

3. The Way, Manner and Method of this Revelation are such as are suited unto
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, whether they please men or no. It is with reference
unto these things that they expatiate and enlarge themselves, in charging the
Scripture with obscurity, and unfitness thereon to be our only Rule and Guide.
For the Bible, they say, is a Book composed of Histories, Prophecies, Songs,
Prayers, and Epistles, and is therefore unmeet for any such use or end. But
these things are of no consideration in our present case. It is thus given out
immediately by God himself; and therefore every way answers Divine Wisdom and
Goodness; whether men are pleased with it or no, we are not at all concerned.
He who designed it for the instruction of the Church, alone knows what was to
be the Method of its composure unto that end. And it has been proved on
another occasion, that considering the state of the Church in its several Ages,
the nature of that Faith which is to be wrought and confirmed by this Divine
Revelation, with the manner of teaching becoming the Authority of God; and the
holy Scripture could not have been given out unto us in any other Order or
Method, than that wherein it is disposed.

4. On these suppositions, there neither is, nor can be more required of us in
order unto our eternal salvation, but that we understand aright, firmly
believe, and yield obedience unto the Revelation of the Mind and Will of God
that is made therein. The Assurance hereof is so evidently included in the
foregoing Assertions, that it needs no confirmation. Every thought unto the
contrary, is so injurious unto the Wisdom, Goodness, Grace and Truth of God, so
opposite unto all the Notions of the Minds of men, on a supposition of Gods
speaking unto them, that it ought to be rejected with detestation.

5. There are efficacious Aids promised, and assured means appointed by God
himself to help all that diligently seek him, unto a certain infallible
understanding of his Mind in the Scripture, so far as the Knowledge of it is
necessary unto our Salvation. This also I have lately confirmed in a peculiar
discourse. These are the Heads whereunto the Plea for the Guidance of the
Scripture in all differences and divisions about Religion, may be reduced.

The case being thus plainly stated, the enquiry hereon is, whether of these
Guides, a man that takes care of his own eternal Salvation, should betake
himself, and firmly adhere unto, to the end.

In answer unto this Enquiry, I shall prove, that no wise man who fears God,
and is careful of the eternal condition of his own soul, can choose the Church
of Rome for this Guide, foregoing the other of the Scripture, with the Divine
Aids promised and given for the understanding thereof.

The Person of whom I speak I suppose to be a wise man; that is, one who
prefers things eternal unto those that are temporal, so as not to be ensnared
by earthly Interests and Advantages, unto the forfeiture of his Interest in
things above; and will be careful not to be imposed on by men who design their
own Advantage in what they would persuade him unto. He who is otherwise minded
is a fool. He is also one that fears God, and therefore is real and in good
earnest in Religion, as desiring to please him in all things. For there are
many who give the world no small disturbance about religious concerns, who do
on all occasions manifest that they have little or no regard unto God in what
they say or do. But in the Persons whom I address unto, I suppose that they
really take care above all other things of the eternal salvation of their
souls. And I shall not deal with them by abstruse Arguments, nor by Testimonies
of men that may be bandied up and down, on the one side and the other; but by
such plain Reasonings as are accommodated unto the common understanding of all
sober, sedate, rational Persons, who own the Principles of Christian Religion,
which have their force from the general usage of mankind in things of an alike
nature, the common natural Principles of men's minds, where they are not
vitiated and depraved, with the experience of what they have found already in
any Duties of Religious Worship. Indeed if we could but prevail with men to be
persuaded that every man must believe for himself, and obey for himself, and
give an account for himself, this difference would be at an end. For the choice
of the Church of Rome to be the Guide enquired after, is nothing but the
putting of the care of saving our souls unto others, who will not be able to
answer for us, when our Trial shall come.

And this subject in particular I have chosen at present to insist upon for two
Reasons.

1. Because, as was before observed, those who at present do plead the Interest
of this Church among us, do decline what they can all particular Controversies,
and under various notions betake themselves to this alone, about an
Authoritative Guide and Leader of all Christians, which they pretend their
Church to be. They do not in their projection for Proselytes, go to them and
enter into Disputes about Transubsubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Adoration of Images, or the like, no nor yet about the Popes Infallibility. But
supposing themselves to be greatly advantaged by the differences in Religion
that are among us, which usually they enlarge upon without either truth or
modesty, under a concealment of greater differences among themselves, they
insist only on the necessity of such a Guide which they pretend their Church
alone to be. Hereby have they prevailed on many, who on one account or other,
do think themselves unmeet any longer to take care of their own salvation. And
when once they have prevailed herein, there is nothing so horrid, nothing so
wicked, that they cannot impose on the consciences of their Proselytes. They
will not now scruple or stick at all, at those things, which they would have
dreaded to have thought of, whilst they had the care of themselves in any
measure upon them. Not one man of a thousand who supposes that he has himself
and his own soul in charge, that he must give an account of and for himself,
will venture on those ways and practices which they will with great
satisfaction rush into, under their conduct.

2. Because of the strange ways they have lately taken, to put this pretense
into use and practice, and to take us all under their conduct. Pretending unto
the guidance of our souls in the things of God, they have attempted to take us
into their power as unto our Lives, Liberties, Laws, and all other our
concernments in this world, which whosoever does unlawfully, forfeits all his
own. And a sufficient* Indication it is of what Guidance we were like to meet
withal, when way was to be made unto it, by Fire, Confusion, Blood, Massacres
and Sedition.

Should there be a School erected, pretending unto an easy certain way of
teaching all Sciences, Divine and Humane, should it pretend a Grant that
nothing of this nature should be taught or learned but in and by it; yet if I
saw the posts of the house hung like Shambles with the limbs of slaughtered
person; if the ground about it be strewed with the bones and ashes of men
burned to death; here lying one strangled, there another stabbed, a third
poisoned; all for no other cause, but either because they would not submit to
the teaching thereof, or would not learn things foolish and wicked, I should
avoid such a School and its Power so far as I were able. But yet because there
has of late among us a great accession been made really unto this Guidance by
persons formerly professing the Protestant Religion, I shall a little enquire
into the Causes of it, or the Means whereby it has been brought about. And I
shall not fear to say, that as unto the most of them who have relinquished the
Protestant Religion, they are these that follow.

1. A profound Ignorance of the Internal Powers of Religion, with an utter want
of all experience of them in themselves, makes them an easy prey to seducers.
Persons who have never had any concernment in Religion, beyond the outside
solemnity of it, with some notions and opinions about the Doctrines of it, are
easily tossed to and fro, from one Religion unto another, or unto none at all,
through the cunning slights of men who lie in wait to deceive.

When men have only a form of Godliness in the Profession of the Truth, but
know nothing of the Power of it, it is an uncertain Accident whether they
persevere in that Profession or no. There are Internal Powers of true Religion
which are efficacious on the minds of men, to enlighten them to purify them,
and give them liberty from the adverse Powers of darkness, vanity and bondage
unto sin. Where men have experience of them in their own hearts, there and
there alone, if a vigorous impression unto the contrary do befall them, will
they be constant in the Profession of the Truth. The success of our Roman
Emissaries, is confined almost unto that sort of Persons, who under the outward
Profession of the Protestant Religion, have been totally ignorant of the virtue
and power of the Truth contained therein.

2. Wickedness of Life taking shelter in the Promises of eternal security,
which that Church with presumptuous confidence tenders unto all that will give
up themselves unto her conduct, though in the last moment of their lives, gains
them a multitude of Proselytes. This engine they apply unto many when they are
leaving the world, even unto such as having lived in sinand ignorance, are
ready to receive condign punishment for their villainies, deceiving them of
those few minutes which might be improved in seeking after Evangelical Faith
and Repentance. But this is the least use they make of it. There are in the
world, among those that are called Protestants, Mighty men, Nobles, men of
Dignity and Revenue, who live in their sins, and are resolved so to do. Yet are
they not able by any means to secure their consciences from troublesome fears
of eternal miseries that will ensue on the course wherein they are. By all
crafty ways of access and compliance, the Factors of this Church do insinuate
themselves, or by others are introduced into the acquaintance of this sort of
Persons. And the first thing they offer unto them, is absolute security of
eternal salvation, if they will but relinquish Heresy, wherein it is
impossible they should ever be saved, and betake themselves unto the conduct of
the Church of Rome; of the change of their lives, the Relinquishment of their
sins, of Repentance from dead works, of the Life of God, and universal
Obedience therein, there are no words between them. Many of these persons who
are resolved beforehand rather to part with all the Religion in the world, than
with one of their lusts and sins, do readily embrace the composition offered.
For really that which is tendered unto them is a consistency between living in
sin, and assured going unto Heaven, which before they knew not that they could
be reconciled. For however they shall live for the future, suppose in the sins
of adultery, fornication, profane swearing, luxury, drunkenness, or the like,
the Church will take care that by Confessions, Masses and Purgatory, they shall
be undoubtedly saved. At this door have entered great numbers of unclean beasts
unto the increase of the Herd, who often prove the most forward Zealots for the
Catholic Cause.

3. Secular Interests and advantages accommodated unto all sorts of Persons,
are another means of their prevalency. There are no sorts of Persons from the
highest to the lowest, that come within their walk and compass, or unto whom
they can have access, with the least probability of success, unto whom they
have not in a readiness to propose some secular advantages, suited unto their
State, Condition, Inclinations and Abilities. Great men shall have favor and
correspondencies with Potentates abroad, besides a principal interest in that
alteration in national affairs, which they doubt not but they shall introduce.
Scholars shall be used and preferred, at least when they have any eminency in
abilities, they shall not want steem and advancement. Mechanics shall be
employed, and the poorest one way or other provided for. And for all sorts of
discontented Persons, who may be of any use unto their Interest, they have the
refuge of their Monasteries, for their entertainment. And is it any wonder, if
in this degenerate age, wherein the most of men do openly and visibly declare a
predominancy in their minds and affections of things carnal and temporal, above
those that are spiritual and eternal, many be ensnared by these promises, which
either shall be made good unto them, or at least are sufficient to keep them in
expectation, until they are engaged beyond recovery.

4. Many, it is to be feared, fall under the dreadful account given of Gods
Righteous dealings with those who obstinately (...), under the Profession of
the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the Love of the
Truth that they might be saved, God shall send them strong Delusions that they
should believe a lie, that they all might bedamned who believed not the Truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. This is that which we have more cause to
fear with respect unto this Nation, than all the Artifices of of the Roman
Church.

Lastly; How powerful and prevalent the last voice of this Church may prove I
know not. The Motto of some potentates on their great Guns, is Vox Vltima
Regum; the last voice of Kings; that of this Church is fire and faggot;
wherewith I pray and hope that they shall never more be heard to speak in
England.

Allowing them these advantages, I shall now prove that no wise or sober man,
who takes care of his own Salvation, can give up himself to the conduct of the
Church of Rome, in his choice of Religion, then when there are the most
abounding contests about the Truth, and the right way of its Profession, which
is supposed our present case.

In my first reason I shall proceed no farther but to render this pretended
Guide suspected with all wise and sober men. For it will be granted I suppose,
that we ought thoroughly to consider who or what that Guide is, whereunto we do
absolutely resign the disposal of all our spiritual concernments without power
of Revocation.

If any men were to make such an absolute Trust of their Lives, Estates and
Liberties into the hand of another man or of other men, putting them all
absolutely out of their own Power, certainly they would think it their Wisdom
and Interest to consider aright how and what they are, unto whom they do so
fully and absolutely resign themselves, and all that they have. And if they
have any just suspicion of their honesty or Faithfulness, or that they seek
themselves or their own advantage in taking this Trust upon them, they will not
easily be induced to resign up their all unto them. Yea the more earnest they
are to persuade them, the more will they suspect that there is Knavery in the
cause. How much more careful ought we to be in the choosing a Guide into whose
power and disposal we must resign all the eternal concernments of our souls;
which all men do, who absolutely give give up the conduct of themselves unto
the Church of Rome in all matters of Religion. For notwithstanding all their
pleas of a sure and safe bank for the consciences of men, there are great
presumptions that they will break at last, and leave them who have entrusted
them unto eternal beggary.

I shall give but one Reason which renders this pretended Guide so justly
suspected, as that no wise man can commit himself thereunto in things of this
importance.

And this is the prodigious worldly secular advantages which the Church of Rome
has made unto it self by this pretense of being the only Guide of all
Christians in matters of Religion. For this pretense is the sole foundation of
the whole Papacy; which when the sand of it is removed, must fall to the
ground. And we may consider both what they have obtained by it, and how they
use their Acquisition. For (1.) By virtue of this pretense alone, they have
erected their Popedom, obtained Principalities and Soveraignties, possessed
themselves of the principal Revenues of most Nations of Europe, have heaped up
huge Treasures of wealth, wherewith they maintain innumerable Persons who have
nothing to do, but by all Arts to promote their Interest, especially that
numerous society which is grown at this day the pest and terror of the world.
These things are evident in other Nations, they were so formerly in this; and
in all the Zeal which of late they have pretended for the conversion, as they
call it, of this Nation, it is legibly written in all the parts of their
design, and the whole mannagement of it, that it was Power, Dominion, Wealth
and Revenue unto themselves that they intended; this Place, that Dignity, and
the other Revenue, and the carnally sweet Dominion over the consciences of all
sorts of Persons were in their eye.

2. We may consider what use they make of these secular Advantages and Revenues
which they have obtained merely by virtue of this pretense. And it may be said
with modesty, that these things were never forced to be wickedly serviceable
unto the lusts of men, among the Heathens themselves, more than they are and
have been among all sorts of men, in the Church of Rome* Ambition, Avarice,
Pride, Luxury, Sensuality, Cruelty, are the Deities that they sacrifice the
spoils of the souls and consciences of men unto. There is no sort of
wickedness, not the highest and most provoking, not the most vile and sordid
that Humane Nature is capable of, but multiplied instances may be given of the
perpetration of them, by the Advantage which they make of this pretense.

This consideration I say is sufficient unto all wise men to render this
pretended Guide justly suspected; and to bring the vagabond unto the strictest
and severest examination that the Law and Word of God does direct unto in such
cases.

1. It is so on the account of Reason and common usage amongst men in cases of
an alike nature. If it be notoriously known and evident, that any sort of
persons, whatever else they seem to be or act, do make great and unaccountable
advantages unto themselves by any Trusts that are committed unto them,
pretending nothing in the mean time but the good of them who so entrust them; a
wise man will not absolutely give up the disposal of himself and all his
concerns unto such persons. Yea when men are more than ordinarily urgent to
have such Trusts committed unto them, we do ordinarily enquire what is their
interest in this matter of care and trouble that makes them so earnest. And if
we find that they have made their own Advantages on all such occasions, we
shall not be too forward to give up unto them all that we have; especially if
the resignation of our selves and our concerns desired by them, be such as we
shall never more have the disposal of any thing in our own power, nor shall
they be accountable for any thing they do thereon. It may be you will say,
those who desire this great Trust to be reposed in them, are in all other
things of Virtue and Piety, most eminent above others. But what if by various
ways and means they discover themselves to be for the most part of the very
worst of men. It will assuredly be said, that such a kind of Trust as that
mentioned, would be ridiculous, and was never made by any wise man; fools and
mad men being only meet to be confined unto it.

Yet such is the Trust that the Church of Rome requires that we should commit
unto her, and that in affairs of infinitely greater importance than all other
earthly concerns. For she would have us absolutely resign up our souls and
consciences with all our eternal Interests, unto her Conduct and Guidance,
without any reservation for the use our own Light, Reason, Knowledge or Faith,
and without power of Revocation on pain of damnation. In the mean time it is
evident and notorious, that by virtue of this Pretense, she has erected the
Popedom, obtained Principalities and Dominion, endowed her self with the
principal Revenues of the Nations, and erected a Supremacy over Kings and
Kingdoms to be disposed of at their pleasure. Is it not the Duty of a wise man
when any of these Persons are importunate with him to forsake the Scripture,
and his own understanding, with all the experience which ever he had of the
Power of Religion, and to give up himself absolutely unto their conduct; to
enquire what is the Interest of these men in these things which makes them thus
importunate.

And if this appear openly to be an increase or confirmation of their secular
advantages, he will say that this is a Trust fit only for them to make, whom
Darkness, Ignorance, the love of Sin, and a vicious conversation have rendered
spiritual fools and bedlams, that can in nothing guide themselves. Especially
he will do so, when he shall find that these high pretenders to be the only
Guides of the souls and consciences of other men, do for the most part walk in
paths themselves that go down to the Chambers of Death. That they are so far
from giving examples of Christian Meekness, Humility, Self-denial, Faith, Love
or real Holiness, from giving a just Representation of Christ in the Image of
God on themselves, as that in many great, notable, prodigious instances they
represent the Devil, with all his Malice, Cruelty and Blood, unto the World.

2. There is that which does hereon, yet farther increase a just suspicion of
this pretended Guide. And this is the way of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
Apostles under him and after him, unto whom that Conduct of our souls which the
Pope and Church of Rome do now lay claim unto, was really committed by God even
the Father. It is known that our Lord Jesus Christ himself, though in his
Divine Person he was the Sovereign Possessor of Heaven and Earth, yet in that
Ministry wherein he took the Guidance of men's souls, he obtained nothing,
possess nothing beyond food and raiment, nor made the least outward Advantage
by any good that he did, or by any miracles that he wrought. This state in
general belonged unto his Humiliation, and was a part of his sufferings. But
withal it was chosen by himself for this end, to convince and satisfy the
souls of men, that he designed nothing in all his Instruction and Guidance of
them, but the Glory of God in their eternal welfare; gaining nothing unto
himself but reproaches, persecution, and the Cross. This he did as knowing that
there was that Glory, Beauty, Power and Usefulness in the Truth wherein he
instructed men, that nothing was outwardly needful to give it an effectual
entrance into their minds, but only to deliver them from prejudices, which all
self advantages made by him would have given unto them. The Pope and Mahomet
who have since pretended unto the same conduct of men's minds in Religion, which
was entrusted originally with him whom the Father sealed, knowing that what
they had to teach of their own, and to lead men into, had no Glory, Beauty,
Evidence, nor Use in it self, have wisely betaken themselves unto the ways of
fraud and force, to impose their Doctrine on the consciences of men, with this
bait and allurement, that what profit and advantage they make unto themselves,
by the conduct which they have assumed, others according to their proportion
shall be sharers therein.

The Holy Apostles succeeded unto the Personal Ministry of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as unto this conduct of the souls of men. Such Power was committed unto
them, by him, who sent them even as the Father sent him; such Assurance was
there in their conduct, through Infallible Inspiration, and the presence of the
Holy Ghost with them in an extraordinary manner, as that all men were bound to
give up themselves unto their Conduct and Guidance. Howbeit they judged that
there was no Duty more incumbent on them, than to make it evident unto all the
world, that they neither sought nor would accept of any temporal Advantages
unto themselves by the Trust reposed in them; but were contended that their
portion in this world should lie in all the extremities and calamities of it.
And this they willingly submitted unto, that all men might he encouraged to
trust them in their everlasting affairs, when they saw what loosers they were
by it in this World, without desire, hope, or expectation of any better
condition.

The Church of Rome lays claim to the very same Authority over, and conduct of
the consciences of men in Religion, as were committed unto Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. It is as safe, as they pretend, for a man to cast off the Authority
and Institutions of Christ himself, as to dissent from those of the Pope. But
what in the mean time means this bleating of the Sheep and lowing of the
Oxen; whence is it that they have managed the pretense hereof, to the gaining
of Power, Dominion, Wealth and Revenues unto themselves, beyond that of the
greatest Kings and Princes in this World? Let others do as they shall think
fit, I shall never commit the conduct of my soul unto them, who for ought I
know would never look after me, nor any other, were it not for the advantage
they make by it unto the service of their earthly desires.

It may be said, that other Churches and Persons do make advantages unto
themselves by that conduct of the souls of men which they lay claim unto. And
if this be sufficient to render such Guides suspected, we shall scatter the
Churches, and leave none to guide them. I answer, it does no way follow. For
the Rules, Measures, and outward Allowances for and in the name of their Labor
and Guidance unto the Ministers of the Gospel, are in general so stated in the
Scripture, as that men cannot mistake therein unto their prejudice. But we are
not at all concerned in what Advantages men make unto themselves hereby;
provided that the conduct they pretend unto, be such as is accompanied with no
dominion over our Faith, but is proposed only as an help thereunto. Whilst men
require not an absolute Resignment of our souls and consciences unto them, but
leave us unto the perfect libert of our own minds, to judge upon and receive
what they propose unto us; to examine and try all that they instruct us in,
which we may reject or refuse, according as it evidenceth it self to be good or
evil unto us; there is no great danger in our conduct.

This I say is sufficient to render this pretended Guide which with so much
vehement importunity would impose it self upon us, to be so justly suspected,
unto all men not forsaken as well of common Reason, as of all due Reverence
unto the Word of God, as that they will not readily embrace it.

2. As what has been spoken is sufficient to render this pretended Guide
suspected with all sober and considerate Persons; so there are cogent reasons,
why it ought to be absolutely rejected, by all who take care of their own
eternal Salvation. The cause peculiarly under consideration is stated on a
double supposition.

1. That there are such differences in and about Religion among us, as wherein
the eternal Salvation of the Souls of men are immediately concerned. For some
of them consist in Opinions, Principles and Practices, pernicious and
destructive unto Salvation, as each side does acknowledge and contend. And it
is meet the cause at present should be expressly stated on this supposition,
because those of the Roman Church design their great advantage from it.

2. That in this case we ought diligently to apply our selves unto some safe
Guide which may lead and conduct us in the right way, wherein we may glorify
God, and obtain eternal Blessedness unto our own souls. This also is not only
allowed by them, but fiercely contended for, as a Foundation of their whole
cause. Wherefore to determine our Thoughts aright in our enquiry on these
suppositions, we may consider the things that follow.

1. The first Supposition is plainly stated in the Scripture. It is plainly
affirmed therein that such things were then beginning in the Church, that they
would fall out in after ages, and increase toward the End and Consummation of
all things. See to this purpose, Acts 20. 29, 30. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 4.
3, 4. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 3. 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. all in compliance with the holy
warnings and predictions of our blessed Savior himself unto the same purpose,
Matthew. 24 4, 5, 11, 23, 24, 25, 26. In all these places and many other, the
Cause as stated in our supposition is expressly foretold, with the pernicious
effects of Opinions and Heresies, overthrowing the Foundation of Faith, and
destroying the souls of men. In this cause is a certain Guide necessary in a
peculiar manner.

2. In no one place, either in express words, or by direct consequence, are
Believers or the Disciples of Christ, directed in this case to betake
themselves unto such a Guidance of the Church of Rome. They are not so in any
one place where these Divisions are foretold, where properly such directions
should be expected or no where; nor yet in any other place whatever. Any one
Divine Testimony unto this purpose, giving this Direction on that supposition,
shall for ever determine this Controversy.

Shall we think that the Lord Jesus Christ, foreknowing, foretelling, and
warning all his Disciples of such a dangerous state and condition, as from
which they cannot escape or be delivered, without a Guide that will safely lead
and conduct them, if there were but one such Guide prepared and appointed by
him, should no where in any Divine Revelation direct them thereunto? Does a
supposition hereof truly represent unto us his love, care and compassion
toward the Church? Can any thing more injurious unto his Wisdom, Faithfulness
and Honor, be once imagined? It is impossible therefore that any man in the
case supposed, should betake himself unto the sole conduct of the Pope or
Church of Rome, without casting contempt on him and his Authority. But,

3. Yet there is farther Evidence of his Mind herein, in that we are expressly
in this case directed unto another Guide, without any mention of the Church of
Rome, which is utterly exclusive of this pretense. For (1.) All Believers are
commanded themselves to examine and try all false Teachers, Prophets and
Spirits that are not of God, Doctrines subverting the Faith, and endangering
the souls of men; which is utterly inconsistent with that absolute universal
Resignation of themselves unto the Guidance of the Church of Rome, which is
claimed by it. See 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. (2. They are directed unto the Way, Means
and Rule whereby they must make this Trial, and come unto the final
determination in their own minds, Isa. 8. 20. 2 Pet. 1. v. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16, 17. And this also is diametrically opposite unto that Resignation of
themselves unto the Church of Rome, which it requires of them. (3.) They have
a Guide promised unto them, to give them an understanding of the Rule in the
discharge of this Duty, and to enable them to make a right and safe
Determination thereon, Joh 16. 13. 1 John 2 26, 27. These things are consistent
with a Ministerial Guide, such as is found in all true Churches, wherein none
pretend to be Lords of our Faith, but only helpers of our Joy. But with a
Supreme Authoritative Guide requiring an absolute Resignation of our
understandings and consciences unto it self, they are altogether inconsistent.

This is the substance of our case, and this is the Determination of it given
us by the Holy Ghost. Diversities and Divisions in Principles, Opinions and
Practices in Religion are supposed, unto as great an height as they can beat,
at this day in the World. Teachers speaking perverse things; departures from
the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils; Teachers
not enduring sound Doctrine; turning away men's Ears from the Truth, and turning
them unto Fables; false Teachers, bringing in damnable Heresies, denying the
Lord that bought them, many following their pernicious ways; Spirits of false
Prophets going out in the World, the Spirit of Antichrist. These things I say
are all supposed and foretold in the Scripture. In this case and state of
things, that we be not seduced, that our souls be not ruined, we are commanded
our selves to try and examine all those who teach such things, whether they be
of God or no; and by the Scripture we are to try them if we intend not to be
deceived and undone for ever. Unto the right understanding hereof a sure and
faithful Guide is promised unto us, to lead us unto all Truth; so that no
concernment of Religion is more plainly stated, and as unto our Duty, more
expressly determined in the Scripture than this is.

It is so in a peculiar manner, in the first Epistle of John the Apostle.
Before the end of his days, Divisions, Errors, Heresies began to abound in
Christian Religion. This he fully testifies, Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. And Epist.
the 2. 7. According unto his Duty he writes unto Believers to warn them of
their danger, with reference unto them that seduced them, or attempted so to
do, chap. 2. 26. And he writes unto this purpose unto Fathers, young Men and
Children, or professed Believers of all sorts, degrees and endowments, ver. 12,
13. and this not because they did not know the Truth, but because they did know
it, and had experience of its Power, ver. 21. But in all the Directions he
gives them for the discharge of their Duty, so as that they might escape the
dangers they were exposed unto; there is not any one word, any intimation that
they should betake themselves unto the Guidance of this or that, or any Church,
much less that which is called the Church of Rome. But the sum of his
Direction is, that they should rely on the Unction they had received from the
Holy One, or the Aids and Supplies of the Spirit of God, to understand the
Scripture in the Examination and Trial they were to make of all these things,
chap. 2. ver. 20, 27.

But to preserve their Interest, they tell us that these Precepts and Promises
are given unto the Church, and not unto individual Believers; as though the
Church were any thing materially, but individual Believers, and formally but a
disposition of them into a sacred Order for their edification. Man was not made
for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath was made for man. Believers were not made for
the Church, but the Church is made for Believers; and is of no use, but with
respect unto their edification. And to deny all individual persons to be the
first object of all Gospel Precepts and Promises, Churches in what sense soever
you take them, being so only as they are directive of their Faith and
Obedience, is to exempt their consciences from the Authority of Christ, to turn
them into beasts, and to overthrow the Gospel.

Let men now who take care of their own eternal Salvation, place themselves in
their Thoughts in that condition, which the present case and their own
circumstances do place them in. The World, the Place where they live, the
People whereunto they do belong, are filled with different Apprehensions,
Principles, Opinions and Practices in and about Religion. Some of these, as
those between the Papists and the Protestants, have immediate influence into
their eternal condition of Blessedness or Misery, as both parties contend.
Dreadful disorders and confusions have followed, and are like to follow these
differences even in this World. They will in this case find, that it highly
concerns them to take care that they be not deceived, and thereby ruined
eternally, as multitudes are; that they be not high-minded, but fear. A Guide
is that which they are to look after, that may carry them safely through all
these difficulties and dangers. Two immediately offer themselves unto them,
tendering the utmost assurance in these things, which the nature of man is
capable of in this world. The one is the Pope or Church of Rome, which requires
no more of them, but a blind submission unto its Guidance; a way I confess to
extricate themselves, and to deliver them from all care about their own souls,
easy and facile, if safe. The other is the Holy Scripture, with the promised
Aids of the Spirit of God, to lead us unto the understanding of it, and the
Truth contained in it. But in this way it is required of men, that they make
use of their own Reason, Understanding, Judgment, Diligence, with fervent
Prayer for Divine Assistance.

The present Question is, Whether of these two Guides such Persons ought to
betake themselves unto? I am on the consideration of one directive Reason only,
others shall be afterward spoken unto. And this is, that the Scripture, which
all acknowledge to be the Word of God, to speak in his Name, expressly supposing
this case, and all the circumstances of it before laid down, does thereon,
frequently direct and command us, to make use of this latter Guide, if we
desire to be saved; and does no where, no not once, on a supposition of this
case, send us unto the Guidance of the Church or Pope of Rome, or any other
Church whatever. Wherefore for men to suffer themselves to be inveagled, their
souls to be perverted, and their Faith overthrown by a few captious Sophystical
Reasonings of men of perverse minds, pursuing their own secular Interest; to
turn aside from the commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, in
so plain, evident and indisputable a case and Duty, is such a folly in it self,
such an impiety against God, such a contempt of the Lord Christ, his Wisdom,
Authority and Care, as must be eternally accounted for.

Thirdly, The things for the most part which this pretended Guide proposes
unto, and imposes on the Consciences, Faith, and Practice of them who give up
themselves unto its conduct, are so unreasonable, so contrary unto the common
sense of Christians, and the very first notions of the minds of men any way
enlightened with the Doctrine of the Gospel; so directly opposite unto the
design of God in the Revelation of himself unto us, and his commands concerning
our Faith and Obedience; that it is a thing astonishable, how they should
attain an access unto them who have any sense of these things. But when once
men have their ey^s bored out, as they do it for themselves in the Resignation
they make of their understandings and consciences unto the conduct of this
Church, they must grind whatever is brought unto them. I shall briefly instance
in some few things of this sort.

1. The keeping of the Scripture from their daily and continual use. I speak
not directly unto them who being brought up from their infancy in that Church,
know nothing of the Scripture, but that the Bible is an obscure dangerous Book
unto all Laymen, which Heretics make use of unto their advantage. Such
Persons can be contented to want it, or be without it, all their lives;
especially seeing it is full of Light and Principles inconsistent with their
carnal Lusts and Interest. But I speak of such who many of them like Timothy
have known the Scriptures from Children; and having been conversant in them,
have had some experience of their Power.

Unto such as these come Persons in the name and on the behalf of this
pretended Guide. And a compass of plausible words they will use, fit to
distract and amuse weak and unstable minds. But the plain sense of what they
say in this case is; cast away this Bible, this Book; it does but perplex you
and disturb your minds with things that are above you, which you cannot
understand, and is therefore an occasion of almost all the pernicious errors
that are in the World Will not any such Person be ready to say; has God given
this Book, this alone, as the only Revelation of his Mind and Will unto us, as
the Guide and Rule whereby we may come unto the eternal Enjoyment of him, which
you dare not directly deny? has he commanded me to Read, Study, Meditate, and
be conversant in it continually? have I found the benefit, of the Light,
counsel and consolation administered by it in my own soul; and shall I now
forsake it, cast it away, to betake my self unto your Guidance and direction?
shall I forsake God, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, all the Prophets and
Apostles, who daily speak unto me in and by this word, to comply with you? The
very horror of the Proposal is enough to secure the minds of any who have the
least spark of spiritual Light or Grace, from a compliance with it? Wherefore
whether it be reasonable to leave the Word of God, which is full of Light,
shining like the Sun in the Firmament, to follow the glimmerings of this
wandering Meteor, which arose out of an horrible pit, and there will end, is
left unto their consideration who take care of the eternal salvation of their
own souls.

2. The Sol^mn Worship of God by the Guides of the Church in a Tongue and
Language which the people do not understand, is another of their Proposals.
This they are bound to attend unto on pain of damnation. But how any thing can
be more contrary unto the common sense of them who know what it is to pray in a
due manner, no man can conceive. As unto them who do not, yet is it not hard to
convince them, where they are not obstinate on other prejudices, how irrational
this Proposal is, how inconsistent with that reasonable service that God
requires of us. Others will say, that they find hindrances and difficulties
enough from, and in this Duty, from the weakness of their Faith, and
instability of their Minds, the suggestions of Satan, with diversions from
outward objects; if you add thereunto that they shall not understand a word of
what is spoken in Prayer, and they know well enough they shall never pray at
all. And the Truth is, did we not know whence they took occasion for this
strange contrivance so contrary to the nature of all Religion; and what
advantage they make of it unto themselves, it could never be sufficiently
admired, how such a senseless Imagination should befall their Minds. I do not
design to show how contrary it is to Scripture Precepts and Examples, to the
practice of all the Saints under the Old Testament, and the New, with that of
the Primitive Churches, and on all accounts what an abominable Sacrilege it
is, so to rob the Church of its chiefest Treasure; it has been done by others
sufficiently. I only give it as an instance how unmeet this pretended Church is
to be such a Guide, as whereunto we are to make an absolute Resignation of our
understandings and consciences in all concerns of Religion. And there is
nothing that can make them, who have any regard unto their own souls, to reject
its Guidance with more detestation. Shall they accept them for their Guide in
Religion, who under pain of damnation confine them in all the public Worship
of the Church, unto the use of a Language that they do not understand? That
instead of praying with their understandings, they must be content with a dumb
show, with postures and gestures, with Altars and Pictures, the antic actings
of a Priest, and a noise of words, whose sense they know not at al? If a man
would seek for an Infallible Guide to Hell, it is hard to find one more likely
and better qualified unto that purpose than is this Church of Rome.

3. There is at the same instant proposed unto us by this Guide, the Doctrine
of Transu^stantiation, with the Sacrifice of the Mass thereon depending. This
they say we must believe, at least avow that we do believe on pain of eternal
and temporal destruction also. But herein they require of us, that on the mere
credit of their conduct, we must renounce the use of our senses, the exercise
of our Reason, and actings of Faith on Divine Revelations, all things whereby
we are either Men or Christians, that we may become blind Idolaters. But they
who pretending to be our Guides in Religion, do thereon impose this monstrous
Imagination on our credulity, with the Idolatrous Practice wherein it issues,
had need give us better security of their Divine Infallibility, than the Angels
in Heaven can do. For if an Angel from Heaven should preach this Doctrine unto
us, we may safely esteem him accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

4. The last thing I shall instance in of this kind is, the Adoration or
Worship of Images. God says concerning it expressly, Thou shall not make unto
thy self any graven Images, thou shall not bow dow to them, nor worship them.
They say contrary; Thou shall make unto thy self graven Images, thou shall bow
down to them and adore them. And in their use they make them the stage plays
in Religion, wherewith the minds of ignorant unstable Persons are allured and
seduced into all manner of superstitious practices, and turned off from the
simplicity of the Gospel. For being once persuaded on the credit of their
Guide, that the making, use, and Adoration of them are lawful, there is enough
in the carnal minds of men, to make them dote, and even be mad upon them.
Wherefore no less service is done unto the interest of sin, and the Kindom of
Satan hereby, than if they should have taken off all sense of the Authority of
God from the consciences of men, in the Prohibition of those things which their
sensual lusts are most prone unto. Could they have dissolved the obligation of
the commands of God, against Adultery, or Stealing, and left men unto the
guidance of their own lusts and inclinations, it is evident what abominable
excesses the generality of men would run into. Neither do the lusts of the mind
engage persons with less fierceness into the pursuit of their objects, than do
those of the flesh. And thence the disannulling of this command of God, has
been an inlet unto all abominable Idolatry. But herein they will not allow
those who give up themselves unto their conduct, once to consider the direct
contradiction that is between Gods commands and theirs; but believe they must
what their Church believes, and practice accordingly; which is the most
intolerable Tyranny over the souls of men, that ever was attempted. Only they
will tell us of Latria. and Dulia, and Hyperdulia, of Religious Worship that is
direct or reductive, transient or terminated on this or that object, and after
a maze of the like insignificant Terms, the conclusion is positive, You shall
worship graven Images.

There are also sundry other things wherein they do or would impose on the
credulity of men, in open contradiction unto their Sense, Reason, and
Experience, as well as unto all evidence of Truth from the Light and Guidance
of the Scripture; which are somewhat of another Nature than those foregoing. I
shall only mention some of them. As (1.) They would have us believe, that we
cannot believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, but upon the Testimony and
Authority of their Church All the evidence that a man is capable of in his own
mind, that he does so believe it; all that can be given in ordering our lives
according unto it, as the Word of God; the assurance and Peace which multitudes
of all sorts have in resolving all their interest in things eternal into the
Faith of it; the sufferings and martyrdomes which many have undergone in the
confirmation of it; the uncontrollable pleas that are made of the sufficiency
of the Motives whereon we believe it so to be, are nothing with them; but we
must say, we cannot believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, but only on
the Testimony and Authority of their Church; and therein both give our selves
the lie, as unto what we know and are assured of, and judge millions to Hell,
who have lived and died in the Faith of it, without any respect unto that
Testimony or Authority. (2.) They will have us to believe, what they do not
indeed believe themselves: As for instance, Justification by our own works. For
practically many of them do for this end trust unto Absolutions, Masses, the
Sacraments, and Sacramentals of the Church, with a reserve for the complement
of it in Purgatory; which are not our own works; and some of the wisest of them
do betake themselves at last to the only Mercy and Grace of God. So would they
have us to ven^ure our souls on that, whereon they will not adventure their
own. (3.) Papal Personal Infallibility was once a principal Article of their
Creed, and the generality of their Proselytes do receive it from them, with no
less firm assent, than they do unto that of Christ himself. But among
themselves they have so multiplied their wrangling Disputes about it, as makes
it evident, that they believe it only so far as holds proportion with their
Interest, and is subservient thereunto, indeed not at all. Their Disputes of a
Difference between the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome, of the Pope in
his Chair and out of it, in the use of help and advice of others, and without
this, in a General Council and without it, in a particular Council and without
it; in matter of Right and of Fact; and the like; make it evident that they
know not in what sense to believe it, and so indeed believe it not at all. And
whereas they do themselves confess that some of their Popes have been of the
worst of men, yea monsters for luxury, uncleanness and violence, that which
they require of us, is not only hard and unreasonable, but impossible for any
sober man to grant; namely, that we believe such Persons to have been
infallible in the Declaration of all Divine Heavenly Mysteries; so as that we
ought to acquiesce in their Declaration of them. (4.) They would have us
believe that the same Body of Christ which was once in the fullness of time,
made of a woman, by the Power of God, is every day made of a wafer, by the
Power of a Priest. And what indignities are hereby cast on his Person, has
been sufficiently demonstrated.

These are some of the Proposals which this pretended Guide makes unto all them
who give up themselves unto its conduct, to be believed with a suitable
practice on the pain of eternal damnation. But yet evident it is, that they are
all of them contrary unto the common Sense, Reason and Experience of all
Christians, all that believe the Gospel, as well as directly contradictory unto
the Scripture and Example of the Primitive Church. It is therefore left unto
the Judgment of all sober Persons, such as are not yet made drunk with the Cup
of their Abominations to determine whether any thing, but either profound
Ignorance and spiritual Darkness, or love of Sin, with a desire to live
securely therein, or secular Interests, or an hardening Judgment for the abuse
of the Truth, or a concurrence of all them, can prevail with men to make an
entire absolute Resignation of their souls, and all their eternal concernments
unto the conduct of this pretended Guide.

Fourthly, The Way for the attaining the Knowledge of the Truth proposed by
this Guide, is opposite unto the Way and Means prescribed by God himself unto
that end. It is so whether we respect the internal Qualifications of our minds,
or the Duties that he prescribes, or the Aid that he promises thereunto. For
as unto the first, he requires that those who would learn the Truth, ought to
be meek, and lowly, and humble, for such alone he will teach, Psalm. 25. 8, 9,
14. Joh. 6. 45. and if we are not taught of God, we learn nothing as we ought,
or not unto any purpose; that they cast out all wickedness, and superfluity of
naughtiness, that so they may receive the ingrafted Word with meekness, Jam. 1.
21. Without these things, they may be always learning, but shall never come
unto the Knowledge of the Truth. And as unto Means and Duties, two things he
enjoins and indispensibly requires of us in order unto this end. (1.) That we
study the Word continually; that we meditate upon it, and place our delight in
it, Joh. 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Psalm. 1. 2. Isa. 8. 20. Joh. 5. 30. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16, 17. Psalm. 119. 18. Joh. 16. 13. 1 John 2. 20. (2.) Fervent and diligent
Prayer, that we may be lead into, and preserved in the Truth, that we may be
enabled to receive it, and hold it fast against Temptations and Oppositions.
For our Aid and Assistance herein, he commands us to wait for it, and expect
the Spirit of Wisd^m and Revelation, to open our eyes, to bring us unto the
full Assurance of Understanding, or to lead us into all Truth. Of these things,
of the necessity of them unto the due Knowledge of the Truth, we hear nothing
from this pretended Guide. She knows well enough that to put the Minds of men
into these Ways, and the use of these Means, whereby they may be taught of
God, and learn the Truth as it is in Jesus, is to loose them from her self for
ever. Howbeit they are the only Ways and Means prescribed and blessed of God
unto this end, with those other especial Duties which belong unto them.

They will say, it may be, that they do instruct their Converts in these
things, and press them withal unto higher Acts of Devotion and Mortification
than others do. But there are two things which deprive them of any advantage by
this pretense. For (1.) We see and know of what sort for the most part their
Converts are. I shall not give that character of them in words, which generally
they give of themselves in their works; for I have nothing to do with the
Persons of men. And I should rejoice to see them give a better evidence of
being instructed in these things, than as yet they have done. But (2.) Whatever
of this nature they propose and prescribe unto them, it is not unto this end,
that they may learn and know the Truth. They require no more of any hereunto,
but that on their sophistical and frivolous pretenses, he give up himself unto
their Guidance, or submit himself unto the Authority of the Pope. For hereby he
formally becomes a member of the Catholic Church, whose Faith, whether he know
it or no, immediately becomes his; and for particulars he must wait for the
Priests information, as occasion shall require.

This is I confess their great advantage in this World. The way they propose to
attain the Knowledge of the Truth, is easy, consistent with the lusts of men,
exposed equally to the wise and foolish, to the sober and intemperate, puts men
out of all doubts, giving them all the quiet assurance which deceit and
falsehood can communicate.

The way of God unto the same end is difficult unto flesh and blood,
destructive unto the lusts of the flesh and of the mind, requiring Diligence,
Humility and Watchfulness in the Exercise of Grace all our Days, which things
few are pleased withal. Yet is this Way of God so suited unto the Nature of
Religion, so becoming the importance of this Duty, so effectual not only unto
the attainment of the Knowledge of Truth, but unto all the ends of it in the
Life of God; is so necessary on the account of the Infinite Greatness and
Holiness of God, with the Nature of Divine Revelations, as that no man, who is
not blinded with prejudices and corrupt Affections, can decline it, to embrace
the other.

There are other things yet, if it be possible, of an higher Abomination, to
deter all sober Persons from touching with this Guide, than those already
insisted on. And such they are, as the present contrivances and practices of
our adversaries, do unavoidably compel us to plead in this cause, and are in
themselves sufficient for ever to divest that Church of this great and gainful
pretense, of being the only Guide of all men in Religion. For,

Fifthly; Consider what it is, wherein they instruct many of them who betake
themselves unto their Conduct and Guidance, I mean of the Agents for and in the
name of the Church of Rome. The first thing which they labor to fix on their
minds and consciences, is absolute Obedience unto their immediate Guides, with
a blind belief of what they propose unto them. And this they prevail on them
unto, by assuming a twofold Authority unto themselves. And the first is that of
forgiving them all their sins, though against the light of Nature, and of their
own consciences, which they confess unto them; and this confession they are
obliged unto under pain of Damnation. Some things indeed they do require of
them, in order unto a participation of Priestly absolution. But they are all in
the Power of the Priest to prescribe, decline, or accept; which latter they
will not be uneasy unto, when it conduces unto their advantage. The issue is,
that in this pardon of their sins, the souls of men may as safely acquiesce, as
if they were immediately pardoned by Christ himself. And if they have occasion
for the advantage of the Catholic Cause, to put them on things that are openly
sinful, as Murder and Sedition, either by virtue of the Direction, Guidance and
Commands of the Priests, they loose their Nature and become no sins at all, or
they are so assured of pardon, as puts them in their consciences, into as good
a state and condition as if they had not sinned. And (2.) They assume unto
themselves an Authority to grant especial Privileges and Rewards in Heaven and
Earth, to the doing of what they command or require, whatever it be. As unto
the Earth, so many Prayers, so many Masses shall be assigned unto their
advantage; and in some cases Canoninozation with all the glorious Privileges
of it. And as unto Heaven what they so do, shall have such a proportion of
merit, as shall exalt them unto the second, third, or fourth place of
precedence and honor therein, among all the Holy Martyrs. It is uncredible
what Power and Dominion over the consciences of their Proselytes, they obtain
by these means, with other artifices of the like Nanture. Hence many of them
know of no other dependence on any as unto present Peace, and eternal
Blessedness, than that on the Priests alone.

Woeful Practices do follow on these Principles. For the minds of men being thus
prepared, they dispose of them unto such occasions or services for the Interest
of the Catholic Cause, as their own Nature, Inclinations, the fierceness or
softness of their tempers, their outward Greatness, Power and Wealth, or their
Straights, Wants and Necessities, render them meet unto For now they are ready
for such things, which if they had not relinquished the care and charge of
their own souls, if they had not absolute^y resigned them unto others; they
would never have entertained a thought of, without detestation and abhorrency.
Poor deluded creatures, who could sufficiently bewail their condition, but that
for the most part through the Love of sin and the wages of it, they choose these
delusions. Some now shall fire Cities; some shall murder innocent Persons;
some shall assassinate Kings and Potentates; some shall creep into houses and
lead captive silly women, laden with sins, lead about with diverse lusts; and
some shall prostitute themselves unto the carnal Lusts and Pleasures of others;
all as they judge conducing unto the Catholic Cause and their own Intrest
therein. These are they who must answer not only for the blood of them that are
murdered, but of their murderers also. I heartily wish these things were not
so; that they never had been so; but being so, it is well that they are known
so to be; and that they are written in such legible characters in most Nations
of Europe, especially in this wherein we live, as that he who runs may read
them. I shall not descend unto particular Instances; every ones mind and
thoughts will suggest them unto them; or they may learn them in Westminster
Hall.

It will be said, that on a supposition that these things are so, yet this is
the crime of but a few, it may be of a few Jesuits; which others, especially
the Church, is not concerned in. They are but a few who teach and instruct
their Converts unto such purposes; but a few that are possessed with those
Maxims and Principles which lead unto these Practices. Notwithstanding their
miscarriages, the Church it self may be a Safe Guide unto the souls of men.

I answer two things; (1.) That those who have these Principles, who teach
these Practices, are all of them appointed unto their Office and Work, imposed
on the consciences of men as their only Guides, by the Authority of the Church
it self. No Caution is given by it against them; no Rule prescribed whereby
they may know them; but they come all armed with the Authority of the Church,
and as such are received by their credulous followers. The whole therefore of
what they do, may justly be ascribed unto the Church it self. (2.) It may be
made to appear, that for about an hundred and fifty years past, no Plot, no
Design has been conceived or perpetrated, wherein Kings, Princes, private
Persons were to be murdered or destroyed, wherein Nations were to be embroyled
in blood and confusion, in order unto the promotion of the Catholic Cause, but
the Church it self was either the Contriver or Approver of it. Who approved of
the murder of the two Kings in France, one after another? of the Massacre there
of an hundred thousand Protestants? who designed and blessed all preparations
for the murder of Queen Elizabth; with the unjust Invasion of the Nation in 88?
who blessed and protected what in them lay the horrible Massacre of Ireland;
with the slaughters that have been made in other places on the same Principles?
was it a few Jesuits only? was it not the Church it self in its Head the Pope,
and its Horns the Cardinals at Rome?

Wherefore although it seem good unto this Church to assume unto it self the
sole Conduct of the souls of all men in the matters of Religion, which has
thrived in its hands unto an incredible Grandeur, in Dominion, Power and
Wealth; yet other men of an ordinary wisdom and capacity, who are not yet taken
alive by them at their pleasure, will be ready to judge (especially now the
Cave of Cacus is opened) that it is necessary for them to take more care of
their own souls.

Some will say, that all these things, Principles and Practices, are separable
from their Religion, and that they will take sufficient heed unto themselves,
that they give admittance unto none of them, especially such as are against the
Light of Nature, and the known Rules of common Honesty. Both the Goodness of
their own natural temper, and the Principles of Morality, which they will never
part withal, will give them and others security herein.

God forbid I should ever charge any Persons with any thing that is Criminal,
whereof they are not, or may not be easily convicted. Those who make these
Professions shall pass with me at the rate and upon the credit of their
Professions.

As shall all men in this World, until they contradict and disprove themselves
by their Actions. But even such Persons had need be very careful that they are
not deceived herein. The Resignation which they are to make of themselves and
their Consciences unto the conduct of this Church, does quite change both their
Light and Rule; for it includes a Renunciation of all Principles and
Persuasions in things Divine and Moral, that do or may in the least interfere
with that Conduct. It is true, that neither that Church nor any else, can
change the Nature of things Moral in themselves; for although they may call
Good, Evil, and Evil, Good; Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light; yet they
cannot make that which is Good, Evil; nor that which is Evil, Good; but they
may make a false Representation of the one and other unto the minds of men.
Hence what was Evil unto them antecedently unto this Resignation of themselves,
as the Fireing of Cities, the Murder of Innocent Persons, the Overthrow of
Governments and Nations for their own Ends, shall be imposed on them by this
pretended Infallible Guide, as things Good and Meritorious with reference unto
their Catholic Ends. These are the two most pernicious Divices in all their
Superstition. 1. That the Consciences of men are exempted and taken off from an
Immediate Dependence on and Subjection unto the Authority of Christ, and put in
immediate Subjection unto the Priests; seeing he neither promises any thing
unto them, nor commands any thing but by the Church. 2. That their Commands,
because they are theirs, do regulate their Consciences even as unto Moral Good
or Evil. Nor is it safe for these men to trust too much unto the Goodness of
their own Natures, nor it may be unto others, who are concerned in what they
shall do. For as it is the Glory of the Doctrine and Grace of the Gospel, to
change the Wolf, the Lion, and the Leopard, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Persons of the
Fiercest and most Violent Inclinations, unto quiet Associates of Lambs and
Children; so it is to be feared from many instances, that by Virtue of their
Conduct, they can change appearing Sheep at least, as unto their natural
Tempers, into that which is Violent, Bloody, and Poisonous.

6. Under pretense of being this Guide, and to impose their Pretensions
thereunto on the Minds and Consciences of men, this Church has filled most
Nations of Europe with Blood and Slaughter; making horrible Devastations of
innumerable Persons, both fearing God and living Peaceably in the World. Ten
times more Blood of Christians has been shed by them unto this End, than was
shed in all the Primitive Pagan Persecutions. All that Dissent from them may
say, Quae Regio in terris nostri non plena cruoris?

Is there any Nation in Europe that is not filled with our Blood? The Last Day
alone can discover the Blood that has been shed secretly or with little noise
by the Inquisition, in the Spanish, and some of the Italian Territories.
England, France, Germany, Flanders, Holland, Ireland, can speak for themselves,
in the Cruelties which unto this End have been executed in them. The sole
Reason of all this Inhumane Violence, has been, that men would not submit
their Souls and Consciences unto that Absolute Power over them and Conduct of
them, which their Church claims unto it self.

And it is most Probable that their Absolute Conduct is of the same Nature with
the Ways and Means whereby they do Attempt it, or have Obtained it. When men by
Force and Fraud, Blood and Slaughters, do endeavor to impose their Rule upon
us, we are not to expect but that the Rule will be answerable unto the Means
that are used for the Attaining it. As in the first Planting and Propagation of
Christian Religion, the Way and Means of them were Spiritual Light, and the
evident Exercise of all Graces, especially Meekness, Humility, Patience in
Sufferings and Contempt of the World. Hereon men had just Grounds to Believe
and Expect, that the Conduct which they were Invited and Called unto, under the
rule of Christ, would be of the same Nature, Meek, Holy, Just and Good; whereof
by Experience they found full Assurance. So where the Rule of our Souls and
Consciences is attempted and carried on by Violence, Blood, Cruelty, and
Desolation of Nations, we have just Ground to believe, that if those who use
them do prevail therein, their Leading and Rule will be of the same Nature.

It is but Reasonable therefore for any man before he make choice of this
Guide, to ask of himself or others, these few Questions. Is there any thing in
the Gospel which gives countenance unto this way of imposing a Guide in
Religion on the Minds and Consciences of men? Was there any thing like it in
the Practices of our Lord Jesus Christ, his Apostles, or the Primitive
Churches? Does this way make a just Representation of the Spirit, the Meekness,
the Holiness, the Love, the Patience of our Lord Jesus Christ? Is it consistent
with the Genius of the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Religion taught therein, as
unto its Nature and Ends, concerning our Deportment in this World, and our
Tendency unto another? Can any man think without Horror, that our Lord Jesus
Christ should be the Author of this way; that he has appointed that all men
should be Starved, or Hanged, or Burned, or otherwise Slaughtered, who would
not Submit unto this Doctrine or Rule of this or any Church, as some of the
worst of men shall please to state them? Is not this that which among other
things gives us Assurance, that the Doctrine and Superstition of Mahomet were
from Hell, from the Old Murderer; in that it is a prime Dictate of them, that
those who will not Submit unto them are to be destroyed with Fire and Sword? By
that time a man has a little weighed these Enquiries, with such other of the
same Nature that may be added unto them: if he be not forsaken of all sense of
the Glory of Christ, of the Honor of the Gospel, of the Reputation of
Christian Religion, and all care of the Salvation of his own Soul, he will make
a long stand before he give up himself Absolutely unto the Conduct of this
Church.

7. I cannot but mention in the next place, that which because it is commonly
pleaded, I shall but mention. And this is, that many important Principles and
Practices of the Religion which this pretended Guide would impose upon us, are
evidently suited unto the Carnal Interests and Lusts of them who have the
Conduct of it. Such are Purgatory, Papal Pardons, Sacrifices for the Dead,
Auricular Confession, with Priestly Absolution thereon; Many have already
declared how the Notion and Superstition of these things, did both raise and do
maintain their Revenues; and are otherwise made use of to make Provision for
the Flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof. And there lies no Encouragement
herein to engage Wise men to give up themselves unto its Conduct. But,

8. Considerate men will be afraid of that conduct under which Christian
Religion has lost all its native Beauty, Simplicity, spiritual Glory and
Power. How are these things represented unto us in the Gospel? How were they
exemplified unto us in the lives of the Apostles and of all the sincere
primitive converts; The Church was through them, a new Heaven and a new Earth,
wherein dwelt Righteousness. The whole of Religion as it was at first
professed, was nothing but a Representation of the Wisdom, Truth, Holiness,
Love and Compassion of Christ; an evident and glorious means to recover mankind
from its Apostasy from God, and to re-introduce his Image on the Souls of men;
a blessed way continually to exercise the Power of Love, Goodness, Charity,
Bounty, Zeal, and Delight in God; a Testimony given unto the Truth, Reality and
substance of things spiritual, invisible and eternal, with their preference
above all earthly things. Under their conduct is this Beauty, this Glory of
Christian Religion lost and defaced. We may say with the Prophet of old; how
is the faithful City become an Harlot, Righteousness lodged in it but now
Murderers. Isa. 1. 21. The Church is the Temple of God; could we have looked
into it of old, we might by faith have seen Christ sitting on his Throne, the
train of his Light, Holiness, Love and grace filling the whole Temple. Look
into it under their conduct, and there is the dreadful Appearance of the
Lawless Person, the man of sin, sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself
to be God, to our Horror and Amazement. Look into the Primitive Assemblyes of
Christians, 2. Cor. 3. 8, 9, 10. you shall see Meekness, Humility, and the
glorious Ministration of the Spirit in outward Simplicity. Look into those of
this Guide, and you shall see them like the House of Micah, Judge. 17. 5. an
House of Gods, with Molten Images, graven Images, Ephods and Teraphims,
multiplied Instruments of Superstition and Idolatry. Look on their Conversation
of old in the World; and it was humble, peaceable, useful, profitable unto
Mankind, with a contempt of earthly things in comparison of those that are
eternal. But under the conduct of this Guide; Ambition, Pride, Sensuality and
profaness, have covered the nations of its Communion; In all things have they
lost and defaced the native Beauty and Glory of Christian Religion. It will be
of no advantage unto any, voluntarily to come in into a participation in this
woeful Apostasy.

9. The Insupportable Yoke that this Guide puts on Kings and Sovereign Princes,
on pretense of its divine Right of an universal Guidance of them and all their
Subjects, deserves the Consideration of them that are concerned, before they
give up themselves unto it. It is true that by and since the Reformation, as
this Power of these men who call themselves this Guide, has been utterly cast
of by many; So in those places where on other accounts they maintain their
Interest, it has been greatly weakened and impared. Hence those of the
greatest Power in the Nations of Europe, have had little regard unto their
Authority unless it be used unto their Interest and Advantage. But their
Principles are still the same as they were; their Pretense of Divine Right the
same that it was, and their desires after the exercise of it unto their own
ends, not at all abated. Could they once again enthrone themselves in the
consciences of Kings themselves and all their Subjects; Could they destroy the
Balance of a contrary Intrest; could they take away the Reserves of Reliefs
against their encroachments, by engaging the Assistance of Subjects against
their Princes, of one Prince against another, as in former days; there is no
reason to think but that they would return unto their former usurpations and
insolency. And wise men, yea Princes themselves, may be deceived, if they take
their measures of the nature of the Papacy, with respect unto Civil Government,
from its present deportment and Attempts, though bad enough. Take away the
perplexities and Difficulties they are cast into, through the Rejection of
their Authority by so many nations, and by the divided Intrests of Kings and
Potentates thereon; heal their deadly wound, and restore them unto a Catholic
Power over the consciences of all sorts of men, by the destruction of them by
whom it is opposed, and it will quickly appear with another aspect on the
world, another manner of influence on the Governors and Governments of
Kingdoms and Nations then now it does. But the consideration hereof belongs
principally unto them, who are not wont to be unconcerned in the Preservation
of their just Authority. Yet if occasion require it, a demonstration shall be
given of the necessary and unavoidable consequences of the Readmission of the
Papal Power, in any of the Nations of Europe who have cast it out; and that
with respect unto the Governors and Governments of them.

Among many other considerations, which offer themselves unto the same Purpose,
and which shall be produced, if occasion is given; I shall add one more and
close this Discourse; And this is, that the foundation of all the Religious
worship, which this Guide directs unto, whence all other parts of it do
proceed, and whereon they do depend, consists of the overthrow of one of the
principle Articles of the Christian faith. And this is, that our Lord Jesus
has by one offering, for ever perfected them that are sanctified; as it is
expressed by the Apostle; Heb. 10. 14. In direct opposition hereunto, the
Ground and Reason of their Mass and the Sacrifice therein, which is the Life,
Soul, Centor, and Foundation of all their Religious worship, lies in this, that
there is a Necessity that Christ be offered often, yea every day, in places
innumerable, without which, they say, the Church can neither be Sanctified or
perfected. Such a Guide is this Church, as that it lays the foundation of all
its sacred worship in the overthrow of the principal foundation of the
Christian faith.

God in his appointed time, will put an end unto all these extravagancies,
excesses and distractions in his Church; when Violence shall be no more heard
in her Land, Wasting nor Destruction within her Borders, when she shall call
her Walls Salvation and her Gates Praise.

FINIS.

