To the Honorable the House of Commons, By E. Owen, P. Soon, and G. Kellett,
Gent. Proposals, humbly offered, for Raising One Million two Hundred Thousand
Pounds in six Months: And also three Hundred and fifty Thousand Pounds per Ann.
Two Hundred and fifty Thousand Pounds per Ann. whereof, to be applied as
thought convenient, By Passing an Act for the Rebuilding of all Houses consumed
by Fire, being (...) the Public Good, present Supply of the Government, and
Ad^age of every Contributor.
1. THat every House advance the immediate Payment, according to the following
Table, and proportionably for a greater Rent, not exceeding the Rent of sixty
Pounds, though the Houses are of a much greater Rent, which will raise the One
Million two Hundred Thousand Pounds within the six Months proposed.

2. That, of the yearly Payment of four Pence per Pound, payable according to
the Table, not exceeding the yearly Rent of 60 l. (...) proposed, there be kept
a separate and distinct Account, one Moiety thereof to be applied as thought
sit, the other Moiety to be preserved as a distinct and separate Fund, to
answer the general Charge of the Sums to be returned according to the Table,
for and toward making Good the contingent Losses by Fire and Charge of
Collecting.

The TABLE.
P^ per Annum. Immediate Payments. Yearly Payments. Sums to be returned. l. l.
s. d. l. s. d. l. 1 0 2 0 0 0 4 10 2 0 4 0 0 0 8 20 3 0 6 0 0 1 0 30 4 0 8 0 0
1 4 40 5 0 10 0 0 1 8 50 6 0 12 0 0 2 0 60 7 0 14 0 0 2 4 70 8 0 16 0 0 2 8 80
9 0 18 0 0 3 0 90 10 1 00 0 0 3 4 100 60 6-0-0 1-0-0 600

In Case of great Conflagrations amounting to a greater Sum than the Fund set
apart for the Purposes aforesaid, the Deficiences to be made good by the next
succeeding Session of Parliament.

And it is humbly hoped, that these Proposals will make good the Sums hereby
intended, it being computed, that there is in England, according to a moderate
Estimate, One Million two Hundred thousand Houses and upwards, including
Chambers in Colleges and Halls in both Universities, Inns of Court, and
Chancery, Doctors-Commons, Halls, and public Buildings, valuing one with
another at 10 l. per Annum Rent, will raise the immediate One Million two
Hundred Thousand Pounds, for the present Supply: and also the yearly Payment of
two Hundred Thousand Pounds to be applied as above.

If this Honorable House, in their Wisdom, think fit to Pass this into an Act,
the following Method is humbly Presented for Collecting the same, and
preventing Frauds and Mistakes therein.

That the Churchwardens and Overseers of their respective Parishes, who are to
Receive and Collect the immediate and yearly Payment, have Books containing a
sufficient Number of Sheets to be divided into Coloums, after the manner
following:

On the Side of Street in the Parish of in the of Houses. No Landlords Names.
Tennants Names. Rent p^r Ann. Immediate Payment. Yearly Payment. Sums (...)
returned. Returned for Non-Payment. New Inhabitants. l. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. 1
A. B. C. D. 1 0 2 0 0 0 4 10 2 2 0 4 0 0 0 8 20 3 3 0 6 0 0 1 0 30 4 4 0 8 0 0
1 4 40 5 5 0 10 0 0 1 8 50 6 6 0 12 0 0 2 0 60 7 7 0 14 0 0 2 4 70 8 8 0 16 0 0
2 8 80 9 9 0 18 0 0 3 0 90 10 10 1 0 0 0 3 4 100 etc. 60-600 6- 00- 1- 00- 600

By Us, A. B. C. D.
Churchwardens, Overseers.

The Oath taken Before Us, (...) to the Act. Justices.

That two Books for every Parish be filled up, Examined, Signed and Comp^red by
the Churchwardens and Overseers thereof, and an Oath taken before a Justice of
the Peace of such County, and Signed by Two, that it is a true Estimate,
according to the best of their Knowledge; one Book to be immediately sent up to
an Office, with proper Officers, to be Erected for that Purpose; the other to
be their Warrant, to Receive and Collect the same and then to be returned with
the Money into the Exchequer, and brought to the aforementioned Office, there to
be compared with their Counter-parts, and an Account to be fairly written in
Books, and Stated by Substracting the Returns from the Money received: And from
the old Books, new Ones to be every Year made and sent to the several Parishes,
with such Alterations as are returned by such Office.

The Act to contain such Penalties, Forfeitures and Provisoes, as the Nature of
the Thing requires, and to consider of, and provide for the several Terms,
Interests, and Estates of the Persons concerned; is left to this Honorable
House: And also, as to Houses already Insured.

If this Honorable House are pleased to think it worth their further
Consideration, a Proposal for making good Losses of Ships in their respective
Voyages, upon your favorable Encouragement, will be also Presented; whereby
Frauds by common Assurers will be prevented; a great yearly Sum raised for the
Public Advantage.

Reasons humbly offered for Passing this into an Act.

THat the Nation being very much Indebted, whereby there is a Necessity of
raising great Sums for an immediate Supply, toward discharging the Arrears due
to the Army and Fleet, and the Debts contracted by the late War, which can no
otherwise be done, than by great Taxes to be laid upon the Subject; It is
humbly conceived, none can be Proposed, whereunto the Subjects will more
readily and cheerfully Contribute, or whereby they will receive so great
Benefit and Advantage.

1. For that what they pay hereupon, they will proportionably save, out of what
must have been otherwise raised.

2. They will hereby receive a present Recompense, by raising the Value of
Houses, at least ten Pounds per Cent. and making their Estates more certain,
and a better Security to Ground-Jointures, Settlements and Mortgages upon.

3. This Method is already put in Practice by a great number of wise and
prudent Men, for the Preservation of themselves and Families, by private
Agreements for mutual Contributions, and is also the Desire of most
Corporations in England, to be established by Authority of Parliament, under a
National Fund and Credit.

4. Hereby will be no Occasion for Briefs and other charitable Collections,
whereby great Sums are yearly drained out of the Subjects Pockets, and the
Frauds and Misapplications of the Subjects Charity prevented, and places the
Receiver above the Notion of taking Alms, inducing them to respect the
Government as the Fountain of the Public Good.

5. Will be the Support of thousands of Families, and thereby in great Measure
prevent the Increase of the Poor, and supply them with a Foundation for future
Industry.

6. Is no ways Oppressive to the Poor who cannot be possessed of any Estate in
Houses.

7. As private Persons for private Interests have erected particular Offices
for this Purpose, which have been very acceptable and well thought on by the
more intelligent Part of Mankind. Therefore so noble and generous a Design as
extends it self to the Preservation, Relief, and Benefit of Cities, Towns, and
Countries; and the Whole in general, will, ('it is not questioned,) merit the
intense Consideration of, and Encouragement by this House, and meet with
grateful Acceptance by the Public.

It is further Proposed, to make good the other One Hundred and fifty thousand
Pounds per Ann. by

1. A double Rate or Charge upon Post-Letters in general, which will be but the
same Charge to the Government in Collecting as at present, and bring in the
clear yearly Sum of One hundred thousand Pound per Ann. and upwards; due Care
being taken to prevent Coach-men, Carriers and others, from conveying Letters.

2. Every Person to pay one Shilling per Pound, out of such Sum he shall
receive with every Clerk, Apprentice or Servant, such Clerk, Apprentice or
Servant, not to be a^ to practice or exercise his Trade, (unless the said Sum
or Duty be duly paid) the Master who receives, and Parent, Guardian or Friend
who pays the same, to forfeit treble the Sum, in case the same be not duly
answered, which computing, that there be Five hundred Thousand put out in three
Years, at ten Pounds one with another, will raise Eighty ^housand Pounds per
Ann. and upward.

These Proposals it is humbly hoped, will meet with the favorable Acceptance
of this Honorable House, as being Intended for the Service of the Government,
the Ease of the Subject, and the Public Good, and these Proposers meet with a
suitable Encouragement.

Printed by W. Onley, near Symond's Inn in Chancery Lane, 1699.


