THE DOCTRINE OF Justification by Faith Through the IMPUTATION OF THE
Righteousness of Christ, EXPLAINED, CONFIRMED, and VINDICATED.

By JOHN OWEN, D.D.

Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39.

LONDON, Printed for R. Boulter, at the Turks-head over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1677.

TO THE READER.
I Shall not need to detain the Reader with an Account of the nature and moment
of that Doctrine which is the entire subject of the ensuing Discourse. For
although sundry Persons, even among our selves, have various Apprehensions
concerning it, yet that the knowledge of the Truth therein is of the highest
Importance unto the Souls of men, is on all hands agreed unto. Nor indeed is it
possible that any man who knows himself to be a sinner, and obnoxious thereon
to the Judgment of God, but he must desire to have some knowledge of it, as
that alone whereby the way of delivery from the evil state and condition
wherein he finds himself, is revealed. There are I confess, multitudes in the
World, who although they cannot avoid some general Convictions of sin, as also
of the Consequents of it; yet do fortify their minds against a practical
Admission of such Conclusions, as in a just consideration of things do
necessarily and unavoidably ensue thereon. Such Persons wilfully deluding
themselves with vain hopes and imaginations, do never once seriously enquire by
what way or means they may obtain peace with God and Acceptance before him,
which in comparison of the present enjoyment of the pleasures of sin, they
value not at all. And it is in vain to recommend the Doctrine of Justification
unto them, who neither desire nor endeavor to be justified. But where any
Persons are really made sensible of their Apostasy from God, of the evil of
their natures and lives, with the dreadful consequences that attend thereon in
the wrath of God and eternal punishment due unto sin, they cannot well judge
themselves more concerned in any thing, than in the knowledge of that divine
way whereby they may be delivered from this condition. And the minds of such
Persons stand in no need of Arguments to satisfy them in the Importance of
this Doctrine; their own concernment in it is sufficient to that purpose. And I
shall assure them, that in the handling of it from first to last, I have had no
other design, but only to enquire diligently into the divine Revelation of that
way, and those means with the causes of them, whereby the Conscience of a
distressed sinner may attain assured peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. I lay more weight on the steady Direction of one Soul in this enquiry,
than in disappointing the Objections of twenty wrangling or fiery Disputers.
The Question therefore unto this purpose being stated, as the Reader will find
in the beginning of our Discourse, although it were necessary to spend some
time in the Explication of the Doctrine it self, and the terms wherein it is
usually taught, yet the main weight of the whole lies in the Interpretation of
Scripture Testimonies, with the Application of them unto the experience of them
who do believe, and the state of them who seek after Salvation by Jesus Christ.
There are therefore some few things that I would desire the Reader to take
notice of, that he may receive benefit by the ensuing Discourse; at least, if
it be not his own fault, be freed from prejudices against it, or a vain
opposition unto it.

1. Although there are at present various contests about the Doctrine of
Justification, and many Books published in the way of controversy about it;
yet this Discourse was written with no design to contend with or contradict any
of what sort or opinion soever. Some few passages which seem of that tendency,
are indeed occasionally inserted. But they are such as every candid Reader will
judge to have been necessary. I have ascribed no Opinion unto any particular
Person, much less wrested the words of any, reflected on their Persons,
censured their Abilities, taken advantages of presumed prejudices against them,
represented their Opinions in the deformed Reflections of strained
Consequences, fancied intended notions which their words do not express, nor
heartily interpreted give any countenance unto, or endeavored the vain
pleasure of seeming success in opposition unto them, which with the like
effects of weakness of mind and disorder of affections, are the animating
principles of many late controversial Writings. To declare and vindicate the
Truth unto the Instruction and Edification of such as love it in sincerity, to
extricate their minds from those difficulties in this particular Instance,
which some endeavor to cast on all Gospel mysteries, to direct the Consciences
of them that enquire after abiding Peace with God, and to establish the minds
of them that do believe, are the things I have aimed at. And an Endeavor unto
this end, considering all circumstances, that station which God has been
pleased graciously to give me in the Church, has made necessary unto me.

2. I have written nothing but what I believe to be true, and useful unto the
promotion of Gospel Obedience. The Reader may not here expect an extraction of
other men's notions, or a collection and improvement of their Arguments, either
by artificial Reasonings, or ornament of Style and Language, but a naked
enquiry into the nature of the things treated on, as revealed in the Scripture,
and as evidencing themselves in their power and efficacy on the minds of them
that do believe. It is the practical direction of the Consciences of men in
their application unto God by Jesus Christ for deliverance from the Curse due
unto the Apostate state, and Peace with him, with the influence of the way
thereof into universal Gospel Obedience, that is alone to be designed in the
handling of this Doctrine. And therefore unto him that would treat of it in a
due manner, it is required that he weigh every thing he asserts in his own mind
and experience, and not dare to propose that unto others which he does not
abide by himself, in the most intimate recesses of his mind, under his nearest
approaches unto God, in his suprisals with Dangers, in deep Afflictions, in his
preparations for death, and most humble Contemplations of the infinite distance
between God and him. Other Notions and Disputations about the Doctrine of
Justification not seasoned with these ingredients, however condited unto the
palate of some by skill and language, are insipid and useless, immediately
degenerating into an unprofitable strife of words.

3. I know that the Doctrine here pleaded for, is charged by many with an
unfriendly aspect toward the necessity of personal Holiness, Good Works, and
all Gospel Obedience in general, yea utterly to take it away. So it was at the
first clear. Revelation of it by the Apostle Paul, as he frequently declares.
But it is sufficiently evinced by him to be the chief principle of, and motive
unto all that Obedience which is accepted with God through Jesus Christ, as we
shall manifest afterward. However it is acknowledged that the objective Grace
of the Gospel in the Doctrine of it, is liable to abuse, where there is nothing
of the subjective Grace of it in the Hearts of men; and the ways of its
influence into the Life of God, are uncouth unto the Reasonings of carnal
minds. So was it charged by the Papists at the first Reformation, and
continues yet so to be. Yet as it gave the first occasion unto the Reformation
it self, so was it that whereby the Souls of men being set at liberty from
their bondage unto innumerable, superstitious fears and observances, utterly
inconsistent with true Gospel Obedience, and directed into the ways of Peace
with God through Jesus Christ, were made fruitful in real Holiness, and to
abound in all those blessed effects of the Life of God which were never found
among their Adversaries. The same charge was afterward renewed by the
Socinians, and continues still to be managed by them. But I suppose wise and
impartial men will not lay much weight on their Accusations, until they have
manifested the efficacy of their contrary persuasion by better effects and
fruits than yet they have done. What sort of men they were who first coined
that systeme of Religion which they adhere unto, one who knew them well enough,
and sufficiently inclined unto their Antitrinitarian Opinions, declares in one
of the Queries that he proposed unto Socinus himself and his followers. If this
says he, be the truth which you contend for, whence comes it to pass that it
is declared only by persons, nulla pietatis commendatione, nullo laudato
prioris vitae exemplo commendatos; imo ut plerumque videmus, per vagabundos,
and contentionum zeli carnalis plenos homines, alios ex castris, aulis, ganeis,
prolatam esse. Scrupuli ab excellenti viro propositi, inter oper. Socin. The
fiercest charge of such men against any Doctrines they oppose as inconsistent
with the necessary motives unto Godliness, are a Recommendation of it unto the
minds of considerative men. And there cannot be a more effectual Engine plied
for the ruin of Religion, then for men to declame against the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone, and other Truths concerning the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as those which overthrow the necessity of moral Duties, Good
Works, and Gospel Obedience, whilst under the conduct of the Opinions which
they embrace in opposition unto them, they give not the least evidence of the
power of the Truth, or Grace of the Gospel upon their own hearts, or in their
lives. Whereas therefore the whole Gospel is the Truth which is after
Godliness, declaring and exhibiting that Grace of God which teaches us to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this world; we being fallen into those times wherein
under great and fierce contests about notions, opinions, and practices in
Religion, there is an horrible decay in true Gospel Purity and Holiness of life
amongst the generality of men, I shall readily grant, that keeping a due regard
unto the only standard of Truth, a secondary Trial of Doctrines proposed and
contended for, may and ought to be made by the ways, lives, walkings, and
conversations of them by whom they are received and professed. And although it
is acknowledged that the Doctrine pleaded in the ensuing discourse be liable to
be abused, yea turned into licentiousness by men of corrupt minds through the
prevalency of vicious Habits in them (as is the whole Doctrine of the Grace of
God by Jesus Christ) and although the way and means of its efficacy and
influence into universal Obedience unto God in Righteousness and true Holiness,
be not discernable without some beam of spiritual Light, nor will give an
experience of their power unto the minds of men utterly destitute of a
principle of spiritual Life; yet if it cannot preserve its station in the
Church by this Rule, of its useful tendency unto the promotion of Godliness,
and its necessity thereunto, in all them by whom it is really believed and
received in its proper light and power, and that in the experience of former
and present times, I shall be content that it be exploded.

4. Finding that not a few have esteemed it compliant with their Interest, to
publish exceptions against some few leaves, which in the handling of a subject
of another nature I occasionally wrote many years ago on this Subject, I am not
without Apprehensions, that either the same persons or others of alike temper
and principles may attempt an opposition unto what is here expressly tendered
thereon. On supposition of such an Attempt, I shall in one word let the Authors
of it know, wherein alone I shall be concerned. For if they shall make it their
business to cavil at Expressions, to wrest my words, wiredraw inferences and
conclusions from them not expressly owned by me, to revile my person, to catch
at advantages in any occasional passages, or other unessential parts of the
Discourse, laboring for an Appearance of success and reputation to themselves
thereby, without a due attendance unto Christian moderation, candor and
ingenuity, I shall take no more notice of what they say or write, then I would
do of the greatest impertinencies that can be reported in this world. The same
I say concerning oppositions of the like nature unto any other writings of
mine; a work which as I hear, some are at present engaged in. I have somewhat
else to do than to cast away any part of the small remainder of my Life in that
kind of controversial Writings which good men bewail, and wise men deride.
Whereas therefore the principal design of this Discourse, is to state the
Doctrine of Justification from the Scripture, and to confirm it by the
Testimonies thereof, I shall not esteem it spoken against, unless our
Exposition of Scripture Testimonies, and the Application of them unto the
present Argument be disproved by just Rules of Interpretation, and another
sense of them be evinced. All other things which I conceive necessary to be
spoken unto, in order unto the right understanding and due improvement of the
Truth pleaded for, are comprised and declared in the ensuing general Discourses
to that purpose; These few things I thought meet to mind the Reader of.

From my Study, May the 30th. 1677. J. O.

Considerations previous unto the Explanation of the Doctrine of Justification.
. 1. THe General Nature of Justification. State of the Person to be justified
antecedently thereunto. Romans 4.5. Chap. 3.19. Chap. 1.32. Gal. 3.10. Joh. 3.18,
36. Gal. 3.22. The sole Inquiry on that state. Whether it be any thing that is
our own inherently, or what is only imputed unto us, that we are to trust unto
for our Acceptance with God. The sum of this Inquiry. The proper ends of
Teaching and Learning the Doctrine of Justification. Things to be avoided
therein. Page 1.. 2. A due consideration of God, the Judge of all, necessary
unto the right stating and apprehension of the Doctrine of Justification, Romans
8.33. Isa. 43.25.45.23. Psalm. 145.2. Romans 3.20. What thoughts will be
ingenerated hereby in the minds of Men. Isai. 33.14. Mic. 6.7. Isa. 6.5. The
Plea of Job against his friends, and before God not the same. Job 40.3, 4, 5.
Chap. 42.4, 5, 6. Directions for visiting the sick given of old. Testimonies of
Jerome and Ambrose. Sense of Men in their Prayers. Dan. 9.7, 18. Psalm.
143.2.130.3, 4. Paraphrase of Austine on that place. Prayer of Pelagius.
Public Liturgies. Page 8.. 3. A due sense of our Apostasy from God, the
Depravation of our Nature thereby, with the power and guilt of Sin, the
holiness of Law, necessary unto a right understanding of the Doctrine of
Justification. Method of the Apostle to this purpose, Romans 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap.
Grounds of the ancient and present Pelagianism, in the denial of these things.
Instances thereof. Boasting of Perfection from the same Ground. Knowledge of
Sin and Grace mutually promote each other. Page 18.. 4. Opposition between
Works and Grace, as unto Justification. Method of the Apostle in the Epistle to
the Romans to manifest this opposition. A Scheam of others, contrary thereunto.
Testimonies witnessing this opposition. Judgment to be made on them.
Distinctions whereby they are evaded. The uselessness of them. Resolution of
the case in hand by Bellarmine. Luke 17.10. Dan. 9.18. Page 24.. 5. A
Commutation as unto Sin and Righteousness, by Imputation between Christ and
Believers, represented in the Scripture. The Ordinance of the Escape Goat.
Levit. 16.21, 22. The nature of Expiatory Sacrifices. Levit. 4.29. Expiation of
an uncertain Murder. Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The Commutation intended,
proved, and vindicated. Isa. 53.5, 6. 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 8.3, 4. Gal. 3.13, 14.
1 Pet. 1.24. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Testimonies of Justin Martyr, Gregory Nissen,
Austine, Chrysostom, Bernard, Taulerus, Pighius, to that purpose. The proper
actings of Faith with respect thereunto. Romans 5.11. Matthew. 11.28. Psa. 38.4.
Genesis 4.13. Isa. 53.11. Gal. 3.1. Isa. 45.22. Joh. 3.14, 15. A bold Calumny
answered. Page 38, 39.. 6. Introduction of Grace by Jesus Christ into the whole
of our Relation unto God, and its respect unto all the parts of our Obedience.
No Mystery of Grace in the Covenant of Works. All Religion originally
commensurate unto Reason. No notions of Natural Light concerning the
Introduction of the Mediation of Christ, and Mystery of Grace into our Relation
to God. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. Reason as corrupted can have no notions of Religion,
but what are derived from its primitive state. Hence the Mysteries of the
Gospel esteemed folly. Reason as corrupted, repugnant unto the Mystery of
G^^^e. Accommodation of Spiritual Mysteries unto Corrupt Reason, wherefore
acceptable unto many. Reasons of it. Two parts of corrupted Natures repugnancy
unto the Mystery of the Gospel. ( 1.) That which would reduce it unto the
private Reason of Men. Thence the Trinity denied. And the Incarnation of the
Son of God. Without which the Doctrine of Justification cannot stand. Rule of
the Socinians in the Interpretation of the Scripture. ( 2.) Want of a due
comprehension of the Harmony that is between all the parts of the Mystery of
Grace. This Harmomy proved. Compared with the Harmony in the Works of Nature.
To be studied. But is learned only of them who are taught of God; and in
experience. Evil events of the want of a due comprehension hereof. Instances of
them. All applied unto the Doctrine of Justification. Page 53.. 7. General
prejudices against the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. ( 1.) That it
is not in Terms found in the Scripture, answered. ( 2.) That nothing is said of
it in the writings of the Evangelists, answered. Joh. 20.30, 31. Nature of
Christ's Personal Ministry. Revelations by the holy Spirit immediately from
Christ. Design of the writings of the Evangelists. ( 3.) Differences among
Protestants themselves about this Doctrine, answered. Sense of the Ancients
herein. What is of real Difference among Protestants, considered. Page 69.. 8.
Influence of the Doctrine of Justification into the first Reformation.
Advantages unto the World by that Reformation. State of the Consciences of Men
under the Papacy, with respect unto Justification before God. Alterations made
therein by the Light of this Doctrine, though not received. Alterations in the
Pagan unbelieving World, by the Introduction of Christianity. Design and
success of the first Reformer herein. Attempts for Reconciliation with the
Papists in this Doctrine, and their success. Remainders of the ^gnorance of the
Truth in the Roman Church. Unavoidable consequences of the corruption of this
Doctrine. Page 83. CHAP. I. Justification by Faith generally acknowledged. The
meaning of it perverted. The nature and use of Faith in Justification proposed
to consideration. Distinctions about it, waved. A twofold Faith of the Gospel
expressed in the Scripture. Faith that is not justifying. Acts 8.13. Joh. 2.23,
24. Luke 8.13. Matthew. 22.28. Historical Faith, whence it is so called, and the
nature of it. Degrees of Assent in it. Justification not ascribed unto any
Degree of it. A Calumny obviated. The causes of true saving Faith. Conviction
of Sin previous unto it. The nature of legal Conviction, and its Effects.
Arguments to prove it antecedent unto Faith. Without the consideration of it,
the true nature of Faith not to be understood. The Order and Relation of the
Law and Gospel. Romans 1.17. Instance of Adam. Effects of Conviction, internal;
Displicency and sorrow. Fear of punishment. Desire of Deliverance. External;
Abstinence from Sin. Performance of Duties; Reformation of Life. Not conditions
of Justification; not Formal Dispositions unto it; not Moral Preparations for
it. The Order of God in Justification. The proper object of justifying Faith.
Not all Divine Verity equally; proved by sundry Arguments. The pardon of our
own sins, whether the first object of Faith. The Lord Christ in the Work of
Mediation, as the Ordinance of God for the Recovery of lost Sinners, the proper
object of justifying Faith. The Position explained and proved. Romans 3.24, 25.
Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. Acts 10.41. Chap. 16.13. Chap. 4.12. Luke 24.25, 26, 27. Joh.
1.12.3.16, 36.6.29.7.38, etc. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 2.1, 31. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21.
Page 92, 93, etc. CHAP. II. The nature of justifying Faith in particular; or of
Faith in that exercise of it, whereby we are justified. The Hearts approbation
of the way of the Justification, and Salvation of Sinners by Christ, with its
acquiescency therein. The description given, explained, and confirmed. ( 1.)
From the nature of the Gospel. ( 2.) Exemplified in its contrary, or the nature
of unbelief. Prove. 1.30. Heb. 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.7. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
What it is, and wherein it does consist. ( 3.) The Design of God, in, and by
the Gospel. His own Glory, his utmost End in all things. The Glory of his
Righteousness, Grace, Love, Wisdom, etc. The end of God in the Way of the
Salvation of Sinners by Christ. Romans 3.25. Joh. 3.16. 1 John 3.16. Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
1 Cor. 1.24. Ephesians. 3.10. Romans 1.16.4.16. Ephesians. 3.9. 2 Cor. 4.6. The nature of
Faith thence declared. Faith alone ascribes and gives this glory to God. Order
of the Acts of Faith, or the method in believing. Convictions previous
thereunto. Sincere assent unto all Divine Revelations, Acts 26.27. The Proposal
of the Gospel unto that end, Romans 10.11, 12, 13, etc. 2 Cor. 3.18. State of
Persons called to believe. Justifying Faith does not consist in any one single
habit or act of the Mind or Will. The nature of that assent which is the first
Act of Faith. Approbation of the Way of Salvation by Christ, comprehensive of
the special nature of justifying Faith. What is included therein. ( 1.) A
Renuntiation of all other ways. Hos. 14.2, 3. Jer. 3.23. Psalm. 7.16. Romans 10.3.
( 2.) Consent of the Will unto this Way, Joh. 14.6. ( 3.) Acquiescency of the
Heart in God. 1 Pet. 1.21. Trust in God. Faith described by Trust, the Reason
of it. Nature and Object of this Trust inquired into. A double consideration of
special Mercy. Whether Obedience be included in the nature of Faith, or be of
the essence of it. A sincere purpose of Universal Obedience inseparable from
Faith. How Faith alone justifies. Repentance, how required in, and unto
Justification. How a condition of the New Covenant. Perseverance in Obedience,
is so also. Definitions of Faith. Page 125. CHAP. III. Use of Faith in
Justification; various Conceptions about it. By whom asserted, as the
Instrument of it, by whom denied. In what sense it is affirmed so to be. The
expressions of the Scripture, concerning the use of Faith in Justification,
what they are; and how they are best explained. By an Instrumental Cause.
Faith, how the Instrument of God in Justification. How the Instrument of them
that do believe. The use of Faith expressed in the Scripture, by apprehending,
receiving; declared by an Instrument. Faith in what sense the condition of our
Justification. Signification of that Term whence to be Learned. Page 146. CHAP.
IV. The proper sense of these words, Justification and to justify, considered.
Necessity thereof. Latin derivation of Justification. Some of the Ancients
deceived by it. From Jus, and Justum; Justus filius, who. The Hebrew (...). Use
and signification of it. Places where it is used, examined. 2 Samuel 15.4. Deuteronomy.
21.5. Prove. 17.15. Isa. 5.23. Chap. 50.8. 1 King. 8.31, 32. 2 Chro. 6.22, 23.
Psalm. 82.3. Exodus 23.7. Isa. 53.11. Jere. 44.16. Dan. 12.3. The constant sense
of the word, evinced. (...). Use of it in other Authors, to punish. What it is
in the New Testament, Matthew. 11.19. Chap. 12.37. Luke 7.29. Chap. 10.29. Chap.
16.15. Chap. 18.14. Acts 13.38, 39. Romans 2.13. Chap. 3.4. Constantly used in a
forensick sense. Places seeming dubious, vindicated. Romans 8.30. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Revel. 22.11. How often these words (...) and (...), are used
in the New Testament. Constant sense of this. The same evinced, from what is
opposed unto it, Isa. 50.8. Prove. 17.15. Romans 5.16, 18. Romans 8.33, 34. And the
Declaration of it in Terms equivalent. Romans 4.6, 7. Romans 5.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.20,
21. Matthew. 1.21. Acts 13.39. Gal. 2.16, etc. Justification in the Scripture,
proposed under a Juridical Scheam, and of a forensick Title. The Parts and
Progress of it. Instances from the whole. Page 169. etc. CHAP. V. Distinction
of a First and Second Justification. The whole Doctrine of the Roman Church
concerning Justification grounded on this Distinction. The First Justification,
the nature and causes of it according unto the Romanists. The Second
Justification, what it is in their sense. Solution of the seeming Difference
between Paul and James, falsely pretended by this Distinction. The same
Distinction received by the Socinians, and others. The latter termed by some,
the continuation of our Justification. The Distinction disproved. Justification
considered, either as unto its Essence, or its Manifestation. The Manifestation
of it twofold, initial and final. Initial is either unto our selves, or others.
No Second Justification hence insues. Justification before God, Legal and
Evangelical. Their distinct natures. The Distinction mentioned, derogatory to
the Merit of Christ. More in it ascribed unto our selves, then unto the Blood
of Christ, in our Justification. The vanity of Disputations to this purpose.
All true Justification, everthrown by this Distinction. No countenance given
unto this Justification in the Scripture. The Second Justification not intended
by the Apostle James. Evil of Arbitrary Distinctions. Our First Justification
so described in the Scripture, as to leave no room for a Second. Of the
Continuation of our Justification: Whether it depend on Faith alone, or our
Personal Righteousness inquired. Justification at once completed in all Causes
and Effects of it, proved at large. Believers upon their Justification, obliged
unto perfect Obedience. The commanding Power of the Law constitutes the nature
of Sin in them, who are not obnoxious unto its curse. Future Sins, in what
sense remitted at our First Justification. The Continuation of Actual Pardon,
and thereby of a justified Estate, on what it does depend. Continuation of
Justification, the act of God; whereon it depends in that sense. On our part it
depends on Faith alone. Nothing required hereunto, but the Application of
Righteousness imputed. The Continuation of our Justification is before God.
That whereon the Continuation of our Justification depends, pleadable before
God. This not our Personal Obedience proved. ( 1.) By the experience of all
Believers. ( 2.) Testimonies of Scripture. ( 3.) Examples. The Distinction
mentioned rejected. Page 189. CHAP. VI. Evangelical Personal Righteousness, the
nature and use of it. Whether there be an Evangelical Justification on our
Evangelical Righteousness inquired into. How this is by some affirmed and
applauded. Evangelical Personal Righteousness asserted as the condition of our
Legal Righteousness, or the Pardon of Sin. Opinion of the Socinians. Personal
Righteousness required in the Gospel. Believers hence denominated Righteous.
Not with respect unto Righteousness habitual, but actual only. Inherent
Righteousness the same with Sanctification or Holiness. In what sense we may be
said to be justified by Inherent Righteousness. No Evangelical Justification on
our Personal Righteousness. The Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ does
not depend thereon. None have this Righteousness, but they are untecedently
justified. A charge before God, in all Justification before God. The Instrument
of this charge; the Law or the Gospel. From neither of them can we be justified
by this Personal Righteousness. The Justification pretended needless and
useless. It has not the nature of any Justification mentioned in the
Scripture; but is contrary to all that is so called. Other Arguments to the
same purpose. Sentential Justification at the last day. Nature of the last
Judgment. Who shall be then justified. A Declaration of Righteousness, and an
Actual Admission unto Glory, the whole of Justification at the last day. The
Argument that we are justified in this life, in the same manner, and on the
same Grounds as we shall be judged at the last day, that Judgment being
according unto Works, answered; and the Impertinency of it declared. Page 211.
CHAP. VII. Imputation, and the nature of it. The first express Record of
Justification, determines it to be by Imputation. Genesis 15.6. Reasons of it.
The Doctrine of Imputation cleared by Paul; the occasion of it. Maligned and
opposed by many. Weight of the Doctrine concerning Imputation of Righteousness
on all hands acknowledged. Judgment of the Reformed Churches herein,
particularly of the Church of England. By whom opposed, and on what Grounds.
Signification of the Word. Difference between reputare and imputare. Imputation
of two kinds. ( 1.) Of what was ours antecedently unto that Imputation, whether
good or evil. Instances in both kinds. Nature of this Imputation. The thing
imputed by it, imputed for what it is, and nothing else. ( 2.) Of what is not
ours antecedently unto that Imputation, but is made so by it. General nature of
this Imputation. Not judging of others to have done what they have not done.
Several distinct Grounds and Reasons of this Imputation. (1.) Ex Justitia; (1.)
Propter Relationem foederalem. (2.) Propter Relationem Naturalem. (2.) Ex
voluntaria sponsione. Instances, Philem. 17. Genesis 43.9* Voluntary sponsion, the
Ground of the Imputation of Sin to Christ. (3.) Ex injuria. 1 King. 1.21. (4.)
Ex mera Gratia. Romans 4. Difference between the Imputation of any Works of ours,
and of the Righteousness of God. Imputation of Inherent Righteousness, is Ex
Justitia. Inconsistency of it, with that which is Ex mera Gratia. Romans 11.6.
Agreement of both kinds of Imputation. The true nature of the Imputation of
Righteousness unto Justification, explained. Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ. The thing it self imputed, not the effect of it; proved against the
Socinians. Page 226. CHAP. VIII. Imputation of Sin unto Christ. Testimonies of
the Ancients unto that purpose. Christ and the Church, one Mystical Person.
Mistakes about that State and Relation. Grounds and Reasons of the Union, that
is the foundation of this Imputation. Christ the Surety of the New Covenant; in
what sense, unto what ends. Heb. 7.22. opened. Mistakes about the Causes, and
Ends of the Death of Christ. The New Covenant in what sense alone procured and
purchased thereby. Inquiry whether the Guilt of our sins, was imputed unto
Christ. The meaning of the words, Guilt and Guilty. The Distinction of Reatus
culpae and Reatus paenae, examined. Act of God in the Imputation of the Guilt
of our Sins unto Christ. Objections against it, answered. The Truth confirmed.
Page 246. CHAP. IX. Principal Controversies about Justification. ( 1.)
Concerning the nature of Justification, stated. ( 2.) Of the Formal Cause of
it. ( 3.) Of the Way whereby we are made partakers of the Benefits of the
Mediation of Christ. What intended by the Formal Cause of Justification,
declared. The Righteousness on the account whereof Believers are justified
before God alone, inquired after under those Terms. This the Righteousness of
Christ, imputed unto them. Occasions of Exceptions and Objections against this
Doctrine General Objections examined. Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ; consistent with the Free Pardon of Sin, with the necessity of
Evangelical Repentance. Method of Gods Grace in our Justification. Necessity of
Faith unto Justification, on supposition of the Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ. Grounds of that Necessity. Other Objections arising mostly from
mistakes of the Truth, asserted, discussed and answered. Page 289. CHAP. X.
Arguments for Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ.
Our own Personal Righteousness, not that on the account whereof we are
justified in the sight of God. Disclaimed in the Scripture, as to any such end.
The truth and reality of it granted. Manifold Imperfections accompanying it,
rendering it unmeet to be a Righteousness unto the Justification of Life. Page
315. CHAP. XI. Nature of the Obedience or Righteousness required unto
Justification. Original and Causes of the Law of Creation. The Substance and
End of that Law. The Immutability or unchangeableness of it, considered
absolutely; and as it was the Instrument of the Covenant between God and Man.
Arguments to prove it unchangeable; and its Obligation unto the Righteousness
first required, perpetually in force. Therefore not abrogated, not dispensed
withal, not derogated from, but accomplished. This alone by Christ, and the
Imputation of his Righteousness unto us. Page 340. CHAP. XII. Imputation of the
Obedience of Christ, no less necessary then that of his suffering on the same
Ground. Objections against it. 1. That it is impossible. Management hereof by
Socinus. Ground of this Objection, That the Lord Christ was for himself obliged
unto all the Obedience he yielded unto God, and performed it for himself,
answered. The Obedience inquired after, the Obedience of the Person of Christ
the Son of God. In his whole Person, Christ was not under the Law. He designed
the Obedience he performed, for us not for himself. This Actual Obedience not
necessary as a qualification of his Person, unto the discharge of his Office.
The Foundation of this Obedience in his being made Man, and of the Posterity of
Abraham, not for himself, but for us. Right of the Humane Nature unto Glory, by
virtue of Union. Obedience necessary unto the Humane Nature, as Christ in it
was made under the Law. This Obediencs properly for us. Instances of that
nature among Men. Christ obeyed as a public Person; and so not for himself.
Humane Nature of Christ subject unto the Law, as an Eternal Rule of dependence
on God, and subjection to him; not as prescribed unto us whilst we are in this
World, in order unto our future Blessedness, or Reward. Second Objection, that
it is useless, answered. He that is pardoned all his sins, is not thereon
esteemed to have done all that is required of him. Not to be unrighteous,
Negatively; not the same with being righteous, Positively. The Law obliges
both unto punishment and obedience; how, and in what sense. Pardon of Sin gives
no title to Eternal Life. The Righteousness of Christ who is one, imputed unto
many. Arguments proving the Imputation of the Obedience of Christ, unto the
Justification of Life. Page 361. CHAP. XIII. The Difference between the two
Covenants, stated. Arguments from thence. Page 396. CHAP. XIV. All Works
whatever expressly excluded from any interst in our Justification before God.
What intended by the Works of the Law. Not those of the Ceremonial Law only.
Not perfect Works only, as required by the Law of our Creation. Not the outward
Works of the Law performed without a principle of Faith. Not Works of the
Jewish Law. Not Works with a conceit of Merit. Not Works only wrought before
believing in the strength of our own wills. Works excluded absolutely from our
Justification without respect unto a Distinction of a First and Second
Justification. The true sense of the Law in the Apostolical Assertion, that
none are justified by the Works thereof. What the Jews understood by the Law.
Distribution of the Law under the Old Testament. The whole Law a perfect Rule
of all Inherent Moral or Spiritual Obedience. What are the Works of the Law,
declared from the Scripture, and the Argument thereby confirmed. The nature of
Justifying Faith further declared. Page 400. CHAP. XV. Of Faith alone. CHAP.
XVI. Testimonies of Scripture confirming the Doctrine of Justification by the
Imputation of the Rightesness of Christ. Jere. 23.6. Explained and vindicated.
Page 419. CHAP. XVII. Testimonies out of the Evangelists, considered. Design of
our Saviors Sermon on the Mount. The purity and penalty of the Law, vindicated
by him. Arguments from thence. Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The Parable of the
Pharisee and Publican explained and applied to the present Argument.
Testimonies out of the Gospel by John, Chap. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. Page
425. CHAP. XVIII. Testimonies out of the Epistles of Paul, the Apostle. His
design in the Fifth Chapter to the Romans. That Design explained at large and
applied to the present Argument. Chap. 3.24, 25, 26. explained, and the true
sense of the words vindicated. The Causes of Justification enumerated.
Apostolical Inferences from the consideration of them. Chap. 4. Design of the
Disputation of the Apostle therein. Analysis of his Discourse. Ver. 4, 5.
particularly insisted on, their true sense vindicated. What Works excluded from
the Justification of Abraham. Who it is, that works not. In what sense the
ungodly are justified. All Men ungodly antecedently unto their Justification.
Faith alone the means of Justification on our part. Faith it self absolutely
considered, not the Righteousness that is imputed unto us. Proved by sundry
Arguments. Page 431. Chap. 5. Ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Boasting
excluded in our selves, asserted in God. The design and sum of the Apostles
Argument. Objection of Socinus removed. Comparison between the two Adams, and
those that derive from them. Sin entered into the World. What Sin intended.
Death, what it compriseth. What intended by it. The sense of those words in as
much, or in whom all have sinned, cleared and vindicated. The various
oppositions used by the Apostle in this Discourse. Principally between Sin or
the Fall, and the Free Gift. Between the disobedience of the one, and the
obedience of another. Judgment on the one hand, and Justification unto Life on
the other. The whole Context at large, explained, and the Argument for
Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, fully
confirmed. P. 464. Chap. 10. V. 3, 4. explained, and insisted on to the same
purpose. Page 489. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ, how of God made Righteousness unto us.
Answer of Bellarmine unto this Testimony, removed. That of Socinus, disproved.
True sense of the words evinced. P. 497. 2 Cor. 5.21. In what sense Christ knew
no sin. Emphasis in that expression. How he was made Sin for us. By the
Imputation of Sin unto him. Mistakes of some about this expression. Sense of
the Ancients. Exception of Bellarmine unto this Testimony, answered; with other
Reasonings of his to the same purpose. P. 502. The Exceptions of others also
removed. Gal. 2.16. Page 513. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Evidence of
this Testemony. Design of the Apostle from the beginning of the Chapter. Method
of the Apostle in the Declaration of the Grace of God. Grace alone the cause of
Deliverance from a State of Sin. Things to be observed in the Assignation of
the Causes of Spiritual Deliverance. Grace, how magnified by him. Force of the
Argument, and evidence from thence. State of the Case here proposed by the
Apostle. General determination of it. By Grace ye are saved. What it is to be
saved, inquired into. The same as to be justified, but not exclusively. The
causes of our Justification, declared Positively and Negatively. The whole
secured unto the Grace of God by Christ, and our Interest therein through Faith
alone. Works excluded. What Works? Not Works of the Law of Moses. Not Works
antecedent unto believing. Works of true Believers. Not only in opposition to
the Grace of God, but to Faith in us. Argument from those words. Reason whereon
this exclusion of Works is founded. To exclude Boasting on our part. Boasting
wherein it consists. Inseparable from the Interest of Works in Justification.
Danger of it. Confirmation of this Reason obviating an Objection. The Objection
stated. If we be not justified by Works, of what use are they, answered. Page
516. Phil. 3.8, 9. Heads of Argument from this Testimony. Design of the
Context. Righteousness the Foundation of Acceptance with God. A twofold
Righteousness considered by the Apostle. Oppossite unto one another, as unto
the especial end inquired after. Which of these he adhered unto, his own
Righteousness or the Righteousness of God; declared by the Apostle with
vehemence of speech. Reasons of his earnestness herein. The turning point
whereon he left Judaism. The opposition made unto this Doctrine by the Jews.
The weight of the Doctrine and unwillingness of Men to receive it. His own
sense of Sin and Grace. Peculiar expressions used in this place, for the
Reasons mentioned, concerning Christ. Concerning all things that are our own.
The choice to be made on the Case stated, whether we will adhere unto our own
Righteousness, or that of Christ's, which are inconsistent as to the end of
Justification. Argument from this place. Exceptions unto this Testimony, and
Argument from thence, removed. Our Personal Righteousness Inherent, the same
with respect unto the Law and Gospel. External Righteousness only required by
the Law, an impious Imagination. Works* wrought before Faith only rejected. The
Exception removed. Righteousness before Conversion, not intended by the
Apostle. Page 256. CHAP. XIX. Objections against the Doctrine of Justification
by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. Nature of these Objections.
Difficulty in discerning aright the sense of some Men in this Argument.
Justification by Works, the end of all declension from the Righteousness of
Christ. Objections against this Doctrine derived from a supposition thereof
alone. First principal Objection; Imputed Righteousness overthrows the
necessity of an holy Life. This Objection as managed by them of the Church of
Rome, an open calumny. How insisted on by some among our selves. Socinus
fierceness in this charge. His foul dishonesty therein. False charges on Men's
opinions, making way for the rash condemnation of their persons. Iniquity of
such censures. The Objection rightly stated. Sufficiently answered in the
previous Discourses about the nature of Faith, and force of Moral Law. The
nature and necessity of Evangelical Holiness elsewhere pleaded. Particular
answers unto this Objection. All who profess this Doctrine do not exemplify it
in their lives. The most holy Truths have been abused. None by whom this
Doctrine is now denied, exceed them in holiness, by whom it was formerly
professed, and the power of it attested. The contrary Doctrine not successful
in the Reformation of the lives of Men. The best way to determine this
difference. The same Objection managed against the Doctrine of the Apostle in
his own days. Efficacious prejudices against this Doctrine in the minds of Men.
The whole Doctrine of the Apostle liable to be abused. Answers of the Apostle
unto this Objection. He never once attempts to answer it, by declaring the
necessity of Personal Righteousness, or good Works unto Justification before
God. He confines the cogency of Evangelical Motives unto Obedience only unto
Believers. Grounds of Evangelical Holiness asserted by him in compliance with
his Doctrine of Justification. (1.) Divine Ordination. Exceptions unto this
Ground, removed. (2.) Answer of the Apostle vindicated. The Obligation of the
Law unto Obedience. Nature of it, and consistency with Grace. This Answer of
the Apostle vindicated. Heads of other Principles that might be pleaded to the
same purpose. Page 539. CHAP. XX. Seeming Difference, no real contradiction
between the Apostles Paul and James, concerning Justification. This granted by
all. Reasons of the seeming Difference. The best Rule of the Interpretation of
places of Scripture, wherein there is an appearing repugnancy. The Doctrine of
Justification according unto that Rule principally to be learned from the
Writings of Paul. The Reasons of his fullness and accuracy in the teaching of
that Doctrine. The Importance of the Truth; the opposition made unto it; and
abuse of it. The design of the Apostle James. Exceptions of some against the
Writings of S. Paul, scandalous and unreasonable. Not in this matter to be
interpreted by the passage in James insisted on, Chap. 2. That there is no
repugnancy between the Doctrine of the two Apostles demonstrated. Heads and
Grounds of the Demonstration. Their scope, design, and end not the same. That
of Paul; the only case stated and determined by him. The designs of the Apostle
James; the case proposed by him quite of another nature. The occasion of the
case proposed and stated him. No appearance of difference between the Apostles,
because of the several cases they speak unto. Not the same Faith intended by
them. Description of the Faith spoken of by the one, and the other. Bellarmines
Arguments to prove true justifying Faith to be intended by James, answered.
Justification not treated of by the Apostles in the same manner, nor used in
the same sense, nor to the same end. The one treats of Justification, as unto
its nature and causes; the other as unto its signs and evidence, proved by the
instances insisted on. Page 557. How the Scripture was fulfilled, that Abraham
believed in God, and it was counted unto him for Righteousness, when he offered
his Son, on the Altar. Works the same, and of the same kind in both the
Apostles. Observations on the Discourse of James. No Conjunction made by him
between Faith and Works in our Justification, but an opposition. No distinction
of a First and Second Justification in him. Justification ascribed by him
wholly unto Works, in what sense. Does not determine how a sinner may be
justified before God; but how a Professor may evidence himself so to be. The
Context opened from Ver. 14. to the end of the Chapter. Page 569.
Some of the Mistakes that have escaped in the Press may be thus corrected.
Page 10. Line 2. a fine, read other, p. 11. l. 24. none, r. nothing, p. 41. l.
30. r* (...), l. 33. (...), p. 42. l. 22. r. (...), p. 53. l. 6. r. this
Author, l. 25. man, r. men, l. 26. them, p. 64. l. 4. a fine, that it is, p.
71. l. 21. and r. add, p. 72. l. 12. r. For an, p. 172. l. 17. for (...) r.
(...), l* 28. Hithpaol, p. 174. l. 8. (...), p. 175. l. 10. (...), l. 20.
(...), l. 24. (...), l. 28. (...), p. 176. l. 3. (...), l. 8. (...), l. 9.
(...), l. 4. a fine, (...), l. 3. a fine, affects, p. 180. l. 22. vocation that
is intended, p. 199. l. 1. which was, r. whereas, p. 208.23. such, r. Faith, p.
234. l. 2. dele (...), p. 266. l. 8. Curcellaeus, p. 283. l. 23. suffered r.
offered, p. 311. l. 30. of him, p. 362. l. 11. r. as if we, p. 392. l. 20. r.
more color, p. 412. l. 7. (...), p. 436. l. 2. a fine, r. other men, p. 444.
l. 10. proofs, r. process, p. 465. l. 1. (...)

Sundry other literal Mistakes and Mispointings are referred unto the candor of
the Reader; which I choose rather than to trouble many with the rehearsal of
what it may be, few will take notice of.

General Considerations previously necessary unto the Explanation of the
Doctrine of Justification.
THat we may treat of the Doctrine of Justification usefully unto its proper
Ends, which are the Glory of God in Christ, with the peace and furtherance of
the Obedience of Believers, some things are previously to be considered, which
we must have respect unto in the whole process of our Discourse. And among
others that might be insisted on to the same purpose, these that ensue are not
to be omitted.

1. The first Enquiry in this matter in a way of Duty, is after the proper
Relief of the Conscience of a sinner, pressed and perplexed with a sense of the
Guilt of sin. For Justification is the way and means whereby such a person does
obtain acceptance before God, with a Right and Title unto an heavenly
Inheritance. And nothing is pleadable in this cause, but what a man would speak
unto his own Conscience in that state, or unto the Conscience of another, when
he is anxious under that Enquiry. Wherefore, The Person under consideration,
that is, who is to be Justified, is one who in himself is (...) Romans 4.5.
Ungodly; and thereon (...); Chap. 3.19. guilty before God; that is, obnoxious,
subject, liable (...), Chap. 1.32; to the righteous sentential Judgment of God;
that he who commits sin, who is in any way guilty of it, is worthy of Death.
Hereupon such a person finds himself (...) Gal. 3.10; under the curse, and the
wrath of God therein abiding on him, Joh. 3.18, 36. In this condition he is
(...); without plea, without excuse, by any thing in and from himself, for his
own relief; His mouth is stopped, Romans 3.19. For he is in the Judgment of God
declared in the Scripture (...); Gal. 3.22; every way shut up under sin and all
the consequents of it. Many Evils in this condition are men subject unto, which
may be reduced unto those two of our first Parents wherein they were
represented. For first, they thought foolishly to hide themselves from God; and
then more foolishly would have charged him as the cause of their sin. And such
naturally are the thoughts of men under their convictions. But whoever is the
subject of the Justification enquired after, is by various means brought into
his Apprehensions, who cried, Sirs! What must I do to be saved?

2. With respect unto this state and condition of men, or men in this state and
condition, the enquiry is, What that is upon the account whereof, God pardons
all their sins, receives them into his favor, declares or pronounces them
Righteous, and acquitted from all Guilt, removes the Curse, and turns away
all his wrath from them, giving them Right and Title unto a blessed Immortality
or life Eternal. This is that alone wherein the Consciences of sinners in this
estate are concerned. Nor do they enquire after any thing, but what they may
have to oppose unto, or answer the Justice of God in the commands and curse of
the Law, and what they may betake themselves unto, for the obtaining of
Acceptance with him unto life and salvation.

That the Apostle does thus and no otherwise state this whole matter, and in an
Answer unto this Enquiry, declare the nature of Justification and all the
causes of it, in the third and fourth Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans,
and elsewhere, shall be afterward declared and proved. And we shall also
manifest that the Apostle James in the second Chapter of his Epistle, does not
speak unto this Enquiry, nor give an Answer unto it; but it is of Justification
in another sense, and to another purpose whereof he treats. And whereas we
cannot either safely or usefully treat of this Doctrine, but with respect unto
the same Ends for which it is declared, and whereunto it is applied in the
Scripture, we should not by any pretenses be turned aside from attending unto
this Case and its Resolution, in all our Discourses on this subject. For it is
the Direction, Satisfaction and peace of the Consciences of men, and not the
curiosity of Notions or subtilty of Disputations, which it is our Duty to
design. And therefore I shall as much as possibly I may, avoid all those
Philosophical Terms and Distinctions wherewith this Evangelical Doctrine has
been perplexed rather than illustrated. For more weight is to be put on the
steady Guidance of the Mind and Conscience of one Believer really exercised
about the Foundation of his peace and acceptance with God, then on the
confutation of ten wrangling Disputers.

3. Now the Enquiry on what account or for what Cause and Reason a man may be
so acquitted or discharged of sin, and accepted with God as before declared,
does necessarily issue in this; Whether it be any thing in our selves, as our
Faith, and Repentance, the Renovation of our Natures, inherent habits of Grace,
and actual works of Righteousness which we have done, or may do; or whether it
be the Obedience, Righteousness, Satisfaction and Merit of the Son of God our
Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, imputed unto us. One of these it must be,
namely, something that is our own, which, whatever may be the Influence of the
Grace of God into it, or causality of it, because wrought in and by us, is
inherently our own in a proper sense; or something, which being not our own,
not inherent in us, not wrought by us, is yet imputed unto us, for the pardon
of our sins, and the Acceptance of our Persons as righteous; or the making of
us Righteous in the sight of God. Neither are these things capable of mixture
or composition, Romans 11.6. Which of these it is the Duty, Wisdom and safety of
a convinced sinner to rely upon and trust unto in his Appearance before God, is
the sum of our present Enquiry.

4. The way whereby sinners do or ought to betake themselves unto this Relief,
on supposition that it is the Righteousness of Christ, and how they come to be
partakers of, or interested in that which is not inherently their own, unto as
good Benefit and as much Advantage as if it were their own, is of a distinct
consideration. And as this also is clearly determined in the Scripture, so it
is acknowledged in the Experience of all them that do truly believe. Neither
are we in this matter much to regard the senses or arguings of men, who were
never thoroughly convinced of sin, nor have ever in their own persons fled for
Refuge unto the Hope set before them.

5. These things I say are always to be attended unto, in our whole
Disquisition into the nature of Evangelical Justification; For without a
constant respect unto them, we shall quickly wander into curious and perplexed
Questions, wherein the Consciences of guilty Sinners are not concerned; and
which therefore really belong not unto the substance or truth of this Doctrine,
nor are to be immixed therewith. It is alone the Relief of those who are in
themselves (...), guilty before, or obnoxious and liable to the Judgment of
God, that we enquire after. That this is not any thing in or of themselves, nor
can so be; that it is a Provision without them, made in infinite Wisdom and
Grace by the mediation of Christ, his Obedience and Death therein, is secured
in the Scripture against all contradiction: And it is the fundamental Principle
of the Gospel, Math. 11.28.

6. It is confessed that many things for the Declaration of the Truth and the
order of the Dispensation of Gods Grace herein, are necessarily to be insisted
on; such are the nature of Justifying Faith, the place and use of it in
Justification, the Causes of the new Covenant, the true notion of the Mediation
and Suretiship of Christ, and the like, which shall all of them be enquired
into. But beyond what tends directly unto the Guidance of the Minds, and
satisfaction of the Souls of Men, who seek after a stable and abiding
foundation of Acceptance with God, we are not easily to be drawn, unless we are
free to lose the Benefit and Comfort of this most important Evangelical Truth,
in needless and unprofitable contentions. And amongst many other miscarriages
which men are subject unto whilst they are conversant about these things, this
in an especial manner is to be avoided.

1. For the Doctrine of Justification is directive of Christian Practice, and
in no other Evangelical Truth is the whole of our Obedience more concerned; For
the Foundation, Reasons and Motives of all our Duty toward God are contained
therein: Wherefore in order unto the due improvement of them, ought it to be
taught and not otherwise. That which alone we aim (or ought so to do) to learn
in it and by it, is how we may get and maintain peace with God, and so to live
unto him, as to be accepted with him in what we do. To satisfy the Minds and
Consciences of men in these things, is this Doctrine to be taught. Wherefore to
carry it out of the understandings of ordinary Christians by speculative
notions and distinctions is disserviceable unto the Faith of the Church. Yea
the mixing of Evangelical Revelations with Philosophical Notions has been in
sundry Ages the Poison of Religion. Pretense of accuracy and artificial skill
in Teaching, is that which gives countenance unto such a way of handling
sacred things. But the Spiritual Amplitude of Divine Truths is restrained
hereby, whilst low mean Philosophical senses are imposed on them. And not only
so, but endless Divisions and Contentions are occasioned and perpetuated. Hence
when any Difference in Religion is, in the pursuit of Controversies about it,
brought into the field of Metaphysical Respects and Philosophical terms whereof
there is (...), sufficient provision for the supply of the Combatants on both
sides, the truth for the most part, as unto any concernment of the souls of men
therein, is utterly lost, and buried in the rubbish of senseless and
unprofitable words. And thus in particular, those who seem to be well enough
agreed in the whole Doctrine of Justification, so far as the Scripture goes
before them, and the Experience of Believers keeps them company, when once they
engage into their Philosophical Definitions and Distinctions, are at such an
irreconcilable variance among themselves, as if they were agreed on no one
thing that does concern it. For as men have various apprehensions in coining
such Definitions as may be defensible against Objections, which most men aim at
therein: So no Proposition can be so plain (at least in materia probabili) but
that a man ordinarily versed in Paedagogical Terms and Metaphysical Notions,
may multiply Distinctions on every word of it.

8. Hence there has been a pretense and appearance of twenty several Opinions
among Protestants about Justification, as Bellarmine and Vasquez, and others of
the Papists charge it against them out of Osiander, when the Faith of them all
was one and the same, Bellar. lib. 5. cap. 1. Vasq. in 1.2. Quaest. 113. disp.
202. whereof we shall speak elsewhere. When men are once advanced into that
field of Disputation, which is all overgrown with thorns of subtilties,
perplexed notions, and futilous terms of Art, they consider principally how
they may entangle others in it, scarce at all how they may get out of it
themselves. And in this posture they oftentimes utterly forget the business
which they are about, especially in this matter of Justification; namely how a
guilty Sinner may come to obtain Favor and Acceptance with God. And not only
so, but I doubt they oftentimes dispute themselves beyond what they can well
abide by, when they return home unto a sedate meditation of the state of things
between God and their own souls. And I cannot much value their notions and
sentiments of this matter, who object and answer themselves out of a sense of
their own Appearance before God, much less of theirs who evidence an open
inconformity unto the Grace and truth of this Doctrine in their hearts and
lives.

9. Wherefore we do but trouble the faith of Christians and the peace of the
true Church of God, whilst we dispute about Expressions, Terms and Notions,
when the substance of the Doctrine intended, may be declared and believed,
without the knowledge, understanding, or use of any of them. Such are all those
in whose subtle management the captious Art of wrangling does principally
consist. A diligent Attendance unto the Revelation made hereof in the
Scripture, and an examination of our own experience thereby, is the Sum of what
is required of us for the right understanding of the truth herein. And every
true Believer who is taught of God, knows how to put his whole trust in Christ
alone, and the Grace of God by him, for Mercy, Righteousness and Glory, and not
at all concern himself with those loads of thorns and briars, which under the
names of Definitions, Distinctions, accurate Notions, in a number of Exotic,
Paedagogical and Philosophical terms, some pretend to accommodate them withal.

10. The Holy Ghost in expressing the most eminent Acts in our Justification,
especially as unto our Believing, or the acting of that faith whereby we are
justified, is pleased to make use of many Metaphorical Expressions. For any to
use them now in the same way, and to the same purpose, is esteemed rude,
undisciplinary, and even ridiculous, but on what Grounds? He that shall deny,
that there is more spiritual sense and experience conveyed by them into the
hearts and minds of Believers, (which is the life and soul of teaching things
practical) than in the most accurate Philosophical expressions, is himself
really ignorant of the whole Truth in this matter. The Propriety of such
Expressions belongs, and is confined unto natural science; but spiritual Truths
are to be taught not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. God is wiser
then man; and the Holy Ghost knows better what are the most expedient ways for
the Illumination of our minds with that knowledge of Evangelical Truths, which
it is our Duty to have and attain, then the wisest of us all. And other
knowledge of, or skill in these things, then what is required of us in a way of
Duty, is not to be valued.

It is therefore to no purpose to handle the mysteries of the Gospel, as if
Holcot and Bricot, Thomas and Gabriel, with all the Sententiarists, Summists,
and Quodlibetarians of the old Roman Peripatetical School, were to be raked out
of their Graves to be our guides. Especially will they be of no use unto us, in
this Doctrine of Justification. For whereas they pertinaciously adhered unto
the Philosophy of Aristotle, who knew nothing of any Righteousness, but what is
an habit inherent in our selves, and the Acts of it, they wrested the whole
Doctrine of Justification unto a compliance therewithal. So Pighius himself
complained of them, Controv. 2. Dissimulare non possumus, hanc vel primam
doctrinae Christianae partem (de Justificatione) obscuratam magis quam
illustratam a scholasticis, spinosis plerisque quaestionibus, and
definitionibus, secundum quas nonnulli magno supercilio primam in omnibus
autoritatem arrogantes, etc.

Secondly, A due consideration of him with whom in this matter we have to do,
and that immediately, is necessary unto a right stating of our thoughts about
it. The Scripture expresses it emphatically, that it is God that justifies,
Romans 8. 33. And he assumes it unto himself as his Prerogative, to do what
belongs thereunto. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25. And it is hard in my
Apprehension, to suggest unto him, any other reason or consideration of the
pardon of our sins; seeing he has taken it on him to do it for his own sake,
that is, for the Lords sake, Dan. 9.17. in whom all the seed of Israel are
justified, Isa. 45.25. In his sight, before his Tribunal it is, that men are
justified or condemned, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant;
for in THY SIGHT shall no man living be justified. And the whole work of
Justification, with all that belongs thereunto, is represented after the
manner of a Juridical proceeding before Gods Tribunal, as we shall see
afterward. Therefore says the Apostle, by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh
be justified in his sight; Romans 3.20. However any may be justified in the sight
of Men or Angels by their own Obedience or Deeds of the Law, yet in His Sight
none can be so.

Necessary it is unto any man who is to come unto a Trial, in the sentence
whereof he is greatly concerned, duly to consider the Judge before whom he is
to appear, and by whom his cause is finally to be determined. And if we manage
our Disputes about Justification without a continual regard unto Him, by whom
we must be cast or acquitted, we shall not rightly apprehend what our Plea
ought to be. Wherefore the Greatness, the Majesty, the Holiness, and Sovereign
Authority of God, are always to be present with us in a due sense of them, when
we enquire how we may be justified before him. Yet is it hard to discern how
the minds of some men are influenced by the consideration of these things, in
their fierce contests for the Interest of their own works in their
Justification; precibus aut precio ut in aliqua part haereant. But the
Scripture does represent unto us what thoughts of him, and of themselves, not
only Sinners, but Saints also, have had, and cannot but have upon near
Discoveries and effectual Conceptions of God and his Greatness. Thoughts hereof
ensuing on a sense of the guilt of sin, filled our first Parents with fear and
shame, and put them on that foolish attempt of hiding themselves from him. Nor
is the wisdom of their posterity one jot better under their Convictions,
without a discovery of the Promise. That alone makes sinners wise, which
tenders them relief. At present, the Generality of men are secure, and do not
much question but that they shall come off well enough one way or other in the
Trial they are to undergo. And as such persons are altogether indifferent what
Doctrine concerning Justification is taught and received; so for the most part
for themselves, they incline unto that Declaration of it which best suits*
their own Reason, as influenced with self-conceit, and corrupt Affections. The
sum hereof is, that what they cannot do themselves, what is wanting that they
may be saved, be it more or less, shall one way or other be made up by Christ,
either the use or the abuse of which persuasion is the greatest fountain of sin
in the world, next unto the Depravation of our nature. And whatever be, or may
be pretended unto the contrary, Persons not convinced of sin, not humbled for
it, are in all their Ratiocinations about spiritual things, under the conduct
of Principles so vitiated and corrupted. See Mat. 18.3, 4. But when God is
pleased by any means to manifest his Glory unto sinners, all their presidences
and contrivances do issue in dreadful horror and distress. An account of their
Temper is given us Isa. 33.14. The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
among us shall dwell with Everlasting burnings? Nor is it thus only with some
peculiar sort of sinners. The same will be the Thoughts of all guilty persons
at some time or another. For those who through sensuality, security, or
superstition, do hide themselves from the vexation of them in this world, will
not fail to meet with them when their Terror shall be increased, and become
remediless. Our God is a consuming fire; and men will one day find, how vain it
is to set their Briars and Thorns against him in battle array. And we may see
what extravagant contrivances convinced sinners will put themselves upon, under
any real view of the Majesty and Holiness of God; Micah 6.6, 7. Wherewith
(says one of them) shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
high God? shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year
old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my Soul. Neither shall I ever think them meet to be
contended withal about the Doctrine of Justification, who take no notice of
these things, but rather despise them.

This is the proper effect of the Conviction of sin, strengthened and sharpened
with the consideration of the Terror of the Lord, who is to judge concerning
it. And this is that which in the Papacy meeting with an Ignorance of the
Righteousness of God, has produced innumerable superstitious Inventions for
the appeasing of the Consciences of men, who by any means fall under the
Disquietments of such Convictions. For they quickly see that none of the
Obedience which God requires of them, as it is performed by them, will
justify them before this high and holy God. Wherefore they seek for shelter in
contrivances about things that he has not commanded, to try if they can put a
cheat upon their Consciences, and find relief in Diversions.

Nor is it thus only with profligate sinners upon their Convictions; but the
best of men, when they have had near and efficacious Representations of the
Greatness, Holiness, and Glory of God, have been cast into the deepest
self-abasement, and most serious Renunciations of all trust or confidence in
themselves. So the Prophet Isaiah upon his vision of the Glory of the Holy One,
cried out, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, chap.
6.5. nor was he relieved but by an Evidence of the free pardon of sin, ver. 7.
So Holy Job in all his contests with his Friends who charged him with
Hypocrisy, and his being a sinner guilty in a peculiar manner above other men,
with assured confidence and perseverance therein justified his sincerity, his
Faith and Trust in God, against their whole charge and every parcel of it. And
this he does with such a full satisfaction of his own Integrity, as that not
only he insists at large on his vindication, but frequently appeals unto God
himself, as unto the Truth of his Plea. For he directly pursues that counsel
with great Assurance which the Apostle James so long after gives unto all
Believers, nor is the Doctrine of that Apostle more eminently exemplified in
any one instance throughout the whole Scripture then in him. For he shows his
Faith by his works, and pleads his Justification thereby. As Job Justified
himself, and was Justified by his works, so we allow it the Duty of every
Believer to be. His plea for Justification by works, in the sense wherein it is
so, was the most noble that ever was in the world, nor was ever any
controversy managed upon a greater occasion.

At length this Job is called into the immediate presence of God, to plead his
own cause, not now as stated between him and his Friends, whether he were an
Hypocrite or no* or whether his Faith or Trust in God was sincere, but as it
was stated between God and him, wherein he seemed to have made some undue
Assumptions on his own behalf. The Question was now reduced unto this; on what
Grounds he might or could be justified in the sight of God? To prepare his mind
unto a right Judgment in this case, God manifests his Glory unto him, and
instructs him in the Greatness of His Majesty and Power. And this he does by a
multiplication of Instances, because under our Temptations we are very slow in
admitting right conceptions of God. Here the Holy man quickly acknowledged,
that the state of the case was utterly altered. All his former pleas of Faith,
Hope, and Trust in God, of sincerity in Obedience, which with so much
earnestness he before insisted on, are now quite laid aside. He saw well enough
that they were not pleadable at the Tribunal before which he now appeared, so
that God should enter into Judgment with him thereon, with respect unto his
Justification. Wherefore in the deepest self-abasement and abhorrency, he
betakes himself unto Sovereign Grace and Mercy. For then Job answered the Lord
and said, behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee, I will lay mine hand upon
my mouth; once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will
proceed no farther; Job 40.3, 4, 5, And again, Hear I beseech thee and I will
speak, I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me; I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes, chap. 42.4, 5, 6. Let any men place themselves in
the Condition wherein now Job was, in the immediate presence of God; Let them
attend unto what he really speaks unto them in his word, namely, what they will
answer unto the Charge that he has against them, and what will be their best
plea before his Tribunal, that they may be Justified. I do not believe that any
man living has more encouraging Grounds to plead for an interest in his own
Faith and Obedience in his Justification before God, then Job had; although I
suppose he had not so much skill to manage a plea to that purpose with
Scholastic notions and distinctions as the Jesuits have. But however, we may
be harnessed with subtle Arguments and Solutions, I fear it will not be safe
for us to adventure farther upon God then he durst to do.

There was of old a Direction for the visitation of the Sick, composed as they
say by Anselm, and published by Casparus Vlenhergius, which expresses a better
sense of these things then some seem to be convinced of. Credisne te non posse
salvari nisi per mortem Christi? Respondet infirmus, Etiam; tum dicit illi; Age
Ergo dum superest in te anima, in hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue; in
nulla alia re fiduciam habe, huic morti te totum commit, hac sola te totum
contege, totum immisce te in hac morte, in hac morte totum te involve. Et si
Dominus te voluerit judicare, Dic, Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi
objicio inter me and tuum Judicium aliter tecum non contendo. Et si tibi
dixerit quia peccator es, dic, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi pono inter me
and peccata mea. Si dixerit tibi quod meruisti damnationem; dic, Domine, mortem
Domini nostri Jesu Christi obtendo inter te and mala merita mea, ipsiusque
merita offero pro merito quod ego debuissem habere nec habeo; si dixerit quod
tibi est iratus, dic Domine, mortem Domini Jesu Christi oppono inter me and
iram tuam. That is, Do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by the
death of Christ? The sick man answers, yes; then let it be said unto him; Go
to then, and whilst thy Soul abides in thee, put all thy confidence in this
death alone, place thy trust in no other thing, commit thy self wholly to this
Death, cover thy self wholly with this alone, cast thy self wholly on this
Death, wrap thy self wholly in this Death. And if God would judge thee, say,
Lord, I place the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy judgment;
and otherwise I will not contend, or enter into Judgment with thee. And if he
shall say unto thee, that thou art a sinner, say, I place the Death of our Lord
Jesus Christ between me and my sins. If he shall say unto thee, that thou have
deserved damnation; say, Lord, I put the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ between
thee and all my sins; and I offer his merits for my own which I should have,
and have not. If he say that he is angry with thee, say, Lord, I place the
Death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy Anger. Those who gave these
Directions, seem to have been sensible of what it is to appear before the
Tribunal of God; and how unsafe it will be for us there to insist on any thing
in our selves. Hence are the words of the same Anselm in his Meditations.
Conscientia mea meruit damnationem, and penitentia mea non sufficit ad
satisfactionem, sed certum est quod misericordia tua superat omnem offensionem.
My Conscience has deserved damnation, and my Repentance is not sufficient for
satisfaction, but most certain it is, that thy mercy abounds above all
offense. And this seems to me a better Direction then those more lately given
by some of the Roman Church. Such is the prayer suggested unto a sick man, by
Johan. Polandus lib. Methodus in adjuvandis morientibus. Domine Jesu, conjunge,
obsecro, obsequium meum cum omnibus quae tu egisti, and passus es ex tam
perfecta Charitate and Obedientia. Et cum divitiis satisfactionum and meritorum
Dilectionis, Patri aeterno illud offerre digneris. Or that of a greater Author,
Antidot. Animae, fol. 17. Tu hinc o rosea Martyrum turba offer pro me, nunc and
in hora mortis meae, merita fidelitatum, constantiae and pretiosi sanguinis*
cum sanguine Agni immaculati, pro omnium salute effust. Hierom long before
Anselm, spoke to the same purpose. Cum dies Judicij aut dormitionis advenerit,
omnes manus dissolventur; quibus dicitur in alio loco confortamini manus
dissolutae; dissolventur auntem manus quia nullum opus dignum Dei justitia
reperiatur, and non justificabitur in conspectu ejus omnis vivens, unde
Propheta dicit in Psalmo, si iniquitates attendas Domine, quis sustinebit, lib.
6. in Isa. in cap. 13. v. 6, 7. When the day of Judgment, or of Death, shall
come, all hands will be dissolved (that is, faint or fall down) unto which it
is said in another place, be strengthened ye hands that hang down. But all
hands shall be melted down, (that is, all men's strength and confidence shall
fail them) because no works shall be found which can answer the Righteousness
of God; for no flesh shall be justified in his sight. Whence the Prophet says
in the Psalm, If thou Lord should mark iniquity, who should stand? And
Ambrose to the same purpose, Nemo ergo sibi arroget, nemo de meritis glorietur,
nemo de potestate se jactet, omnes speremus per Dominum Jesum misericordiam
invenire, quoniam omnes ante Tribunal ejus stabimus, de illo veniam, de illo
indulgentiam postulabo, quaenam spes alia peccatoribus, in Psalm. 119. Resh. Let
no man arrogate any thing unto himself, let no man glory in his own merits or
good deeds, let no man boast of his power, let us all hope to find mercy by
Lord Jesus, for we shall all stand before his Judgment Seat. Of him will I beg
pardon, of him will I desire Indulgence, what other hope is there for sinners?

Wherefore if men will be turned off from a continual regard unto the
Greatness, Holiness, and Majesty of God, by their Inventions in the Heat of
Disputation, if they do forget a Reverential Consideration of what will become
them, and what they may betake themselves unto, when they stand before his
Tribunal, they may engage into such apprehensions, as they dare not abide by in
their own personal Trial. For how shall man be just with God? Hence it has
been observed, that the Schoolmen themselves in their Meditations and
Devotional writings, wherein they had immediate thoughts of God with whom they
had to do, did speak quite another Language as to Justification before God,
then they do in their wrangling Philosophical fiery Disputes about it. And I
had rather learn what some men really judge about their own Justification from
their prayers, then their writings. Nor do I remember, that I did ever hear any
good man in his prayers, use any expressions about Justification, pardon of
sin, and Righteousness before God, wherein any plea from any thing in our
selves was introduced or made use of. The Prayer of Daniel has in this matter
been the substance of their Supplications. O Lord! Righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of faces; we do not present our Supplications
before thee for our own Righteousness, but for thy great mercies, O Lord hear,
O Lord forgive, for thine own sake O my God, Dan. 9.7, 18, 19. Or that of the
Psalmist, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2. Or, If thou Lord mark Iniquity,
Lord who shall stand; but there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared, Psalm. 130. 2, 3, 4. On which words, the Exposition of Austin is
remarkable, speaking of David, and applying it unto himself. Ecce clamat sub
molibus iniquitatum suarum. Circumspexit se, circumspexit vitam suam, vidit
illam undique flagitiis coopertam, quacunque respexit, nihil in se boni
invenit: Et cum tanta and tam multa peccata undique videret, tanquam
expavescens, exclamavit, si iniquitates observaris Domine, quis sustinebit?
vidit enim prope totam vitam humanam circumlatrari peccatis; accusari omnes
conscientias cogitationibus suis, non inveniri Cor Castum praesumens de
justitia, quod quia inveniri non potest, praesumat ergo omnium Cor de
misericordia Domini Dei sui, and dicat Deo, si iniquitates observaris Domine,
Domine quis sustinebit? Quae autem est spes? quoniam apud te propitiatio est.
And whereas we may and ought to represent unto God in our Supplications our
Faith, or what it is that we believe herein, I much question, whether some men
can find in their hearts to pray over and plead before him, all the Arguments
and Distinctions they make use of to prove the interest of our Works and
Obedience in our Justification before him, or enter into Judgment with him
upon the conclusions which they make from them. Nor will many be satisfied to
make use of that Prayer which Pelagius taught the Widow, as it was objected to
him in the Diaspolitan Synod. Tu nosti Domine quam sanctae, quam innocents,
quam purae ab omni fraud and rapina quas ad te expando manus; quam justa, quam
immaculata labia and ab omni mendacio libera, quibus tibi ut mihi miserearis
preces fundo. Thou know, O Lord, how holy, how innocent, how pure from all
deceit and rapine are the hands which I stretch forth unto thee; how just, how
unspotted with evil, how free from lying are those lips wherewith I pour forth
prayers unto thee, that thou would have mercy on me. And yet although he
taught her so to plead her own purity, innocence and righteousness before God,
yet he does it not, as those whereon she might be absolutely justified, but
only as the condition of her obtaining mercy. Nor have I observed that any
public Liturgies (the Mass Book only excepted, wherein there is a frequent
recourse unto the merits and intercession of Saints) do guide men in their
prayers before God to plead any thing for their acceptance with him, or as the
means or condition thereof, but Grace, Mercy, the Righteousness and Blood of
Christ alone.

Wherefore I cannot but judge it best, (others may think of it as they please)
for those who would teach or learn the Doctrine of Justification in a due
manner, to place their Consciences in the presence of God, and their Persons
before his Tribunal, and then upon a due consideration of his Greatness, Power,
Majesty, Righteousness, Holiness, of the terror of his Glory, and Sovereign
Authority, to enquire what the Scripture, and a sense of their own Condition
directs them unto as their Relief and Refuge, and what Plea it becomes them to
make for themselves. Secret thoughts of God and our selves, retired
meditations, the conduct of the spirit in humble supplications, Deathbed
preparations for an immediate appearance before God, Faith and Love in exercise
on Christ, speak other things for the most part, then many contend for.

3. A clear apprehension and due sense of the Greatness of our Apostasy from
God, of the Depravation of our Natures thereby, of the Power and Guilt of Sin,
of the Holiness and Severity of the Law, are necessary unto a right
apprehension of the Doctrine of Justification. Therefore unto the Declaration
of it does the Apostle premise a large Discourse thoroughly to convince the
minds of all that seek to be justified, with a sense of these things, Romans 1.2,
3. The Rules which he has given us, the Method which he prescribes, and the
Ends which he designeth, are those which we shall choose to follow. And, He
lays it down in general, That the Righteoussness of God is revealed from
Faith to Faith and that the Just shall live by Faith; chap. 1.17. But he
declares not in particular the causes, nature, and way of our Justification,
until he has fully evinced that all men are shut up under this state of sin,
and manifested how deplorable their Condition is thereby. And in the Ignorance
of these things, in the denying or palliating of them, lies the foundation of
all mis-belief about the Grace of God. Pelagianism in its first Root, and all
its present Branches, is resolved thereinto. For not apprehending the dread of
our Original Apostasy from God, nor the consequents of it in the universal
Depravation of our Nature, they disown any necessity either of the Satisfaction
of Christ, or the Efficacy of Divine Grace for our Recovery or Restoration. So
upon the matter the principal Ends of the Mission both of the Son of God, and
of the Holy Spirit, are renounced; which issues in the denial of the Deity of
the one and the Personality of the other. The Fall which we had being not
great, and the Disease contracted thereby being easily curable, and there being
little or no evil in these things which are now unavoidable unto our nature, it
is no great matter to be freed or justified from all, by a mere act of Favor
on our own Endeavors; nor is the Efficacious Grace of God any way needful unto
our Sanctification and Obedience, as these men suppose.

Where these or the like conceits are admitted, and the minds of men by them
kept off from a due apprehension of the State and Guilt of sin, and their
Consciences from being affected with the terror of the Lord and curse of the
Law thereon; Justification is a notion to be dealt withal pleasantly or
subtly as men see occasion. And hence arise the Differences about it at
present, I mean those which are really such, and not merely the different ways
whereby Learned men express their thoughts and apprehensions concerning it.

By some the Imputation of the actual Apostasy and Transgression of Adam the
head of our nature, whereby his sin became the sin of the world, is utterly
denied. Hereby both the ground the Apostle proceeds on, in evincing the
necessity of our Justification, or our being made Righteous by the Obedience of
another, and all the Arguments brought in the Confirmation of the Doctrine of
it, in the fifth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans are evaded and
overthrown. Socinus de Servator. par. 4. cap. 6. confesses that place to give
great countenance unto the Doctrine of Justification by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ. And therefore he sets himself to oppose with sundry
Artifices the Imputation of the sin of Adam unto his natural posterity. For he
perceived well enough that upon the Admission thereof, the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto his spiritual seed, would unavoidably follow
according unto the Tenor of the Apostles Discourse.

Some deny the Depravation and Corruption of our Nature which ensued on our
Apostasy from God, and the loss of his Image. Or if they do not absolutely
deny it, yet they so extenuate it as to render it a matter of no great concern
unto us. Some Disease and Distemper of the Soul they will acknowledge, arising
from the disorder of our Affections, whereby we are apt to receive in such
vicious habits and customs, as are in practice in the world. And as the Guilt
hereof is not much, so the danger of it is not great. And as for any spiritual
filth or stain of our nature that is in it, it is clear washed away from all by
Baptism. That Deformity of Soul which came upon us in the loss of the Image of
God, wherein the Beauty and Harmony of all our faculties in all their Actings
in order unto their utmost End, did consist; That Enmity unto God even in the
mind which ensued thereon that Darkness which our Understandings were clouded
yea blinded withal; the Spiritual Death which passed on the whole Soul, and
total Alienation from the life of God; that Impotency unto Good, that
Inclination unto Evil, that Deceitfulness of sin, that Power and Efficacy of
corrupt Lusts, which the Scripture and Experience so fully charge on the state
of lost Nature, are rejected as empty Notions or Fables. No wonder if such
Persons look upon Imputed Righteousness as the shadow of a Dream, who esteem
those things which evidence its necessity, to be but fond imaginations. And
small hope is there to bring such men to value the Righteousness of Christ, as
imputed to them, who are so unacquainted with their own unrighteousness
inherent in them. Until men know themselves better, they will care very little
to know Christ at all.

Against such as these the Doctrine of Justification may be defended, as we are
obliged to contend for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints, and as the
mouths of Gainsayers are to be stopped. But to endeavor their satisfaction in
it, whilst they are under the power of such apprehensions is a vain Attempt. As
our Savior said unto them unto whom he had declared the necessity of
Regeneration; if I have told you Earthly things and you believe not, how shall
ye believe if I tell you heavenly things? so may we say, if men will not
believe those things, whereof it would be mavelous, but that the Reason of it
is known, that they have not an undeniable Evidence and Experience in
themselves, how can they believe those Heavenly mysteries which respect a
supposition of that within themselves, which they will not acknowledge.

Hence some are so far from any concernment in a perfect Righteousness to be
imputed unto them, as that they boast of a perfection in themselves. So did the
Pelagians of old, glory of a sinless perfection in the sight of God, even when
they were convinced of sinful miscarriages in the sight of men, as they are
charged by Hierom, lib. 2. Dialog. and by Austin. lib. 2. contra Julian. cap.
8. Such persons are not Subjecta capacia auditionis Evangelicae. Whilst men
have no sense in their own Hearts and Consciences of the spiritual disorder of
their Souls, of the secret continual actings of sin with deceit and violence,
obstructing all that is good, promoting all that is evil, defiling all that is
done by them through the lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit as contrary
unto it, though no outward perpetration of sin nor actual omission of Duty do
ensue thereon; who are not engaged in a constant watchful conflict against the
first motions of sin, unto whom they are not the greatest burden and sorrow in
this life, causing them to cry out for deliverance from them; who can despise
those who make acknowledgments in their confession unto God, of their sense of
these things, with the Guilt wherewith they are accompanied, will with an
assured confidence reject and contemn what is offered about Justification
through the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. For no man
will be so fond as to be solicitous of a Righteousness that is not his own, who
has at home in a readiness that which is his own, which will serve his turn.
It is therefore the ignorance of these things alone, that can delude men into
an apprehension of their Justification before God by their own personal
Righteousness. For if they were acquainted with them, they would quickly
discern such an imperfection in the best of their Duties, such a frequency of
sinful irregularities in their Minds, and disorders in their Affections, such
an unsuitableness in all that they are and do, from the inward frames of their
Hearts unto all their outward actions, unto the Greatness and Holiness of God,
as would abate their confidence in placing any Trust in their own Righteousness
for their Justification.

By means of these and the like presumptuous conceptions of unenlightened
minds, the Consciences of men are kept off from being affected with a due sense
of sin, and a serious consideration how they may obtain acceptance before God.
Neither the consideration of the Holiness or Terror of the Lord; nor the
severity of the Law as it indispensibly requires a Righteousness in compliance
with its commands; nor the promise of the Gospel declaring and tendering a
Righteousness, the Righteousness of God in answer thereunto; nor the
uncertainty of their own minds upon Trials and Surprizals, as having no stable
ground of Peace to Anchor on; nor the constant secret disquietment of their
Consciences, if not seared or hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; can
prevail with them whose thoughts are prepossessed with such slight conceptions
of the state and guilt of sin, to fly for Refuge unto the only hope that is set
before them, or really and distinctly to comport with the only way of
Deliverance and Salvation.

Wherefore if we would either teach or learn the Doctrine of Justification in a
due manner, a clear apprehension of the Greatness of our Apostasy from God, a
due sense of the Guilt of sin, a deep Experience of its power, all with respect
unto the Holiness and Law of God, are necessary unto us. We have nothing to do
in this matter with men who through the Feavor of Pride have lost the
Understanding of their own miserable condition. For, Natura sic apparet vitiata
ut hoc majoris vitij sit non videre, Austin. The whole need not the Physician
but the sick. Those who are pricked unto the Heart for sin, and cry out what
shall we do to be saved, will understand what we have to say. Against others we
must defend the Truth as God shall enable. And it may be made good by all sorts
of Instances, That as men rise in their notions about the extenuation of sin,
so they fall in their regard unto the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is
no less true also on the other hand, as Unbelief works in men a disesteem of
the Person and Righteousness of Christ, they are cast inevitably to seek for
countenance unto their own Consciences, in the extenuation of sin. So
insensibly are the minds of men diverted from Christ and seduced to place their
confidence in themselves. Some confused respect they have unto him, as a Relief
they know not how nor wherein; but they live in that pretended height of humane
Wisdom, to trust to themselves. So they are instructed to do by the best of the
Philosophers. Vnum bonum est, quod beatae vitae causa and firmamentum est, tibi
fidere. Senec. Epist. 31. Hence also is the internal sanctifying Grace of God
among many equally despised with the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ.
The sum of their Faith, and of their Arguments in the confirmation of it, is
given by the Learned Roman Orator and Philosopher. Virtutem (says he) nemo
unquam Deo acceptam retulit; nimirum recte. Propter virtutem enim jure
laudamur, and in virtute recte gloriamur, quod non contingeret, si donum a Deo,
non a nobis haberemus. Tull. de not. Deor.

4. The opposition that the Scripture makes between Grace and Works in general,
with the Exclusion of the one and the Assertion of the other in our
Justification, deserves a previous consideration. The opposition intended is
not made between Grace and Works or our own Obedience, as unto their Essence,
Nature and Consistency in the order and method of our Salvation but only with
respect unto our Justification. I do not design herein to plead any particular
Testimonies of Scripture, as unto their especial sense or declaration of the
mind of the Holy Ghost in them, which will afterward be with some Diligence
enquired into; but only to take a view which way the Eye of the Scripture
guides our Apprehensions, and what compliance there is in our own Experience
with that Guidance.

The Principal seat of this Doctrine, as will be confessed by all, is in the
Epistles of Paul unto the Romans and Galatians, whereunto that also of the
Hebrews may be added. But in that unto the Romans it is most eminently
declared. For therein is it handled by the Apostle ex professo, at large, and
that both Doctrinally, and in the way of controversy with them by whom the
Truth was opposed. And it is worth our consideration what process he makes
toward the Declaration of it, and what principles he proceeds upon therein.

1. He lays it down as the fundamental maxim which he would proceed upon, or
as a general Thesis including the substance of what he designed to explain and
prove, that, in the Gospel the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith, as it is written the Just shall live by Faith, chap. 1.17. All sorts of
men who had any knowledge of God and themselves were then, as they must be
always, enquiring, and in one Degree or other laboring after Righteousness.
For this they looked on, and that justly, as the only means of an Advantageous
Relation between God and themselves. Neither had the Generality of men any
other thoughts, but that this Righteousness must be their own, inherent in
them, and performed by them, as Romans 10.3. For as this is the Language of a
natural Conscience, and of the Law, and suited unto all Philosophical notions
concerning the nature of Righteousness; so whatever Testimony was given of
another kind in the Law and the Prophets, (as such a Testimony is given unto a
Righteousness of God without the Law, chap. 3.21.) there was a Veil upon it as
to the understanding of all sorts of men. As therefore Righteousness is that
which all men seek after, and cannot but seek after who design or desire
Acceptance with God, so it is in vain to enquire of the Law, of a natural
Conscience, of Philosophical Reason, after any Righteousness but what consists
in inherent Habits and Acts of our own. Neither Law, nor natural Conscience,
nor Reason, do know any other. But in opposition unto this Righteousness of our
own, and the necesssity thereof, testified unto by the Law in its Primitive
constitution, by the natural Light of Conscience, and the apprehension of the
nature of things by Reason, the Apostle declares, that in the Gospel there is
revealed another Righteousness, which is also the Righteousness of another, the
Righteousness of God, and that from Faith to Faith. For not only is the
Righteousness it self revealed aliene from those other Principles, but also the
manner of our Participation of it, or its Communication unto us from Faith to
Faith, (the Faith of God in the Revelation, and our Faith in the Acceptance of
it, being only here concerned) is an eminent Revelation. Righteousness of all
things should rather seem to be from Works unto Works, from the Work of Grace
in us, to the Works of Obedience done by us, as the Papists affirm. No says
the Apostle, it is from Faith to Faith, whereof afterward.

This is the general Thesis the Apostle proposes unto Confirmation, and he
seems therein to exclude from Justification every thing but the Righteousness
of God and the Faith of Believers. And to this purpose he considers all Persons
that did or might pretend unto Righteousness or seek after it, and all ways and
means whereby they hoped to attain unto it, or whereby it might most probably
be obtained, declaring the failing of all persons, and the insufficiency of all
means as unto them, for the obtaining a Righteousness of our own before God.
And as unto Persons.

1. He considers the Gentiles with all their notions of God, their Practice in
Religious Worship, with their Conversation thereon. And from the whole of what
might be observed amongst them, he concludes that they neither were, nor could
be justified before God, but that they were all, and that most deservedly,
obnoxious unto the sentence of Death. And whatever men may discourse concerning
the Justification and Salvation of any, without the Revelation of the
Righteousness of God by the Gospel from Faith to Faith, it is expressly
contradictory to his whole Discourse, chap. 1. from ver. 19. to the End.

2. He considers the Jews who enjoyed the written Law, and the Privileges
wherewith it was accompanied, especially that of Circumcision, which was the
outward Seal of Gods Covenant. And on many Considerations, with many Arguments,
he excludes them also from any possibility of attaining Justification before
God by any of the Privileges they enjoyed, or their own compliance
therewithal, chap. 2. And both sorts he excludes distinctly from this
privilege of Righteousness before God, with this one Argument, That both of
them sinned openly against that which they took for the Rule of their
Righteousness, namely, the Gentiles against the Light of Nature, and the Jews
against the Law, whence it inevitably follows, that none of them could attain
unto the Righteousness of their own Rule. But he proceeds farther unto that
which is common to them all. And,

3. He proves the same against all sorts of Persons whether Jews or Gentiles,
from the consideration of the universal depravation of nature in them all, and
the horrible effects that necessarily ensue thereon in the Hearts and Lives of
men, chap. 3. So evidencing, That as they all were, so it could not fall out
but that all must be shut up under sin, and come short of Righteousness. So
from Persons he proceeds to Things or Means of Righteousness. And,

4. Because the Law was given of God immediately as the whole and only Rule of
our Obedience unto him, and the works of the Law are therefore all that is
required of us, these may be pleaded with some pretense as those whereby we may
be justified. Wherefore in particular he considers the Nature, Use, and End of
the Law, manifesting its utter insufficiency to be a means of our Justification
before God, chap. 3.19, 20.

5. It may be yet objected, That the Law and its works may be thus insufficient
as it is obeyed by Unbelievers in the state of Nature, without the Aids of
Grace administered in the Promise, but with respect unto them who are Regenerate
and do believe, whose Faith and Works are accepted with God, it may be
otherwise. To obviate this Objection, he gives an Instance in two of the most
eminent Believers under the Old Testament, namely, Abraham and David, declaring
that all Works whatever were excluded in and from their Justification, chap. 4.

On these Principles, and by this Gradation he peremptorily concludes, That all
and every one of the Sons of men, as unto any thing that is in themselves or
can be done by them, or be wrought in them, are guilty before God, obnoxious
unto Death, shut up under sin, and have their mouths so stopped, as to be
deprived of all pleas in their own excuse; that they had no Righteousness
wherewith to appear before God, and that all the ways and means whence they
expected it, were insufficient unto that purpose.

Hereon he proceeds with his Enquiry how men may be delivered from this
condition, and come to be justified in the sight of God. And in the Resolution
hereof he makes no mention of any thing in themselves, but only Faith whereby
we receive the Atonement. That whereby we are justified, he says is the
Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Christ Jesus, or that we are
justified freely by Grace through the Redemption that is in him, chap. 3.22,
23, 24, 25. And not content here with this answer unto the enquiry how lost
convinced sinners may come to be justified before God, namely, That it is by
the Righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, by Grace by the blood of
Christ, as he is set forth for a Propitiation; He immediately proceeds unto a
positive exclusion of every thing in and of our selves that might pretend unto
an Interest herein, as that which is inconsistent with the Righteousness of God
as revealed in the Gospel, and witnessed unto by the Law and the Prophets. How
contrary their Scheme of Divinity is unto this Design of the Apostle, and his
management of it, who affirm that before the Law men were justified by
Obedience unto the Light of Nature, and some particular Revelations made unto
them in things of their own especial private concernment; and that after the
giving of the Law they were so by Obedience unto God according to the
Directions thereof, as also that the Heathen might obtain the same benefit in
compliance with the Dictates of Reason, cannot be contradicted by any who have
not a mind to be contentious.

Answerable unto this Declaration of the mind of the Holy Ghost herein by the
Apostle, is the constant Tenor of the Scripture speaking to the same purpose.
The Grace of God, the Promise of Mercy, the free pardon of Sin, the Blood of
Christ, his Obedience and the Righteousness of God in him, rested in and
received by Faith, are every where asserted as the causes and means of our
Justification, in opposition unto any thing in our selves so expressed as it
uses to express the best of our Obedience and the utmost of our personal
Righteousness. Wherever mention is made of the Duties, Obedience, and personal
Righteousness of the best of men with respect unto their Justification, they
are all renounced by them, and they betake themselves unto Sovereign Grace and
Mercy alone. Some places to this purpose may be recounted.

The Foundation of the whole is laid in the first Promise wherein the
Destruction of the Work of the Devil by the suffering of the seed of the woman,
is proposed as the only Relief for sinners, and only means of the Recovery of
the favor of God. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel,
Genesis 3.15. Abraham believed in the Lord, and he counted it unto him for
Righteousness, Genesis 15.6. And Aaron shall lay both his hands on the Head of the
live Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the Children of Israel,
and all their Transgressions in all their sins, putting them on the head of the
Goat; and the Goat shall bear upon him all their Iniquities unto a Land not
inhabited, Lev. 16.21, 22. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will
make mention of thy Righteousness even of thine only, Psalm. 71.16. If thou Lord
should mark Iniquity, O Lord who shall stand? but there is forgiveness with
thee that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.3, 4. Enter not into Judgment with
thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.
Behold he put no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly,
how much less on them that dwell in houses of Clay whose foundation is in the
dust, Job 4.18, 19. Fury is not in me; who would set the Briers and Thorns
against me in battle, I would go through them, I would burn them together. Or
let him take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall
make peace with me, Isa. 27.4, 5. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
Righteousness and strength, in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified and Glory, Isa. 45.24, 25. All we like Sheep have gone astray, we
have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the
Iniquity of us all. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
for he shall bear their Iniquities, Isa. 53.6, 11. For this is his name whereby
he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. But we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. He
shall finish the Transgression and make an End of sin, and make Reconciliation
for Iniquity, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Unto as many
as received him he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name, Joh. 1.12. For as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish but have everlasting life, chap. 3.14, 15. see. ver.
16, 17, 18. Be it known therefore unto you Men and Brethren, that through this
man is preached unto you the forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe
are justified from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses, Acts 13.38, 39. That they may receive forgiveness of sins and
inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith that is in me, chap. 26.18.
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God. To declare at this time his Righteousness, that
he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Where then
is Boasting? it is excluded, by what Law? of Works; nay but by the Law of
Faith. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith without the deeds
of the Law, Romans 3.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. For if Abraham were justified by works,
he has whereof to Glory, but not before God; For what says the Scripture,
Abraham believed God and it was counted unto him for Righteousness; now to him
that works is the Reward, not reckoned of Grace but of Debt. But to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted for Righteousness. Even as David also describes the Blessedness of the
man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are
those whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the
man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin, Romans 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But not
as the offense, so also is the free Gift; for if through the offense of one
many be dead, much more the Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, which is by
one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that
sinned, so is the Gift; for the judgment was by one to Condemnation: but the
free Gift is of many offenses unto Justification. For if by one man's offense
Death reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of Grace, and of
the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore
as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men unto condemnation, even so
by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all men unto Justification
of life. For as by one man's Disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made righteous, chap 5. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
There is therefore no condemnation unto them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. For the Law of the spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death; and what
the Law could not do, in that it is weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.
That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, chap. 8. 1, 2, 3,
4. For Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness unto every one that
believes, chap. 10.4. And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise
Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace,
otherwise Works is no more Works, chap. 11.6. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification
and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law: for by the
Works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16. But that no man is
justified by the Law in the sight of God, is evident. For the just shall live
by Faith, and the Law is not of Faith; but the man that does them shall live in
them. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us, chap. 3.11, 12, 13. For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the Gift of God. Not of Works, lest any man should boast.
For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto Good Works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Yea
doubtless, and I count all things loss for the Excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung that I may win Christ; and be found in him, not having my
own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Who has
saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our Works, but
according unto his own purpose, and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. That being justified by his Grace, we
should be made Heirs according to the hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3.7. He has
once appeared in the End of the World to put away sin, Heb. 9.26, 28. having in
himself purged our sins, chap. 1.3. For by one Offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, chap. 10.14. For the Blood of Jesus Christ the
Son of God cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Wherefore unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God and his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and
ever, Amen. Rev. 1.5, 6.

These are some of the places which at present occur to Remembrance, wherein
the Scripture represents unto us the Grounds, Causes, and Reasons of our
Acceptance with God. The especial import of many of them, and the Evidence of
Truth that is in them will be afterward considered. Here we take only a
general view of them. And everything in and of our selves under any
consideration whatever, seems to be excluded from our Justification before God,
Faith alone excepted whereby we receive his Grace and the Atonement. And on
the other side, the whole of our Acceptance with Him seems to be assigned unto
Grace, Mercy, the Obedience and Blood of Christ; in opposition unto our own
Worth and Righteousness, or our own Works and Obedience. And I cannot but
suppose that the Soul of a convinced sinner, if not prepossessed with
prejudice, will in general not judge amiss whether of these things that are set
in opposition one to the other, he should betake himself unto, that he may be
justified.

But it is replied, these things are not to be understood absolutely and
without Limitations. Sundry Distinctions are necessary, that we may come to
understand the mind of the Holy Ghost and sense of the Scripture in these
Ascriptions unto Grace, and Exclusions of the Law, our own Works and
Righteousness from our Justification. For (1) the Law is either the moral or
the ceremonial Law; the latter indeed is excluded from any place in our
Justification, but not the former. (2) Works required by the Law are either
wrought before Faith, without the Aid of Grace; or after believing, by the help
of the Holy Ghost. The former are excluded from our Justification, but not the
latter. (3) Works of Obedience wrought after Grace received, may be considered
either as sincere only, or absolutely perfect according to what was originally
required in the Covenant of Works. Those of the latter sort are excluded from
any place in our Justification, but not those of the former. (4) There is a
twofold Justification before God in this life; a first and a second, and we
must diligently consider with respect unto whether of these Justifications any
thing is spoken in the Scripture. (5) Justification may be considered either as
to its beginning, or as unto its continuation, and so it has diverse causes
under these diverse respects. (6) Works may be considered either as Meritorious
ex condigno, so as their merit should arise from their own intrinsic worth, or
ex congruo only with respect unto the Covenant and promise of God. Those of the
first sort are excluded at least from the first Justification; the latter may
have place both in the first and second. (7) Moral Causes may be of many sorts;
preparatory, dispository, meritorious, conditionally efficient, or only sine
quibus non. And we must diligently enquire in what sense, under the Notion of
what cause or causes, our Works are excluded from our Justification, and under
what notions they are necessary thereunto. And there is no one of these
Distinctions but it needs many more to explain it, which accordingly are made
use of by Learned men. And so specious a Color may be put on these things,
when warily managed by the Art of Disputation, that very few are able to
discern the Ground of them, or what there is of substance in that which is
pleaded for; and fewer yet, on whether side the Truth does lie. But he who is
really convinced of sin, and being also sensible of what it is to enter into
judgment with the Holy God, enquires for himself and not for others, how he
may come to be accepted with him, will be apt upon the consideration of all
these Distinctions and Sub-distinctions wherewith they are attended, to say to
their Authors, fecistis probe, incertior sum multo, quam dudum. My Enquiry is
how I shall come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? how
shall I escape the wrath to come? what shall I plead in judgment before God,
that I may be absolved, acquitted, justified? where shall I have a
Righteousness that will endure a Trial in his presence? If I should be
harnessed with a thousand of these distinctions, I am afraid they would prove
Thorns and Briars, which he would pass through and consume.

The Enquiry therefore is upon the consideration of the state of the Person to
be justified before mentioned and described, and the proposal of the Reliefs in
our Justification as now expressed; whether it be the wisest and safest course
for such a Person seeking to be justified before God, to betake himself
absolutely, his whole Trust and Confidence, unto Sovereign Grace and the
Mediation of Christ, or to have some reserve for, or to place some confidence
in his own Graces, Duties, Works and Obedience? In putting this great
Difference unto Vmpirage, that we may not be thought to fix on a partial
Arbitrator, we shall refer it to one of our greatest and most learned
Adversaries in this cause. And he positively gives us in his Determination and
Resolution in those known words. In this case; Propter incertitudinem propriae
justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola
misericordia Dei and: benignitate reponere, Bellar. de Justificat. lib. 5. cap.
7. prop. 3. By reason of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and the
danger of vain Glory, it is the safest course to repose our whole Trust in the
mercy and kindness or Grace of God alone.

And this Determination of this important enquiry, he confirms with two
Testimonies of Scripture, as he might have done it with many more. But those
which he thought meet to mention are not impertinent. The first is Dan. 9.18.
We do not present our Supplications before thee for our Righteousness but for
thy great mercies. And the other is that of our Savior, Luke 17.10. When you
have done all these things which are commanded you, say We are unprofitable
Servants. And after he has confirmed his Resolution with sundry Testimonies of
the Fathers, he closes his Discourse with this Dilemma, Either a man has true
merits, or he has not. If he has not, he is perniciously deceived (when he
trusts in any thing but the mercy of God alone) and seduceth himself,
trusting in false merits; If he has them he loses nothing whilst he looks
not to them, but trusts in God alone. So that whether a man have any good works
or no, as to his Justification before God, it is best and safest for him, not
to have any regard unto them, or put any trust in them. And if this be so, he
might have spared all his pains he took in writing his Sophistical Books about
Justification, whose principal Design is to seduce the minds of men into a
contrary opinion. And so, for ought I know, they may spare their labor also
without any disadvantage unto the Church of God, or their own Souls, who so
earnestly contend for some kind of Interest or other, for our own Duties and
Obedience in our Justification before God, seeing it will be found that they
place their own whole Trust and Confidence in the Grace of God by Jesus Christ
alone. For to what purpose do we labor and strive with Endless Disputations,
Arguments and Distinctions to prefer our Duties and Obedience unto some office
in our Justification before God, if when we have done all we find it the safest
course in our own persons to abhor our selves with Job in the presence of God,
to betake our selves unto Sovereign Grace and Mercy with the Publican, and to
place all our confidence in them through the Obedience and Blood of Christ.

So died that great Emperor Charles the fifth, as Thuanus gives the account of
his Novissima. So he reasoned with himself; Se quidem indignum esse qui
propriis meritis regnum caelorum obtineret; Sed Dominum Deum suum qui illud
duplici jure obtineat, and: Patris haereditate, and: Passionis merito, altero
contentum esse, alterum sibi donare; ex cujus dono illud sibi merito vendicet,
hacque fiducia fretus minime confundatur; neque enim oleum misericordiae nisi
in vase fiduciae poni; hanc hominis fiduciam esse a se deficientis and
innitentis domino suo, alioquin propriis meritis fidere, non fidei esse sed
perfidiae; peccata deleri per Dei indulgentiam, ideoque credere nos debere
peccata deleri non posse nisi ab eo eui soli peccavimus, and in quem peccatum
non cadit, per quem solum nobis peecata condonentur; That in himself he was
altogether unworthy to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven by his own Works or Merits,
but that his Lord God who enjoyed it on a double Right or Title, by inheritance
of the Father, and the merit of his own passion, was contented with the one
himself, and freely granted unto him the other; on whose free grant he laid
claim thereunto, and in confidence thereof he should not be confounded; for the
Oil of mercy is poured only into the Vessel of Faith or Trust; that this is the
Trust of a man despairing in himself, and resting in his Lord; otherwise to
trust unto his own Works or Merits, is not Faith but Treachery; that sins are
blotted out by the mercy of God; and therefore we ought to believe that our
sins can be pardoned by him alone against whom alone we have sinned; with whom
there is no sin, and by whom alone sins are forgiven.

This is the Faith of men when they come to dye, and those who are exercised
with Temptations whilst they live. Some are hardened in sin, and endeavor to
leave this World without thoughts of another. Some are stupidly ignorant, who
neither know nor consider what it is to appear in the presence of God, and to
be judged by him. Some are seduced to place their confidence in merits,
pardons, indulgences, and future suffrages for the dead. But such as are
acquainted with God and themselves in any spiritual manner, who take a view of
the time that is past, and approaching Eternity, into which they must enter by
the Judgment seat of God, however they may have thought, talked and disputed
about their own works and Obedience, looking on Christ and his Righteousness
only to make up some small defects in themselves, will come at last unto an
universal Renuntiation of what they have been and are, and betake themselves
unto Christ alone for Righteousness or Salvation. And in the whole ensuing
Discourse I shall as little as is possible immix my self in any curious
Scholastical disputes. This is the substance of what is pleaded for, that men
should renounce all confidence in themselves, and every thing that may give
countenance thereunto; betaking themselves unto the Grace of God by Christ
alone, for Righteousness and Salvation. This God designeth in the Gospel, 1
Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. and herein whatever difficulties we may meet withal in the
Explication of some Propositions and Terms that belong unto the Doctrine of
Justification, about which men have various conceptions, I doubt not of the
internal concurrent suffrage of them who know any thing as they ought of God
and themselves.

Fifthly, There is in the Scripture represented unto us a Commutation between
Christ and Believers, as unto Sin and Righteousness, that is in the imputation
of their sins unto him, and of his Righteousness unto them. In the Improvement
and Application hereof unto our own Souls, no small part of the life and
exercise of Faith does consist.

This was taught the Church of God in offering of the Escape Goat. And Aaron
shall lay his hands on the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the
Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their
Sins, putting them on the head of the Goat; And the Goat shall bear upon him
all their Iniquities, Levit. 16.21, 22. Whether this Goat sent away with this
burden upon him did live, and so was a Type of the life of Christ in his
Resurrection after his Death, or whether he perished in the Wilderness being
cast down the precipice of a Rock by him that conveyed him away as the Jews
suppose; it is generally acknowledged, that what was done to him and with him,
was only a Representation of what was done really in the Person of Jesus
Christ. And Aaron did not only confess the sins of the People over the Goat,
but he also put them all on his head, (...) and he shall give them all to be on
the head of the Goat; in answer whereunto it is said that he bare them all upon
him. This he did by virtue of the divine Institution, wherein was a
ratification of what was done. He did not transfuse sin from one subject into
another, but transferred the Guilt of it from one to another. And to evidence
this Translation of sin from the People unto the Sacrifice in his confession,
he put and fixed both his hands on his head. Thence the Jews say, that all
Israel was made as innocent on the day of Expiation as they were in the day of
Creation. From ver. 30. Wherein they came short of perfection or consummation
thereby the Apostle declares, Heb. 10. But this is the language of every
Expiatory Sacrifice, quod in ejus caput sit; let the Guilt be on him. Hence the
Sacrifice it self was called (...) and (...) Sin and Guilt, Levit.
4.29.7.2.10.17. And therefore where there was an uncertain Murder, and none
could be found that was liable to punishment thereon, that Guilt might not come
upon the Land, nor the Sin be imputed unto the whole People, an Heifer was to
be slain by the Elders of the City that was next unto the place where the
Murder was committed, to take away the Guilt of it, Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. But whereas this was only a moral Representation of the punishment due to
Guilt, and no Sacrifice, the Guilty person being not known; those who slew the
Heifer did not put their hands on him, so to transfer their own guilt to him,
but washed their hands over him, to declare their personal innocence. By these
means as in all other Expiatory Sacrifices, did God instruct the Church in the
transferring of the Guilt of sin, unto him who was to bear all their
Iniquities, with their Discharge and Justification thereby.

So God laid on Christ the Iniquities of us all, that by his Stripes we might
be healed, Isa. 53.5, 6. Our Iniquity was laid on him, and he bare it, ver. 11.
and through his bearing of it, we are freed from it. His Stripes are our
healing, our sin was his, imputed unto him, his merit is ours, imputed unto us.
He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. This is that Commutation I mentioned, He was made
sin for us, we are made the Righteousness of God in him; God not imputing sin
unto us, ver. 19. but imputing Righteousness unto us, does it on this Ground
alone, That he was made sin for us. And if by his being made sin, only his
being made a Sacrifice for sin is intended, it is to the same purpose. For the
formal Reason of any thing being made an Expiatory Sacrifice, was the
Imputation of sin unto it by Divine Institution. The same is expressed by the
same Apostle, Romans 8.3, 4. God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. The sin was made his, he answered for it, and the
Righteousness which God requires by the Law is made ours; The Righteousness of
the Law is fulfilled in us; not by our doing it, but by his. This is that
blessed Change and Commutation wherein alone the Soul of a convinced sinner can
find rest and peace. So he has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us, that the blessing of faithful Abraham might come upon us,
Gal. 3.13, 14. The Curse of the Law contained all that was due to sin; this
belonged unto us. But it was transferred on him; He was made a Curse, whereof
his hanging on a Tree was the sign and token. Hence he is said to bear all our
sins in his own Body upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 1.24. because his hanging on the
Tree was the token of his bearing the Curse. For he that is hanged on the Tree
is the Curse of God, Deuteronomy. 21.23. And in the blessing of Faithful Abraham all
Righteousness and Acceptance with God is included; for Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness.

But because some, who for Reasons best known unto themselves, do take all
occasions to except against my Writings, have in particular raised an
impertinent clamor about somewhat that I formerly delivered to this purpose, I
shall declare the whole of my Judgment herein, in the words of some of those,
whom they can pretend no quarrel against that I know of.

The excellent words of Justin Martyr deserve the first place. (...). Epist. ad
Diognet. He gave his Son a Ransom for us; the Holy for Transgressors; the
Innocent for the nocent; the Just for the unjust; the Incorruptible for the
corrupt; the Immortal for mortals. For what else could hide or cover our sins
but his Righteousness? in whom else could we wicked and ungodly ones be
justified, or esteemed Righteous, but in the Son of God alone? O SWEET
PERMVTATION; or Change! O unsearchable Work or curious Operation! O Blessed
Beneficence exceeding all Expectation! That the Iniquity of many should be hid
in one Just one, and the Righteousness of One should justify many
Transgressors. And Gregory Nysson speaks to the same purpose. (...). Orat. 2.
in Cant. He has transferred unto himself the filth of my sins, and
communicated unto me his purity, and made me partaker of his Beauty. So
Augustine also. Ipse peccatum ut nos justitia, nec nostra sed Dei; nec in nobis
sed in ipso, sicut ipse peccatum non suum sed nostrum, nec in se sed in nobis
constitutum. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 41. He was Sin that we might be
Righteousness, not our own but the Righteousness of God, not in our selves but
in him. As he was Sin not his own but ours; not in himself but in us. The old
Latin Translation rendering those words, Psalm. 22.1. (...) Verba delictorum
meorum; He thus comments on the place. Quomodo ergo dicit delictorum meorum?
nisi quia pro delictis nostris ipse precatur; and delicta nostra, delicta sua
fecit, ut justitiam suam nostram justitiam faceret. How, says he, of my Sins;
because he prays for our Sins; He made our Sins to be his, that he might make
his Righteousness to be ours. (...); O sweet Commutation and Change! And
Chrysostom to the same purpose; on those words of the Apostle, That we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him. (...), (...). in 2 Epist. ad Corinth.
cap. 5. Hom. 11. What word, what speech is this, what mind can comprehend or
express it; For he says he made him who was Righteous to be made a Sinner,
that he might make sinners Righteous; nor yet does he say so neither, but that
which is far more sublime and excellent. For he speaks not of an inclination or
affection, but expresses the quality it self. For he says not, he made him a
sinner, but sin, that we might be made not merely Righteous but Righteousness,
and that the Righteousness of God, when we are justified not by works, ( for if
we should, there must be no spot found in them) but by Grace, whereby all sin
is blotted out. So Bernard also Epist. 190. ad Innocent. Homo qui debuit, homo
qui solvit. Nam si unus, inquit, pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo omnes mortui
sunt; ut videlicet satisfactio unius omnibus imputetur, sicut omnium peccata
unus ille portavit. Nec alter jam inveniatur qui for as fecit, alter qui
satisfecit; quia Caput and Corpus unus est Christus. And many more speak unto
the same purpose. Hence Luther before he engaged in the Work of Reformation, in
an Epistle to one George Spenlein a Monk, was not afraid to write after this
manner; Mi dulcis frater, disce Christum and hunc crucifixum, disce ei cantare,
and de teipso desperans dicere ei; Tu Domine Jesu es justitia mea, ego autem
sum peccatum tuum; tu assumpsisti meum, and dedisti mihi tuum, assumpsisti quod
non eras, and dedisti mihi quod non eram. Ipse suscepit te and peccata tua
fecit sua, and suam justitiam fecit tuam; maledictus qui haec non credit.
Epist. An. 1516. Tom. 1.

If those who show themselves now so quarrelsome almost about every word that
is spoken concerning Christ and his Righteousness, had ever been harrassed in
their Consciences about the Guilt of sin, as this man was, they would think it
no strange matter to speak and write as, he did. Yea some there are who have
lived and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome it self that have given
their Testimony unto this Truth. So speaks Taulerus; Meditat. vitae Christ.
cap. 7. Christus omnia mundi peccata in se recepit, tantumque pro illis ultro
sibi assumpsit dolorem cordis ac si ipse ea perpetrasset. Christ took upon him
all the sins of the World, and willingly underwent that grief of heart for
them, as if he himself had committed them. And again speaking in the person of
Christ. Quandoquidem peccatum Adae multum abire non potest, obsecro te Pater
Coelestis, ut ipsum in me vindices. Ego enim omnia illius peccata in me recipo.
Si haec irae tempestas, propter me orta est, mitte me in mare amarissimae
passionis. Whereas the great Sin of Adam cannot go away, I beseech thee
Heavenly Father punish it in me. For I take all his sins upon my self. If then
this Tempest of Anger be risen for me, cast me into the Sea of my most bitter
passion. See in the Justification of these Expressions, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. The Discourse of Albertus Pighius to this purpose, though often cited and
urged, shall be once again repeated, both for its Worth and Truth, as also to
let some men see, how fondly they have pleased themselves in reflecting on some
Expressions of mine, as though I had been singular in them. His words are,
after others to the same purpose; Quoniam quidem inquit (Apostolus) Deus erat
in Christo, mundum reconcilians sibi, non imputans hominibus sua delicta; Et
deposuit apud nos verbum reconciliationis. In illa ergo justificamur coram Deo,
non in nobis; non nostra sed illius justitia, quae nobis cum illo jam
communicantibus imputatur. Propriae justitiae inopes, extra nos, in illo
docemur justitiam quaerere. Cum, inquit, qui peccatum non noverat, pro nobis
peccatum fecit; hoc est, hostiam peccati expiatricem, ut nos efficeremur
Justitia Dei in ipso, non nostra, sed Dei justitia justi efficimur in Christo,
quo jure? Amicitiae, quae communionem omnium inter amicos facit, juxta vetus
and celebratissimum proverbium; Christo insertis, conglutinatis and unitis and
sua nostra facit, suas divitias nobis communicate, suam justitiam inter Patris
judicium and nostram injustitiam interponit, and sub ea veluti sub umbone ac
clypeo a divina, quam commeruimus, ira nos abscondit, tuetur ac protegit, imo
eandem nobis impertit and nostram facit, qua tecti ornatique audacter and
secure jam divino nos sistamus Tribunali and Judicio: justique non solum
appareamus, sed etiam simus. Quemadmodum enim unius delicto peccatores nos
etiam factos affirmat Apostolus: ita unius Christi justitiam in justificandis
nobis omnibus efficacem esse; Et sicut per inobedientiam unius hominis
peccatores constituti sunt multi, sic per Obedientiam unius justi (inquit)
constituentur multi. Haec est Christi justitia, ejus Obedientia, qua voluntatem
Patris sui perfecit in omnibus; sicut contra nostra injustitia, est nostra
inobedientia, and mandatorum Dei praevaricatio. In Christi autem obedientia
quod nostra collocatur justitia inde est, quod nobis illi incorporatis, ac si
nostra esset, accepta ea fertur: ut ea ipsa etiam nos justi habeamur. Et velut
ille quondam Jacob, quum nativitate primogenitus non esset, sub habitu fratris
occultatus, atque ejus vest indutus, quae odorem optimum spirabat, seipsum
insinuavit Patri, ut sub aliena persona benedictionem primogeniturae acciperet:
Ita and nos sub Christi primogeniti fratris nostri preciosa puritate
delitescere, bono ejus odore fragrare, ejus perfectione vitia nostra sepeliri
and obtegi, atque ita nos piissimo Patri ingerere, ut justitiae benedictionem
ab eodem assequamur* necesse est. And afterward. Justificat ergo nos Deus
Pater bonitate sua gratuita, quo nos in Christo complectitur, dum eidem
insertos innocentia and justitia Christi nos induit; quae una ut vera and
perfecta est, quae Dei sustinere conspectum potest, ita unum pro nobis sisti
oportet Tribunali divini judicii and veluti causae nostrae intercessorem eidem
repraesentari: qua subnixi etiam hic obtineremus remissionem peccatorum
nostrorum assiduam: cujus puritate velatae non imputantur nobis sordes nostrae,
imperfectionum immunditiae, sed veluti sepultae conteguntur, ne in judicium Dei
veniant: donec confecto in nobis, and plane extincto veteri homine, divina
bonitas nos in beatam pacem cum novo Adam recipiat. God was in Christ says the
Apostle, reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing-unto men their sins.
In him therefore we are justified before God, not in our selves, not by our
own, but by his Righteousness, which is imputed unto us now communicating with
him. Wanting Righteousness of our own, we are taught to seek for Righteousness
without our selves in him. So he says, him who knew not sin, he made to be sin
for us, that is, an expiatory Sacrifice for sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him; we are made Righteous in Christ not with our own
but with the Righteousness of God. By what Right? the Right of friendship,
which makes all common among friends, according unto the ancient celebrated
proverb. Being ingrafted into Christ, fastened, united unto him, he makes his
things ours, communicates his Riches unto us, interposeth his Righteousness
between the Judgment of God and our unrighteousness, and under that as under a
shield and buckler, he hides us from that divine wrath which we have deserved;
he defends and protects us therewith, yea he communicates it unto us and makes
it ours, so as that being covered and adorned therewith, we may boldly and
securely place our selves before the divine Tribunal and Judgment, so as not
only to appear Righteous, but so to be. For even as the Apostle affirms that
by one man's fault we were all made sinners, so is the Righteousness of Christ
alone, efficacious in the Justification of us all; and as by the disobedience
of one man many were made sinners, so by the Obedience of one man (says he)
many are made Righteous. This is the Righteousness of Christ, even his
Obedience, whereby in all things he fulfilled the Will of his Father. As on the
other hand our unrighteousness, is our disobedience, and our transgression of
the Commands of God. But that our Righteousness is placed in the Obedience of
Christ, it is from hence, that we being incorporated into him, it is accounted
unto us as if it were ours; so as that therewith we are esteemed Righteous. And
as Jacob of old, whereas he was not the first born, being hid under the habit
of his Brother, and clothed with his Garment which breathed a sweet savor,
presented himself unto his Father, that in the person of another, he might
receive the Blessing of the Primogeniture; so is it necessary that we should
lie hid under the precious purity of the first born our eldest Brother, be
fragrant with his sweet savor, and have our sin buried and covered with his
perfection, that we may present our selves before our most Holy Father, to
obtain from him the Blessing of Righteousness. And again; God therefore does
justify us by his free Grace or Goodness wherewith he embraces us in Christ
Jesus, when he cloatheth us with his Innocence and Righteousness as we are
ingrafted into him; for as that alone is true and perfect which only can endure
in the sight of God, so that alone ought to be presented and pleaded for us
before the divine Tribunal, as the advocate of, or plea in our cause; resting
hereon, we here obtain the daily pardon of sin; with whose purity being
covered, our filth and the uncleanness of our imperfections are not imputed
unto us, but are covered as if they were buried, that they may not come into
the Jugdment of God; until the old man being destroyed and slain in us, divine
Goodness receives us into peace with the second Adam. So far he; expressing the
power which the influence of divine truth had on his mind, contrary to the
Interest of the cause wherein he was engaged, and the loss of his Reputation
with them, for whom in all other things, he was one of the fiercest Champions.
And some among the Roman Church, who cannot bear this Assertion of the
Commutation of Sin and Righteousness by Imputation between Christ and
Believers, no more then some among our selves, do yet affirm the same
concerning the Righteousness of other men. Mercaturam quandam docere nos Paulus
videtur. Abundatis, inquit, vos pecunia, and estis inopes justitiae, contra
illi abundant justitia, and sunt inopes pecuniae, fiat quaedam commutatio; date
vos piis egentibus pecuniam quae vobis affluit, and illis deficit; sic futurum
est ut illi vicissim justitiam suam qua abundant, and qua vos estis destituti,
vobis communicent. Hosius; de expresso Dei verbo, Tom. 2. page 21. But I have
mentioned these Testimonies principally to be a Relief unto some men's
Ignorance, who are ready to speak evil of what they understand not.

This blessed Permutation as unto Sin and Righteousness, is represented unto us
in the Scripture as a principal object of our Faith; as that whereon our Peace
with God is founded. And although both these, the Imputation of Sin unto
Christ, and the Imputation of Righteousness unto us, be the Acts of God and not
ours, yet are we by Faith to exemplify them in our own Souls, and really to
perform what on our part is required unto their Application unto us, whereby we
receive the Atonement, Romans 5.11. Christ calls unto him all those that are
weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. The weight that is upon the Consciences of
men wherewith they are laden, is the burden of sin. So the Psalmist complains
that his sins were a burden too heavy for him, Psalm. 38.4. Such was Cains
apprehension of his Guilt, Genesis 4.13. This Burden Christ bare when it was laid
on him by divine Estimation. For so it is said (...) Isa. 53.11. He shall bear
their sins on him as a burden. And this he did when God made to meet upon him
the Iniquity of us all, ver. 6. In the Application of this unto our own Souls,
as it is required that we be sensible of the weight and burden of our sins, and
how it is heavier then we can bear, so the Lord Christ calls us unto him with
it, that we may be eased. This he does in the preaching of the Gospel, wherein
he is evidently Crucified before our Eyes, Gal. 3.1. In the view which Faith
has of Christ crucified, (for Faith is a looking unto him, Isa. 45.22. chap.
65.1. answering their looking unto the Brazen Serpent who were stung with fiery
Serpents, Joh. 3.14, 15.) and under a sense of his Invitation, (for Faith is
our coming unto him upon his call and invitation) to come unto him with our
Burdens, a Believer considers that God has laid all our Iniquities upon him,
yea that he has done so, is an especial object whereon Faith is to act it
self, which is Faith in his Blood. Hereon does the Soul approve of, and embrace
the Righteousness and Grace of God, with the infinite condescension and love of
Christ himself. It gives its consent that what is thus done, is what becomes
the infinite Wisdom and Grace of God, and therein it rests. Such a Person seeks
no more to establish his own Righteousness, but submits to the Righteousness of
God. Herein by Faith does he leave that Burden on Christ, which he called him
to bring with him, and complies with the Wisdom and Righteousness of God in
laying it upon him. And herewithall does he receive the everlasting
Righteousness, which the Lord Christ brought in when he made an end of sin, and
Reconciliation for Transgressors.

The Reader may be pleased to observe, that I am not debating these things
argumentatively in such propriety of Expressions as are required in a
Scholastical Disputation, which shall be done afterward so far as I judge it
necessary. But I am doing that which indeed is better and of more Importance;
namely, declaring the Experience of Faith in the Expressions of the Scripture,
or such as are analogous unto them. And I had rather be instrumental in the
communication of light and knowledge unto the meanest Believer, then to have
the clearest success against prejudiced Disputers. Wherefore by Faith thus
acting are we justified and have peace with God. Other Foundation in this
matter can no man lay that will endure the Trial.

Nor are we to be moved that men who are unacquainted with these things in
their Reality and Power, do reject the whole work of Faith herein, as an easy
effort of Fancy or Imagination. For the preaching of the Cross is foolishness
unto the best of the natural wisdom of men. Neither can any understand them but
by the spirit of God. Those who know the Terror of the Lord, who have been
really convinced and made sensible of the Guilt of their Apostasy from God,
and of their actual sins in that state, and what a fearful thing it is to fall
into the hands of the living God, seeking thereon after a real solid Foundation
whereon they may be accepted with him, have other thoughts of these things, and
do find Believing a thing to be quite of another nature then such men suppose.
It is not a work of Fancy or Imagination unto men to deny and abhor themselves,
to subscribe unto the Righteousness of God in denouncing Death as due to their
sins, to renounce all hopes and expectations of Relief from any Righteousness
of their own, to mix the Word and Promise of God concerning Christ and
Righteousness by him with Faith, so as to receive the Atonement, and
therewithal to give up themselves unto an universal Obedience unto God. And as
for them unto whom through Pride and Self-conceit on the one hand, or Ignorance
on the other it is so; we have in this matter no concernment with them. For
unto whom these things are only the work of Fancy, the Gospel is a Fable.

Something unto this purpose I had written long since in a practical Discourse
concerning Communion with God. And whereas some men of an inferior condition,
have found it useful for the strengthening themselves in their dependencies on
some of their superiors, or in compliance with their own Inclinationt, to
cavil at my Writings and revile their Author; that Book has been principally
singled out to exercise their faculty and Good intentions upon. This course is
steered of late by one Mr. Hotchkisse, in a Book about Justification, wherein
in particular he falls very severely on that Doctrine which for the substance
of it, is here again proposed, page 81. And were it not that I hope it may be
somewhat useful unto him to be a little warned of his Immoralities in that
Discourse, I should not in the least have taken notice of his other
Impertinencies. The Good man I perceive can be angry with Persons whom he never
saw, and about things which he cannot or will not understand, so far as to
revile them with most opprobious Language. For my part although I have never
written any thing designedly on this subject, or the Doctrine of Justification
before now; yet he could not but discern by what was occasionally delivered in
that Discourse, that I maintain no other Doctrine herein, but what is the
common Faith of the most Learned men in all Protestant Churches. And the
Reasons why I am singled out for the object of his petulancy and spleen, are
too manifest to need Repetition. But I shall yet inform him of what perhaps he
is ignorant; namely, That I esteem it no small honor that the Reproaches
wherewith the Doctrine opposed by him is reproached do fall upon me. And the
same I say concerning all the reviling and contemptuous Expressions that his
ensuing pages are filled withal. But as to the present occasion I beg his
excuse if I believe him not, that the reading of the passages which he mentions
out of my Book, filled him with Horror and Indignation, as he pretends. For
whereas he acknowledges that my words may have a sense which he approves of
(and which therefore must of necessity be good and sound) what honest and sober
person would not rather take them in that sense, then wrest them unto another,
so to cast himself under the disquietment of a fit of horrible Indignation, In
this fit I suppose it was, if such a fit indeed did befall him (as one Evil
begets another) that he thought he might insinuate something of my denial of
the necessity of our own personal Repentance and Obedience. For no man who had
read that Book only of all my Writings, could with the least regard to
Conscience or Honesty give countenance unto such a surmise, unless his mind was
much discomposed by the unexpected invasion of a fit of Horror. But such is
his dealing with me from first to last, nor do I know where to fix on any one
instance of his Exceptions against me, wherein I can suppose he had escaped his
pretended fit, and was returned unto himself, that is unto honest and ingenuous
thoughts, wherewith I hope he is mostly conversant. But though I cannot miss in
the Justification of this charge by considering any Instance of his
Reflections, yet I shall at present take that which he insists longest upon,
and fills his Discourse about it with most scurrility of Expressions. And
this is in the 164 th page of his Book and those that follow. For there he
disputes fiercely against me for making this to be an undue End of our serving
God, namely, that we may flee from the wrath to come. And who would not take
this for an inexpiable crime in any, especially in him who has written so much
of the nature and use of Threatenings under the Gospel, and the Fear that ought
to be ingenerated by them in the hearts of men, as I have done. Wherefore so
great a Crime being the object of them, all his Revilings seem not only to be
Excused but Hallowed. But what if all this should prove a wilful prevarication,
not becoming a Good man, much less a Minister of the Gospel? my words as
reported and transcribed by himself are these; Some there are that do the
Service of the House of God as the drudgery of their Lives; the principle they
yield Obedience upon is Spirit of Bondage unto fear; the Rule they do it by is
the Law in its dread and rigor; exacting it of them to the utmost without
mercy or mitigation; the End they do it for is to fly from the Wrath to come,
to pacify Conscience, and to seek for Righteousness as it were by the works of
the Law. What follow unto the same purpose he omits, and what he adds as my
words are not so, but his own, ubi pudor, ubi sides? That which I affirmed to
be a part of an evil End when and as it makes up one entire End by being mixed
with sundry other things expressly mentioned, is singled out, as if I had denied
that in any sense it might be a part of a good End in our Obedience, which I
never thought, I never said, I have spoken and written much to the contrary.
And yet to countenance himself in this disingenuous procedure, besides many
other untrue Reflections he adds that I insinuate, that those whom I describe
are Christians that seek Righteousness by Faith in Christ, page 167. I must
needs tell my Author that my Faith in this matter is, That such works as these
will have no influence in his Justification; And that the principal Reason why
I suppose I shall not in my progress in this Discourse take any particular
notice of his exceptions either against the Truth or me, next unto this
consideration, that they are all trite and obsolete, and as to what seems to
be of any force in them will occur unto me in other Authors from whom they are
derived, is that I may not have a continual occasion to declare how forgetful
he has been of all the Rules of ingenuity, yea and of common honesty in his
dealing with me. For that which gave the occasion unto this present unpleasing
digression, it being no more as to the substance of it, but that our sins were
imputed unto Christ, and that his Righteousness is imputed unto us, it is that
in the Faith whereof I am assured I shall live and dye, though he should write
twenty as learned Books against it, as those which he has already published;
and in what sense I do believe these things shall be afterward declared. And
although I judge no man upon the Expressions that fall from him in Polemical
Writings, wherein on many occasions they do affront their own experience and
contradict their own prayers, yet as to those who understand not that blessed
Commutation of Sins and Righteousness as to the substance of it, which I have
pleaded for, and the actings of our Faith with respect thereunto, I shall be
bold to say, That if the Gospel be hid it is hid to them that perish.

Sixthly, We can never state our Thoughts aright in this matter unless we have
a clear Apprehension of, and satisfaction in, the Introduction of Grace by
Jesus Christ into the whole of our Relation unto God, with its respect unto all
parts of our Obedience. There was no such thing, nothing of that nature or
kind, in the first constitution of that Relation and Obedience by the Law of
our Creation. We were made in a state of immediate Relation unto God in our own
persons, as our Creator, Preserver and Rewarder. There was no mystery of Grace
in the Covenant of Works. No more was required unto the consummation of that
state, but what was given us in our Creation, enabling us unto rewardable
Obedience. Do this and live, was sole Rule of our Relation unto God. There was
nothing in Religion originally of that which the Gospel celebrates under the
name of the Grace, Kindness and Love of God, whence all our favorable Relation
unto God does now proceed, and whereinto it is resolved; nothing of the
Interposition of a Mediator with respect unto our Righteousness before God and
Acceptance with him, which is at present the Life and Soul of Religion, the
Substance of the Gospel, and the Center of all the Truths revealed in it. The
Introduction of these things is that which makes our Religion a mystery, yea a
great mystery, if the Apostle may be believed, 1 Timothy 3.16. All Religion at
first was suited and commensurable unto Reason; but being now become a mystery,
men for the most part are very unwilling to receive it. But so it must be; and
unless we are restored unto our primitive Rectitude, a Religion suited unto the
principles of our Reason, which it has none but what answer that first state,
will not serve our Turns.

Wherefore of this Introduction of Christ and Grace in him, into our Relation
unto God, there are no notions in the natural conceptions of our minds, nor are
they discoverable by Reason in the best and utmost of its exercise, 1. Cor.
2.14. For before our understandings were darkened, and our Reason debased by
the Fall, there were no such things revealed or proposed unto us; yea the
supposition of them is inconsistent with, and contradictory unto, that whole
state and condition wherein we were to live to God; seeing they all suppose the
Entrance of sin. And it is not likely that our Reason as now corrupted, should
be willing to embrace that which it knew nothing of in its best condition, and
which was inconsistent with that way of attaining happiness which was
absolutely suited unto it. For it has no Faculty or Power but what it has
derived from that state. And to suppose it is now of it self suited and ready
to embrace such heavenly mysteries of Truth and Grace, as it had no notions of,
nor could have in the state of Innocence, is to suppose that by the Fall our
Eyes were opened to know Good and Evil, in the sense that the Serpent deceived
our first Parents with an Expectation of. Whereas therefore our Reason was
given us for our only Guide in the first constitution of our Natures, it is
naturally unready to receive what is above it, and as corrupted has an Enmity
thereunto.

Hence in the first open proposal of this mystery, namely, of the Love and
Grace of God in Christ, of the Introduction of a Mediator and his Righteousness
into our Relation unto God, in that way which God in infinite Wisdom had
designed; the whole of it was looked on as mere folly by the Generality of the
wise and rational men of the World, as the Apostle declares at large, 1 Cor.
chapter 1. Neither was the Faith of them ever really received in the World, without
an Act of the Holy Ghost upon the mind in its Renovation. And those who judge
that there is nothing more needful to enable the mind of man to receive the
mysteries of the Gospel in a due manner, but the outward proposal of the
Doctrine thereof, do not only deny the Depravation of our Nature by the Fall,
but by just consequence, wholly renounce that Grace whereby we are to be
recovered. Wherefore Reason (as has been elsewhere proved) acting on and by
its own innate Principles and Abilities, conveyed unto it from its original
state, and as now corrupted, is repugnant unto the whole Intoduction of Grace
by Christ into our Relation unto God, Romans 8.7. An Endeavor therefore to
reduce the Doctrine of the Gospel, or what is declared therein, concerning the
hidden mystery of the Grace of God in Christ, unto the principles and
inclinations of the minds of men, or Reason as it remains in us after the
Entrance of sin, under the power at least of those notions and conceptions of
things Religious, which it retains from its first state and condition, is to
debase and corrupt them, (as we shall see in sundry Instances) and so make way
for their Rejection.

Hence very difficult it is to keep up doctrinally and practically the minds of
men unto the Reality and Spiritual height of this mystery. For men naturally do
neither understand it, nor like it. And therefore every attempt to accommodate
it unto the principles and inbred notions of corrupt Reason is very acceptable
unto many, yea unto the most. For the things which such men speak and declare,
are without more ado, without any exercise of Faith or Prayer, without any
supernatural Illumination, easily intelligible, and exposed to the common sense
of mankind. But whereas a Declaration of the mysteries of the Gospel can obtain
no Admission into the minds of men but by the effectual working of the Spirit
of God, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. it is generally looked on as difficult, perplexed,
unintelligible; and even the minds of many who find they cannot contradict it,
are yet not at all delighted with it. And here lies the Advantage of all them
who in these days do attempt to corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel in the whole
or any part of it, for the accommodation of it unto the common notions of
corrupted Reason, is the whole of what they design. And in the confidence of
the suffrage hereof, they not only oppose the things themselves, but despise
the Declarations of them as Enthusiastical canting. And by nothing do they more
prevail themselves, then by a pretense of reducing all things to Reason, and a
contempt of what they oppose as unintelligible Fanaticism. But I am not more
satisfied in any thing of the most uncontrollable Evidence, then that the
Understandings of these men is no just measure or standard of Spiritual Truth.
Wherefore notwithstanding all this fierceness and scorn, with the pretended
Advantages which some think they have made by traducing Expressions in the
writings of some men, it may be improper, it may be only not suited unto their
own genius and capacity in these things, we are not to be ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, which is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes.

Of this Repugnancy unto the mystery of the Wisdom and Grace of God in Christ,
and the Foundation of its whole Economy in the distinct operations of the
Persons of the Holy Trinity therein, there are two parts or branches.

1. That which would reduce the whole of it unto the private Reason of men, and
their own weak imperfect mannagement thereof. This is the entire design of the
Socinians. Hence,

1. The Doctrine of the Trinity it self is denied, impugned, yea derided by
them, and that solely on this Account. They plead that it is incomprehensible
by Reason; for there is in that Doctrine, a Declaration of things absolutely
infinite and eternal, which cannot be exemplified in, nor accommodated unto
things finite and temporal. This is the substance of all their pleas against
the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, that which gives a seeming life and sprightly
vigor to their Objections against it; wherein yet under the pretense of the
use and exercise of Reason, they fall and resolve all their reasonings into the
most absurd and irrational principles that ever the minds of men were besotted
withal. For unless you will grant them that what is above their Reason is
therefore contradictory unto true Reason; that what is infinite and eternal is
perfectly comprehensible and in all its concerns and respects to be accounted
for; that what cannot be in things finite and of a separate existence, cannot
be in things infinite whose being and existence can be but one, with other such
irrational yea brutish Imaginations, all the Arguments of these pretended men
of Reason against the Trinity, become like Chaff that every Breath of Wind will
blow away. Hereon they must as they do, deny the distinct Operations of any
Persons in the Godhead in the Dispensation of the mystery of Grace. For if
there are no such distinct Persons there can be no such distinct Operations.
Now as upon a denial of these things no one Article of Faith can be rightly
understood, nor any one Duty of Obedience be performed unto God in an
acceptable manner, so in particular, we grant that the Doctrine of
Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, cannot stand.

2. On the same Ground the Incarnation of the Son of God is rejected as (...),
the most absurb conception that ever befell the minds of men. Now it is to no
purpose to dispute with men so persuaded about Justification. Yea we will
freely acknowledge that all things we believe about it are (...), no better
then old Wives Tales, if the Incarnation of the Son of God be so also. For I
can as well understand how he who is a mere man, however exalted, dignified,
and glorified, can exercise a Spiritual Rule in and over the Hearts,
Consciences and Thoughts of all the men in the World, being intimately knowing
of and present unto them all equally at all times, (which is another of their
fopperies) as how the Righteousness and Obedience of One should be esteemed the
Righteousness of all that Believe, if that One be no more then a man, if he be
not acknowledged to be the Son of God incarnate.

Whilst the minds of men are prepossessed with such prejudices, nay unless they
firmly assent unto the Truth in these foundations of it, it is impossible to
convince them of the Truth and Necessity of that Justification of a sinner
which is revealed in the Gospel. Allow the Lord Christ to be no other Person
but what they believe him to be, and I will grant there can be no other way of
Justification then what they declare; though I cannot believe that ever any
sinner will be justified thereby. These are the issues of an obstinate Refusal
to give way unto the Introduction of the mystery of God and his Grace, into the
way of Salvation and our Relation unto him.

And he who would desire an Instance of the fertility of men's Inventions in
forging and coining Objections against heavenly mysteries in the Justification
of the Sovereignty of their own Reason as unto what belongs to our Relation
unto God, need go no farther then the Writings of these men against the Trinity
and Incarnation of the Eternal Word. For this is their fundamental Rule in
things divine and Doctrines of Religion, that not what the Scripture says is
therefore to be accounted true, although it seems repugnant unto any Reasonings
of ours, or is above what we can comprehend, but what seems repugnant unto our
Reason, let the words of the Scripture be what they will, that we must conclude
that the Scripture does not say so, though it seem never so expressly so to do.
Itaque non quia utrumque Scriptura dicat propterea haec inter se non pugnare
concludendum est; sed potius quia haec inter se pugnant ideo alterutrum a
Scriptura non dici statuendum est, says Schlicting. ad Meisn. def. Socin. page
102. Wherefore because the Scripture affirms both these (that is the Efficacy
of Gods Grace and the Freedom of our Wills) we cannot conclude from thence,
that they are not repugnant; but because these things are repugnant unto one
another, we must determine, that one of them is not spoken in the Scripture;
no, it seems, let it say what it will. This is the hansomest way they can take
in advancing their own Reason above the Scripture, which yet savours of
intolerable Presumption. So Socinus himself speaking of the satisfaction of
Christ says in plain Terms; Ego quidem etiamsi non semel sed saepius id in
sacris monumentis scriptum extaret, non idcirco tamen ita prorsus rem se habere
crederem, ut vos opinamini; cum enim id omnino fieri non possit, non secus
atque in multis aliis Scripturae Testimoniis, una cum caeteris omnibus facio;
aliqua quae minus incommoda videretur, interpretatione adhibita, eum sensum ex
ejusmodi verbis elicerem qui sibi constaret; For my part if this (Doctrine)
were extant and written in the Holy Scripture, not once but often, yet would I
not therefore believe it to be so as you do; For whereas it can by no means be
so (whatever the Scripture says) I would as I do with others in other places,
make use of some less incommodious Interpretation, whereby I would draw a sense
out of the words that should be consistent with it self. And how he would do
this he declares a little before; Sacra verba in alium sensum quam verba sonant
per inusitatos etiam Tropos quandoque explicantur; He would explain the words
into another sense then what they sound or propose by unusual Tropes. And
indeed such uncouth Tropes does he apply as so many Engines and Machines to
pervert all the Divine Testimonies concerning our Redemption, Reconciliation,
and Justification by the Blood of Christ.

Having therefore fixed this as their Rule, constantly to prefer their own
Reason above the express words of the Scripture, which must therefore by one
means or other be so perverted or wrested to be made compliant therewith, it is
Endless to trace them in their multiplied Objections against the holy
mysteries, all resolved into this one principle, that their Reason cannot
comprehend them, nor does approve of them. And if any man would have an
especial Instance of the serpentine Wits of men winding themselves from under
the power of Conviction by the spiritual Light of Truth, or at least
endeavoring so to do, let him read the Comments of the Jewish Rabbis on
Isaiah chap. 53. and of the Socinians on the Beginning of the Gospel of John.

Secondly, The second Branch of this Repugnancy springs from the want of a
due comprehension of that Harmony which is in the mystery of Grace, and between
all the parts of it. This comprehension is the principal effect of that Wisdom
which Believers are taught by the Holy Ghost. For our understanding of the
Wisdom of God in a mystery is neither an Art nor a Science whether purely
speculative or more practical, but a spiritual Wisdom. And this spiritual
Wisdom is such as understands and apprehends things, not so much, or not only
in the notion of them, as in their Power, Reality, and Efficacy toward their
proper Ends. And therefore although it may be very few, unless they be learned,
judicious, and diligent in the use of means of all sorts, do attain unto it
clearly and distinctly in the Doctrinal notions of it; yet are all true
Believers, yea the meanest of them directed and enabled by the Holy Spirit as
unto their own practice and duty, to act suitably unto a comprehension of this
Harmony, according to the Promise that they shall be all taught of God. Hence
those things which appear unto others contradictory and inconsistent one with
another, so as that they are forced to offer violence unto the Scripture and
their own Experience in the Rejection of the one or other of them, are
reconciled in their minds, and made mutually useful or helpful unto one
another, in the whole course of their Obedience. But these things must be
farther spoken unto.

Such an Harmony as that intended there is in the whole mystery of God. For it
is the most curious effect and product of divine Wisdom; And it is no
impeachment of the Truth of it, that it is not discernable by humane Reason. A
full comprehension of it no creature can in this world arise unto. Only in the
contemplation of Faith, we may arrive unto such an understanding Admiration of
it, as shall enable us to give Glory unto God, and to make use of all the parts
of it in practice as we have occasion. Concerning it the Holy man mentioned
before cried out, (...); O unsearchable contrivance and operation! And so is it
expressed by the Apostle, as that which has an unfathomable depth of Wisdom in
it, (...), etc. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God; how unsearchable are his ways and his Judgments past finding out, Romans
11.33, 34, 35, 36. see to the same purpose, Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10.

There is an Harmony, a suitableness of one thing unto another in all the works
of Creation. Yet we see that it is not perfectly nor absolutely discoverable
unto the wisest and most diligent of men. How far are they from an Agreement
about the order and motions of the Heavenly Bodies, of the Sympathies and
Qualities of sundry things here below, in the Relation of Causality and
Efficiency between one thing and another. The new discoveries made concerning
any of them, do only evidence how far men are from a just and perfect
comprehension of them. Yet such an universal Harmony there is in all the parts
of nature and its operations, that nothing in its proper station and operation
is destructively contradictory either to the whole, or any part of it, but
every thing contributes unto the preservation and use of the Universe. But
although this Harmony be not absolutely comprehensible by any, yet do all
living Creatures who follow the conduct or instinct of Nature make use of it,
and live upon it, and without it neither their Being could be preserved, nor
their Operations continued.

But in the mystery of God and his Grace the Harmony and suitableness of one
thing unto another, with their tendency unto the same End, is incomparably more
excellent and glorious then that which is seen in nature or the works of it.
For whereas God made all things at first in Wisdom, yet is the new Creation of
all things by Jesus Christ, ascribed peculiarly unto the Riches, Stores, and
Treasures of that infinite wisdom. Neither can any discern it unless they are
taught of God, for it is only spiritually discerned. But yet is it by the most
despised. Some seem to think that there is no great wisdom in it, and some that
no great wisdom is required unto the comprehension of it; Few think it worth
the while to spend half that time in prayer, in meditation, in the exercise of
self denial, Mortification and Holy Obedience, doing the will of Christ that
they may know of his word to the attaining of a due comprehension of the
mystery of Godliness, as some do of diligence, study, and trial of Experiments,
who design to excel in natural or mathematical Sciences. Wherefore there are
three things evident herein.

1. That such an Harmony there is in all the parts of the mystery of God,
wherein all the blessed properties of the divine nature are glorified, our Duty
in all Instances is directed and engaged, our Salvation in the way of Obedience
secured, and Christ as the End of all exalted. Wherefore we are not only to
consider and know the several parts of the Doctrine of spiritual Truth, but
their Relation also one unto another, their consistency one with another in
practice, and their mutual furtherance of one another unto their common End.
And a disorder in our Apprehensions about any part of that, whose Beauty and
Use arises from its Harmony gives some confusion of mind with respect unto the
whole.

2. That unto a comprehension of this Harmony in a due measure, it is necessary
that we be taught of God, without which we can never be wise in the knowledge
of the mystery of his Grace. And herein ought we to place the principal part of
our diligence in our Enquiries into the Truths of the Gospel.

3. All those who are taught of God to know his Will, unless it be when their
minds are disordered by prejudices, false opinions or temptations, have an
experience in themselves and their own practical Obedience, of the consistency
of all parts of the mystery of Gods Grace and Truth in Christ among themselves,
of their spiritual Harmony and cogent tendency unto the same End. The
Introduction of the Grace of Christ into our Relation unto God, makes no
confusion or disorder in their minds, by the conflict of the principles of
natural Reason, with respect unto our first Relation unto God, and those of
Grace with respect unto that whereunto we are renewed.

From the want of a due comprehension of this divine Harmony it is, that the
minds of men are filled with Imaginations of an Inconsistency between the most
important parts of the mystery of the Gospel, from whence the confusions that
are at this day in Christian Religion do proceed.

Thus the Socinians can see no consistency between the Grace or Love of God,
and the satisfaction of Christ, but imagine if the one of them be admitted, the
other must be excluded out of our Religion. Wherefore they principally oppose
the latter under a pretense of asserting and vindicating the former. And where
these things are expressly conjoined in the same proposition of Faith; as where
it is said that we are justified freely by the Grace of God, through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his Blood, as Romans 3.24, 25. they will offer
violence unto common sense and Reason, rather then not disturb that Harmony
which they cannot understand. For although it be plainly affirmed to be a
Redemption by his Blood, as he is a propitiation, as his Blood was a Ransom or
price of Redemption, yet they will contend, there it is only metaphorical, a
mere deliverance by power, like that of the Israelites by Moses. But these
things are clearly stated in the Gospel, and therefore not only consistent, but
such as that the one cannot subsist without the other. Nor is there any mention
of any especial Love or Grace of God unto sinners, but with respect unto the
satisfaction of Christ as the means of the communication of all their effects
unto them. See Joh. 3.16. Romans 3.23, 24, 25. chap. 8.30, 31, 32, 33. 2 Cor.
5.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 1.7. etc.

In like manner they can see no consistency between the satisfaction of Christ,
and the necessity of Holiness or Obedience in them that do believe. Hence they
continually clamor, that by our Doctrine of the Mediation of Christ, we
overthrow all Obligations unto an Holy Life. And by their Sophistical
Reasonings unto this purpose, they prevail with many to embrace their
delusions, who have not a spiritual experience to confront their Sophistry
withal. But as the Testimony of the Scripture lies expressly against them, so
those who truly believe, and have real experience of the influence of that
Truth into the life of God, and how impossible it is to yield any acceptable
Obedience herein without respect thereunto, are secured from their snares.

These and the like Imaginations arise from the unwillingness of men to admit
of the Introduction of the mystery of Grace, into our Relation unto God. For
suppose us to stand before God on the old constitution of the Covenant of
Creation, which alone natural Reason likes and is comprehensive of, and we do
acknowledge these things to be inconsistent. But the mystery of the Wisdom and
Grace of God in Christ, cannot stand without them both.

So likewise Gods Efficacious Grace in the conversion of sinners, and the
exercise of the Faculties of their Minds in a way of Duty are asserted as
contradictory and inconsistent. And although they seem both to be positively
and frequently declared in the Scripture, yet say these men, their Consistency
being repugnant to their Reason, let the Scripture say what it will, yet is it
to be said by us, that the Scripture does not assert one of them. And this is
from the same cause; men cannot in their Wisdom see it possible that the
mystery of Gods Grace should be introduced into our Relation and Obedience unto
God. Hence have many Ages of the Church, especially the last of them, been
filled with Endless Disputes, in Opposition to the Grace of God, or to
accommodate the conceptions of it, unto the Interests of corrupted Reason.

But there is no Instance more pregnant unto this purpose then that under our
present consideration. Free Justification through the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, is cried out against as inconsistent with a necessity
of personal Holiness and Obedience; and because the Socinians insist
principally on this pretense, it shall be fully and diligently considered
apart, and that Holiness which without it they and others deriving from them do
pretend unto, shall be tried by the unerring Rule.

Wherefore I desire it may be observed that in pleading for this Doctrine, we
do it as a principal part of the Introduction of Grace into our whole Relation
unto God. Hence we grant;

1. That it is unsuited, yea foolish, and as some speak Childish, unto the
principles of unenlightened and unsanctified Reason, or Understandings of men.
And this we conceive to be the principal cause of all the Oppositions that are
made unto it, and all the Depravations of it that the Church is pestered
withal. Hence are the wits of men so fertile in Sophistical Cavils against it,
so ready to load it with seeming absurdities, and I know not what
unsuitableness unto their wondrous rational conceptions. And no Objection can
be made against it, be it never so trivial, but it is highly applauded by those
who look on that Introduction of the mystery of Grace which is above their
natural conceptions, as unintelligible folly.

2. That the necessary Relation of these things one unto the other, namely of
Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and the
necessity of our Personal Obedience, will not be clearly understood nor duly
improved, but by and in the exercise of the Wisdom of Faith. This we grant
also; and let who will make what advantage they can of this concession. True
Faith has that spiritual Light in it or accompanying of it, as that it is able
to receive it, and to conduct the Soul unto Obedience by it. Wherefore
reserving the particular consideration hereof unto its proper place, I say in
general.

1. That this Relation is evident unto that spiritual Wisdom whereby we are
enabled doctrinally and practically to comprehend the Harmony of the mystery of
God, and the consistency of all the parts of it one with another.

2. That it is made evident by the Scripture, wherein both these things,
Justification through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and the
Necessity of our Personal Obedience are plainly asserted and declared. And we
defy that Rule of the Socinians, that seeing these things are inconsistent in
their apprehension or unto their Reason, therefore we must say that one of them
is not taught in the Scripture; For whatever it may appear unto their Reason,
it does not so to ours; and we have at least as Good Reason to trust unto our
own Reason, as unto theirs. Yet we absolutely acquiesce in neither, but in the
Authority of God in the Scripture; rejoicing only in this, that we can set our
seal unto his Revelations by our own Experience. For

3. It is fully evident in the gracious conduct which the minds of them that
believe are under, even that of the Spirit of Truth and Grace, and the
Inclinations of that new Principle of the Divine Life whereby they are acted.
For although from the Remainders of Sin and Darkness that are in them,
Temptations may arise unto a continuation in sin because Grace has abounded,
yet are their minds so formed and framed by the Doctrine of this Grace, and the
Grace of this Doctrine, that the abounding of Grace herein, is the principal
motive unto their abounding in Holiness, as we shall see afterward.

And this we aver to be the spring of all those Objections which the
Adversaries of this Doctrine do continually endeavor to entangle it withal.
As (1) If the Passive Righteousness (as it is commonly called) that is his
Death and Suffering be imputed unto us, there is no need nor can it be, that
his Active Righteousness or the Obedience of his Life, should be imputed unto
us; and so on the contrary, for both together are inconsistent. (2) That if all
sin be pardoned, there is no need of the Righteousness; and so on the contrary,
if the Righteousness of Christ be imputed unto us, there is no room for or need
of the pardon of sin. (3) If we believe the pardon of our sins, then are our
sins pardoned before we believe, or we are bound to believe that which is not
so. (4) If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed unto us, then are we esteemed
to have done and suffered, what indeed we never did nor suffered; and it is
true, that if we are esteemed our selves to have done it, Imputation is
overthrown. (5) If Christ's Righteousness be imputed unto us, then are we as
Righteous as was Christ himself. (6) If our sins were imputed unto Christ, then
was he thought to have sinned, and was a sinner subjectively. (7) If Good Works
be excluded from any interest in our Justification before God, then are they of
no use unto our Salvation. (8) That it is ridiculous to think, that where there
is no sin, there is not all the Righteousness that can be required. (9) That
Righteousness imputed is only a putative or imaginary Righteousness, etc.

Now although all these and the like Objections however subtly managed, (as
Socinus boasts that he had used more then ordinary subtilty in this cause, in
quo si subtilius aliquanto quanto opus esse videretur, quaedam a nobis
disputata sunt; De servat. par. 4. cap. 4.) are capable of plain and clear
solutions, and we shall avoid the examination of none of them; yet at present I
shall only say, that all the shades which they cast on the minds of men, do
vanish and disappear before the Light of express Scripture Testimonies, and the
Experience of them that do believe, where there is a due comprehension of the
mystery of Grace in any tolerable measure.

Seventhly, There are some common prejudices that are usually pleaded against
the Doctrine of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, which because
they will not orderly fall under a particular consideration in our progress,
may be briefly examined in these general previous considerations.

1. It is usually urged against it, that this Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ is no where mentioned expressly in the Scripture. This is the first
Objection of Bellarmine against it. Hactenus, says he, nullum omnino locum
invenire potuerunt ubi legeretur Christi Justitiam nobis imputari ad justitiam;
vel nos justos esse per Christi Justitiam nobis imputatam. De Justificat. lib.
2. cap. 7. An Objection doubtless unreasonably and immodestly urged by men of
his persuasion* For not only do they make profession of their whole Faith, or
their belief of all things in matters of Religion, in Terms and Expressions no
where used in the Scripture, but believe many things also, as they say, with
Faith divine, not at all revealed or contained in the Scripture, but drained by
them out of the Traditions of the Church. I do not therefore understand how
such persons can modestly manage this as an Objection against any Doctrine,
that the Terms wherein some do express it, are not (...) found in the
Scripture, just in that order of one word after another as by them they are
used. For this Rule may be much enlarged, and yet be kept strait enough to
exclude the principal concerns of their Church out of the confines of
Christianity; nor can I apprehend much more Equity in others who reflect with
severity on this expression of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ as
unscriptural, as if those who make use thereof were criminal in no small
degree: when themselves immediately in the Declaration of their own judgment,
make use of such Terms, Distinctions and Expressions, as are so far from being
in the Scripture, as that it is odds they had never been in the world, had they
escaped Aristotle's Mint, or that of the Schools deriving from him.

And thus although a sufficient Answer has frequently enough, if any thing can
be so, been returned unto this Objection in Bellarmine, yet has one of late
amongst our selves made the Translation of it into English, to be the substance
of the first Chapter of a Book about Justification; though he needed not to
have given such an early intimation unto whom he is beholding for the greatest
part of his ensuing Discourse, unless it be what is taken up in despightful
reviling of other men. For take from him what is not his own on the one hand,
and impertinent cavils at the words and expression of other men, with forged
imputations on some of them, on the other, and his whole Book will disappear.
But yet although he affirms that none of the Protestant Writers who speak of
the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, (which were all of them
without exception until of late) have precisely kept to the form of wholesome
Words, but have rather swerved and varied from the Language of the Scripture,
yet he will excuse them from open Error, if they intend no more thereby, but
that we are made partakers of the benefits of the Righteousness of Christ. But
if they intend that the Righteousness of Christ it self is imputed unto us,
(that is* so as to be our Righteousness before God whereon we are pardoned and
accepted with him, or do receive the forgiveness of sins, and a right to the
Heavenly Inheritance) then are they guilty of that Error which makes us to be
esteemed to do our selves what Christ did; and so on the other side, Christ to
have done what we do and did, chap. 2, 3. But these things are not so. For if
we are esteemed to have done any thing in our own persons, it cannot be imputed
unto us as done for us by another; as it will appear when we shall treat of
these things afterward. But the great and Holy Persons intended, are as little
concerned in the Accusations or Apologies of some Writers, as those Writers
seem to be acquainted with that Learning, Wisdom, and Judgment, wherein they
did excel, and the Characters whereof are so eminently conspicuous in all
their Writings.

But the Judgment of most Protestants is not only heartily expressed, but
approved of also by Bellarmine himself in another place. Non esset (says he)
absurdum si quis diceret nobis imputari Christi justitiam and merita; cum nobis
donentur and applicentur; ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecissemus. De Justif. lib.
2. cap. 10. It were not absurd if any one should say that the Righteousness and
Merits of Christ are imputed unto us, when they are given and applied unto us,
as if we our selves had satisfied God. And this he confirms with that saying of
Bernard and Innocent, Epist. 190. Nam si unus pro omnibus mortuus est, ergo
omnes mortui sunt, ut videlicet satisfactio unius omnibus imputetur, sicut
omnium peccata unus ille portavit. And those who will acknowledge no more in
this matter, but only a Participation Quovis modo, one way or other, of the
Benefits of the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ, wherein we have the
concurrence of the Socinians also, might do well as I suppose, plainly to deny
all Imputation of his Righteousness unto us in any sense as they do, seeing the
Benefits of his Righteousness cannot be said to be imputed unto us, what way
soever we are made Partakers of them. For to say, that the Righteousness of
Christ is imputed unto us with respect unto the Benefits of it, when neither
the Righteousness it self is imputed unto us, nor can the Benefits of it be
imputed unto us, as we shall see afterward, does minister great occasion of
much needless variance and contests. Neither do I know any Reason why men
should seek countenance unto this Doctrine under such an Expression as
themselves reflect upon as unscriptural, if they be contented that their minds
and sense should be clearly understood and apprehended. For Truth needs no
subterfuges.

The Socinians do now principally make use of this Objection. For finding the
whole Church of God in the use of sundry Expressions, in the Declaration of the
most important Truths of the Gospel that are not literally contained in the
Scripture, they hoped from an Advantage from thence in their opposition unto
the things themselves. Such are the Terms of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, as this also of the Imputation of his
Righteousness. How little they have prevailed in the other Instances has been
sufficiently manifested by them with whom they have had to do. But as unto that
part of this Objection which concerns the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ unto Believers, those by whom it is asserted do say;

1. That it is the Thing alone intended which they plead for. If that be not
contained in the Scripture, if it be not plainly taught and confirmed therein,
they will speedily relinquish it. But if they can prove that the Doctrine which
they intend in this expression, and which is thereby plainly declared unto the
understandings of men, is a divine Truth sufficiently witnessed unto in the
Scripture, then is this expression of it reductively scriptural, and the Truth
it self so expressed a Divine Verity. To deny this, is to take away all use of
the Interpretation of the Scripture; and to overthrow the Ministry of the
Church. This therefore is to be alone enquired into.

2. They say, the same thing is taught and expressed in the Scripture in
Phrases aequipollent. For it affirms that by the Obedience of One (that is
Christ) many are made Righteous, Romans 5.18. And that we are made Righteous by
the Imputation of Righteousness unto us. Blessed is the man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness without works, chap. 4.6. And if we are made Righteous
by the Imputation of Righteousness unto us, that Obedience or Righteousness
whereby we are made Righteous, is imputed unto us. And they will be content
with this Expression of this Doctrine, That the Obedience of Christ whereby we
are made Righteous, is the Righteousness that God imputes unto us. Wherefore
this Objection is of no force to disadvantage the Truth pleaded for.

2. Socinus objects in particular against this Doctrine of Justification by the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and of his satisfaction, that there
is nothing said of it in the Evangelists, nor in the Report of the Sermons of
Christ unto the people, no nor yet in those of his private Discourses with his
Disciples. And he urges it vehemently and at large, against the whole of the
Expiation of sin by his Death; De Servator. par. 4. cap. 9. And as it is easy,
malis inventis pejora addere, this notion of his is not only made use of and
pressed at large by one among our selves, but improved also by a dangerous
comparison between the Writings of the Evangelists and the other Writings of
the New Testament. For to enforce this Argument, that the Histories of the
Gospel wherein the Sermons of Christ are recorded, do make no mention of the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as in his judgment they do not, nor
of his Satisfaction, or Merit or Expiation of sin, or of Redemption by his
Death, as they do not in the judgment of Socinus, it is added by him, that for
his part he is apt to admire our Saviors Sermons, who was the Author of our
Religion, before the Writings of the Apostles, though inspired men. Whereunto
many dangerous insinuations and reflections on the Writings of St. Paul,
contrary to the Faith and Sense of the Church in all Ages are subjoined. S.
page 240, 241.

But this Boldness is not only unwarrantable but to be abhorred. What place of
Scripture, what Ecclesiastical Tradition, what single president of any one
sober Christian Writer, what Theological Reason will countenance a man in
making the comparison mentioned, and so determining thereon? such juvenile
boldness, such want of a due apprehension and understanding of the Nature of
divine Inspirations, with the order and design of the writing of the New
Testament, which are the springs of this precipitate censure, ought to be
reflected on. At present to remove this pretense out of our way, it may be
observed.

1. That what the Lord Christ taught his Disciples in his Personal Ministry on
the Earth, was suited unto that Economy of the Church which was antecedent
unto his Death and Resurrection. Nothing did he withold from them, that was
needful to their Faith, Obedience, and Consolation in that state. Many things
he instructed them in out of the Scripture, many new Revelations he made unto
them, and many times did he occasionally instruct and rectify their
judgments. Howbeit he made no clear distinct Revelation of those sacred
mysteries unto them, which are peculiar unto the Faith of the New Testament,
nor were to be distinctly apprehended before his Death and Resurrection.

2. What the Lord Christ revealed afterward by his Spirit unto the Apostles,
was no less immediately from himself, then was the Truth which he spoke unto
them with his own mouth in the days of his flesh. An Apprehension to the
contrary is destructive of Christian Religion. The Epistles of the Apostles are
no less Christ's Sermons, then that which he delivered on the Mount. Wherefore,

3. Neither in the things themselves, nor in the way of their Delivery or
Revelation, is there any Advantage of the one sort of Writings above the other.
The things written in the Epistles proceed from the same Wisdom, the same
Grace, the same Love, with the things which he spoke with his own mouth in the
days of his flesh, and are of the same divine veracity, Authority and Efficacy.
The Revelation which he made by his Spirit, is no less divine, and immediate
from himself, then what he spoke unto his Disciples on the Earth, To
distinguish between these things on any of these accounts, is intolerable folly.

4. The Writings of the Evangelists do not contain the whole of all the
Instructions which the Lord Christ gave unto his Disciples personally on the
Earth. For he was seen of them after his Resurrection forty days, and spoke
with them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.3. And yet
nothing hereof is recorded in their writings, but only some few occasional
speeches. Nor had he given before unto them a clear and distinct understanding
of those things which were delivered concerning his Death and Resurrection in
the Old Testament, as is plainly declared, Luke 24.25, 26, 27. For it was not
necessary for them in that state wherein they were. Wherefore,

5. As to the extent of Divine Revelations objectively, those which he granted
by his Spirit unto his Apostles after his Ascension, were beyond those which he
Personally taught them, so far as they are recorded in the Writings of the
Evangelists. For he told them plainly not long before his death, that he had
many things to say unto them which then they could not bear, Joh. 16.12. And
for the knowledge of those things he refers them to the coming of the Spirit to
make Revelation of them from himself, in the next words; Howbeit when he the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak, and he will
show you things to come; He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and
show it unto you, ver. 13, 14. And on this account he had told them before,
that it was expedient for them that he should go away, that the Holy Spirit
might come unto them, whom he would send from the Father, ver. 7. Hereunto he
referred the full and clear manifestation of the mysteries of the Gospel. So
false as well as dangerous and scandalous are those insinuations of Socinus and
his followers.

Secondly, The Writings of the Evangelists are full unto their proper Ends and
Purposes. These were to record the Genealogy, Conception, Birth, Acts, Miracles
and Teachings of our Savior, so far as to evince him to be the true only
promised Messiah. So he testifies who wrote the last of them. Many other signs
truly did Jesus which are not written in this Book; But these are written that
ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, Joh. 20.30, 31. Unto
this End every thing is recorded by them that is needful unto the ingenerating
and establishment of Faith. Upon this confirmation, all things declared in the
Old Testament concerning him, all that was taught in Types and Sacrifices
became the object of Faith in that sense wherein they were interpreted in the
Accomplishment: And that in them this Doctrine was before revealed, shall be
proved afterward. It is therefore no wonder if some things, and those of the
highest importance, should be declared more fully in other Writings of the New
Testament, then they are in those of the Evangelists.

Thirdly, The Pretense it self is wholly false. For there are as many pregnant
Testimonies given unto this Truth in one alone of the Evangelists, as in any
other Book of the New Testament; namely in the Book of John. I shall refer to
some of them which will be pleaded in their proper place, chap. 1.12, 17, 19.
chap. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 36. chap. 5.24.

But we may pass this by, as one of those Inventions concerning which Socinus
boasts in his Epistle to Michael Vajoditus, that his Writings were esteemed by
many for the singularity of the things asserted in them.

Fourthly, The Difference that has been among Protestant Writers about this
Doctrine is pleaded in the prejudice of it. Osiander in the entrance of the
Reformation fell into a vain imagination, that we were Justified or made
Righteous with the Essential Righteousness of God, communicated unto us by
Jesus Christ. And whereas he was opposed herein with some severity by the most
learned persons of those days, to countenance himself in his singularity he
pretended that there were twenty different Opinions amongst the Protestants
themselves about the formal cause of our Justification before God. This was
quickly laid hold on by them of the Roman Church, and is urged as a prejudice
against the whole Doctrine, by Bellarmine, Vasquez, and others. But the vanity
of this pretense of his has been sufficiently discovered; and Bellarmine
himself could fancy but four Opinions among them, that seemed to be different
from one another, reckoning that of Osiander for one: De Justificat. lib. 2.
cap. 1. But whereas he knew that the Imagination of Osiander was exploded by
them all, the other three that he mentions are indeed but distinct parts of the
same entire Doctrine. Wherefore until of late it might be truly said, that the
Faith and Doctrine of all Protestants was in this Article entirely the same.
For however they differed in the way, manner, and methods of its Declaration,
and too many private men were addicted unto Definitions and Descriptions of
their own, under pretense of Logical accuracy in Teaching, which gave an
appearance of some contradiction among them, yet in this they generally agreed,
that it is the Righteousness of Christ and not our own, on the account whereof
we receive the pardon of sin, acceptance with God, are declared Righteous by
the Gospel, and have a Right and Title unto the Heavenly Inheritance. Hereon, I
say they were generally agreed, first against the Papists, and afterward
against the Socinians; and where this is granted, I will not contend with any
man about his way of declaring the Doctrine of it.

And that I may add it by the way, we have herein the concurrence of the
Fathers of the Primitive Church. For although by Justification following the
Etymology of the Latin word, they understood the making us Righteous with
internal personal Righteousness, at least some of them did so, as Austin in
particular, yet that we are pardoned and accepted with God on any other
account, but that of the Righteousness of Christ, they believed not. And
whereas, especially in their Controversy with the Pelagians after the rising
of that Heresy, they plead vehemently that we are made Righteous by the Grace
of God, changing our Hearts and Natures, and creating in us a principle of
spiritual Life and Holiness, and not by the endeavors of our own free will, or
works performed in the strength thereof, their words and expressions have been
abused contrary to their Intention and Design.

For we wholly concur with them, and subscribe unto all that they dispute about
the making of us personally Righteous and holy, by the effectual Grace of God,
against all merit of works and operations of our own free Will, (our
Sanctification being every way as much of Grace, as our Justification properly
so called) and that in opposition unto the common Doctrine of the Roman Church
about the same matter; only they call this our being made inherently and
personally Righteous by Grace, sometimes by the name of Justification which we
do not. And this is laid hold on as an Advantage by those of the Roman Church
who do not concur with them in the way and manner whereby we are so made
Righteous. But whereas by our Justification before God, we intend only that
Righteousness whereon our sins are pardoned, wherewith we are made Righteous in
his sight, or for which we are accepted as Righteous before him, it will be
hard to find any of them assigning of it unto any other causes then the
Protestants do. So it is fallen out, that what they design to prove, we
entirely comply with them in; but the way and manner whereby they prove it, is
made use of by the Papists unto another End, which they intended not.

But as to the way and manner of the Declaration of this Doctrine among
Protestants themselves, there ever was some variety and Difference in
Expressions. Nor will it otherwise be whilst the Abilities and Capacities of
men, whether in the conceiving of things of this nature, or in the expression
of their conceptions are so various as they are. And it is acknowledged that
these Differences of late have had by some as much weight laid upon them, as
the substance of the Doctrine generally agreed in. Hence some have composed
entire Books consisting almost of nothing, but impertinent Cavils at other Men's
Words and Expressions. But these things proceed from the weakness of some men,
and other vicious habits of their minds, and do not belong unto the cause it
self. And such Persons, as for me, shall write as they do, and fight on until
they are weary. Neither has the multiplication of Questions and the curious
discussion of them in the handling of this Doctrine, wherein nothing ought to
be diligently insisted on, but what is directive of our practice, been of much
use unto the Truth it self, though it has not been directly opposed in them.

That which is of real Difference among Persons who agree in the substance of
the Doctrine may be reduced unto a very few Heads. As (1) There is something of
this kind about the nature of Faith whereby we are justified, with its proper
Object in Justifying, and its Use in Justification. And an Instance we have
herein, not only of the weakness of our Intellects in the Apprehension of
spiritual things, but also of the remainders of confusion and disorder in our
minds, at least how true it is that we know only in part, and prophecy only in
part, whilst we are in this life. For whereas this Faith is an Act of our
minds, put forth in the way of Duty to God, yet many by whom it is sincerely
exercised, and that continually, are not agreed either in the nature or proper
object of it. Yet is there no doubt but that some of them who differ amongst
themselves about these things, have delivered their minds free from the
prepossession of prejudices and notions derived from other artificial
Reasonings imposed on them, and do really express their own conceptions as to
the best and utmost of their Experience. And notwithstanding this Difference
they do yet all of them please God in the exercise of Faith as it is their
Duty, and have that respect unto its proper Object, as secures both their
Justification and Salvation. And if we cannot on this consideration bear with,
and forbear one another in our different conceptions, and expressions of those
conceptions about these things, it is a sign we have a great mind to be
contentious, and that our confidences are built on very weak foundations. For
my part I had much rather my Lot should be found among them who do really
believe with the heart unto Righteousness, though they are not able to give a
tolerable Definition of Faith unto others, then among them who can endlesly
dispute about it with seeming Accuracy and Skill, but are negligent in the
exercise of it as their own Duty. Wherefore some things shall be briefly spoken
of in this matter, to declare my own apprehensions concerning the things
mentioned, without the least design to contradict or oppose the conceptions of
others.

2. There has been a Controversy more directly stated among some Learned
Divines of the reformed Churches, (for the Lutherans are unanimous on the one
side) about the Righteousness of Christ that is said to be imputed unto us. For
some would have this to be only his suffering of Death, and the satisfaction
which he made for sin thereby, and others include therein the Obedience of his
life also. The occasion, original, and progress of this controversy, the
persons by whom it has been managed, with the writings wherein it is so, and
the various ways that have been endeavored for its Reconciliation, are
sufficiently known unto all, who have enquired into these things. Neither shall
I immix my self herein, in the way of controversy or in opposition unto
others, though I shall freely declare my own Judgment in it, so far as the
consideration of the Righteousness of Christ under this distinction is
inseparable from the substance of the Truth it self which I plead for.

3. Some Difference there has been also, whether the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, or the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, may be said
to be the formal cause of our Justification before God, wherein there appears
some variety of Expression among Learned men, who have handled this subject in
the way of controversy with the Papists. The true Occasion of the Differences
about this Expression has been this and no other. Those of the Roman Church do
constantly assert, that the Righteousness whereby we are Righteous before God,
is the formal cause of our Justification. And this Righteousness they say, is
our own inherent Personal Righteousness, and not the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us. Wherefore they treat of this whole controversy, namely, what
is the Righteousness on the account whereof we are accepted with God, or
justified under the name of the formal cause of Justification, which is the
subject of the second Book of Bellarmine concerning Justification. In
opposition unto them, some Protestants contending that the Righteousness
wherewith we are esteemed Righteous before God, and accepted with him, is the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, and not our own inherent, imperfect
Personal Righteousness, they have done it under this enquiry, namely, what is
the formal cause of our Justification; which some have said to be the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, some the Righteousness of Christ
imputed. But what they designed herein was not to resolve this Controversy
into a Philosophical enquiry about the nature of a formal cause, but only to
prove that, that truly belonged unto the Righteousness of Christ in our
Justification, which the Papists ascribed unto our own, under that name. That
there is an habitual infused habit of Grace which is the formal cause of our
personal inherent Righteousness they grant. But they all deny that God pardons
our sins, and justifies our persons with respect unto this Righteousness as the
formal cause thereof. Nay they deny that in the Justification of a sinner there
either is, or can be any inherent formal cause of it. And what they mean by a
formal cause in our Justification is only that which gives the denomination
unto the subject, as the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ does to a
person that he is justified.

Wherefore notwithstanding the differences that have been among some in the
various expression of their conceptions, the substance of the Doctrine of the
Reformed Churches, is by them agreed upon and retained entire. For they all
agree that God justifies no sinner, absolveth him not from Guilt, nor
declares him Righteous, so as to have a Title unto the Heavenly Inheritance,
but with respect unto a true and perfect Righteousness, as also that this
Righteousness is truly the Righteousness of him that is so justified. That this
Righteousness becomes ours by Gods free Grace and Donation, the way on our
part whereby we come to be really and effectually interested therein, being
Faith alone. And that this is the perfect Obedience or Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us; In these things, as they shall be afterward distinctly
explained, is contained the whole of that Truth, whose Explanation and
Confirmation is the Design of the ensuing Discourse. And because those by whom
this Doctrine in the substance of it, is of late impugned, derive more from the
Socinians then the Papists, and make a nearer approach unto their principles, I
shall chiefly insist on the examination of those Original Authors, by whom
their notions were first coined, and whose weapons they make use of in their
defense.

Eighthly, To close these previous Discourses, it is worthy our consideration
what weight was laid on this Doctrine of Justification at the first
Reformation, and what Influence it had into the whole work thereof. However the
minds of men may be changed as unto sundry Doctrines of Faith among us, yet
none can justly own the name of Protestant, but he must highly value the first
Reformation. And they cannot well do otherwise, whose present even temporal
Advantages are resolved thereinto. However I intend none but such as own an
especial presence and Guidance of God with them who were eminently and
successfully employed therein. Such persons cannot but grant that their Faith
in this matter, and the concurrence of their Thoughts about its Importance, are
worthy consideration.

Now it is known, that the Doctrine of Justification gave the first occasion to
the whole work of Reformation, and was the main hinge whereon it turned. This
those mentioned declared to be Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, and
that the vindication thereof alone, deserved all the pains that was taken in
the whole endeavor of Reformation. But things are now, and that by virtue of
their Doctrine herein, much changed in the World, though it be not so
understood or acknowledged. In general no small Benefit redounded unto the
World by the Reformation, even among them by whom it was not, nor is received,
though many bluster with contrary pretensions. For all the Evils which have
accidentally ensued thereon, arising most of them from the corrupt Passions and
Interests of them by whom it has been opposed, are usually ascribed unto it;
and all the Light, Liberty, and Benefit of the Minds of men which it has
introduced, are ascribed unto other causes. But this may be signally observed
with respect unto the Doctrine of Justification, with the causes and effects of
its Discovery and Vindication. For the first Reformers found their own, and the
Consciences of other men, so immersed in darkness, so pressed and harrassed
with fears, terrors, and disquietments under the power of it, and so destitute
of any steady Guidance into the ways of peace with God, as that with all
diligence (like persons sensible that herein their Spiritual and Eternal
Interest was concerned) they made their Enquiries after the Truth in this
matter, which they knew must be the only means of their Deliverance. All men in
those days, were either kept in Bondage under endless Fears and Anxieties of
mind upon the convictions of sin, or sent for Relief unto Indulgences, Priestly
Pardons, Pennances, Pilgrimages, works satisfactory of their own, and
supererogatory of others, or kept under Chains of Darkness for Purgatory unto
the last day. Now he is no way able to compare things past and present, who
fees not how great an Alteration is made in these things even in the Papal
Church. For before the Reformation, whereby the Light of the Gospel, especially
in this Doctrine of Justification, was diffused among men, and shone even into
their minds who never comprehended nor received it, the whole almost of
Religion among them was taken up with and confined unto these things. And to
instigate men unto an abounding sedulity in the observation of them, their
minds were stuffed with Traditions and Stories of Visions, Apparitions,
frightful Spirits, and other Imaginations that poor mortals are apt to be
amazed withal, and which their restless disquietments gave countenance unto.

Somnia, terrores Magici, miracula, sagae
Nocturni Lemures, portentaque Thessala --
Were the principal objects of their Creed, and matter of their Religious
Conversation. That very Church it self is comparatively at ease from these
things unto what it was before the Reformation; though so much of them is still
retained, as to blind the Eyes of men from discerning the Necessity as well as
the Truth of the Evangelical Doctrine of Justification.

It is fallen out herein not much otherwise then it did at the first Entrance
of Christianity into the world. For there was an Emanation of Light and Truth
from the Gospel which affected the minds of men, by whom yet the whole of it in
its general Design, was opposed and persecuted. For from thence the very vulgar
sort of men became to have better apprehensions and notions of God and his
properties, or the Original and Rule of the Universe, then they had arrived
unto in the midnight of their Paganism. And a sort of learned speculative men
there were, who by virtue of that Light of Truth which sprung from the Gospel,
and was now diffused into the minds of men, reformed and improved the old
Philosophy, discarding many of those falsehoods and impertinencies wherewith it
had been encumbred. But when this was done, they still maintained their cause
on the old principles of the Philosophers, and indeed their opposition unto the
Gospel was far more plausible and pleadable than it was before. For after they
had discarded the gross conceptions of the common sort about the divine Nature
and Rule, and had blended the Light of Truth which brake forth in Christian
Religion with their own Philosophical notions, they made a vigorous Attempt for
the reinforcement of Heathenism against the main Design of the Gospel. And
things have not as I said, fallen out much otherwise in the Reformation. For as
by the Light of Truth which therein brake forth, the Consciences of even the
vulgar sort are in some measure freed from those Childish Affrightments which
they were before in Bondage unto; so those who are Learned have been enabled to
reduce the Opinions and Practices of their Church, into a more defensible
posture, and make their Opposition unto the Truths of the Gospel more plausible
than they formerly were. Yea that Doctrine which in the way of its Teaching and
Practice among them, as also in its effects on the Consciences of men, was so
horrid as to drive innumerable persons from their Communion in that and other
things also, is now in the new Representation of it, with the artificial
covering provided for its former effects in practice, thought an Argument meet
to be pleaded for a return unto its entire Communion.

But to root out the Superstitions mentioned out of the minds of men, to
communicate unto them the knowledge of the Righteousness of God which is
revealed from Faith to Faith, and thereby to deliver them from their bondage,
fears and distress, directing convinced sinners unto the only way of solid
peace with God, did the first Reformers labor so diligently in the Declaration
and Vindication of the Evangelical Doctrine of Justification; and God was with
them. And it is worth our consideration, whether we should on every cavil and
sophism of men not so taught, not so employed, not so tried, not so owned of
God as they were, and in whose Writings there are not appearing such Characters
of Wisdom, sound Judgment, and deep Experience as in theirs, easily part with
that Doctrine of Truth, wherein alone they found peace unto their own Souls,
and whereby they were instrumental to give liberty and peace with God unto the
Souls and Consciences of others innumerable, accompanied with the visible
effects of Holiness of Life, and fruitfulness in the works of Righteousness,
unto the praise of God by Jesus Christ.

In my judgment Luther spoke the truth when he said; amisso Articulo
Justificationis, simul amissa est tota Doctrina Christiana. And I wish he had
not been a true Prophet, when he foretold that in the following Ages the
Doctrine hereof would be again obscured; the Causes whereof I have elsewhere
enquired into.

Some late Writers indeed among the Protestants have endeavored to reduce the
controversy about Justification with the Papists, unto an Appearance of a far
less real Difference, then is usually judged to be in it. And a good work it is
no doubt to pare off all unnecessary occasions of Debate and Differences in
Religion, provided we go not so near the Quick, as to let out any of its vital
Spirits. The way taken herein is to proceed upon some Concessions of the most
sober among the Papists, in their Ascriptions unto Grace and the Merit of
Christ on the one side; and the express judgment of the Protestants variously
delivered, of the necessity of good works to them that are justified. Besides
it appears that in different expressions which either party adhere unto, as it
were by Tradition, the same things are indeed intended. Among them who have
labored in this kind Ludovicus le Blanc, for his perspicuity and plainness,
his moderation and freedom from a contentious frame of Spirit, is pene solus
legi dignus. He is like the Ghost of Tiresias in this matter. But I must needs
say that I have not seen the effect that might be desired of any such
undertaking. For when each party comes unto the Interpretation of their own
Concessions which is ex communi jure, to be allowed unto them, and which they
will be sure to do in compliance with their Judgment in the substance of the
Doctrine wherein the main stress of the Difference lies, the distance and
breach continue as Wide as ever they were. Nor is there the least ground
toward peace obtained by any of our condescensions or compliances herein. For
unless we can come up entirely unto the Decrees and Canons of the Council of
Trent, wherein the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament is anathematized, they
will make no other use of any men's compliances, but only to increase the
clamor of Differences among our selves. I mention nothing of this nature to
hinder any man from granting whatever he can or please unto them, without the
prejudice of the substance of Truths professed in the Protestant Churches; but
only to intimate the uselessness of such concessions in order unto Peace and
Agreement with them, whilst they have a Procrustes Bed to lay us upon; and from
whose size they will not recede.

Here and there one, (not above three or four in all may be named within this
hundred and thirty years) in the Roman Communion, have owned our Doctrine of
Justification for the substance of it. So did Albertus Pighius and the
Antidagma Coloniense, as Bellarmin acknowledges. And what he says of Pighius is
true, as we shall see afterward; the other I have not seen. Cardinal
Contarenus in a Treatise of Justification, written before, and published about
the Beginning of the Trent Council, delivers himself in the favor of it. But
upon the observation of what he had done, some say he was shortly after
poisoned, though I must confess I know not where they had the Report.

But do what we can for the sake of Peace, as too much cannot be done for it,
with the safety of Truth; it cannot be denied but that the Doctrine of
Justification as it works effectually in the Church of Rome, is the Foundation
of many Enormities among them both in Judgment and Practice. They do not
continue I acknowledge, in that visible predominancy and rage as formerly; nor
are the Generality of the people in so much slavish Bondage unto them as they
were. But the streams of them do still issue from this corrupt Fountain, unto
the dangerous Infection of the Souls of men. For Missatical Expiatory
Sacrifices for the living and the dead, the necessity of Auricular Confession
with Authoritative Absolution, Penances, Pilgrimages, Sacramentals,
Indulgences, Commutations, Works Satisfactory and Supererogatory, the Merit and
Intercession of Saints departed, with especial Devotions and Applications to
this or that particular Saint or Angel, Purgatory, yea on the matter the whole
of Monastic Devotion, do depend thereon. They are all nothing but ways
invented to pacify the Consciences of men, or divert them from attending to
the Charge which is given in against them by the Law of God; sorry supplies
they are of a Righteousness of their own, for them who know not how to submit
themselves to the Righteousness of God. And if the Doctrine of free
Justification by the Blood of Christ were once again exploded, or corrupted and
made unintelligible; unto these things as absurd and foolish as now unto some
they seem to be, or what is not one jot better, men must and will again betake
themselves. For if once they are diverted from putting their Trust in the
Righteousness of Christ and Grace of God alone, and do practically thereon
follow after, take up with, or rest in that which is their own, the first
impressions of a sense of sin which shall befall their Consciences, will drive
them from their present hold, to seek for shelter in any thing that tenders
unto them the least Appearance of Relief. Men may talk and dispute what they
please whilst they are at peace in their own minds without a real sense either
of sin or Righteousness; yea and scoff at them who are not under the power of
the same security. But when they shall be awakened with other Apprehensions of
things then yet they are aware of, they will be put on new Resolutions. And it
is in vain to dispute with any about Justification, who have not been duly
convinced of a state of sin, and of its Guilt; for such men neither understand
what they say, nor that whereof they dogmatize.

We have therefore the same Reasons that the first Reformers had to be careful
about the preservation of this Doctrine of the Gospel pure and entire; though
we may not expect the like success with them in our Endeavors unto that End.
For the minds of the Generality of men are in another posture then they were,
when they dealt with them. Under the power of Ignorance and Superstition they
were, but yet multitudes of them affected with a sense of the Guilt of sin.
With us for the most part things are quite otherwise. Notional Light,
accompanied with a senselessness of sin, leads men unto a contempt of this
Doctrine, indeed of the whole mystery of the Gospel. We have had Experience of
the fruits of the Faith which we now plead for in this Nation for many years,
yea now for some Ages. And it cannot well be denied but that those who have
been most severely tenacious of the Doctrine of Justification by the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ, have been the most exemplary in an Holy Life; I
speak of former days. And if this Doctrine be yet further corrupted, debased,
or unlearned among us, we shall quickly fall into one of the Extremes wherewith
we are at present urged on either side. For although the Reliefs provided in
the Church of Rome, for the satisfaction of the consciences of men are at
present by the most disliked, yea despised; yet if they are once brought to a
loss how to place their whole trust and confidence in the Righteousness of
Christ and Grace of God in him, they will not always live at such an
uncertainty of mind, as the best of their own Personal Obedience will hang them
on the Briars of; but betake themselves unto somewhat that tenders them certain
peace and security, though at present it may seem foolish unto them. And I
doubt not but that some out of a mere Ignorance of the Righteousness of God,
which either they have not been taught, or had no mind to learn, have with some
Integrity in the Exercise of their Consciences, betaken themselves unto that
pretended Rest which the Church of Rome offers unto them. For being troubled
about their sins, they think it better to betake themselves unto that great
variety of means for the ease and discharge of their Consciences which the
Roman Church affords, then to abide where they are, without the least pretense
of Relief, as men will find in due time, there is no such thing to be found or
obtained in themselves. They may go on for a time with good satisfaction unto
their own minds; but if once they are brought unto a loss through the
Conviction of sin, they must look beyond themselves for peace and satisfaction,
or sit down without them to Eternity. Nor are the principles and ways which
others take up withal in another Extreme upon the Rejection of this Doctrine,
although more plausible, yet at all more really useful unto the Souls of men,
then those of the Roman Church which they reject as obsolete, and unsuited unto
the Genius of the present Age. For they all of them arise from, or lead unto
the want of a due sense of the Nature and Guilt of sin, as also of the Holiness
and Righteousness of God with respect thereunto. And when such principles as
these do once grow prevalent in the minds of men, they quickly grow careless,
negligent, secure in sinning, and End for the most part in Atheism, or a great
Indifferency as unto all Religion, and all the Duties thereof.

CHAP. I. Justifying Faith, the Causes, Object, and Nature of it, declared.
THe means of Justification on our part is Faith. That we are justified by
Faith is so frequently, and so expressly affirmed in the Scripture, as that it
cannot directly and in terms by any be denied. For whereas some begin, by an
excess of partiality which controversial Engagements and Provocations do
incline them unto, to affirm that our Justification is more frequently ascribed
unto other things, Graces or Duties, than unto Faith, it is to be passed by in
silence, and not contended about. But yet also the Explanation which some
others make of this general concession, That we are justified by Faith, does as
fully overthrow what is affirmed therein, as if it were in terms rejected. And
it would more advantage the understandings of men, if it were plainly refused
upon its first proposal, than to be lead about in a maze of Words, and
Distinctions unto its real Exclusion; as is done both by the Romanists and
Socinians. At present we may take the Proposition as granted, and only enquire
into the true genuine sense and meaning of it. That which first occurs unto our
Consideration is Faith; and that which does concern it may be reduced unto two
Heads; (1) Its Nature. (2) Its Use in our Justification.

Of the Nature of Faith in general, of the especial Nature of justifying Faith,
of its Characteristical Distinctions from that which is called Faith, but is
not justifying, so many Discourses (diverse of them the effects of sound
Judgment and good Experience) are already extant, as it is altogether needless
to engage at large into a farther discussion of them. However something must be
spoken to declare in what sense we understand these things; what is that Faith
which we ascribe our Justification unto, and what is its Use therein.

The Distinctions that are usually made concerning Faith, (as it is a word of
various significations) I shall wholly pretermit; not only as obvious and
known, but as not belonging unto our present Argument. That which we are
concerned in is, That in the Scripture there is mention made plainly of a
twofold Faith whereby men believe the Gospel. For there is a Faith whereby we
are justified, which he who has shall be assuredly saved, which purifieth the
heart, and works by Love. And there is a Faith or Believing which does
nothing of all this; which who has, and has no more, is not justified, nor
can be saved. Wherefore every Faith, whereby men are said to believe, is not
justifying. Thus it is said of Simon the Magician that he believed, Act. 8.13.
When he was in the Gall of Bitterness and bond of Iniquity, and therefore did
not believe with that Faith which purifieth the Heart, Act. 15.9. And, that
many believed on the name of Jesus when they saw the Miracles that he did, but
Jesus did not commit himself unto them because he knew what was in man, Joh.
2.23, 24. They did not believe on his Name as those do, or with that kind of
Faith, who thereon receive power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. And some
when they hear the Word receive it with joy, believing for a while, but have no
Root; Luke 8.13. And Faith without a Root in the Heart will not justify any.
For with the Heart Men believe unto Righteousness, Romans 10.10. So is it with
them who shall cry, Lord, Lord, (at the last day) we have prophesied in thy
name, whilst yet they were always workers of Iniquity, Math. 7.22, 23.

This Faith is usually called Historical Faith. But this Denomination is not
taken from the Object of it, as though it were only the History of the
Scripture, or the Historical things contained in it. For it respects the whole
Truth of the Word, yea of the Promises of the Gospel as well as other things.
But it is so called from the nature of the Assent wherein it does consist. For
it is such as we give unto Historical things that are credibly testified unto
us.

And this Faith has diverse differences or degrees, both in respect unto the
Grounds or Reasons of it; and also its Effects. For as unto the first, all
Faith is an Assent upon Testimony; and divine Faith is an Assent upon a divine
Testimony. According as this Testimony is received, so are the Differences or
Degrees of this Faith. Some apprehend it on humane motives only, and their
credibility unto the Judgment of Reason; and their Assent is a mere natural Act
of their Understanding, which is the lowest degree of this Historical Faith.
Some have their minds enabled unto it by spiritual Illumination, making a
discovery of the Evidences of Divine Truth whereon it is to be believed; the
Assent they give hereon is more firm and operative than that of the former sort.

Again, It has its Differences or Degrees with respect unto its Effects. With
some it does no way or very little, influence the Will or the Affections, or
work any Change in the lives of men. So is it with them that profess they
believe the Gospel, and yet live in all manner of sins. In this Degree it is
called by the Apostle James a dead Faith, and compared unto a dead Carcass,
without life or motion, and is an Assent of the very same nature and kind with
that which Devils are compelled to give. And this Faith abounds in the World.
With others it has an effectual work upon the Affections, and that in many
degrees also, represented in the several sorts of Ground whereinto the Seed of
the Word is cast, and produces many effects in their lives. In the utmost
improvement of it, both as to the Evidence it proceeds from, and the Effects it
produces, it is usually called temporary Faith; for it is neither permanent
against all oppositions, nor will bring any unto Eternal Rest. The name is
taken from that Expression of our Savior, concerning him who believes with
this Faith, (...), Math. 13.21.

This Faith I grant to be true in its kind, and not merely to be equivocally so
called; it is not (...); It is so as unto the general nature of Faith; but of
the same special nature with justifying Faith it is not. Justifying Faith is
not an higher, or the highest, degree of this Faith, but is of another kind or
nature. Wherefore sundry things may be observed concerning this Faith in the
utmost improvement of it unto our present purpose. As,

1. This Faith with all the effects of it, men may have and not be justified;
and if they have not a Faith of another kind they cannot be justified. For
Justification is no where ascribed unto it, yea it is affirmed by the Apostle
James, That none can be justified by it.

2. It may produce great Effects in the Minds, Affections, and Lives of Men,
although not one of them that are peculiar unto justifying Faith. Yet such they
may be, as that those in whom they are wrought may be, and ought in the
Judgment of Charity to be looked on as true Believers.

3. This is that Faith which may be alone. We are justified by Faith alone. But
we are not justified by that Faith which can be alone. Alone, respects its
influence into our Justification, not its nature and existence. And we
absolutely deny that we can be justified by that Faith which can be alone, that
is without a principle of spiritual Life and universal Obedience, operative in
all the works of it, as Duty does require.

These things I have observed, only to obviate that Calumny and Reproach which
some endeavor to fix on the Doctrine of Justification by Faith only, through
the Mediation of Christ. For those who assert it must be Solifidians,
Antinomians, and I know not what; such as oppose or deny the necessity of
universal Obedience, or Good Works. Most of them who manage it cannot but know
in their own Consciences that this Charge is false. But this is the way of
handling Controversies with many. They can aver any thing that seems to
advantage the cause they plead, to the great scandal of Religion. If by
Solifidians they mean those who believe that Faith alone is on our part, the
Means, Instrument or Condition (of which afterward) of our Justification, all
the Prophets and Apostles were so, and were so taught to be by Jesus Christ, as
shall be proved. If they mean, those who affirm that the Faith whereby we are
justified is alone, separate or separable, from a principle and the fruit of
Holy Obedience, they must find them out themselves, we know nothing of them.
For we allow no Faith to be of the same kind or nature with that whereby we are
justified, but what virtually and radically contains in it universal Obedience,
as the effect is in the cause, the fruit in the Root, and which acts it self in
all particular Duties, according as by Rule and Circumstances they are made so
to be. Yea we allow no Faith to be justifying, or to be of the same kind with
it, which is not its self and in its own nature a spiritually vital principle
of Obedience and Good Works. And if this be not sufficient to prevail with some
not to seek for advantages by such shameful calumnies, yet is it so with
others, to free their minds from any concernment in them.

For the especial nature of Justifying Faith which we enquire into, the things
whereby it is evidenced may be reduced unto these four Heads. (1) The Causes of
it on the part of God. (2) What is in us previously required unto it. (3) The
proper Object of it. (4) Its proper peculiar Acts and Effects. Which shall be
spoken unto so far as is necessary unto our present design.

1. The Doctrine of the Causes of Faith as unto its first Original in the
Divine Will, and the way of its communication unto us, is so large, and so
immixed with that of the way and manner of the operation of efficacious Grace
in Conversion (which I have handled elsewhere) as that I shall not here insist
upon it. For as it cannot in a few words be spoken unto according unto its
weight and worth, so to engage into a full handling of it, would too much
divert us from our present Argument. This I shall only say, that from thence it
may be uncontroulably evidenced, That the Faith whereby we are justified, is of
an especial kind or nature, wherein no other Faith which Justification is not
inseparable from, does partake with it.

2. Wherefore our first Enquiry is concerning what was proposed in the second
place, namely, what is an our part in a way of Duty previously required
thereunto; or what is necessary to be found in us antecedaneously unto our
Believing unto the Justification of Life. And I say there is supposed in them
in whom this Faith is wrought, on whom it is bestowed, and whose Duty it is to
believe therewith; the work of the Law in the Conviction of sin, or Conviction
of sin is a necessary Antecedent unto Justifying Faith. Many have disputed what
belongs hereunto, and what effects it produces in the mind, that dispose the
Soul unto the receiving of the Promise of the Gospel. But whereas there are
different Apprehensions about these effects or concomitants of Conviction, (in
Compunction, Humiliation, Self-judging, with sorrow for sin committed, and the
like) as also about the Degrees of them, as ordinarily pre-required unto Faith
and Conversion unto God; I shall speak very briefly unto them, so far as they
are inseparable from the Conviction asserted. And I shall first consider this
Conviction it self with what is essential thereunto, and then the effects of it
in conjunction with that temporary Faith before spoken of. I shall do so, not
as unto their nature, the knowledge whereof I take for granted, but only as
they have respect unto our Justification.

As to the first I say, The work of Conviction in general, whereby the Soul of
man has a practical understanding of the nature of sin, its Guilt and the
Punishment due unto it, and is made sensible of his own interest therein, both
with respect unto sin original and actual, with his own utter disability to
deliver himself out of the state and condition, wherein on the account of these
things he finds himself to be, is that which we affirm to be antecedaneously
necessary unto Justifying Faith; that is in the Adult, and of whose
Justification the Word is the external means and instrument.

A Convinced sinner is only Subjectum capax Justificationis; not that every one
that is convinced is or must necessarily be justified. There is not any such
disposition or preparation of the subject by this Conviction, its effects and
consequents, as that the form of Justification, as the Papists speak, or
justifying Grace must necessarily ensue or be introduced thereon. Nor is there
any such preparation in it, as that by virtue of any divine Compact or Promise,
a Person so convinced, shall be pardoned and justified. But as a man may
believe with any kind of Faith that is not justifying, such as that before
mentioned, without this Conviction; so it is ordinarily previous, and necessary
so to be, unto that Faith which is unto the Justification of Life. The motive
is not unto it, that thereon a man shall be assuredly justified; but that
without it he cannot be so.

This I say is required in the Person to be justified in order of nature
antecedaneously unto that Faith whereby we are justified, which we shall prove
with the ensuing Arguments. For (1) without the due consideration and
supposition of it. the true nature of Faith can never be understood. For as we
have showed before, Justification is Gods way of the Deliverance of the
convinced sinner, or one whose mouth is stopped, and who is guilty before God,
obnoxious to the Law, and shut up under Sin. A sense therefore of this estate
and all that belongs unto it, is required unto Believing. Hence Le Blanc who
has searched with some diligence into these things, commends the Definition of
Faith given by Mestrezat; that it is the flight of a penitent sinner unto the
mercy of God in Christ. And there is indeed more Sense and Truth in it, than in
twenty other that seem more accurate. But without a supposition of the
Conviction mentioned, there is no understanding of this definition of Faith.
For it is that alone which puts the Soul upon a flight unto the mercy of God in
Christ, to be saved from the wrath to come, Heb. 6.18. fled for Refuge.

2 ly. The Order, Relation, and use of the Law and the Gospel do uncontroulably
evince the necessity of this Conviction previous unto Believing. For that which
any man has first to deal withal, with respect unto his Eternal Condition,
both naturally and by Gods Institution is the Law. This is first presented unto
the Soul, with its Terms of Righteousness and Life, and with its Curse in case
of failure. Without this the Gospel cannot be understood, nor the Grace of it
duly valued. For it is the Revelation of Gods way for the relieving the Souls
of men from the sentence and curse of the Law, Romans 1.17. That was the Nature,
that was the Use and End of the first Promise, and of the whole work of Gods
Grace revealed in all the ensuing Promises, or in the whole Gospel. Wherefore
the Faith which we treat of being Evangelical, that which in its especial
nature and use, not the Law but the Gospel requires, that which has the
Gospel for its Principle, Rule, and Object, it is not required of us, cannot be
acted by us, but on a supposition of the work and effect of the Law in the
conviction of sin, by giving the knowledge of it, a sense of its Guilt, and the
state of the sinner on the Account thereof. And that Faith which has not
respect hereunto, we absolutely deny to be that Faith whereby we are justified,
Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. Romans 10.4.

3 ly. This our Savior himself directly teaches in the Gospel. For he calls
unto him only those who are weary and heavy laden, affirms that the whole have
no need of the Physician but the sick; and that he came not to call the
Righteous but sinners to Repentance. In all which he intends not those who were
really sinners, as all men are, for he makes a difference between them,
offering the Gospel unto some and not unto others, but such as were convinced
of sin, burdened with it, and sought after deliverance.

So those unto whom the Apostle Peter proposed the Promise of the Gospel with
the pardon of sin thereby as the Object of Gospel Faith, were pricked to the
Heart upon the conviction of their sin, and cried what shall we do; Act. 2.37,
38, 39. Such also was the state of the Jailer unto whom the Apostle Paul
proposed Salvation by Christ, as what he was to believe for his Deliverance,
Act. 16.30, 31.

4 ly. The state of Adam and Gods dealing with him therein, is the best
Representation of the order and method of these things. As He was after the
Fall, so are we by nature in the very same state and condition. Really he was
utterly lost by sin, and convinced he was both of the nature of his sin, and of
the effects of it in that Act of God by the Law on his mind, which is called
the the opening of his Eyes. For it was nothing but the communication unto his
mind by his conscience of a sense of the nature, guilt, effects, and
consequents of sin, which the Law could then teach him, and could not do so
before. This fills him with shame and fear; against the former whereof he
provided by Figg-leaves, and against the latter by hiding himself among the
Trees of the Garden. Nor, however they may please themselves with them, are any
of the contrivances of men, for freedom and safety from sin, either wiser or
more likely to have success. In this condition, God by an immediate Inquisition
into the matter of fact, sharpeneth this Conviction by the Addition of his own
Testimony unto its Truth, and casts him actually under the Curse of the Law,
in a juridical denunciation of it. In this lost, forlorn, hopeless condition
God proposes the Promise of Redemption by Christ unto him. And this was the
Object of that Faith whereby he was to be justified.

Although these things are not thus eminently and distinctly transacted in the
minds and consciences of all who are called unto Believing by the Gospel, yet
for the substance of them, and as to the previousness of the Conviction of sin
unto Faith, they are found in all that sincerely believe.

These things are known, and for the substance of them generally agreed unto.
But yet are they such as being duly considered will discover the vanity and
mistakes of many definitions of Faith that are obtruded on us. For any
definition or description of it which has not express, or at least virtual
respect hereunto, is but a deceit, and no way answers the Experience of them
that truly believe. And such are all those who place it merely in an Assent
unto divine Revelation, of what Nature soever that Assent be, and whatever
Effects are ascribed unto it. For such an Assent there may be without any
respect unto this work of the Law. Neither do I, to speak plainly, at all value
the most accurate Disputations of any about the Nature and Act of Justifying
Faith, who never had in themselves an Experience of the work of the Law in
Conviction and Condemnation for sin, with the Effects of it upon their
Consciences; or do omit the due consideration of their own Experience, wherein
what they truly believe is better stated than in all their Disputations. That
Faith whereby we are justified is in general the acting of the Soul toward
God, as revealing himself in the Gospel for deliverance out of this state and
condition, or from under the Curse of the Law applied unto the Conscience,
according to his mind, and by the ways that he has appointed. I give not this
as any definition of Faith, but only express, what has a necessary influence
into it, whence the nature of it may be discerned.

2. The Effects of this Conviction with their respect unto our Justification
real or pretended may also be briefly considered. And whereas this Conviction
is a mere work of the Law, it is not with respect unto these Effects to be
considered alone, but in conjunction with, and under the conduct of that
temporary Faith of the Gospel before described. And these two, Temporary Faith
and Legal Conviction are the principles of all Works or Duties in Religion
antecedenr unto Justification, and which therefore we must deny to have in them
any Causality thereof. But it is granted that many Acts and Duties both
internal and external, will ensue on real Convictions. Those that are internal
may be reduced unto three Heads. (1) Displicency and Sorrow that we have
sinned. It is impossible that any one should be really convinced of sin in the
way before declared, but that a dislike of sin, and of himself that he has
sinned, shame of it, and sorrow for it, will ensue thereon. And it is a
sufficient Evidence that he is not really convinced of sin, whatever he
profess, or whatever confession he make, whose mind is not so affected, Jer.
36.24. (2) Fear of punishment due to sin. For Conviction respects not only the
instructive and preceptive part of the Law, whereby the Being and Nature of sin
are discovered, but the Sentence and Curse of it also whereby it is judged and
condemned, Genesis 4.13, 14. Wherefore, where fear of the punishment threatened
does not ensue, no person is really convinced of sin; nor has the Law had its
proper Work toward him, as it is previous unto the Administration of the
Gospel. And whereas by Faith we fly from the wrath to come, where there is not
a Sense and Apprehension of that wrath as due unto us, there is no Ground or
Reason for our Believing. (3) A desire of Deliverance from that state wherein a
convinced sinner finds himself upon his Conviction, is unavoidable unto him.
And its naturally the first thing that Conviction works in the minds of men,
and that in various degrees of care, fear, solicitude and restlessness, which
from Experience and the conduct of Scripture Light, have been explained by
many, unto the great benefit of the Church, and sufficiently derided by others.
(2) These internal Acts of the mind will also produce sundry external Duties
which may be referred unto two Heads. (1) Abstinence from known sin unto the
utmost of men's power. For they who begin to find that it is an evil thing and a
bitter that they have sinned against God, cannot but endeavor a future
Abstinence from it. And as this has respect unto all the former internal Acts,
as Causes of it, so it is a peculiar exurgency of the last of them or a desire
of deliverance from the state wherein such persons are. For this they suppose
to be the best expedient for it, or at least that without which it will not be,
And herein usually do their Spirits act by Promises and Vows, with renewed
sorrow on surprisals into sin, which will befall them in that condition. (2)
The Duties of Religious Worship in prayer and hearing of the Word, with
diligence in the use of the Ordinances of the Church, will ensue hereon. For
without these they know that no deliverance is to be obtained. Reformation of
Life and Conversation in various degrees does partly consist in these things,
and partly follow upon them. And these things are always so, where the
Convictions of men are real and abiding.

But yet it must be said, that they are neither severally nor jointly, though
in the highest degree, either necessary dispositions, preparations, previous
congruities in a way of merit, nor conditions of our Justification. For,

1. They are not Conditions of Justification. For where one thing is the
Condition of another, that other thing must follow the fulfilling of that
Condition. Otherwise the Condition of it, it is not. But they may be all found
where Justification does not ensue. Wherefore there is no Covenant, Promise, or
Constitution of God, making them to be such Conditions of Justification, though
in their own nature they may be subservient unto what is required of us with
respect thereunto. But a certain infallible connection with it by virtue of any
Promise or Covenant of God (as it is with Faith) they have not. And other
Condition, but what is constituted and made to be so by divine compact or
promise, is not to be allowed. For otherwise Conditions might be endlesly
multiplied, and all things natural as well as moral made to be so. So the meat
we eat may be a Condition of Justification. Faith and Justification are
inseparable, but so are not Justification and the things we now insist upon, as
Experience does evince.

2. Justification may be where the outward Acts and Duties mentioned,
proceeding from Convictions under the conduct of temporary Faith are not. For
Adam was Justified without them, so also were the Converts in the Acts, chap.
2. For what is reported concerning them is all of it Essentially included in
Conviction; ver. 37. And so likewise was it with the Jailer; Acts 16.30, 31.
And as unto many of them, it is so with most that do believe. Therefore they
are not Conditions. For a Condition suspends the Event of that whereof it is a
Condition.

3. They are not formal dispositions unto Justification, because it consists
not in the Introduction of any new form or inherent Quality in the Soul, as
has been in part already declared, and shall yet afterward be more fully
evinced. Nor (4) are they moral preparations for it; for being antecedent unto
Faith Evangelical, no man can have any design in them, but only to seek for
Righteousness by the Works of the Law, which is no preparation unto
Justification. All Discoveries of the Righteousness of God, with the Souls
adherence unto it, belong to Faith alone. There is indeed a Repentance which
accompanies Faith, and is included in the nature of it, at least radically.
This is required unto our Justification. But that legal Repentance which
precedes Gospel Faith and is without it, is neither a Disposition, Preparation,
nor Condition of our Justification.

In brief; The order of these things may be observed in the dealing of God with
Adam, as was before intimated. And there are three degrees in it. (1) The
Opening of the Eyes of the sinner, to see the filth and guilt of sin in the
Sentence and Curse of the Law applied unto his Conscience; Romans 7. 9, 10. This
effects in the mind of the sinner the things before mentioned, and puts him
upon all the Duties that spring from them. For Persons on their first
Convictions ordinarily judge no more but that their state being evil and
dangerous, it is their Duty to better it, and that they can or shall do so
accordingly, if they apply themselves, thereunto. But all these things as to a
Protection or Deliverance from the sentence of the Law, are no better then
Figg-leaves and hiding. (2) Ordinarily God by his Providence* or in the
Dispensation of the Word, gives life and power unto this Work of the Law in a
peculiar manner; in answer unto the charge which he gave unto Adam after his
Attempt to hide himself. Hereby the mouth of the sinner is stopped, and he
becomes, as thoroughly sensible of his Guilt before God, so satisfied that there
is no Relief or Deliverance to be expected from any of those ways of sorrow or
duty that he has put himself upon. (3) In this condition it is a mere Act of
Sovereign Grace, without any respect unto these things foregoing, to call the
sinner unto Believing, or Faith in the Promise unto the Justification of Life.
This is Gods order; yet so as that what precedeth his call unto Faith, has no
causality thereof.

3. The next thing to be enquired into is the proper Object of Justifying
Faith, or of true Faith, in its office, work, and duty, with respect unto our
Justification. And herein we must first consider what we cannot so well close
withal. For besides other Differences that seem to be about it, which indeed
are but different Explanations of the same thing for the substance, there are
two Opinions which are looked on as Extremes, the one in an Excess and the
other in Defect. The first is that of the Roman Church, and those who comply
with them therein. And this is, That the Object of Justifying Faith as such, is
all Divine Verity, all Divine Revelation, whether written in the Scripture, or
delivered by Tradition represented unto us by the Authority of the Church. In
the latter part of this Description we are not at present concerned. That the
whole Scripture and all the parts of it, and all the Truths of what sort soever
they be that are contained in it, are equally the Object of Faith in the
discharge of its Office in our Justification, is that which they maintain.
Hence as to the nature of it they cannot allow it to consist in any thing but
an Assent of the mind. For supposing the whole Scripture, and all contained in
it, Laws, Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, Stories, Prophesies and the like, to
be the Object of it, and these not as containing in them things Good or Evil
unto us, but under this formal consideration as divinely revealed, they cannot
assign or allow any other Act of the mind to be required hereunto but Assent
only. And so confident are they herein, namely, That Faith is no more then an
Assent unto divine Revelation, as that Bellarmin in opposition unto Calvin, who
placed knowledge in the description of Justifying Faith, affirms that it is
better defined by Ignorance than by Knowledge.

This Description of Justifying Faith and its Object, has been so discussed,
and on such evident Grounds of Scripture and Reason rejected by Protestant
Writers of all sorts, as that it is needless to insist much upon it again. Some
things I shall observe in relation unto it, whereby we may discover what is of
Truth in what they assert, and wherein it falls short thereof. Neither shall I
respect only them of the Roman Church, who require no more to Faith or
Believing, but only a bare Assent of the mind unto divine Revelations, but them
also who place it wholly in such a firm Assent as produces Obedience unto all
divine Commands. For as it does both these, as both these are included in it,
so unto the especial nature of it more is required. It is as justifying neither
a mere Assent nor any such firm degree of it, as should produce such effects.

1. All Faith whatever is an Act of that power of our Souls in general, whereby
we are able firmly to assent unto the Truth upon Testimony, in things not
evident unto us by Sense or Reason. It is the Evidence of things not seen. And
all divine Faith is in general an Assent unto the Truth that is proposed unto
us upon divine Testimony. And hereby as it is commonly agreed, it is
distinguished from Opinion and moral certainty on the one hand, and Science or
Demonstration on the other.

2. Wherefore in Justifying Faith, there is an Assent unto all divine
Revelation upon the Testimony of God the Revealer. By no other Act of our mind,
wherein this is not included or supposed, can we be justified; not because it
is not justifying, but because it is not Faith. This Assent I say is included
in Justifying Faith. And therefore we find it often spoken of in the Scripture
(the Instances whereof are gathered up by Bellarmin and others) with respect
unto other things, and not restrained unto the especial promise of Grace in
Christ, which is that which they oppose. But besides, that in most places of
that kind, the proper Object of Faith as Justifying is included and referred
ultimately unto, though diversely expressed by some of its Causes or concomitant
Adjuncts, it is granted that we believe all divine Truth, with that very Faith
whereby we are justified, so as that other things may well be ascribed unto it.

3. On these Concessions we yet say two things. (1) That the whole nature of
Justifying Faith does not consist merely in an Assent of the mind, be it never
so firm and steadfast, nor whatever Effects of Obedience it may produce. (2)
That in its Duty and Office in Justification, whence it has that especial
denomination, which alone we are in the Explanation of, it does not equally
respect all divine Revelation as such, but has a peculiar Object proposed unto
it in the Scripture. And whereas both these will be immediately evinced in our
description of the proper Object and Nature of Faith, I shall at present oppose
some few things unto this Description of them, sufficient to manifest how
aliene it is from the Truth.

1. This Assent is an Act of the understanding only. An Act of the mind with
respect unto Truth evidenced unto it, be it of what nature it will. So we
believe the worst of things and the most grievous unto us, as well as the best
and the most useful. But Believing is an Act of the Heart, which in the
Scripture comprizeth all the Faculties of the Soul, as one entire principle of
moral and spiritual Duties. With the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness,
Romans 10.10. And it is frequently described by an Act of the Will, though it be
not so alone, But without an Act of the Will no man can believe as he ought.
See Joh. 5.40. Joh. 1.12. chap. 6.35. We come to Christ in an Act of the Will;
and let whosoever will, come. And to be willing is taken for to believe, Psalm.
110.3. and Unbelief is Disobedience, Heb. 3.18, 19.

2. All Divine Truth is equally the Object of this Assent. It respects not the
especial nature or use of any one Truth, be it of what kind it will, more than
another; nor can it do so, since it regards only Divine Revelation. Hence that
Judas was the Traitor must have as great an influence into our Justification,
as that Christ died for our sins. But how contrary this is unto the Scripture,
the Analogy of Faith, and the Experience of all that believe, needs neither
Declaration nor Confirmation.

3. This Assent unto all Divine Revelation may be true and sincere, where there
has been no previous work of the Law, nor any Conviction of sin. No such thing
is required thereunto, nor are they found in many who yet do so assent unto the
Truth. But, as we have showed, this is necessary unto Evangelical Justifying
Faith; and to suppose the contrary is to overthrow the order and use of the Law
and Gospel, with their mutual Relation unto one another in subserviency unto
the design of God in the Salvation of Sinners.

4. It is not a way of seeking Relief unto a convinced sinner, whose, mouth is
stopped, in that he is become guilty before God. Such alone are capable
Subjects of Justification, and do or can seek after it in a due manner. A mere
Assent unto Divine Revelation is not peculiarly suited to give such persons
Relief. For it is that which brings them into that condition from whence they
are to be relieved. For the knowledge of sin is by the Law. But Faith is a
peculiar acting of the Soul for Deliverance.

5. It is no more then what the Devils themselves may have, and have, as the
Apostle James affirms. For that Instance of their Believing one God, proves
that they believe also whatever this one God who is the first Essential Truth
does reveal, to be true. And it may consist with all manner of wickedness, and
without any Obedience; and so make God a liar, 1 John 2.4. And it is no wonder
if men deny us to be justified by Faith, who know no other Faith but this.

6. It no way answers the Descriptions that are given of justifying Faith in
the Scripture. Particularly it is by Faith as it is justifying that we are said
to receive Christ; Joh. 1.12. Col. 2.6. To receive the Promise, the Word, the
Grace of God, the Atonement, Jam. 1.21. Joh. 3.33. Act. 2.41. chap. 11.1. Romans
5.11. Heb. 11.17. To cleave unto God, Deuteronomy. 4.4. Act. 11.23. And so in the Old
Testament it is generally expressed by Trust and Hope. Now none of these things
are contained in a mere Assent unto the Truth; but they require other actings
of the Soul than what are peculiar unto the understanding only.

7. It answers not the Experience of them that truly believe. This all our
Enquiries and Arguments in this matter must have respect unto. For the sum of
what we aim at, is only to discover what they do, who really believe unto the
Justification of Life. It is not what notions men may have hereof, nor how they
express their Conceptions, how defensible they are against Objections by
accuracy of Expressions and subtle Distinctions; but only what we our selves
do, if we truly believe, that we enquire after. And although our Differences
about it, do argue the great imperfection of that state wherein we are, so as
that those who truly believe cannot agree what they do in their so doing, which
should give us a mutual tenderness and forbearance toward each other; yet if
men would attend unto their own Experience in the Application of their Souls
unto God, for the pardon of Sin and Righteousness to Life, more than unto the
notions which on various occasions their minds are influenced by or
prepossessed withal, many differences and unnecessary disputations about the
nature of Justifying Faith would be prevented or prescinded. I deny therefore
that this general Assent unto the Truth, how firm soever it be, or what effects
in the way of Duty or Obedience soever it may produce, does answer the
Experience of any one true Believer, as containing the entire Actings of his
Soul toward God for pardon of sin and Justification.

8. That Faith alone is Justifying which has Justification actually
accompanying of it. For thence alone it has that denomination. To suppose a
man to have Justifying Faith, and not to be justified is to suppose a
Contradiction. Nor do we enquire after the nature of any other Faith but that
whereby a Believer is actually justified. But it is not so with all them in
whom this Assent is found; nor will those that plead for it, allow that upon it
alone any are immediately justified. Wherefore it is sufficiently evident that
there is somewhat more required unto Justifying Faith than a real Assent unto
all Divine Revelations, although we do give that Assent by the Faith whereby we
are justified.

But on the other side, it is supposed that by some the Object of Justifying
Faith is so much restrained, and the nature of it thereby determined unto such
a peculiar Acting of the mind, as compriseth not the whole of what is in the
Scripture ascribed unto it. So some have said, that it is the pardon of our
sins in particular that is the Object of Justifying Faith; Faith therefore they
make to be a full persuasion of the forgiveness of our sins through the
Mediation of Christ; or that what Christ did and suffered as our Mediator, he
did it for us in particular. And a particular Application of especial mercy
unto our own Souls and Consciences is hereby made the Essence of Faith. Or to
believe that our own sins are forgiven, seems hereby to be the first and most
proper Act of Justifying Faith. Hence it would follow, that whosoever does not
believe, or has not a firm persuasion of the forgiveness of his own sins in
particular, has no saving Faith, is no true Believer; which is by no means to
be admitted. And if any have been or are of this Opinion, I fear that they were
in the asserting of it, neglective of their own Experience; Or it may be
rather, that they knew not how in their Experience, all the other Actings of
Faith wherein its Essence does consist, were included in this persuasion, which
in an especial manner they aimed at; whereof we shall speak afterward. And
there is no doubt unto me but that this which they propose, Faith is suited
unto, aims at, and does ordinarily effect in true Believers, who improve it,
and grow in its exercise in a due manner.

Many great Divines at the first Reformation, did (as the Lutherans generally
yet do) thus make the mercy of God in Christ, and thereby the forgiveness of
our own sins, to be the proper Object of Justifying Faith, as such; whose
Essence therefore they placed in a fiducial Trust in the Grace of God by Christ
declared in the Promises, with a certain unwavering Application of them unto
our selves. And I say with some confidence, that those who endeavor not to
attain hereunto, either understand not the nature of Believing, or are very
neglective both of the Grace of God, and of their own Peace.

That which inclined those great and holy Persons so to express themselves in
this matter, and to place the Essence of Faith in the highest Acting of it,
(wherein yet they always included and supposed its other Acts) was the state of
the Consciences of men with whom they had to do. Their Contest in this Article
with the Roman Church, was about the way and means whereby the Consciences of
convinced troubled sinners might come to rest and peace with God. For at that
time they were no otherwise instructed, but that these things were to be
obtained, not only by works of Righteousness which men did themselves in
Obedience unto the Commands of God, but also by the strict observance of many
Inventions of what they called the Church; with an Ascription of a strange
Efficacy to the same Ends, unto missatical Sacrifices, Sacramentals,
Absolutions, Pennances, Pilgrimages, and other the like Superstitions. Hereby
they observed that the Consciences of men were kept in perpetual disquietments,
perplexities, fears and bondage, exclusive of that Rest, Assurance, and Peace
with God through the Blood of Christ, which the Gospel proclaims and tenders.
And when the Leaders of the People in that Church had observed this, that
indeed the ways and means which they proposed and presented, would never bring
the Souls of men to Rest, nor give them the least Assurance of the pardon of
sins, they made it a part of their Doctrine, that the belief of the pardon of
our own sins, and Assurance of the Love of God in Christ, were false and
pernicious. For what should they else do, when they knew well enough, that in
their way, and by their propositions they were not to be attained? Hence the
principal Controversy in this matter which the Reformed Divines had with those
of the Church of Rome was this, whether there be according unto, and by the
Gospel, a state of Rest and assured Peace with God to be attained in this life.
And having all Advantages imaginable for the proof hereof, from the very
nature, use, and end of the Gospel, from the Grace, Love, and Design of God in
Christ, from the Efficacy of his Mediation in his Oblation and Intercession,
they assigned these things to be the especial Object of Justifying Faith, and
that Faith it self to be a fiduciary Trust in the especial Grace and Mercy of
God, through the blood of Christ, as proposed in the Promises of the Gospel.
That is, they directed the Souls of men to seek for peace with God, the pardon
of sin, and a Right unto the Heavenly Inheritance, by placing their sole Trust
and Confidence in the mercy of God by Christ alone. But yet withal I never
read any of them, (I know not what others have done) who affirmed that every
true and sincere Believer always had a full Assurance of the Especial Love of
God in Christ, or of the pardon of his own sins; though they plead that this
the Scripture requires of them in a way of Duty, and that this they ought to
aim at the Attainment of.

And these things I shall leave as I find them, unto the use of the Church. For
I shall not contend with any about the way and manner of expressing the Truth,
where the substance of it is retained. That which in these things is aimed at,
is the Advancement and Glory of the Grace of God in Christ, with the conduct of
the Souls of men unto Rest and Peace with him. Where this is attained or aimed
at, and that in the way of Truth for the substance of it, variety of
Apprehensions and Expressions concerning the same things, may tend unto the
useful exercise of the Faith and Edification of the Church. Wherefore neither
opposing nor rejecting what has been delivered by others as their Judgments
herein, I shall propose my own thoughts concerning it; not without some hopes
that they may tend to communicate Light in the knowledge of the thing it self
enquired into, and the Reconciliation of some differences about it amongst
Learned and Holy men. I say therefore, That the Lord Jesus Christ himself, as
the Ordinance of God in his work of Mediation for the Recovery and Salvation of
lost sinners, and as unto that End proposed in the Promise of the Gospel, is
the adequate proper Object of Justifying Faith, or of saving Faith in its Work
and Duty with respect unto our Justification.

The Reason why I thus state the Object of Justifying Faith, is because it
completely answers all that is ascribed unto it in the Scripture, and all that
the nature of it does require. What belongs unto it as Faith in general is here
supposed; and what is peculiar unto it as Justifying is fully expressed. And a
few things will serve for the Explication of the Thesis which shall afterward
be confirmed.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ himself is asserted to be the proper Object of
Justifying Faith. For so it is required in all those Testimonies of Scripture
where that Faith is declared to be our believing in him, on his name, our
receiving of him, or looking unto him, whereunto the Promise of Justification
and Eternal Life is annexed; whereof afterward. See Joh. 1.12. chap. 3.16, 36.
chap. 6.29, 47. chap. 7.38. chap. 15.25. Act. 10.41. Act. 13.38, 39. Act.
16.31. Act. 26.18. etc.

2. He is not proposed as the Object of our Faith unto the Justification of
Life absolutely, but as the Ordinance of God even the Father unto that end, who
therefore also is the immediate Object of Faith as Justifying; in what respects
we shall declare immediately. So Justification is frequently ascribed unto
Faith as peculiarly acted on him, Joh. 5.24. He that believes on him that sent
me, has Everlasting Life, and shall not come into Judgment, but is passed from
Death into Life. And herein is comprised that Grace, Love and Favor of God,
which is the principal moving cause of our Justification, Romans 3.23, 24. Add
hereunto Joh. 6.29. and the Object of Faith is complete. This is the Work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. God the Father as sending, and
the Son as sent, that is, Jesus Christ in the work of his Mediation, as the
Ordinance of God for the Recovery and Salvation of lost sinners, is the Object
of our Faith. See 1 Pet. 1.21.

3. That he may be the Object of our Faith whose general nature consists in
Assent, and which is the Foundation of all its other Acts, He is proposed in
the promises of the Gospel, which I therefore place as concurring unto its
complete Object. Yet do I not herein consider the Promises merely as peculiar
divine Revelations, in which sense they belong unto the formal Object of Faith;
but as they contain, propose, and exhibit Christ as the Ordinance of God and
the Benefits of his Mediation unto them that do believe. There is an especial
Assent unto the Promises of the Gospel, wherein some place the nature and
essence of Justifying Faith, or of Faith in its Work and Duty with respect unto
our Justification. And so they make the Promises of the Gospel to be the proper
Object of it. And it cannot be, but that in the Actings of Justifying Faith
there is a peculiar Assent unto them. Howbeit this being only an Act of the
mind, neither the whole nature, nor the whole work of Faith can consist
therein. Wherefore so far as the Promises concur to the complete Object of
Faith, they are considered materially also, namely, as they contain, propose,
and exhibit Christ unto Believers. And in that sense are they frequently
affirmed in the Scripture to be the Object of our Faith unto the Justification
of Life, Act. 2.39. Act. 26.6. Romans 4.16, 20. chap. 15.8. Gal. 3.16, 18. Heb.
4.1. chap. 6.13. chap. 8.6. chap. 10.36.

4. The End for which the Lord Christ in the Work of his Mediation is the
Ordinance of God, and as such proposed in the Promises of the Gospel, namely,
the Recovery and Salvation of lost sinners, belongs unto the Object of Faith as
Justifying. Hence the forgiveness of sin and Eternal Life are proposed in the
Scripture as things that are to be believed unto Justification, or as the
Object of our Faith, Math. 9.2. Act. 2.38, 39. chap. 5.31. chap. 26.18. Romans
3.25. chap. 4.7, 8. Col. 2.13. Tit. 1.2. etc. And whereas the Just is to live
by his Faith, and every one is to believe for himself, or make an Application
of the things believed unto his own behoof, some from hence have affirmed the
pardon of our own sins, and our own Salvation to be the proper Object of Faith,
and indeed it does belong thereunto when in the way and order of God and the
Gospel we can attain unto it, 1. Cor. 15.3, 4. Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.

Wherefore asserting the Lord Jesus Christ in the Work of his Mediation to be
the Object of Faith unto Justification, I include therein the Grace of God
which is the Cause, the pardon of sin which is the Effect, and the Promises of
the Gospel which are the means of communicating Christ and the benefit of his
Mediation unto us.

And all these things are so united, so intermixed in their mutual Relations
and Respects, so concatenated in the purpose of God, and the Declaration made
of his Will in the Gospel, as that the Believing of any one of them does
virtually include the belief of the rest. And by whom any one of them is
disbelieved, they frustrate and make void all the rest, and so Faith it self.

The due Consideration of these things solveth all the Difficulties that arise
about the nature of Faith, either from the Scripture, or from the Experience of
them that believe, with respect unto its Object. Many things in the Scripture
are we said to believe with it and by it, and that unto Justification. But two
things are hence evident. (1) That no one of them can be asserted to be the
complete adequate Object of our Faith. (2) That none of them are so absolutely,
but as they relate unto the Lord Christ, as the Ordinance of God for our
Justification and Salvation.

And this answers the Experience of all that do truly believe. For these
things being united and made inseparable in the constitution of God, all of
them are virtually included in every one of them. (1) Some fix their Faith and
Trust principally on the Grace, Love, and Mercy of God; especially they did so
under the Old Testament, before the clear Revelation of Christ and his
Mediation. So did the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.34. Psalm. 33.18, 19. And the
Publican, Luke 18.13. And these are in places of the Scripture innumerable
proposed as the Causes of our Justification. See Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. But this they do not absolutely, but with respect unto
the Redemption that is in the Blood of Christ; Dan. 9.17. Nor does the
Scripture any where propose them unto us, but under that consideration. See
Romans 3.24, 25. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. For this is the cause, way and means of the
communication of that Grace, Love, and Mercy unto us. (2) Some place and fix
them principally on the Lord Christ, his Mediation and the Benefits thereof.
This the Apostle Paul proposes frequently unto us in his own Example. See Gal.
2.20. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. But this they do not absolutely, but with respect unto
the Grace and Love of God whence it is that they are given and communicated
unto us, Romans 8.32. Joh. 3.16. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. Nor are they otherwise any
where proposed unto us in the Scripture as the Object of our Faith unto
Justification. (3) Some in a peculiar manner fix their Souls in Believing on
the Promises. And this is exemplified in the Instance of Abraham, Genesis 15.16.
Romans 4.20. And so are they proposed in the Scripture as the Object of our
Faith, Act. 2.39. Romans 4.16. Heb. 4.1, 2. chap. 6.12, 13. But this they do not
merely as they are Divine Revelations, but as they contain and propose unto us
the Lord Christ and the Benefits of his Mediation, from the Grace, Love, and
Mercy of God. Hence the Apostle disputes at large in his Epistle unto the
Galatians, That if Justification be any way but by the Promise, both the Grace
of God, and the death of Christ are evacuated and made of none effect. And the
Reason is, because the Promise is nothing but the way and means of the
Communication of them unto us. (4) Some fix their Faith on the things
themselves which they aim at; namely, the pardon of sin and Eternal Life. And
these also in the Scripture are proposed unto us as the Object of our Faith, or
that which we are to believe unto Justification, Psalm. 130.4. Act. 26.18. Tit.
1.2. But this is to be done in its proper order, especially as unto the
Application of them unto our own Souls. For we are no where required to believe
them, or our own Interest in them, but as they are effects of Grace, and Love
of God, through Christ and his Mediation proposed in the Promises of the
Gospel. Wherefore the Belief of them is included in the Belief of these, and is
in order of nature antecedent thereunto. And the Belief of the forgiveness of
sins and Eternal Life, without the due Exercise of Faith in those Causes of
them, is but Presumption.

I have therefore given the entire Object of Faith as Justifying, or in its
Work and Duty with respect unto our Justification, in compliance with the
Testimonies of the Scripture, and the Experience of them that believe.

Allowing therefore their proper place unto the Promises, and unto the Effect
of all in the pardon of sins and Eternal Life; that which I shall farther
confirm is, That the Lord Christ in the Work of his Mediation, as the Ordinance
of God for the Recovery and Salvation of lost sinners, is the proper adequate
Object of Justifying Faith. And the true nature of Evangelical Faith consists
in the Respect of the Heart (which we shall immediately describe) unto the
Love, Grace, and Wisdom of God, with the Mediation of Christ, in his Obedience,
with the Sacrifice, Satisfaction, and Atonement for sin which he made by his
Blood. These things are impiously opposed by some as inconsistent. For the
second Head of the Socinian Impiety is, That the Grace of God, and Satisfaction
of Christ are opposite and inconsistent, so as that if we allow of the one we
must deny the other. But as these things are so proposed in the Scripture, as
that without granting them both, neither can be believed; so Faith which
respects them as subordinate, namely, the Mediation of Christ unto the Grace of
God, that fixes it self on the Lord Christ and that Redemption which is in his
blood, as the Ordinance of God, the Effect of his Wisdom, Grace and Love, finds
rest in both, and in nothing else.

For the proof of the Assertion I need not labor in it; it being not only
abundantly declared in the Scripture, but that which contains in it a principal
part of the Design and Substance of the Gospel. I shall therefore only refer
unto some of the Places wherein it is taught, or the Testimonies that are given
unto it.

The whole is expressed in that place of the Apostle wherein the Doctrine of
Justification is most eminently proposed unto us, Romans 3.24, 25. Being
justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus;
whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood; to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins. Whereunto we may add
Ephesians. 1.6, 7. He has made us accepted in the Beloved, in whom we have
Redemption through his Blood, according to the Riches of his Grace. That
whereby we are justified is the especial Object of our Faith unto
Justification. But this is the Lord Christ in the Work of his Mediation. For we
are justified by the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; for in him we have
Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sin. Christ as a
Propitiation is the Cause of our Justification, and the Object of our Faith, or
we attain it by Faith in his Blood. But this is so under this formal
Consideration, as he is the Ordinance of God for that End, appointed, given,
proposed, set forth from and by the Grace, Wisdom, and Love of God. God set him
forth to be a Propitiation. He makes us accepted in the Beloved. We have
Redemption in his Blood, according to the Riches of his Grace, whereby he makes
us accepted in the Beloved. And herein he abounds toward us in all wisdom;
Ephesians. 1.8. This therefore is that which the Gospel proposes unto us, as the
especial Object of our Faith unto the Justification of Life.

But we may also in the same manner confirm the several parts of the Assertion
distinctly.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ as proposed in the Promise of the Gospel, is the
peculiar Object of Faith unto Justification. There are three sorts of
Testimonies whereby this is confirmed.

1. Those wherein it is positively asserted. As Act. 10.41. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall
receive the Remission of sins. Christ believed in as the means and cause of the
Remission of sins, is that which all the Prophets give witness unto Act. 16.31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. It is the Answer of
the Apostles unto the Jaylors enquiry; Sirs, What must I do to be saved? His
Duty in Believing, and the Object of it, the Lord Jesus Christ, is what they
return thereunto, Act. 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other; for there
is none other Name under Heaven given unto men whereby we must be saved. That
which is proposed unto us as the only way and means of our Justification and
Salvation, and that in opposition unto all other ways, is the Object of Faith
unto our Justification; But this is Christ alone, exclusively unto all other
things. This is testified unto by Moses and the Prophets; the Design of the
whole Scripture being to direct the Faith of the Church unto the Lord Christ
alone* for Life and Salvation, Luke 24.25, 26, 27.

2. All those wherein Justifying Faith is affirmed to be, our Believing in him,
or Believing on his name, which are multiplied. Joh. 1.12. He gave power to
them to become the Sons of God, who believed on his name, chap. 3.16. That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life, ver.
36. He that believes on the Son has Everlasting Life, chap. 6.29. This is the
work of God that ye believe on him whom he has sent, ver. 47. He that
believes on me has Everlasting Life, chap. 7.38. He that believes on me, out
of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water. So chap. 9.35, 36, 37. chap.
11.25. Act. 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified, by Faith that is in me, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. In all
which places, and many other, we are not only directed to place and affix our
Faith on him, but the Effect of Justification is ascribed thereunto. So
expressly, Act. 13.38, 39. which is what we design to prove.

3. Those which give us such a description of the Acts of Faith, as make him
the direct and proper Object of it. Such are they wherein it is called a
receiving of him, Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, Col. 2.6. As you have
received Christ Jesus the Lord. That which we receive by Faith is the proper
Object of it. And it is represented their looking unto the Brazen Serpent when
it was lifted up, who were stung by fiery Serpents, Joh. 3.14, 15. chap. 12.
32. Faith is that Act of the Soul whereby Convinced sinners, ready otherwise to
perish, do look unto Christ as he was made a Propitiation for their sins; and
who so do shall not perish but have Everlasting Life. He is therefore the
Object of our Faith.

2 ly. He is so as he is the Ordinance of God unto this End, which
consideration is not to be separated from our Faith in him. And this also is
confirmed by several sorts of Testimonies.

1. All Those wherein the Love and Grace of God are proposed as the only Cause
of giving Jesus Christ to be the way and means of our Recovery and Salvation,
whence they become, or God in them, the supreme Efficient Cause of our
Justification, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have Everlasting
Life, So Romans 5.8. 1 John 4.9, 10. Being justified freely by his Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Christ, Romans 3.23. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. This the Lord
Christ directs our Faith unto continually, referring all unto him that sent
him, and whose Will be came to do, Heb. 10.5.

2. All those, wherein God is said to set forth and propose Christ, and to make
him be for us, and unto us, what he is so, unto the Justification of Life, Romans
3.25. Whom God has proposed to be a Propitiation, 1. Cor. 1.30. Who of God is
made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption, 2
Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him. Act. 5.35. etc. Wherefore in the acting
of Faith in Christ unto Justification, we can no otherwise consider him but as
the Ordinance of God to that End; he brings nothing unto us, does nothing for
us, but what God appointed, designed, and made him to be. And this must
diligently be considered, that by our regard by Faith unto the Blood, the
Sacrifice, the Satisfaction of Christ, we take off nothing from the free Grace,
Favor and Love of God.

3. All those wherein the Wisdom of God, in the contrivance of this way of
Justification and Salvation is proposed unto us; Ephesians. 1.7, 8. In whom we have
Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the Riches
of his Grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and
Understanding. See chap. 3.10, 11. 1 Cor. 1.24.

The whole is comprised in that of the Apostle; God was in Christ reconciling
the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19.
All that is done in our Reconciliation unto God, as unto the pardon of our
sins, and Acceptance with him unto Life, was by the presence of God in his
Grace, Wisdom, and Power in Christ, designing and effecting of it.

Wherefore the Lord Christ proposed in the Promise of the Gospel as the Object
of our Faith unto the Justification of Life, is considered as the Ordinance of
God unto that End. Hence the Love, the Grace, and the Wisdom of God in the
sending and giving of him, are comprised in that Object; and not only the
Actings of God in Christ toward us, but all his Actings toward the Person of
Christ himself unto the same End belong thereunto. So as unto his Death; God
set him forth to be a Propitiation; Romans 3.24. He spared him not, but
delivered, him up for us all, Romans 8.32. And therein laid all our sins upon
him, Isa. 53.6. So he was raised for our Justification, Romans 4.25. And our
Faith is in God who raised him from the dead, Romans 10.9. And in his Exaltation,
Act. 5.31. Which things complete the record that God has given of his Son, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12.

The whole is confirmed by the Exercise of Faith in prayer, which is the Souls
Application of it self unto God for the participation of the Benefits of the
Mediation of Christ. And it is called our Access through him unto the Father;
Ephesians. 2.18. Our coming through him unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.15, 16. and through him,
as both an High Priest and Sacrifice, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21. So do we bow our
Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Ephesians. 3.14. This answers the
Experience of all who know what it is to pray. We come therein in the name of
Christ, by him, through his Mediation, unto God even the Father, to be through
his Grace, Love and Mercy, made partakers of what he has designed and promised
to communicate unto poor sinners by him. And this represents the complete
Object of our Faith.

The due Consideration of these things will reconcile and reduce into a perfect
Harmony, whatever is spoken in the Scripture concerning the Object of
Justifying Faith, or what we are said to believe therewith. For whereas this is
affirmed of sundry things distinctly, they can none of them be supposed to be
the entire adequate Object of Faith. But consider them all in their Relation
unto Christ, and they have all of them their proper place therein; namely, the
Grace of God, which is the Cause; the pardon of sin, which is the Effect; and
the Promises of the Gospel, which are the Means of communicating the Lord
Christ and the benefits of his Mediation unto us.

The Reader may be pleased to take notice that I do in this place not only
neglect, but despise the late Attempt of some, to wrest all things of this
nature spoken of the Person and Mediation of Christ unto the Doctrine of the
Gospel, exclusively unto them; and that not only as what is noisome and impious
in it self, but as that also which has not yet been endeavored to be proved,
with any Appearance of Learning, Argument, or Sobriety.

CHAP. II. The Nature of Justifying Faith.
THat which we shall now enquire into, is the Nature of Justifying Faith; or of
Faith in that Act and Exercise of it whereby we are justified, or whereon
Justification according unto Gods Ordination and Promise does ensue. And the
Reader is desired to take along with him a supposition of those things which we
have already ascribed unto it, as it is sincere Faith in general; as also of
what is required previously thereunto, as unto its especial Nature, Work and
Duty in our Justification. For we do deny that ordinarily and according unto
the method of Gods proceeding with us declared in the Scripture, wherein the
Rule of our Duty is prescribed, that any one does, or can truly believe with
Faith unto Justification, in whom the Work of Conviction before described, has
not been wrought. All Descriptions or Definitions of Faith that have not a
respect thereunto, are but vain speculations. And hence some do give us such
Definitions of Faith, as it is hard to conceive, that they ever asked of
themselves, what they do in their Believing on Jesus Christ for Life and
Salvation.

The Nature of Justifying Faith with respect unto that Exercise of it whereby
we are justified, consists in the Hearts Approbation of the way of
Justification and Salvation of sinners by Jesus Christ proposed in the Gospel,
as proceeding from the Grace, Wisdom, and Love of God, with its Acquiescency
therein, as unto its own Concernment and Condition.

There needs no more for the Explanation of this Declaration of the Nature of
Faith, than what we have before proved concerning its Object; and what may seem
wanting thereunto, will be fully supplied in the ensuing Confirmation of it.
The Lord Christ and his Mediation, as the Ordinance of God for the Recovery,
Life and Salvation of sinners, is supposed as the Object of this Faith. And
they are all considered as an Effect of Wisdom, Grace, Authority and Love of
God, with all their actings in and toward the Lord Christ himself in his
susception and discharge of his Office. Hereunto he constantly refers all that
he did and suffered, with all the Benefits redounding unto the Church thereby.
Hence as we observed before, sometimes the Grace, or Love, or especial Mercy of
God, sometimes his actings in or toward the Lord Christ himself, in sending
him, giving him up unto Death, and raising him from the dead, are proposed as
the Object of our Faith unto Justification. But they are so always with respect
unto his Obedience and the Atonement that he made for sin. Neither are they so
altogether absolutely considered, but as proposed in the Promises of the
Gospel. Hence a sincere Assent unto the divine Veracity in those Promises, is
included in this Approbation.

What belongs unto the Confirmation of this Description of Faith shall be
reduced unto these four Heads. (1) The Declaration of its contrary, or the
nature of privative unbelief upon the proposal of the Gospel. For these things
do mutually illustrate one another. (2) The Declaration of the Design and End
of God in and by the Gospel. (3) The Nature of Faiths compliance with that
Design, or its Actings with respect thereunto. (4) The Order, Method, and Way
of Believing as declared in the Scripture.

1. The Gospel is the Revelation or Declaration of that way of Justification
and Salvation for sinners by Jesus Christ, which God in infinite Wisdom, Love
and Grace, has prepared. And upon a supposition of the Reception thereof, it
is accompanied with Precepts of Obedience, and Promises of Rewards. Therein the
Righteousness of God, that which he requires, accepts and approves unto
Salvation, is revealed from Faith unto Faith, Romans 1.17. This is the Record of
God therein that he has given unto us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his
Son, 1 John 5.10. So Joh. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. The Words of this Life, Act. 5.20.
All the Counsel of God, Act. 20.27. Wherefore in the Dispensation or Preaching
of the Gospel, this way of Salvation is proposed unto sinners, as the great
Effect of divine Wisdom and Grace. Unbelief is the Rejection, Neglect,
Non-admission, or Disapprobation of it, on the Terms whereon, and for the Ends
for which it is so proposed. The Unbelief of the Pharisees upon the preparatory
Preaching of John the Baptist is called the rejecting of the Counsel of God
against themselves, that is, unto their own Ruin, Luke 7.30. They would none
my Counsel, is an Expression to the same purpose, Prove. 1.30. so is, the
neglecting of this great Salvation, Heb. 2.3. Not giving it that Admission
which the Excellency of it does require. A disallowing of Christ; The Stone
(...), 1 Pet. 2.7. The Builders disapproved of, as not meet for that Place and
Work whereunto it was designed, Act. 4.14. This is Unbelief. To disapprove of
Christ and the Way of Salvation by him, as not answering Divine Wisdom nor
suited unto the End designed. So is it described by the refusing or not
receiving of him, all to the same purpose.

What is intended will be more Evident, if we consider the proposal of the
Gospel where it issued in Unbelief, in the first preaching of it, and where it
continues still so to do.

1. Most of those who rejected the Gospel by their Unbelief, did it under this
notion, that the way of Salvation and Blessedness proposed therein, was not a
way answering Divine Goodness and Power, such as they might safely Confide in
and Trust unto. This the Apostle declares at large, 1 Cor. 1. so he expresses
it, ver. 23, 24. We Preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness. But unto them that are called both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. That which they
declared unto them in the preaching of the Gospel was, That Christ died for our
sins according to the Scripture, chap. 15.3. Herein they proposed him as the
Ordinance of God, as the great effect of his Wisdom and Power for the Salvation
of sinners. But as unto those who continued in their Unbelief, they rejected it
as any such way, esteeming it both Weakness and Folly. And therefore he
describes the Faith of them that are called by their Approbation of the Wisdom
and Power of God herein. The want of a comprehension of the Glory of God in
this way of Salvation, rejecting it thereon, is that Unbelief which ruins the
Souls of men, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.

So is it with all that continue Unbelievers under the proposal of the Object
of Faith in the Preaching of the Gospel. They may give an Assent unto the Truth
of it, so far as it is a mere Act of the mind; at least they find not
themselves concerned to reject it. Yea they may Assent unto it with that
Temporary Faith which we described before, and perform many Duties of Religion
thereon. Yet do they manifest that they are not sincere Believers, that they do
not believe with the Heart, unto Righteousness, by many things that are
irreconcilable unto, and inconsistent with Justifying Faith. The Enquiry
therefore is, wherein the Unbelief of such persons on the Account whereof they
perish, does consist, and what is the formal nature of it. It is not as was
said, in the want of an Assent unto the Truths of the Doctrine of the Gospel;
for from such an Assent are they said in many places of the Scripture to
believe, as has been proved. And this Assent may be so firm, and by various
means so radicated in their minds, as that in Testimony unto it they may give
their Bodies to be burned; as men also may do in the confirmation of a false
persuasion. Nor is it the want of an especial fiduciary Application of the
Promises of the Gospel unto themselves, and the belief of the pardon of their
own sins in particular. For this is not proposed unto them in the first
preaching of the Gospel, as that which they are first to believe; and there may
be a believing unto Righteousness where this is not attained, Isa. 50.10. This
will evidence Faith not to be true, but it is not formal unbelief. Nor is it
the want of Obedience unto the precepts of the Gospel in Duties of Holiness and
Righteousness. For these commands as formally given in and by the Gospel,
belong only unto them that truly believe and are justified thereon. That
therefore which is required unto Evangelical Faith, wherein the nature of it
does consist, as it is the foundation of all future Obedience, is the Hearts
Approbation of the way of Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, proposed unto it
as the Effect of the infinite Wisdom, Love, Grace, and Goodness of God; and as
that which is suited unto all the wants and whole design of Guilty Convinced
sinners. This such Persons have not, and in the want thereof consists the
formal Nature of Unbelief. For without this, no man is, or can be influenced by
the Gospel unto a Relinquishment of sin, or encouraged unto Obedience, whatever
they may do on other grounds and motives that are foreign unto the Grace of
it. And wherever this Cordial sincere Approbation of the way of Salvation by
Jesus Christ proposed in the Gospel does prevail, it will infallibly produce
both Repentance and Obedience.

If the Mind and Heart of a Convinced sinner (for of such alone we treat) be
able spiritually to discern the Wisdom, Love, and Grace of God in this way of
Salvation, and be under the power of that persuasion, he has the ground of
Repentance and Obedience which is given by the Gospel. The receiving of Christ
mentioned in the Scripture, and whereby the Nature of Faith in its exercise is
expressed, I refer unto the latter part of the Description given concerning the
Souls Acquiescency in God, by the way proposed.

Again, Some there were at first, and such still continue to be, who rejected
not this way absolutely, and in the notion of it, but comparatively, as reduced
to practice, and so perished in their unbelief. They judged the way of their
own Righteousness to be better, as that which might be more safely trusted
unto, as more according unto the mind of God and unto his Glory. So did the
Jews generally, the frame of whose minds the Apostle represents, Romans 10.3, 4.
And many of them assented unto the Doctrine of the Gospel in general as true,
howbeit they liked it not in their Hearts as the best way of Justification and
Salvation, but sought for them by the works of the Law.

Wherefore Unbelief in its formal nature consists in the want of a spiritual
discerning, and Approbation of the way of salvation by Jesus Christ, as an
Effect of the infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Love of God. For where these are,
the Soul of a convinced sinner cannot but embrace it, and adhere unto it. Hence
also all Acquiescency in this Way, and Trust and Confidence in committing the
Soul unto it, or unto God in it, and by it, without which whatever is pretended
of Believing is but a shadow of Faith, is impossible unto such persons. For
they want the foundation whereon alone they can be built. And the consideration
hereof does sufficiently manifest wherein the nature of true Evangelical Faith
does consist.

2. The Design of God in and by the Gospel with the Work and Office of Faith
with respect thereunto, farther confirms the Description given of it. That
which God designeth herein in the first place, is not the Justification and
Salvation of sinners. His utmost complete End in all his Counsels, is his own
Glory; he does all things for himself, nor can he who is infinite do otherwise.
But in an especial manner he expresses this concerning this way of Salvation
by Jesus Christ.

Particularly, He designed herein the Glory of his Righteousness. To declare
his Righteousness; Romans 3.25. Of his Love; God so loved the world, Joh. 3.16.
Herein we perceive the Love of God that he laid down his life for us, 1 John
3.16. Of his Grace; accepted to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, Ephesians.
1.5, 6. Of his Wisdom; Christ Crucified, the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. might
be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. Of his Power;
It is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. Of his Faithfulness, Romans
4.16. For God designed herein, not only the Reparation of all that Glory, whose
Declaration was impeached and obscured by the Entrance of sin, but also a
farther Exaltation and more eminent Manifestation of it, as unto the Degrees of
its Exaltation, and some especial Instances before concealed, Ephesians. 3.9. And
all this is called the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, whereof Faith
is the beholding, 2 Cor. 4.6.

3. This being the principal Design of God in the way of Justification and
Salvation by Christ proposed in the Gospel, that which on our part is required
unto a participation of the Benefits of it, is the Ascription of that Glory
unto God which he designs so to Exalt. The Acknowledgment of all these glorious
properties of the Divine Nature, as manifested in the provision and proposition
of this way of life, Righteousness and Salvation, with an Approbation of the
way it self as an effect of them, and that which is safely to be trusted unto,
is that which is required of us; and this is Faith or Believing. Being strong
in Faith he gave Glory to God, Romans 4.22. And this is in the nature of the
weakest degree of sincere Faith. And no other Grace, Work or Duty, is suited
hereunto, or firstly and directly of that tendency, but only consequentially
and in the way of Gratitude. And although I cannot wholly Assent unto him who
affirms that Faith in the Epistles of Paul, is nothing but, Existimatio
magnifice sentiens de Dei Potentia, Justitia, Bonitate, and si quid promiserit
in eo praestando constantia; because it is too general and not limited unto the
way of Salvation by Christ, his Elect in whom he will be glorified, yet has it
much of the Nature of Faith in it. Wherefore I say, that hence we may both
learn the Nature of Faith, and whence it is that Faith alone is required unto
our Justification. The Reason of it is, because this is that Grace or Duty
alone whereby we do or can give unto God that Glory which he designeth to
manifest and exalt in and by Jesus Christ. This, only Faith is suited unto, and
this it is to believe. Faith in the sense we enquire after, is the Hearts
Approbation of, and consent unto the way of Life and Salvation of sinners by
Jesus Christ, as that, wherein the Glory of the Righteousness, Wisdom, Grace,
Love, and Mercy of God is exalted, the praise whereof it ascribes unto him, and
rests in it, as unto the Ends of it, namely, Justification, Life and
Salvation. It is to give Glory to God, Romans 4.20. to behold his Glory as in a
Glass, or the Gospel wherein it is represented unto us, 2 Cor. 3.18. To have in
our Hearts the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. The contrary whereunto makes God a liar, and thereby
despoileth him of the Glory of all those holy properties which he this way
designed to manifest, 1 John 5.10.

And if I mistake not, this is that which the Experience of them that truly
believe, when they are out of the Heats of Disputation will give Testimony unto.

4. To understand the Nature of Justifying Faith aright, on the Act and
Exercise of saving Faith in order unto our Justification, which are properly
enquired after, we must consider the order of it, first the things which are
necessarily previous thereunto, and then what it is to believe with respect
unto them. As,

1. The state of a Convinced sinner; who is the only Subjectum capax
Justificationis. This has been spoken unto already; and the necessity of its
precedence unto the orderly proposal and receiving of Evangelical Righteousness
unto Justification, demonstrated. If we lose a respect hereunto, we lose our
best Guide toward the Discovery of the Nature of Faith. Let no man think to
understand the Gospel, who knows nothing of the Law. Gods constitution and
the nature of the things themselves, have given the Law the precedence with
respect unto sinners; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. And Gospel Faith
is the Souls acting according to the mind of God for deliverance from that
state and condition which it is cast under by the Law. And all those
Descriptions of Faith which abound in the Writings of Learned men, which do not
at least include in them a virtual respect unto this state and condition, or
the Work of the Law on the Consciences of sinners, are all of them vain
speculations* There is nothing in this whole Doctrine that I will more firmly
adhere unto, than the necessity of the Convictions mentioned previous unto true
Believing, without which not one line of it can be understood aright, and men
do but beat the Air in their contentions about it. See Romans 3.21, 22, 23, 24.

2. We suppose herein a sincere Assent unto all Divine Revelations, whereof the
Promises of Grace and Mercy by Christ are an especial part. This Paul supposed
in Agrippa when he would have won him over unto Faith in Christ Jesus, King
Agrippa believe thou the Prophets, I know that thou believe, Act. 26.27.
And this Assent which respects the Promises of the Gospel, not as they contain,
propose, and exhibit the Lord Christ and the Benefits of his Mediation unto us,
but as Divine Revelations of infallible Truth, is true and sincere in its kind,
as we described it before under the notion of Temporary Faith. But as it
proceeds no farther, as it includes no Act of the Will or Heart, it is not that
Faith whereby we are Justified. However it is required thereunto, and is
included therein.

3. The proposal of the Gospel according unto the Mind of God is hereunto
supposed. That is, that it be preached according unto Gods Appointment. For not
only the Gospel it self, but the Dispensation or Preaching of it in the
Ministry of the Church is ordinarily required unto Believing. This the Apostle
asserts, and proves the necessity of it at large, Romans 10.11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. Herein the Lord Christ and his Mediation with God, the only way and
means for the Justification and Salvation of lost convinced sinners, as the
product and effect of Divine Wisdom, Love, Grace* and Righteousness, is
revealed, declared, proposed, and offered unto such sinners. For therein is the
Righteousness of God revealed from Faith unto Faith, Romans 1.17. The Glory of
God is represented as in a Glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. and Life and Immortality are
brought to Light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Heb. 2.3. Wherefore,

4. The Persons who are required to believe, and whose immediate Duty it is so
to do, are such who really in their own Consciences are brought unto, and do
make the Enquiries mentioned in the Scripture; What shall we do? What shall we
do to be saved? How shall we fly from the wrath to come? Wherewithal shall we
appear before God? How shall we answer what is laid unto our Charge? Or such as
being sensible of the Guilt of sin do seek for a Righteousness in the sight of
God, Act. 2.38. Act. 16.30, 31. Micah 6.6, 7. Isa. 35.4. Heb. 6.18.

On these suppositions the Command and Direction given unto men being, Believe
and you shall be saved, the Enquiry is, what is that Act or Work of Faith,
whereby the may obtain a real interest or propriety in the Promises of the
Gospel, and the things declared in them unto their Justification before God.

And 1. It is evident from what has been discoursed, that it does not consist
in, that it is not to be fully expressed by any one single habit or Act of the
Mind or Will distinctly whatever. For there are such Descriptions given of it
in the Scripture, such things are proposed as the Object of it, and such is the
Experience of all that sincerely believe, as no one single Act either of the
Mind or Will, can answer unto. Nor can an exact method of those Acts of the
Soul which are concurrent therein be prescribed. Only what is Essential unto it
is manifest.

2. That which in order of Nature seems to have the precedence is the Assent of
the Mind unto that which the Psalmist betakes himself unto in the first place
for relief, under a sense of sin and trouble, Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou Lord
should mark Iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand. The Sentence of the Law and
Judgment of Conscience lie against him as unto any Acceptance with God.
Therefore he despairs in himself, of standing in Judgment, or being acquitted
before him. In this state that which the Soul first fixes on as unto its
relief is, that there is forgiveness with God. This as declared in the Gospel,
is, that God in his Love and Grace will pardon and justify guilty sinners
through the blood and Mediation of Christ* So it is proposed, Romans 3.23, 24.
The Assent of the Mind hereunto as proposed in the Promise of the Gospel, is
the root of Faith, the foundation of all that the Soul does in believing. Nor
is there any Evangelical Faith without it* But yet consider it abstractedly as
a mere Act of the Mind, the Essence and Nature of Justifying Faith does not
consist solely therein, though it cannot be without it. But,

2. This is accompanied in sincere Believing with an Approbation of the way of
Deliverance and Salvation proposed, as an effect of Divine Grace, Wisdom and
Love, whereon the Heart does rest in it, and apply it self unto it, according
to the Mind of God. This is that Faith whereby we are justified; which I shall
farther evince by showing what is included in it, and inseparable from it.

1. It includes in it a sincere Renunciation of all other ways and means for
the attaining of Righteousness, Life and Salvation. This is Essential unto
Faith, Act. 4.12. Hos. 14.2, 3. Jerem. 3.23. Psalm. 71.16. I will make mention
of thy Righteousness, of thine only. When a person is in the condition before
described, (and such alone are called immediately to believe, Math. 9.13. chap.
11.28. 1 Timothy 1.15.) many things will present themselves unto him for his
relief; particularly his own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. A Renunciation of them
all as unto any hope or expectation of Relief from them, belongs unto sincere
Believing, Isa. 50.10, 11.

2. There is in it the Wills consent, whereby the Soul betakes it self
cordially and sincerely, as unto all its expectation of pardon of sin and
Righteousness before God, unto the way of Salvation proposed in the Gospel.
This is that which is called coming unto Christ, and receiving of him, whereby
true Justifying Faith is so often expressed in the Scripture; or as it is
peculiarly called believing in him, or believing on his name. The whole is
expressed, Joh. 14.6. Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, the Truth and the
Life, no Man comes unto the Father but by me.

3. An Acquiescency of the Heart in God, as the Author and principal Cause of
the way of Salvation prepared; as acting in a way of Sovereign Grace and Mercy
toward sinners; Who by him do believe in God who raised him up from the dead,
and gave him Glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. The
Heart of a sinner does herein give unto God the Glory of all those holy
properties of his Nature which he designed to manifest in and by Jesus Christ.
See Isa. 42.1. chap. 49.3. And this Acquiescency of the Heart in God, is that
which is the immediate root of that waiting, patience, long-suffering and hope,
which are the proper Acts and Effects of Justifying Faith, Heb. 6.12, 15, 18,
19.

4. Trust in God, or the Grace and Mercy of God in and through the Lord Christ
as set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, does belong
hereunto, or necessarily ensue hereon. For the person called unto Believing, is
(1) convinced of sin, and exposed unto wrath. (2) Has nothing else to trust
unto for Help and Relief. (3) Does actually renounce all other things that
tender themselves unto that End; and therefore without some Act of Trust the
Soul must lie under actual Despair, which is utterly inconsistent with Faith,
or the Choice and Approbation of the way of Salvation before described. 5. The
most frequent Declaration of the Nature of Faith in the Scripture, especially
in the Old Testament, is by this Trust, and that because it is that Act of it
which composeth the Soul, and brings it unto all the Rest it can attain. For
all our Rest in this world is from Trust in God. And the especial Object of
this Trust, so far as it belongs unto the Nature of that Faith whereby we are
Justified, is God in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. For this is
respected where his Goodness, his Mercy, his Grace, his Name, his Faithfulness,
his Power, are expressed, or any of them, as that which it does immediately
rely upon. For they are no way the Object of our Trust, nor can be, but on the
account of the Covenant which is confirmed and ratified in and by the Blood of
Christ alone.

Whether this Trust or Confidence shall be esteemed of the Essence of Faith, or
as that which on the first fruit and working of it we are found in the exercise
of, we need not positively determine. I place it therefore as that which
belongs unto Justifying Faith, and is inseparable from it. For if all we have
spoken before concerning Faith may be comprised under the notion of a firm
Assent and Persuasion, yet it cannot be so, if any such Assent be conceiveable
exclusive of this Trust.

This Trust is that whereof many Divines do make special mercy to be the
peculiar Object; and that especial mercy to be such as to include in it the
pardon of our own sins. This by their Adversaries is fiercely opposed, and that
on such Grounds as manifest that they do not believe that there is any such
state attainable in this Life; and that if there were, it would not be of any
use unto us, but rather be a means of security and negligence in our Duty;
wherein they betray how great is the Ignorance of these things in their own
Minds. But Mercy may be said to be Especial two ways. (1) In it self, and in
opposition unto common mercy. (2) With respect unto him that believes. In the
first sense Especial mercy is the Object of Faith as Justifying. For no more is
intended by it, but the Grace of God setting forth Christ to be a propitiation
through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.23, 24. And Faith in this Especial mercy, is
that which the Apostle calls our Receiving of the Atonement, Romans 5.11. That is
our Approbation of it, and Adherence unto it, as the great Effect of Divine
Wisdom, Goodness, Faithfulness, Love and Grace, which will therefore never fail
them who put their Trust in it. In the latter sense it is looked on as the
pardon of our own sins in particular, the especial mercy of God unto our Souls.
That this is the Object of Justifying Faith, That a man is bound to believe
this in order of Nature antecedent unto his Justification I do deny; neither
yet do I know of any Testimony or safe Experience whereby it may be confirmed.
But yet for any to deny that an undeceiving belief hereof is to be attained in
this life; or that it is our duty to believe the pardon of our own sins, and
the especial Love of God in Christ, in the order and method of our duty and
privileges limited and determined in the Gospel, so as to come to the full
assurance of them, (though I will not deny but that Peace with God which is
inseparable from Justification may be without them) seem not to be much
acquainted with the Design of God in the Gospel, the Efficacy of the Sacrifice
of Christ, the Nature and Work of Faith or their own Duty, nor the professed
Experience of Believers recorded in the Scripture. See Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Heb. 10.2, 10, 21, 20. Psalm. 46.1, 2. Psalm. 138.7, 8. etc. Yet it is granted
that all these things are rather fruits or effects of Faith, as under Exercise
and Improvement, than of the Essence of it, as it is the Instrument in our
Justification.

And the Trust before mentioned, which is either Essential to Justifying Faith,
or inseparable from it, is excellently expressed by Bernard, De Evangel. Ser.
3. Tria considero in quibus tota mea spes consistit; charitatem adoptionis,
veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis. Murmuret jam quantum voluerit,
insipiens cogitatio mea, dicens Quis enim es tu, and quanta est illa gloria,
quibusve meritis hanc obtinere speras? and ego fiducialiter respondebo, Scio
cui credidi, and certus sum quia in charitate adoptavit me, quia verax in
promissione, quia potens in exhibitione; licet enim ei facere quod voluerit.
Hic est funiculus triplex, qui difficulter rumpitur, quem nobis ex patria
nostra in hanc terram usque demissum, firmiter obsecro teneamus, and ipse nos
sublevet, ipse nos trahat and pertrahat usque ad conspectum gloriae magni Dei,
qui est benedictus in secula.

Concerning this Faith and Trust it is earnestly pleaded by many, that
Obedience is included in it. But as to the way and manner thereof they
variously express themselves. Socinus and those who follow him absolutely, do
make Obedience to be the Essential form of Faith, which is denied by
Episcopius. The Papists distinguish between Faith informed, and Faith formed by
Charity, which comes to the same purpose. For both are built on this
supposition, that there may be true Evangelical Faith, that which is required
as our Duty, and consequently is accepted of God, that may contain all in it
which is comprised in the name and duty of Faith, that may be without Charity
or Obedience, and so be useless. For the Socinians do not make Obedience to be
the Essence of Faith absolutely, but as it justifies. And so they plead unto
this purpose, that Faith without works is dead. But to suppose that a dead
Faith, or that Faith which is dead, is that Faith which is required of us in
the Gospel in the way of Duty, is a monstrous Imagination. Others plead for
Obedience, Charity, the Love of God to be included in the Nature of Faith; but
plead not directly that this Obedience is the form of Faith, but that which
belongs unto the perfection of it, as it is justifying. Neither yet do they say
that by this Obedience, a continued course of Works and Obedience, as though
that were necessary unto our first Justification, is required; but only a
sincere active purpose of Obedience; and thereon, as the manner of our days is,
load them with reproaches who are otherwise minded, if they knew who they were.
For how impossible it is according unto their principles who believe
Justification by Faith alone, that justifying Faith should be without a sincere
purpose of Heart to obey God in all things, I shall briefly declare. For (1)
They believe that Faith is not of our selves, it is the Gift of God; yea that
it is a Grace wrought in the Hearts of men by the exceeding greatness of his
Power. And to suppose such a Grace dead, unactive, unfruitful, not operative
unto the Great End of the Glory of God, and the transforming of the Souls of
them that receive it into his Image, is a Reflection on the Wisdom, Goodness,
and Love of God himself. (2) That this Grace is in them a principle of
spiritual Life; which in the habit of it as resident in the Heart, is not
really distinguished from that of all other Grace whereby we live to God. So
that there should be Faith habitually in the Heart, I mean that Evangelical
Faith we enquire after, or actually exercised, where there is not an habit of
all other Graces, is utterly impossible. Neither is it possible that there
should be any Exercise of this Faith unto Justification, but where the mind is
prepared, disposed, and determined unto universal Obedience. And therefore (3)
It is denied, that any Faith, Trust, or Confidence which may be imagined, so as
to be absolutely separable from, and have its whole nature consistent with the
absence of all other Graces, is that Faith which is the especial Gift of God,
and which in the Gospel is required of us in a way of Duty. And whereas some
have said, That Men may believe, and place their firm Trust in Christ for Life
and Salvation, and yet not be justified; it is a position so destructive unto
the Gospel, and so full of scandal unto all pious Souls, and contains such an
express denial of the Record that God has given concerning his Son Jesus
Christ, as I wonder that any person of Sobriety and Learning should be
surprised unto it. And whereas they plead the Experience of multitudes who
profess this firm Faith and Confidence in Christ, and yet are not justified; it
is true indeed, but nothing unto their purpose. For whatever they profess, not
only, not one of them do so in the sight and judgment of God, where this matter
is to be tried; but it is no difficult matter to evict them of the folly and
falseness of this profession, by the Light and Rule of the Gospel, even in
their own Consciences if they would attend unto Instruction.

Wherefore we say the Faith whereby we are justified is such as is not found in
any but those who are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and by him united unto
Christ, whose Nature is renewed, and in whom there is a principle of all Grace
and purpose of Obedience. Only we say it is not any other Grace, as Charity,
and the like, nor any Obedience that gives life and form unto this Faith; but
it is this Faith that gives life and efficacy unto all other Graces, and form
unto all Evangelical Obedience. Neither does any thing hence accrue unto our
Adversaries, who would have all those Graces which are in their Root and
Principle at least, present in all that are to be justified, to have the same
influence unto our Justification as Faith has; or that we are said to be
justified by Faith alone, and in Explication of it in answer unto the
Reproaches of the Romanists, do say we are justified by Faith alone, but not by
that Faith which is alone, that we intend by Faith all other Graces and
Obedience also. For besides that, the nature of no other Grace is capable of
that Office which is assigned unto Faith in our Justification, nor can be
assumed into a society in operation with it, namely, to receive Christ, and the
promises of life by him, and to give Glory unto God on their Account; so when
they can give us any Testimony of Scripture assigning our Justification unto
any other Grace, or all Graces together, or all the Fruits of them, so as it is
assigned unto Faith, they shall be attended unto.

And this in particular is to be affirmed of Repentance, concerning which it is
most vehemently urged, that it is of the same necessity unto our Justification
as Faith is. For this they say is easily proved from Testimonies of Scripture
innumerable, which call all men to Repentance that will be saved; especially
those two eminent places are insisted on; Act. 2.38, 39. chap. 3.16. but that
which they have to prove, is not that it is of the same necessity with Faith
unto them that are to be justified, but that it is of the same use with Faith
in their Justification. Baptism in that place of the Apostle, Act. 2.38, 39. is
joined with Faith no less than Repentance. And in other places it is expressly
put into the same condition. Hence most of the Ancients concluded that it was
no less necessary unto Salvation than Faith or Repentance it self. Yet never
did any of them assign it the same use in Justification with Faith. But it is
pleaded, whatever is a necessary condition of the new Covenant is also a
necessary Condition of Justification. For otherwise a man might be justified,
and continuing in his justified estate not be saved, for want of that necessary
condition. For by a necessary Condition of the new Covenant they understand
that, without which a man cannot be saved. But of this Nature is Repentance as
well as Faith, and so is equally a condition of our Justification. The
Ambiguity of the signification of the word Condition, does cast much disorder
on the present enquiry, in the Discourses of some men. But to pass it by at
present, I say final perseverance is a necessary condition of the New Covenant;
wherefore by this Rule it is also of Justification. They say some things are
Conditions absolutely, such as are Faith and Repentance, and a purpose of
Obedience, some are so on some supposition only; namely, that a man's life be
continued in this world, such is a course in Obedience and Good Works, and
Perseverance unto the End. Wherefore I say then, that on supposition that a man
lives in this World, perseverance unto the End is a necessary Condition of his
Justification. And if so, no man can be justified whilst he is in this World.
For a Condition does suspend that whereof it is a Condition from Existence,
until it be accomplished. It is then to no purpose to dispute any longer about
Justification, if indeed no man is nor can be justified in this life. But how
contrary this is to Scripture and Experience is known.

If it be said that final perseverance, which is so express a Condition of
Salvation in the New Covenant, is not indeed the Condition of our first
Justification, but it is the Condition of the Continuation of our
Justification; then they yield up their grand position, that whatever is a
necessary Condition of the New Covenant, is a necessary Condition of
Justification; for it is that which they call the first Justification alone
which we treat about. And that the Continuation of our Justification depends
solely on the same causes with our Justification it self, shall be afterward
declared. But it is not yet proved, nor ever will be, that whatever is required
in them that are to be justified, is a Condition whereon their Justification is
immediately suspended. We allow that alone to be a Condition of Justification
which has an influence of causality thereunto, though it be but the causality
of an Instrument. This we ascribe unto Faith alone. And because we do so, it is
pleaded that we ascribe more in our Justification unto our selves than they do
by whom we are opposed. For we ascribe the efficiency of an Instrument herein
unto our own Faith; when they say only that it is a Condition, or Causa sine
qua non, of our Justification. But I judge that grave and wise men ought not to
give so much to the defense of the Cause they have undertaken, seeing they
cannot but know indeed the contrary. For after they have given the specious
name of a Condition, and a Causa sine qua non, unto Faith, they immediately
take all other Graces and Works of Obedience into the same state with it, and
the same use in Justification; and after this seeming Gold has been cast for a
while into the fire of Disputation, there comes out the Calf of a personal
inherent Righteousness, whereby Men are justified before God, virtute foederis
Evangelici; for as for the Righteousness of Christ to be imputed unto us, it is
gone into Heaven, and they know not what is become of it.

Having given this brief Declaration of the Nature of Justifying Faith, and the
Acts of it, (as I suppose sufficient unto my present Design) I shall not
trouble my self to give an accurate Definition of it. What are my Thoughts
concerning it, will be better understood by what has been spoken, than by any
precise definition I can give. And the Truth is, definitions of Justifying
Faith have been so multiplied by Learned Men, and in so great variety, and such
a manifest inconsistency among some of them, that they have been of no
advantage unto the Truth, but occasions of new Controversies and Divisions,
whilst every one has labored to defend the Accuracy of his own Definition,
when yet it may be difficult for a true Believer to find any thing compliant
with his own Experience in them; which kind of Definitions in these things, I
have no esteem for. I know no man that has labored in this Argument about the
Nature of Faith more than Doctor Jackson; yet when he has done all, he gives
us a definition of Justifying Faith which I know few that will subscribe unto;
yet is it in the main scope of it both pious and sound. For he tells us; Here
at length we may define the Faith by which the just do live, to be a firm and
constant Adherence unto the mercies and loving kindness of the Lord, or
generally unto the spiritual food exhibited in his Sacred Word, as much better
than this Life it self, and all the Contentments it is capable of, grounded on
a taste or relish of their sweetness, wrought in the Soul or Heart of a Man by
the spirit of Christ. Whereunto he adds, The terms for the most part are the
Prophet David's, not metaphorical as some may fancy, much less equivocal, but
proper and homogeneal to the subject defined. Tom. 1. Book 4. chap. 9. For the
lively Scriptural Expressions of Faith, by receiving of Christ, leaning on him,
rolling our selves or our burden on him, tasting how gracious the Lord is, and
the like, which of late have been reproached, yea blasphemed by many, I may
have occasion to speak of them afterward; as also to manifest that they convey
a better understanding of the Nature, Work, and Object of Justifying Faith,
unto the minds of men spiritually enlightened, than the most accurate
Definitions that many pretend unto; some whereof are destructive and exclusive
of them all.

CHAP. III. The Use of Faith in Justification; Its especial Object farther
cleared.
THe Description before given of Justifying Faith does sufficiently manifest of
what Use it is in Justification. Nor shall I in general add much unto what may
be thence observed unto that purpose. But whereas this Use of it has been
expressed with some variety, and several ways of it asserted inconsistent with
one another, they must be considered in our passage. And I shall do it with all
brevity possible; for these things lead not in any part of the Controversy
about the Nature of Justification, but are merely subservient unto other
Conceptions concerning it. When Men have fixed their Apprehensions about the
principal matters in Controversy, they express what concerns the Use of
Faith in an Accommodation thereunto. Supposing such to be the Nature of
Justification as they assert, it must be granted that the Use of Faith therein,
must be what they plead for. And if what is peculiar unto any in the substance
of the Doctrine be disproved, they cannot deny but that their Notions about the
Use of Faith do fall unto the Ground. Thus is it with all who affirm Faith to
be either the Instrument, or the Condition, or the Causa sine qua non, or the
preparation and disposition of the Subject, or a meritorious cause by way of
condecency or congruity, in and of our Justification. For all these notions of
the Use of Faith are suited and accommodated unto the Opinions of Men
concerning the nature and principal causes of Justification. Neither can any
Trial or Determination be made, as unto their Truth and Propriety, but upon a
previous Judgment concerning those causes, and the whole Nature of
Justification it self. Whereas therefore it were vain and endless to plead the
principal matter in Controversy upon every thing that occasionally belongs
unto it; and so by the Title unto the whole Inheritance on every Cottage that
is built on the premises, I shall briefly speak unto these various Conceptions
about the Use of Faith in our Justification, rather to find out and give an
understanding of what is intended by them, than to argue about their Truth and
Propriety, which depends on that wherein the substance of the Controversy does
consist.

Protestant Divines until of late, have unanimously affirmed Faith to be the
instrumental cause of our Justification. So it is expressed to be in many of
the public Confessions of their Churches. This Notion of theirs concerning the
Nature and Use of Faith, was from the first opposed by those of the Roman
Church. Afterward it was denied also by the Socinians, as either false or
improper. Socin. Miscellnn. Smalcius adv. Frantz. disput. 4 Schlicting. adver.
Meisner. de Justificat. And of late this expression is disliked by some among
our selves; wherein they follow Episcopius Curcellius and others of that way.
Those who are sober and moderate do rather decline this Notion and Expression
as improper than reject them as untrue. And our safest course in these cases is
to consider what is the thing or matter intended. If that be agreed upon, he
deserves best of Truth, who parts with strife about propriety of Expressions,
before it be meddled with. Tenacious pleading about them will surely render our
Contentions Endless; and none will ever want an Appearance of probability to
give them countenance in what they pretend. If our design in teaching be the
same with that of the Scripture, namely, to inform the Minds of Believers, and
convey the Light of the knowledge of God in Christ unto them, we must be
contented sometimes to make use of such Expressions, as will scarce pass the
Ordeal of arbitrary Rules and Distinctions through the whole compass of
notional and artificial Sciences. And those who without more ado reject the
instrumentality of Faith in our Justification as an unscriptural Notion, as
though it were easy for them with one breath to blow away the Reasons and
Arguments of so many Learned Men as have pleaded for it, may not I think do
amiss to review the Grounds of their Confidence. For the Question being only
concerning what is intended by it, it is not enough that the Term or Word it
self of an instrument is not found unto this purpose in the Scripture. For on
the same Ground we may reject a Trinity of Persons in the Divine Essence,
without an acknowledgment whereof, not one Line of the Scripture can be rightly
understood.

Those who assert Faith to be as the Instrumental cause in our Justification,
do it with respect unto two Ends. For first they design thereby to declare the
meaning of those expressions in the Scripture, wherein we are said to be
justified (...) absolutely, which must denote, either instrumentum aut formam,
aut modum actionis. (...); Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a Man is
justified by Faith. So (...), ver. 22. (...); Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.8. (...);
Ephesians. 2.8. (...). Romans 3.22, 30. That is fide; ex fide, per fidem; which we
can express only by Faith or through Faith. Propter fidem, or (...); for our
Faith we are no where said to be justified. The Enquiry is, what is the most
proper, lightsome, and convenient way of declaring the meaning of these
Expressions. This the Generality of Protestants do judge to be by an
instrumental cause. For some kind of causality they do plainly intimate,
whereof the lowest and meanest is that which is instrumental. For they are used
of Faith in our Justification before God, and of no other Grace or Duty
whatever. Wherefore the proper Work or Office of Faith in our Justification is
intended by them. And (...) is no where used in the whole New Testament with a
genitive case, (nor in any other good Author) but it denotes an instrumental
Efficiency at least. In the divine Works of the Holy Trinity, the operation of
the second Person, who is in them a principal Efficient, yet is sometimes
expressed thereby; it may be to denote the order of Operation in the Holy
Trinity answering the order of Subsistence, though it be applied unto God
absolutely or the Father; Romans 11.35. (...), by him are all things. Again,
(...); and (...) are directly opposed, Gal. 3.2. But when it is said that a man
is not justified, (...), by the works of the Law, it is acknowledged by all
that the meaning of the Expression is to exclude all efficiency in every kind
of such works from our Justification. It follows therefore that where in
opposition hereunto, we are said to be justified (...), by Faith; an
instrumental efficiency is intended. Yet will I not therefore make it my
controversy with any, that Faith is properly an instrument, or the
instrumental cause in or of our Justification; and so divert into an
impertinent contest about the nature and kinds of Instruments and Instrumental
causes as they are metaphysically hunted with a confused Cry of futilous terms
and distinctions. But this I judge, that among all those notions of things
which may be taken from common use and understanding to represent unto our
minds the meaning and intention of the scriptural Expressions so often used,
(...), there is none so proper as this of an Instrument or Instrumental cause,
seeing a causality is included in them, and that of any other kind certainly
excluded; nor has it any of its own.

But it may be said, that if Faith be the Instrumental cause of Justification;
it is either the Instrument of God, or the Instrument of Believers themselves.
That it is not the Instrument of God is plain, in that it is a duty which he
prescribes unto us; it is an Act of our own; and it is we that believe not
God; nor can any Act of ours be the Instrument of his Work. And if it be our
Instrument, seeing an Efficiency is ascribed unto it, then are we the efficient
causes of our own Justification in some sense, and may be said to justify our
selves, which is derogatory to the Grace of God, and the Blood of Christ.

I confess that I lay not much weight on Exceptions of this nature. For (1)
notwithstanding what is said herein, the Scripture is express, that God
justifies us by Faith. It is one God which shall justify the Circumcision
(...), (by Faith) and the uncircumcision, (...), through or by Faith, Romans
3.30. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through
Faith, Gal. 3.8. As he purifieth the Hearts of men by Faith, Act. 15.9.
Wherefore Faith in some sense may be said to be the Instrument of God in our
Justification; both as it is the means and way ordained and appointed by him on
our part whereby we shall be justified, as also because he bestows it on us,
and works it in us unto this end that we may be justified; For by Grace we are
saved, through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of God, Ephesians.
3.8. If any one shall now say, that on these accounts, or with respect unto
Divine Ordination and Operation concurring unto our Justification, that Faith
is the Instrument of God in its place and way, (as the Gospel also is, Romans
1.16. and the Ministers of it, 2 Cor. 5.18. 1 Timothy 4.6. and the Sacraments
also, Romans 4.11. Tit. 3.5. in their several places and kinds) unto our
Justification, it may be he will contribute unto a right conception of the work
of God herein, as much as those shall by whom it is denied.

But that which is principally intended is, that it is the Instrument of them
that do believe. Neither yet are they said hereon to justify themselves. For
whereas it does neither really produce the effect of Justification by a
physical operation, nor can do so, it being a pure Sovereign Act of God; nor is
morally any way meritorious thereof, nor does dispose the subject wherein it is
unto the Introduction of an inherent formal cause of Justification, there being
no such thing in rerum natura, nor has any other Physical or moral respect
unto the effect of Justification, but what arises merely from the constitution
and appointment of God, there is no Color of Reason from the Instrumentality
of Faith asserted, to ascribe the Effect of Justification unto any, but unto
the principal efficient cause, which is God alone, and from whom it proceeds
in a way of free and sovereign Grace, disposing the Order of things, and the
Relation of them one unto another, as seems good unto him. (...)* Romans 3.24.
(...), ver. 25. It is therefore the Ordinance of God prescribing our duty, that
we may be justified freely by his Grace, having its use and operation toward
that End after the manner of an Instrument, as we shall see farther,
immediately. Wherefore so far as I can discern, they contribute nothing unto
the real understanding of this Truth, who deny Faith to be the instrumental
cause of our Justification, and on other Grounds assert it to be the Condition
thereof, unless they can prove that this is a more natural exposition of those
expressions, (...), which is the first thing to be enquired after. For all that
we do in this matter is but to endeavor a right understanding of Scripture
propositions and expressions, unless we intend to wander extra oleas, and lose
our selves in a maze of uncertain conjectures.

Secondly, They designed to declare the use of Faith in Justification,
expressed in the Scripture by apprehending and receiving of Christ, or his
Righteousness, and Remission of sins thereby. The words whereby this use of
Faith in our Justification is expressed are (...), and (...). And the constant
use of them in the Scripture is to take or receive what is offered, tendered,
given or granted unto us; or to apprehend and lay hold of any thing thereby to
make it our own, as (...) is also used in the same sense. Heb. 2.16. So are we
said by Faith to receive Christ, Joh. 1.12. Col. 2.6. The Abundance of Grace
and the Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. The word of Promise, Act. 2.41. The
word of God, Act. 8.14. 1 These. 1.6. chap. 2.13. The Atonement made by the
blood of Christ, Romans 5.11. The forgiveness of sins, Act. 10.43. chap. 26.18.
The Promise of the spirit, Gal. 3.14. The Promises, Heb. 9.15. There is
therefore nothing that concurreth unto our Justification, but we receive it by
Faith. And unbelief is expressed by not receiving, Joh. 1.11. chap. 3.11. chap.
12.48. chap. 14.17. Wherefore the Object of Faith in our Justification, that
whereby we are justified, is tendered, granted and given unto us of God, the
use of Faith being to lay hold upon it, to receive it, so as that it may be our
own. What we receive of outward things that are so given unto us, we do it by
our hand which therefore is the instrument of that reception, that whereby we
apprehend or lay hold of any thing to appropriate it unto our selves; and that
because this is the peculiar Office which by nature it is assigned unto among
all the members of the body. Other Uses it has, and other members on other
Accounts may be as useful unto the body as it; but it alone is the instrument
of receiving and apprehending that which being given, is to be made our own and
to abide with us. Whereas therefore the Righteousness wherewith we are
justified is the Gift of God, which is tendered unto us in the Promise of the
Gospel, the Use and Office of Faith being to receive, apprehend, or lay hold of
and appropriate this Righteousness, I know not how it can be better expressed
than by an Instrument, nor by what notion of it more light of understanding may
be conveyed unto our minds. Some may suppose other Notions are meet to express
it by on other Accounts; and it may be so with respect unto other uses of it.
But the sole present Enquiry is, how it shall be declared, as that which
receives Christ, the Atonement, the Gift of Righteousness, which will prove
its only use in our Justification. He that can better express this than by an
Instrument, ordained of God unto this End, all whose use depends on that
Ordination of God, will deserve well of the Truth. It is true that all those
who place the formal Cause or Reason of our Justification in our selves, or our
inherent Righteousness, and so either directly or by just consequence deny all
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto our Justification, are not
capable of admitting Faith to be an Instrument in this work, nor are pressed
with this consideration. For they acknowledge not that we receive a
Righteousness which is not our own by way of Gift, whereby we are justified,
and so cannot allow of any Instrument whereby it should be received. The
Righteousness it self being as they phrase it, putative, imaginary, a chimaera,
a fiction, it can have no real accidents, nothing that can be really predicated
concerning it. Wherefore as was said at the Entrance of this Discourse, the
Truth and Propriety of this declaration of the Use of Faith in our
Justification by an Instrumental cause, depends on the substance of the
Doctrine it self concerning the nature and principal causes of it, with which
they must stand or fall. If we are justified through the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, which Faith alone apprehends and receives, it will not
be denied but that it is rightly enough placed as the Instrumental cause of our
Justification. And if we are justified by an inherent Evangelical Righteousness
of our own, Faith may be the Condition of its Imputation, or a disposition for
its Introduction, or a congruous merit of it, but an Instrument it cannot be.
But yet for the present it has this double advantage; (1) That it best and
most appositely answers what is affirmed of the Use of Faith in our
Justification, in the Scripture, as the Instances given do manifest; (2.) That
no other notion of it can be so stated, but that it must be apprehended in
order of time to be previous unto Justification, which Justifying Faith cannot
be, unless a man may be a true Believer with Justifying Faith, and yet not be
justified.

Some do plead that Faith is the Condition of our Justification, and that
otherwise it is not to be conceived of. As I said before, so I say again, I
shall not contend with any man about Words, Terms, or Expressions, so long as
what is intended by them, is agreed upon. And there is an obvious sense wherein
Faith may be called the Condition of our Justification. For no more may be
intended thereby, but that it is the Duty on our part which God requires, that
we may be justified. And this the whole Scripture bears witness unto. Yet
this hinders not, but that as unto its Use, it may be the Instrument whereby
we apprehend or receive Christ and his Righteousness. But to assert it the
Condition of our Justification, or that we are justified by it as the Condition
of the New Covenant, so as from a pre-conceived signification of that word, to
give it another use in Justification exclusive of that pleaded for, as the
Instrumental Cause thereof, is not easily to be admitted; because it supposes
an Alteration in the substance of the Doctrine it self.

The Word is no where used in the Scripture in this matter; which I argue no
farther, but that we have no certain Rule or Standard to try and measure its
signification by. Wherefore it cannot first be introduced in what sense men
please, and then that sense turned into Argument for other Ends. For thus on a
supposed concession, that it is the Condition of our Justification, some
heighten it into a subordinate Righteousness, imputed unto us, antecedently as
I suppose, unto the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ in any sense,
whereof it is the Condition. And some who pretend to lessen its efficiency or
dignity in the use of it in our Justification say, it is only causa sine qua
non, which leaves us at as great an uncertainty as to the nature and efficacy
of this Condition as we were before. Nor is the true sense of things at all
illustrated, but rather darkened by such notions.

If we may introduce Words into Religion no where used in the Scripture (as we
may and must if we design to bring light, and communicate proper apprehensions
of the things contained unto the minds of men) yet are we not to take along
with them arbitrary pre-conceived senses, forged either among Lawyers, or in
the Peripatetical School. The use of them in the most approved Authors of the
Language whereunto they do belong, and their common vulgar acceptance among
our selves, must determine their sense and meaning. It is known what confusion
in the minds of men, the Introduction of words into Ecclesiastical Doctrines,
of whose signification there has not been a certain determinate Rule agreed
on, has produced. So the word Merit was introduced by some of the Ancients,
(as is plain from the design of their Discourses where they use it) for
impetration or acquisition quovis modo; by any means whatever. But there being
no cogent Reason to confine the Word unto that precise signification, it has
given occasion to as great a Corruption as has befallen Christian Religion. We
must therefore make use of the best means we have to understand the meaning of
this word, and what is intended by it, before we admit of its use in this case.

Conditio in the best Latin Writers is variously used; answering (...) in the
Greek: That is, Status, Fortuna, Dignitas, Causa, Pactum initum. In which of
their significations it is here to be understood is not easy to be determined.
In common use among us, it sometimes denotes the State and Quality of men, that
is, (...) and (...), and sometimes a valuable consideration of what is to be
done; that is, (...) or (...). But herein it is applied unto things in great
variety; sometimes the principal procuring purchasing cause is so expressed. As
the Condition whereon a man lends another an hundred pound, is that he be paid
it again with Interest. The Condition whereon a man conveyeth his Land unto
another, is, that he receive so much money for it. So a Condition is a valuable
consideration. And sometimes it signifies such things as are added to the
principal cause whereon its operation is suspended. As a man bequeaths an
hundred pound unto another, on condition that he come or go to such a place to
demand it. This is no valuable consideration, yet is the effect of the
principal cause, or the Will of the Testator suspended thereon. And as unto
Degrees of respect unto that whereof any thing is a Condition, as to purchase,
procurement, valuable consideration, necessary presence, the variety is
endless. We therefore cannot obtain a determinate sense of this word Condition,
but from a particular declaration of what is intended by it, wherever it is
used. And although this be not sufficient to exclude the Use of it from the
Declaration of the way and manner how we are justified by Faith; yet is it so
to exclude the imposition of any precise signification of it, any other than is
given it by the matter treated of. Without this every thing is left ambiguous
and uncertain whereunto it is applied.

For Instance; It is commonly said that Faith and New Obedience are the
Condition of the New Covenant. But yet because of the ambiguous signification
and various use of that term (Condition) we cannot certainly understand what is
intended in the Assertion. If no more be intended, but that God in and by the
New Covenant does indispensibly require these things of us, that is, the
Restipulation of a good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead, in order unto his own Glory, and our full enjoyment of all the
Benefits of it, it is unquestionably true. But if it be intended, that they are
such a Condition of the Covenant, as to be by us performed antecedently unto
the participation of any Grace, Mercy, or Privilege of it, so as that they
should be the consideration and procuring causes of them, that they should be
all of them as some speak, the Reward of our Faith and Obedience, it is most
false, and not only contrary to express Testimonies of Scripture, but
destructive of the nature of the Covenant it self. If it be intended that these
things, though promised in the Covenant and wrought in us by the Grace of God,
are yet Duties required of us in order unto the participation and enjoyment of
the full End of the Covenant in Glory, it is the Truth which is asserted. But
if it be said that Faith and New Obedience, that is the Works of Righteousness
which we do, are so the Condition of the Covenant, as that whatever the one is
ordained of God as a means of, and in order to such or such an End, as
Justification, that the other is likewise ordained unto the same End, with the
same kind of Efficacy, or with the same respect unto the effect, it is expressly
contrary to the whole scope and express Design of the Apostle on that Subject.
But it will be said that a Condition in the sense intended, when Faith is said
to be the Condition of our Justification, is no more but that it is causa sine
qua non; which is easy enough to be apprehended. But yet neither are we so
delivered out of uncertainties, into a plain understanding of what is intended.
For these causae sine quibus non, may be taken largely or more strictly and
precisely. So are they commonly distinguished by the Masters in these Arts.
Those so called in a larger sense, are all such causes in any kind of
efficiency or merit, as are inferior unto principal Causes, and would operate
nothing without them, but in conjunction with them have a real effective
influence, Physical or Moral, into the production of the effect. And if we take
a Condition to be a causa sine qua non, in this sense, we are still at a loss
what may be its Use, Efficiency or Merit, with respect unto our Justification.
If it be taken more strictly for that which is necessarily present, but has no
causality in any kind, not that of a receptive Instrument, I cannot understand
how it should be an Ordinance of God. For every thing that he has appointed
unto any end Moral or Spiritual, has by virtue of that Appointment, either a
symbolical instructive efficacy, or an active efficiency, or a rewardable
condecency with respect unto that End. Other things may be generally and
remotely necessary unto such an End, so far as it partakes of the order of
natural beings, which are not Ordinances of God with respect thereunto, and so
have no kind of causality with respect unto it, as it is Moral or Spiritual. So
the Air we breath is needful unto the preaching of the Word, and consequently a
causa sine qua non thereof; but an Ordinance of God with especial respect
thereunto it is not. But every thing that he appoints unto an especial
spiritual End, has an Efficacy or Operation in one or other of the ways
mentioned. For they either concur with the principal cause in its internal
Efficiency, or they operate externally in the removal of Obstacles and
Hindrances that oppose the principal cause in its Efficiency. And this
excludes all causes sine quibus non strictly so taken from any place among
Divine Ordinances. God appoints nothing for an End that shall do nothing. His
Sacraments are not (...), but by virtue of his Institution do exhibit that
Grace which they do not in themselves contain. The preaching of the Word has a
real Efficiency unto all the Ends of it; so have all the Graces and Duties that
he works in us, and requires of us; by them all are we made meet for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; And our whole Obedience through his
gracious Appointment has a rewardable condecency with respect unto Eternal
Life. Wherefore as Faith may be allowed to be the condition of our
Justification, if no more be intended thereby, but that it is what God requires
of us that we may be justified; so to confine the declaration of its Use in our
Justification unto its being the condition of it, when so much as a determinate
signification of it cannot be agreed upon, is subservient only unto the
Interest of unprofitable strife and contention.

To close these Discourses concerning Faith and its Use in our Justification,
some things must yet be added concerning its especial Object. For although what
has been spoken already thereon, in the description of its nature and object
in general, be sufficient in general to state its especial Object also; yet
there having been an Enquiry concerning it, and debate about it in a peculiar
notion, and under some especial terms, that also must be considered. And this
is whether Justifying Faith in our Justification or its Use therein, do respect
Christ as a King and Prophet, as well as a Priest with the satisfaction that as
such he made for us, and that in the same manner, and unto the same Ends and
Purposes. And I shall be brief in this Enquiry, because it is but a late
controversy, and it may be has more of Curiosity in its Disquisition, than of
Edification in its Determination. However being not, that I know of, under
these terms stated in any public Confessions of the Reformed Churches, it is
free for any to express their Apprehensions concerning it. And to this purpose
I say;

1. Faith whereby we are justified in the receiving of Christ, principally
respects his Person for all those Ends for which he is the Ordinance of God. It
does not in the first place as it is Faith in general, respect his Person
absolutely, seeing its formal Object as such, is the Truth of God in the
Proposition, and not the thing it self proposed. Wherefore it so respects and
receives Christ as proposed in the Promise; the Promise it self being the
formal Object of its Assent.

2. We cannot so receive Christ in the Promise, as in that Act of receiving him
to exclude the consideration of any of his Offices. For as he is not at any
time to be considered by us, but as vested with all his Offices, so a distinct
conception of the mind to receive Christ as a Priest, but not as a King or
Prophet, is not Faith but unbelief, not the receiving but the rejecting of him.

3. In the receiving of Christ for Justification formally, our distinct express
Design is to be justified thereby, and no more. Now to be justified is to be
freed from the Guilt of sin, or to have all our sins pardoned, and to have a
Righteousness wherewith to appear before God, so as to be accepted with him,
and a Right to the Heavenly Inheritance. Every Believer has other designs
also, wherein he is equally concerned with this; as namely, the Renovation of
his Nature, the Sanctification of his Person, and Ability to live unto God in
all holy Obedience. But the things before mentioned are all that he aims at
or designeth in his Applications unto Christ, or his receiving of him unto
Justification. Wherefore,

4. Justifying Faith in that Act or Work of it whereby we are justified,
respects Christ in his Priestly Office alone, as he was the surety of the
Covenant, with what he did in the discharge thereof. The Consideration of his
other Offices is not excluded, but it is not formally comprised in the Object
of Faith as Justifying.

5. When we say that the Sacerdotal Office of Christ, or the Blood of Christ,
or the satisfaction of Christ is that alone which Faith respects in
Justification, we do not exclude, yea we do really include and comprise in that
Assertion, all that depends thereon, or concurs to make them effectual unto our
Justification. As (1) The free Grace and Favor of God in giving of Christ for
us and unto us, whereby we are frequently said to be justified, Romans 3.24.
Ephesians. 2.8. Tit. 3.7. His Wisdom, Love, Righteousness and Power, are of the
same Consideration as has been declared. (2) Whatever in Christ himself was
necessary antecedently unto his discharge of that Office, or was consequential
thereof, or did necessarily accompany it. Such was his Incarnation, the whole
course of his Obedience, his Resurrection, Ascension, Exaltation and
Intercession. For the Consideration of all these things is inseparable from the
Discharge of his Priestly Office. And therefore is Justification either
expressly or virtually assigned unto them also, Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.8. Heb.
2.13, 14, 15, 16. Romans 4.25. Act. 5.31. Heb. 7.27. Romans 8.34. But yet wherever
our Justification is so assigned unto them, they are not absolutely considered,
but with respect unto their relation to his Sacrifice and Satisfaction. (3) All
the means of the Application of the Sacrifice and Righteousness of the Lord
Christ unto us are also included therein. Such is the principal Efficient cause
thereof which is the Holy Ghost, whence we are said to be justified in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. and the
instrumental cause thereof on the part of God, which is the Promise of the
Gospel, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.22, 23. It would therefore be unduly pretended, that
by this Assertion we do narrow or straiten the Object of Justifying Faith as it
Justifies. For indeed we assign a respect unto the whole Mediatory Office of
Christ, not excluding the Kingly and Prophetical parts thereof; but only such a
notion of them, as would not bring in more of Christ, but much of our selves
into our Justification. And the Assertion as laid down may be proved.

1. From the Experience of all that are justified, or do seek for Justification
according unto the Gospel. For under this notion of seeking for Justification,
or a Righteousness unto Justification, they were all of them to be considered,
and do consider themselves as (...), guilty before God, subject, obnoxious,
liable unto his wrath in the curse of the Law; as we declared in the Entrance
of this Discourse, Romans 3.19. They were all in the same state that Adam was in
after the Fall, unto whom God proposed the Relief of the Incarnation and
Suffering of Christ, Genesis 3.15. And to seek after Justification, is to seek
after a discharge from this woeful state and condition. Such persons have and
ought to have other designs and desires also. For whereas the state wherein
they are antecedent unto their Justification, is not only a state of Guilt and
Wrath, but such also as wherein through the Depravation of their Nature, the
power of sin is prevalent in them, and their whole Souls are defiled, they
design and desire not only to be justified, but to be sanctified also. But as
unto the Guilt of sin, and the want of a Righteousness before God, from which
Justification is their Relief, herein I say they have respect unto Christ as
set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood. In their Design for
Sanctification they have respect unto the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of
Christ, in their especial exercise. But as to their freedom from the Guilt of
sin, and their Acceptance with God, or their Justification in his sight, that
they may be freed from condemnation, that they may not come into judgment; it
is Christ crucified, it is Christ lifted up as the brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness, it is the Blood of Christ, it is the Propitiation that he was, and
the Atonement that he made, it is his bearing their sins, his being made sin
and the curse for them, it is his Obedience, the End which he put unto sin, and
the Everlasting Righteousness which he brought in, that alone their Faith does
fix upon and acquiesce in. If it be otherwise in the Experience of any, I
acknowledge I am not acquainted with it. I do not say that Conviction of sin is
the only antecedent Condition of actual Justification. But this it is that
makes a sinner subjectum capax Justificationis. No man therefore is to be
considered as a person to be Justified, but he who is actually under the power
of the Conviction of sin, with all the necessary consequents thereof. Suppose
therefore any sinner in this Condition, as it is described by the Apostle, Romans
3. Guilty before God, with his mouth stopped as unto any pleas, defenses or
excuses; suppose him to seek after a Relief and Deliverance out of this estate,
that is to be justified according to the Gospel; he neither does, nor can
wisely take any other course than what he is there directed unto by the same
Apostle, ver. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Therefore by the Deeds of the Law there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of
sin. But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Even the Righteousness of God, which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, for there is
no difference; For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, Being
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ;
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. Whence I argue;

That which a Guilty condemned sinner finding no hope, nor Relief from the Law
of God the sole Rule of all his Obedience, does betake himself unto by Faith
that he may be delivered or justified, that is the especial Object of Faith as
Justifying. But this is the Grace of God alone through the Redemption that is
in Christ, or Christ proposed as a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood.
Either this is so, or the Apostle does not aright guide the Souls and
Consciences of men in that condition wherein he himself does place them. It is
the Blood of Christ alone that he directs the Faith unto of all them that would
be justified before God. Grace, Redemption, Propitiation, all through the Blood
of Christ, Faith does peculiarly respect and fix upon. This is that, if I
mistake not, which they will confirm by their Experience, who have made any
distinct observation of the actings of their Faith in their Justification
before God.

2. The Scripture plainly declares that Faith as Justifying, respects the
sacerdotal Office and Actings of Christ alone. In the great Representation of
the Justification of the Church of Old in the Expiatory Sacrifice, when all
their sins and iniquities were pardoned, and their persons accepted with God,
the acting of their Faith was limited unto the Imposition of all their sins on
the head of the Sacrifice by the high Priest, Lev. 16. By his knowledge, that
is Faith in him shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities, Isa. 53.11. That alone which Faith respects in Christ as unto
the Justification of sinners, is his bearing their iniquities. Guilty convinced
sinners look unto him by Faith, as those who were stung with fiery Serpents did
to the Brazen Serpent; that is, as he was lifted up on the Cross, Joh. 3.14,
15. So did he himself express the nature and actings of Faith in our
Justification, Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood. As he is a Propitiation, as he shed
his Blood for us, as we have Redemption thereby, he is the peculiar Object of
our Faith, with respect unto our Justification. See to the same purpose, Romans
5.9, 10. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15, 16. Romans 8.3, 4. He was
made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. That which we seek after in Justification is a
Participation of the Righteousness of God; to be made the Righteousness of God,
and that not in our selves but in another, that is in Christ Jesus. And that
alone which is proposed unto our Faith as the means and cause of it, is, his
being made sin for us, or a Sacrifice for sin, wherein all the Guilt of our
sins was laid on him, and he bare all our Iniquities. This therefore is its
peculiar Object herein. And wherever in the Scripture we are directed to seek
for the forgiveness of sins by the Blood of Christ, receive the Atonement, to
be justified through the Faith of him as crucified, the Object of Faith in
Justification is limited and determined.

But it may be pleaded in Exception unto the Testimonies, that no one of them
does affirm, that we are justified by Faith in the Blood of Christ alone; so as
to exclude the consideration of the other Offices of Christ and their actings,
from being the Object of Faith in the same manner, and unto the same ends, with
his Sacerdotal Office, and what belongs thereunto, or is derived from it.

Answ. This exception derives from that common Objection against the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith alone; namely that, That exclusive term alone, is not
found in the Scripture, or in any of the Testimonies that are produced for
Justification by Faith. But it is replied with sufficient evidence of Truth,
that although the word be not found Syllabically used unto this purpose; yet
there are exceptive Expressions equivalent unto it, as we shall see afterward.
It is so in this particular instance also. For (1) whereas our Justification is
expressly ascribed unto our Faith in the Blood of Christ, as the Propitiation
for our Sins, unto our believing in him as Crucified for us, and it is no where
ascribed unto our receiving of him as King, Lord, or Prophet; it is plain, that
the former Expressions are virtually exclusive of the later consideration. (2)
I do not say, That the consideration of the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of
Christ is excluded from our Justification, as works are excluded in Opposition
unto Faith and Grace. For they are so excluded, as that we are to exercise an
act of our minds in their positive Rejection, as saying, Get you hence, you
have no Lot nor Portion in this matter. But as to these Offices of Christ, as
to the Object of Faith as Justifying, we say only that they are not included
therein. For so to believe to be justified by his Blood, as to exercise a
positive act of the mind, excluding a compliance with his other Offices, is an
impious Imagination.

3. Neither the Consideration of these Offices themselves, nor of any of the
peculiar Acts of them, are suited to give the Souls and Consciences of
convinced Sinners, that Relief which they seek after in Justification. We are
not in this whole cause to lose out of our Eye, the state of the Person who is
to be justified, and what it is he does seek after, and ought to seek after,
therein. Now this is Pardon of Sin, and Righteousness before God alone. That
therefore, which is no way suited to give or tender this Relief unto him, is
not, nor can be the Object of his Faith, whereby he is justified in that
exercise of it, whereon his justification does depend. This Relief it will be
said, is to be had in Christ alone; it is true, but under what Consideration?
For the sole design of the Sinner, is how he may be accepted with God, be at
peace with him, have all his wrath turned away, by a Propitiation or
Atonement. Now this can no otherwise be done, but by the acting of some one,
toward God, and with God on his behalf; for it is about the turning away of
Gods Anger, and Acceptance with him, that the enquiry is made. It is by the
Blood of Christ, that we are made nigh, who were far off; Ephesians. 2.13. By the
Blood of Christ are we Reconciled who were Enemies; v. 16. By the Blood of
Christ we have Redemption. Romans 3.24, 25. Ephesians. 1.7. etc. This therefore, is the
Object of Faith.

All the actings of the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of Christ, are all of
them from God, that is in the Name and Authority of God toward us. Not any one
of them is toward God on our behalf, so as that by virtue of them, we should
expect Acceptance with God. They are all Good, Blessed, Holy, in themselves,
and of an eminent tendency unto the Glory of God in our Salvation: Yea, they
are no less necessary unto our Salvation to the praise of Gods Grace, then are
the Atonement for Sin and Satisfaction which he made; for from them is the way
of life Revealed unto us, Grace communicated, our Persons sanctified, and the
Reward bestowed. Yea, in the exercise of his Kingly power does the Lord Christ
does pardon and justify Sinners. Not that he did as a King constitute the Law
of Justification, for it was given and established in the first Promise, and he
came to put it in Execution; Joh. 3.16. But in the virtue of his Atonement and
Righteousness imputed unto them, he does both pardon and justify Sinners. But
they are the acts of his Sacerdotal Office alone, that respect God on our
behalf. Whatever he did on Earth with God for the Church, in Obedience,
Suffering, and Offering up of himself, whatever he does in Heaven in
Intercession, and Appearance in the presence of God for us, it all entirely
belongs unto his Priestly Office. And in these things alone does the Soul of a
convinced Sinner find Relief, when he seeks after Deliverance from the state of
Sin and Acceptance with God. In these therefore alone the peculiar Object of
his Faith, that which will give him Rest and Peace, must be comprised. And this
last consideration is of it self sufficient to determine this difference.

Sundry things are Objected against this Assertion, which I shall not here at
large discuss, because what is material in any of them, will occur on other
occasions, where its consideration will be more proper. In general it may be
pleaded, that Justifying Faith is the same with saving Faith; nor is it said,
that we are justified by this or that part of Faith, but by Faith in General,
that is, as taken essentially for the entire Grace of Faith. And as unto Faith
in this sense, not only a respect unto Christ in all his Offices, but Obedience
it self also is included in it, as is evident in many places of the Scripture.
Wherefore there is no Reason why we should limit the Object of it, unto the
Person of Christ as acting in the discharge of his Sacerdotal Office, with the
Effects and Fruits thereof.

Answ. 1. Saving Faith, and Justifying Faith in any Believer are one and the
same, and the Adjuncts of Saving and Justifying are but external Denominations,
from its distinct Operations and Effects. But yet Saving Faith does act in a
peculiar manner, and is of peculiar use in Justification, such as it is not of
under any other Consideration whatever. Wherefore (2) Although Saving Faith as
it is described in General, do ever include Obedience, not as its Form or
Essence, but as the necessary Effect is included in the cause, and the Fruit in
the Fruit-bearing juice, and is often mentioned as to its Being and Exercise,
where there is no express mention of Christ, his Blood, and his Righteousness,
but is applied unto all the Acts, Duties, and Ends of the Gospel; yet this
proves not at all, but that as unto its Duty, Place, and acting in our
Justification, it has a peculiar Object. If it could be proved, that where
Justification is ascribed unto Faith, that there it has any other Object
assigned unto it, as that which it rested in for the pardon of Sin and
Acceptance with God, this Objection were of some force. But this cannot be
done. (3)This is not to say, that we are justified by a part of Faith, and not
by it as considered essentially; for we are justified by the entire Grace of
Faith, acting in such a peculiar way and manner; as others have observed. But
the Truth is, we need not insist on the Discussion of this Enquiry. For the
true meaning of it is, not whether any thing of Christ is to be excluded from
being the Object of Justifying Faith, or of Faith in our Justification, but
what in and of our selves under the name of receiving Christ, as our Lord and
King is to be admitted unto an Efficiency or Conditionality in that work. As it
is granted, that justifying Faith is the receiving of Christ, so whatever
belongs unto the Person of Christ, or any Office of his, or any Acts in the
discharge of any Office, that may be reduced unto any cause of our
Justification, the meritorious, procuring, material, formal, or manifesting
cause of it, is so far as it does so, freely admitted to belong unto the Object
of Justifying Faith. Neither will I contend with any upon this disadvantageous
stating of the Question, What of Christ is to be esteemed the Object of
Justifying Faith, and what is not so. For the thing intended is only this;
whether our own Obedience, distinct from Faith, or included in it, and in like
manner as Faith, be the condition of our Justification before God. This being
that which is intended, which the other question is but invented to lead unto a
compliance with, by a more specious pretense then in it self it is capable of
under those terms, it shall be examined and no otherwise.

CHAP. IV. Of Justification, the notion and signification of the Word in the
Scripture.
UNto the right understanding of the nature of Justification, the proper sense
and signification of these words themselves, Justification and to justify, is
to be enquired into. For until that is agreed upon, it is impossible that our
Discourses concerning the thing it self should be freed from equivocation. Take
words in various senses, and all may be true that is contradictorily affirmed
or denied concerning what they are supposed to signify. And so it has
actually fallen out in this case, as we shall see more fully afterward. Some
taking these words in one sense, some in another, have appeared to deliver
contrary Doctrines concerning the thing it self, or our Justification before
God; who yet have fully agreed in what the proper determinate sense or
sigfication of the words does import. And therefore the true meaning of them
has been declared and vindicated already by many. But whereas the right
stating hereof, is of more moment unto the Determination of what is principally
controverted about the Doctrine it self, or the thing signified, than most do
apprehend; and something at least remains to be added for the Declaration and
Vindication of the import and only signification of these words in the
Scripture, I shall give an account of my observations concerning it, with what
diligence I can.

The Latin Derivation and Composition of the word Justificatio would seem to
denote an internal change from inherent Unrighteousness, unto Righteousness
likewise inherent; by a Physical motion, and Transmutation, as the Schoolmen
speak. For such is the signification of words of the same Composition. So
Sanctification, Mortification, Vivification, and the like do all denote a real
internal Work on the Subject spoken of. Hereon in the whole Roman School,
Justification is taken for Justifaction, or the making of a man to be
inherently Righteous by the infusion of a principle or habit of Grace, who was
before inherently and habitually unjust and unrighteous. Whilst this is taken
to be the proper signification of the word; we neither do, nor can speak ad
idem in our Disputations with them about the cause and nature of that
Justification, which the Scripture teaches.

And this appearing sense of the Word possibly deceived some of the Ancients,
as Austin in particular, to declare the Doctrine of free gratuitous
sanctification, without respect unto any Works of our own, under the name of
Justification. For neither he nor any of them, ever thought of a Justification
before God, consisting in the pardon of our sins and the Acceptance of our
Persons as Righteous, by virtue of any inherent habit of Grace infused into us,
or acted by us. Wherefore the subject matter must be determined by the
Scriptural use and signification of these words, before we can speak properly
or intelligibly concerning it. For if to Justify men in the Scripture,
signify to make them subjectively and inherently Righteous, we must
acknowledge a mistake in what we Teach concerning the nature and causes of
Justification. And if it signify no such thing, all their Disputations about
Justification by the infusion of Grace and inherent Righteousness thereon fall
to the Ground. Wherefore all Protestants (and the Socinians all of them comply
therein) do affirm that the use and signification of these words is Forensick,
denoting an Act of Jurisdiction. Only the Socinians, and some others would have
it to consist in the pardon of sin only, which indeed the word does not at all
signify. But the sense of the word, is to Assoil, to Acquit, to Declare and
pronounce Righteous upon a Trial, which in this case, the pardon of Sin does
necessarily accompany.

Justificatio and Justifico belong not indeed unto the Latin Tongue; nor can
any good Author be produced who ever used them, for the making of him
inherently Righteous by any means who was not so before. But whereas these
words were coined and framed to signify such things as are intended, we have
no way to determine the signification of them, but by the consideration of the
nature of the things, which they were invented to declare and signify. And
whereas in this Language these words are derived from Jus and Justum, they must
respect an Act of Jurisdiction, rather then a Physical Operation or infusion.
Justificari is Justus censeri, pro justo haberi; to be esteemed, accounted or
adjudged Righteous. So a Man was made Justus Filius in Adoption unto him, by
whom he was Adopted: Which what it is, is well declared by Budaeus. Cajus lib.
2. F. de Adopt. De Arrogatione loquens --; Is qui adoptat rogatur, id est,
interrogatur, an velit eum quem adopturus sit, Justum sibi Filium esse. Justum
(says he) intelligo non verum, ut aliqui censent, sed omnibus partibus ut ita
dicam Filiationis, very Filij vicem obtinentem, naturalis and legitimi Filij
loco sedentem. Wherefore as by Adoption, there is no internal inherent change
made in the Person Adopted; but by virtue thereof he is esteemed and adjudged
as a true Son, and has all the rights of a legitimate Son; so by
Justification, as to the importance of the word, a man is only esteemed,
declared and pronounced Righteous, as if he were completely so. And in the
present case, Justification and gratuitous Adoption are the same Grace for the
substance of them, Joh. 1.12. only respect is had in their different
denomination of the same Grace, unto different effects or privileges that
ensue thereon.

But the true and genuine signification of these words is to be determined from
those in the Original languages of the Scripture which are expounded by them.
In the Hebrew it is (...) This the Lxx. render by (...) Job. 27.5. (...), Chap.
13.18. (...) Prove. 17.15. To show or declare one Righteous; to appear
Righteous; to judge any one Righteous. And the sense may be taken from any one
of them, as Chap. 13.18. (...) Behold now I have ordered my cause, I know that
I shall be justified. The ordering of his cause, (his Judgment) his cause to be
judged on, is his preparation for a sentence, either of Absolution or
Condemnation; and hereon his confidence was that he should be Justified, that
is, absolved, acquitted, pronounced Righteous. And the sense is no less
pregnant in the other places; commonly they render it by (...), whereof I shall
speak afterward.

Properly it denotes an Action toward another, (as Justification, and to
justify do) in Hiphil only: and a reciprocal Action of a man on himself in
Hithpael (...). Hereby alone is the true sense of these words determined. And I
say that in no place, or on any occasion, is it used in that Conjugation
wherein it denotes an Action toward another, in any other sense, but to
absolve, acquit, esteem, declare, pronounce Righteous, or to impute
Righteousness, which is the Forensick sense of the word we plead for; that is
its constant use and signification, nor does it ever once signify to make
inherently Righteous; much less to pardon or forgive, so vain is the pretense
of some that Justification consists only in the pardon of Sin, which is not
signified by the Word in any one place of Scripture. Almost in all places this
sense is absolutely unquestionable; nor is there any more then one which will
admit of any debate, and that on so faint a pretense as cannot prejudice its
constant use and signification in all other places. Whatever therefore an
infusion of inherent Grace may be, or however it may be called, Justification
it is not, it cannot be; the Word no where signifying any such thing. Wherefore
those of the Church of Rome do not so much oppose Justification by Faith
through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as indeed deny that
there is any such thing as Justification. For that which they call the first
Justification, consisting in the infusion of a principle of inherent Grace, is
no such thing as Justification. And their second Justification which they place
in the merit of Works wherein Absolution or pardon of Sin, has neither place
nor consideration, is inconsistent with Evangelical Justification, as we shall
show afterward.

This Word therefore, whether the act of God toward men, or of men toward
God, or of men among themselves, or of one toward another be expressed
thereby, is always used in a Forensick sense, and does not denote a Physical
operation, Transfusion or Transmutation. 2 Samuel 15.4. If any man has a Suit or
Cause let him come to me, (...) and I will do him Justice; I will Justify him,
judge in his Cause and pronounce for him. Deuteronomy. 25.1. If there be a
Controversy among men, and they come to Judgment, that the Judges may judge
them, (...) they shall justify the Righteous, pronounce sentence on his side,
whereunto is opposed (...) and they shall condemn the wicked; make him wicked,
as the Word signifies; that is, judge, declare and pronounce him wicked,
whereby he becomes so judicially, and in the eye of the Law; as the other is
made Righteous, by declaration and acquitment. He does not say this shall
pardon the Righteous, which to suppose would overthrow both the Antithesis and
design of the place. And (...) is as much to infuse wickedness into a man, as
(...) is to infuse a principle of Grace or Righteousness into him. The same
Antithesis occurs; Prove. 17.15. (...) He that justifies the wicked, and
condemns the Righteous. Not he that makes the wicked inherently Righteous,
not he that changes him inherently from Unrighteous unto Righteousness: But he
that without any Ground, Reason or Foundation acquits him in Judgment, or
declares him to be Righteous, is an Abomination unto the Lord. And although
this be spoken of the Judgment of men, yet the Judgment of God also is
according unto this Truth. For although he Justifies the Ungodly, those who
are so in themselves; yet he does it on the ground and consideration of a
perfect Righteousness made theirs by Imputation; and by another act of his
Grace, that they may be meet Subjects of this Righteous Favor, really and
inherently changes them from Unrighteousness unto Holiness, by the Renovation
of their Natures: And these things are singular in the actings of God, which
nothing amongst men has any Resemblance unto or can represent. For the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, unto a Person in himself ungodly
unto his Justification, or that he may be acquitted, absolved, and declared
Righteous, is built on such Foundations, and proceeds on such Principles of
Righteousness, Wisdom, and Sovereignty, as have no place among the actions of
men, nor can have so, as shall afterward be declared. And moreover, when God
does Justify the ungodly on the account of the Righteousness imputed unto him,
he does at the same instant, by the power of his Grace, make him inherently and
subjectively Righteous or Holy, which men cannot do one toward another. And
therefore whereas man's Justifying of the wicked, is to justify them in their
wicked ways, whereby they are constantly made worse and more obdurate in evil;
when God justifies the ungodly, their change from personal unrighteousness and
unholiness, unto Righteousness and Holiness, does necessarily and infallibly
accompany it.

To the same purpose is the word used; Isa. 5.23. Which justify the wicked for
Reward. Chap. 50.8. (...). He is near that justifies me, who shall contend
with me, let us stand together, who is my Adversary, let him come near unto;
Behold the Lord God will help me, who shall condemn me; Where we have a full
Declaration of the proper sense of the Word, which is to acquit and pronounce
Righteous on a Trial. And the same sense is fully expressed in the former
Antithesis. 1 Kings. 8.31, 32. If any man trespass against his Neighbor, and
an Oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and the Oath came before thine
Altar in this House; then hear thou in Heaven and do, and judge thy Servants,
(...) to condemn the wicked, to charge his wickedness on him, to bring his way
on his head, (...) and to justify the Righteous. The same words are repeated 2 Chronicles. 6.22, 23. Psalm. 82.3. (...) Do justice to the Afflicted and Poor; that
is, justify them in their cause against Wrong and Oppression. Exodus 23.7.
(...) I will not justify the wicked; absolve, acquit, or pronounce him
Righteous. Job. 27.5. (...) Be it far from me that I should justify you, or
pronounce sentence on your side, as if you were Righteous. Isa. 53.11. By his
knowledge my Righteous servant (...) shall justify many; the reason whereof is
added: For he shall bear their Iniquities, whereon they are absolved and
justified.

Once it is used in Hithpael, wherein a reciprocal action is denoted, that
whereby a man Justifies himself. Genesis 44.16. And Judah said, what shall we say
unto my Lord? what shall we speak (...) and how shall we justify our selves,
God has found out our Iniquity? they could plead nothing why they should be
absolved from Guilt.

Once the Participle is used to denote the outward instrumental cause of the
Justification of others, in which place alone there is any doubt of its sense.
Dan. 12.3. (...); And they that justify many; namely, in the same sense that
the Preachers of the Gospel are said to save themselves and others. 1 Timothy
4.16. For men may be no less the Instrumental causes of the Justification of
others, than of their Sanctification.

Wherefore although (...) in Kal, signifies justum esse, and sometimes just
agere, which may relate unto inherent Righteousness; yet where any action
toward another is denoted, this word signifies nothing, but to esteem,
declare, pronounce, and adjudge any one absolved, acquitted, cleared,
justified: There is therefore no other kind of Justification once mentioned in
the Old Testament.

(...) is the word used to the same purpose in the New Testament, and that
alone. Neither is this word used in any good Author whatever, to signify the
making of a man Righteous by any applications to produce internal Righteousness
in him; but either to absolve and acquit, to judge, esteem, and pronounce
Righteous, or on the contrary to condemn So Suidas (...). It has two
signifiications, to punish, and to account Righteous. And he confirms this
sense of the word by Instances out of Herodotus, Appianus, and Josephus. And
again, (...); with an Accusative case, that is, when it respects and effects a
Subject, a Person, it is either to condemn and punish, or to esteem and declare
Righteous; and of this latter sense, he gives pregnant instances in the next
words. Hesychius mentions only the first signification. (...). They never
thought of any sense of this word, but what is Forensick. And in our Language
to be Justified, was commonly used formerly, for to be judged and sentenced; as
it is still among the Scots. One of the Articles of Peace between the two
Nations at the surrender of Leith, in the days of Edward the sixth was; That if
any one committed a crime, he should be justified by the Law, upon his Trial.
And in general (...), is Jus in judicio auferre; and (...), is justum censere,
declarare, pronuntiare; and how in the Scriptures it is constantly opposed unto
condemnare, we shall see immediately.

But we may more distinctly consider the use of this Word in the New Testament,
as we have done that of (...) in the Old* And that which we enquire concerning
is, whether this word be used in the New Testament, in a Forensick sense to
denote an Act of Jurisdiction, or in a Physical sense to express an internal
change or mutation, the infusion of an habit of Righteousness, and the
denomination of the person to be Justified thereon; or whether it signifies
not pardon of sin. But this we may lay aside; For surely no man was ever yet so
fond, as to pretend that (...) did signify to pardon sin; yet is it the only
word applied to express our Justification in the New Testament. For if it be
taken only in the former sense, then that which is pleaded for by those of the
Roman Church, under the name of Justification, whatever it be, however good,
useful and necessary, yet Justification it is not, nor can be so called; seeing
it is a thing quite of another nature than what alone is signified by that
word. Matthew. 11.19. (...); Wisdom is justified of her Children, not made just,
but approved and declared. Chap. 12.37. (...); by the words thou shall be
Justified; not made just by them, but judged according to them, as is manifest
in the Antithesis, (...); and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Luke. 7.29.
(...); they justified God; not surely by making him Righteous in himself, but
by owning, avowing and declaring his Righteousness; Chap. 10.29. (...); He
willing to justify himself, to declare and maintain his own Righteousness. To
the same purpose; Chap. 16.15. (...); you are they that justify your selves
before men, they did not make themselves internally Righteous, but approved of
their own condition; as our Savior declares in the place; Chap. 18.14. The
Publican went down (...) Justified unto his House; that is acquitted, absolved,
pardoned, upon the confession of his sin, and supplication for Remission. Act.
13.38, 39. with Romans 2.13. (...). The doers of the Law shall be justified. The
place declares directly the nature of our Justification before God, and puts
the signification of the word out of question. For Justification ensues, as the
whole effect of inherent Righteousness according unto the Law: And therefore it
is not the making of us Righteous; which is irrefragable. It is spoken of God;
Romans 3.4. (...); That thou may be justified in thy sayings, where to ascribe
any other sense to the word is Blasphemy. In like manner the same word is used,
and in the same signification; 1 Cor. 4.4. 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 3.20, 26, 28, 30.
Chap. 4.2, 5. Chap. 5.1, 9. Chap. 6.7. Chap. 8.30. Gal. 2.16, 17. Chap. 3.11,
24. Chap. 5.4. Tit. 3.7. Jam. 2.22, 24, 25. And in no one of these instances
can it admit of any other signification, or denote the making of any man
Righteous by the infusion of an habit, or principle of Righteousness, or any
internal mutation whatever.

It is not therefore in many places of Scripture as Bellarmine grants, that the
words we have insisted on, do signify the declaration or juridical
pronuntiation of any one to be Righteous, but in all places where they are
used, they are capable of no other but a Forensick sense; especially, is this
evident where mention is made of Justification before God. And because in my
judgment this one consideration does sufficiently defeat all the pretenses of
those of the Roman Church about the nature of Justification, I shall consider
what is excepted against the observation insisted on, and remove it out of our
way.

Lud. de Blanc. In his Reconciliatory endeavors on this Article of
Justification (These. de usu and acceptatione vocis, Justificandi) grants unto
the Papists, that the word (...) does in sundry places of the New Testament,
signify to renew, to sanctify, to infuse an habit of Holiness or
Righteousness according as they plead. And there is no reason to think but he
has grounded that concession on those instances, which are most pertinent unto
that purpose. Neither is it to be expected that a better countenance will be
given by any unto this concession, then is given it by him. I shall therefore
examine all the instances which he insists upon unto this purpose, and leave
the determination of the difference unto the judgment of the Reader. Only I
shall premise that which I judge not an unreasonable demand; namely, That if
the signification of the word in any, or all the places which he mentions,
should seem doubtful unto any (as it does not unto me) that the uncertainty of
a very few places, should not make us question the proper signification of a
word, whose sense is determined in so many, wherein it is clear and
unquestionable. The first place he mentions, is that of the Apostle Paul
himself, Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also
glorified. The reason whereby he pleads that by justified in this place, an
internal work of inherent Holiness in them that are predestined is designed,
is this and no other. It is not, says he, likely that the Holy Apostle in this
enumeration of gracious Privileges, would omit the mention of our
Sanctification by which we are freed from the service of sin, and adorned with
true internal Holiness and Righteousness: But this is utterly omitted, if it be
not comprised under the name and title of being Justified; For it is absurd
with some, to refer it unto the Head of Glorification.

Answ. (1) The Grace of Sanctification, whereby our natures are spiritually
washed, purified and endowed with a principle of life, Holiness and Obedience
unto God, is a Privilege unquestionably great and excellent, and without which
none can be saved. Of the same nature also is our Redemption by the Blood of
Christ. And both these does this Apostle in other places without number,
declare, commend, and insist upon. But that he ought to have introduced the
mention of them, or either of them in this place, seeing he has not done so, I
dare not judge.

2. If our Sanctification be included or intended in any of the Privileges
here expressed, there is none of them, Predestination only excepted, but it is
more probably to be reduced unto, than unto that of being justified. Indeed in
Vocation it seems to be included expressly. For whereas it is effectual
Vocation, that is intended wherein an Holy principle of spiritual life, or
Faith it self is communicated unto us, our Sanctification radically, and as the
effect in its adaequate immediate cause is contained in it. Hence we are said
to be called to be Saints; Romans 1.7. which is the same with being Sanctified in
Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.2. And in many other places is Sanctification included
in Vocation.

3. Whereas our Sanctification in the infusion of a principle of spiritual
life, and the actings of it unto an increase in duties of Holiness,
Righteousness and Obedience, is that, whereby we are made meet for Glory, and
is of the same nature essentially with Glory it self, whence its advances in
us, are said to be from Glory to Glory; 2 Cor. 3.18. and Glory it self is
called the Grace of life; 1 Pet. 3.7. It is much more properly expressed by our
being Glorified, than by being Justified, which is a Privilege quite of
another nature. However it is evident, that there is no reason why we should
depart from the general use and signification of the Word, no circumstance in
the Text compelling us so to do.

The next place that he gives up unto this signification is 1 Cor. 6.11. Such
were some of you, but you are washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are
Justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; That by
Justification here, the infusion of an inherent principle of Grace making us
inherently Righteous, is intended, he endeavors to prove by three Reasons.
(1) Because Justification is here ascribed unto the Holy Ghost, ye are
justified by the Spirit of our God. But to renew us is the properwork of the
Holy Spirit. (2) It is manifest, he says, That by Justification, the Apostle
does signify some change in the Corinthians, whereby they ceased to be what
they were before. For they were Fornicators and Drunkards, such as could not
inherit the Kingdom of God, but now were changed, which proves a real inherent
work of Grace, to be intended. (3) If Justification here signify nothing, but
to be absolved from the punishment of sin, then the reasoning of the Apostle
will be infirm and frigid. For after he has said that which is greater, as
heightning of it, he adds the less: For it is more to be washed, then merely
to be freed from the punishment of sin.

Answ. 1. All these reasons prove not, that it is the same to be Sanctified and
to be Justified, which must be, if that be the sense of the latter, which is
here pleaded for. But the Apostle makes an express distinction between them,
and as this Author observes, proceeds from one to another by an ascent from the
lesser to the greater. And the infusion of an habit or principle of Grace, or
Righteousness Evangelical, whereby we are inherently Righteous, by which he
explains plains our being justified in this place, is our Sanctification and
nothing else. Yea, and Sanctification is here distinguished from washing; but
ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified; So as that it peculiarly in this place
denotes positive habits of Grace and Holiness: Neither can he declare the
nature of it, any way different from what he would have expressed by, being
Justified.

2. Justification is ascribed unto the Spirit of God, as the principal
efficient cause of the Application of the Grace of God and Blood of Christ,
whereby we are Justified, unto our Souls and Consciences. And he is so also of
the operation of that Faith whereby we are Justified; whence, although we are
said to be justified by him, yet it does not follow that our Justification
consists in the Renovation of our natures.

3. The change and mutation that was made in these Corinthians, so far as it
was Physical in effects inherent, (as such there was) the Apostle expressly
ascribes unto their washing and Sanctification; So that there is no need to
suppose this change to be expressed by their being Justified. And in the real
change asserted, that is, in the Renovation of our Natures, consists the true
entire work and nature of our Sanctification. But whereas by reason of the
vicious habits and practices mentioned, they were in a state of Condemnation,
and such as had no right unto the Kingdom of Heaven, they were by their
Justification changed and transferred out of that state into another, wherein
they had peace with God, and right unto life Eternal.

4. The third reason proceeds upon a mistake; namely, That to be justified, is
only to be freed from the punishment due unto sin. For it comprizeth both the
Non-imputation of sin, and the Imputation of Righteousness, with the privilege
of Adoption and right unto the Heavenly Inheritance, which are inseparable from
it. And although it does not appear that the Apostle in the enumeration of
these Privileges, did intend a process from the lesser unto the greater; nor
is it safe for us to compare the unutterable effects of the Grace of God by
Christ Jesus, such as Sanctification and Justification are, and to determine
which is greatest, and which is least; yet following the conduct of the
Scripture, and the due consideration of the things themselves, we may say that
in this life we can be made partakers of no greater Mercy or Privilege, than
what consists in our Justification. And the Reader may see from hence, how
impossible it is to produce any one place wherein the words, Justification, and
to justify, do signify a real internal Work and Physical operation; in that
this learned man, a person of more then ordinary perspicuity, candor and
judgment, designing to prove it, insisted on such instances, as give so little
countenance unto what he pretended. He adds, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according unto his Mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior; that being justified by his
Grace, we should be made Heirs according unto the hope of Eternal life. The
argument which he alone insists upon to prove, that by Justification here, an
infusion of internal Grace is intended, is this; That the Apostle affirming
first, that God saved us, according unto his Mercy by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, and afterward affirming that we
are Justified by his Grace, he supposes it necessary, that we should be
Regenerate and renewed, that we may be justified; and if so, then our
Justification contains and compriseth our Sanctification also.

Answ. The plain truth is, the Apostle speaks not one word of the Necessity of
our Sanctification, or Regeneration, or Renovation by the Holy Ghost,
antecedently unto our Justification, a supposition whereof contains the whole
force of this Argument. Indeed he assigns our Regeneration, Renovation, and
Justification all the means of our Salvation, all equally unto Grace and Mercy,
in opposition unto any works of our own, which we shall afterward make use of.
Nor is there intimated by him, any order of precedence, or connection between
the things that he mentions, but only between Justification and Adoption,
Justification having the priority in order of nature; that being justified by
his Grace, we should be Heirs according to the hope of Eternal life. All the
things he mentions are inseparable. No man is Regenerate or renewed by the Holy
Ghost, but withal he is justified. No man is justified, but withal he is
renewed by the Holy Ghost. And they are all of them equally of Sovereign Grace
in God in opposition unto any works of Righteousness that we have wrought. And
we plead for the freedom of Gods Grace in Sanctification, no less then in
Justification. But that it is necessary that we should be Sanctified that we
may be justified before God, who justifies the ungodly; the Apostle says not
in this place, nor any thing to that purpose; neither yet if he did so, would
it at all prove, that the signification of that expression to be justified, is
to be sanctified, or to have inherent Holiness and Righteousness wrought in us.
And these Testimonies would not have been produced to prove it, wherein these
things are so expressly distinguished, but that there are none to be found of
more force or evidence.

The last place wherein he grants this signification of the word (...) is
Revel. 22.11. (...), qui Justus est, Justificetur adhuc; which place is pleaded
by all the Romanists. And our Author says, they are but few among the
Protestants who do not acknowledge that the word cannot be here used in a
Forensick sense* but that to be justified, is to go on and increase in Piety
and Righteousness.

Answ. But (1) There is a great objection lies in the way of any Argument from
these words; namely, from the various Reading of the place. For many ancient
Copies read not (...); which the vulgar renders Justificetur adhuc, but (...);
Let him that is Righteous work Righteousness still, as does the Printed Copy
which now lies before me. So it was in the Copy of the Complutensian Edition
which Stephens commends above all others; and in one more ancient Copy that he
used. So it is in the Syriack and Arabic published by Huterus, and in our own
Polyglot. So Cyprian reads the words de bono patientiae; Justus autem adhuc
justiora faciat, similiter and qui sanctus sanctiora. And I doubt not but that
is the true reading of the place; (...) being supplied by some to comply with
(...) that ensues. And this phrase of (...) is peculiar unto this Apostle,
being no where used in the New Testament, (nor it may be in any other Author)
but by him. And he uses it expressly; 1 Epist. 2.29. and Chap. 3.7. where those
words, (...), do plainly contain what is here expressed. (2) To be justified,
as the word is rendered by the vulgar, let him be justified more (as it must be
rendered, if the word (...) be retained) respects an act of God, which neither
in its beginning nor continuation is prescribed unto us as a duty, nor is
capable of increase in degrees as we shall show afterward. (3) Men are said to
be (...) generally from inherent Righteousness; and if the Apostle had intended
Justification in this place, he would not have said (...) but (...). All which
things prefer the Complutensian, Syriack, and Arabic, before the vulgar
reading of this place. If the vulgar reading be retained, no more can be
intended, but that he who is Righteous, should so proceed in working
Righteousness, as to secure his justified estate unto himself, and to manifest
it before God and the World.

Now whereas the words (...) and (...) are used 36 times in the New Testament,
these are all the places, whereunto any exception is put in against their
Forensick signification; And how ineffectual these exceptions are, is evident
unto any impartial Judge.

Some other Considerations may yet be made use of and pleaded to the same
purpose: Such is the opposition that is made between Justification and
Condemnation; So is it, Isa. 50.8, 9. Prove. 17.15. Romans 5.16, 18. Chap. 8.33,
34. and in sundry other places, as may be observed in the preceding enumeration
of them. Wherefore as Condemnation is not the infusing of an habit of
wickedness into him that is condemned; nor the making of him to be inherently
wicked, who was before Righteous; but the passing a sentence upon a man with
respect unto his wickedness; no more is Justification the change of a person
from inherent unrighteousness unto Righteousness, by the infusion of a
principle of Grace, but a sentential Declaration of him to be Righteous.

Moreover, the thing intended is frequently declared in the Scripture by other
aequivalent terms, which are absolutely exclusive of any such sense, as the
infusion of an habit of Righteousness; So the Apostle expresses it by the
Imputation of Righteousness without Works; Romans 4.6, 11. And calls it the
Blessedness, which we have by the pardon of sin, and the covering of Iniquity
in the same place. So it is called Reconciliation with God; Romans 5.9, 10. To be
justified by the Blood of Christ, is the same with being Reconciled by his
Death. Being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him.
For if when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son,
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. See 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
Reconciliation is not the infusion of an habit of Grace, but the effecting of
peace and love, by the removal of all enmity and causes of offense. To save,
and Salvation are used to the same purpose. He shall save his people from their
sins; Matthew. 1.21. is the same, with, by him all that believe are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses.
Act. 13.39. That of Gal. 2.16. We have believed that we might be justified by
the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law, is the same with Act.
15.11. But we believe that through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall
be saved even as they; Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and
not of Works; is so to be justified. So it is expressed by pardon, or the
Remission of Sins, which is the effect of it; Romans 4.5, 6. By receiving the
Atonement; Chap. 5.11. not coming into Judgment or Condemnation; Joh. 5.24.
Blotting out sins and Iniquities; Isa. 43.25. Psalm. 51.9. Isa. 44.22. Jer.
18.23. Act. 3.19. Casting them into the bottom of the Sea; Micah. 7.19. and
sundry other expressions of an alike importance. The Apostle declaring it by
its effects, says, (...) Many shall be made Righteous, Romans 5.19. (...), who on
a juridical Trial in open Court, is absolved and declared Righteous.

And so it may be observed that all things concerning Justification are
proposed in the Scripture under a juridical Scheme, or Forensick Trial and
Sentence. As (1) A judgment is supposed in it, concerning which, the Psalmist
prays that it may not proceed on the terms of the Law, Psalm. 143.2. (2) The
Judge, is God himself; Isa. 50.7, 8. Romans 8.33. (3) The Tribunal whereon God
sits in Judgment, is the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. Therefore will the Lord
wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that
he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of Judgment Isa. 30.18. (4) A
Guilty person. This is the Sinner, who is (...), so guilty of sin, as to be
obnoxious to the Judgment of God; (...). Romans 3.19. Chap. 1.32. whose mouth is
stopped by Conviction. (5) Accusers are ready to propose and promote the charge
against the guilty person; These are the Law, Joh. 5.45. and Conscience, Romans
2.15. and Satan also, Zach. 3.2. Rev. 12.10. (6) The Charge is admitted and
drawn up into an Handvvriting in form of Law, and is laid before the Tribunal
of the Judge in Bar, to the Deliverance of the Offender. Col. 2.14. (7) A Plea
is prepared in the Gospel for the guilty person. And this is Grace, through the
Blood of Christ, the Ransom paid, the Atonement made, the Eternal
Righteousness brought in by the Surety of the Covenant. Romans 3.23, 24, 25. Dan.
9.24. Ephesians. 1.7. (8) Hereunto alone the Sinner betakes himself, renouncing all
other Apologies or defensatives whatever. Psalm. 130.2, 3. Psalm. 143.2. Job.
9.2, 3. Chap. 42.5, 6, 7. Luke 18.13. Romans 3.24, 25. Chap. 5.11, 16, 17, 18,
19. Chap. 8.1, 2, 3. ver. 32.33. Isa. 53.5, 6. Heb. 9.13, 14, 15. Chap. 10.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 John 1.7. Other Plea for
a Sinner before God there is none. He who knows God and himself, will not
provide or betake himself unto any other. Nor will he as I suppose trust unto
any other defense, were he sure of all the Angels in Heaven to plead for him.
(9) To make this Plea effectual we have an Advocate with the Father, and he
pleads his own propitiation for us. 1 John 2.1, 2. (10) The Sentence hereon is
Absolution, on the account of the Ransom, Blood or Sacrifice and Righteousness
of Christ; with Acceptance into favor, as persons approved of God. Job.
33.24. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 3.23, 24, 25. Chap. 8.1, 33, 34. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal.
3.13, 14.

Of what use the Declaration of this Process in the Justification of a Sinner
may be, has been in some measure before declared. And if many did seriously
consider, that all these things do concur and are required unto the
Justification of every one that shall be saved, it may be they would not have
such slight thoughts of sin, and the way of Deliverance from the guilt of it,
as they seem to have. From this Consideration did the Apostle learn that Terror
of the Lord, which made him so earnest with men to seek after Reconciliation; 2
Cor. 5.10, 11.

I had not so long insisted on the signification of the words in the Scripture,
but that a right understanding of it, does not only exclude the pretenses of
the Romanists about the infusion of an habit of Charity, from being the formal
cause of our Justification before God, but may also give occasion unto some to
take advice, into what place or consideration they can dispose their own
personal inherent Righteousness in their Justification before him.

CHAP. V. The Distinction of a first and second Justification Examined. The
Continuation of Justification whereon it does depend.
BEfore we enquire immediately into the nature and causes of Justification,
there are some things yet previously to be considered, that we may prevent all
Ambiguity and misunderstanding, about the Subject to be treated of. I say
therefore that the Evangelical Justification which alone we plead about, is but
one, and is at once completed. About any other Justification before God but
one, we will not contend with any. Those who can find out another, may as they
please ascribe what they will unto it, or ascribe it unto what they will. Let
us therefore consider what is offered of this nature.

Those of the Roman Church do ground their whole Doctrine of Justification upon
a distinction of a double Justification, which they call the first and the
second. The first Justification, they say, is the infusion or the Communication
unto us of an inherent principle or habit of Grace or Charity. Hereby they say
Original sin is extinguished, and all habits of sin are expelled. This
Justification they say is by Faith, the Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ
being the only meritorious cause thereof. Only they dispute many things about
preparations for it, and dispositions unto it. Under those terms the Council of
Trent included the Doctrine of the Schoolmen about meritum de congruo, as both
Hosius and Andradius confess in the defense of that Council. And as they are
explained, they come much to one; however the Council warily avoided the name
of merit, with respect unto this their first Justification. And the use of
Faith herein, (which with them is no more but a general assent unto Divine
Revelation) is to bear the principal part in these preparations. So that to be
Justified by Faith according unto them, is to have the mind prepared by this
kind of believing to receive Gratiam gratum facientem, an habit of Grace
expelling sin, and making us acceptable unto God. For upon this believing with
those other Duties of Contrition and Repentance which must accompany it, it is
meet and congruous unto Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Faithfulness to give us
that Grace whereby we are justified. And this according unto them is that
Justification, whereof the Apostle Paul treats in his Epistles, from the
procurement whereof he excludes all the Works of the Law. The second
Justification is an effect or consequent hereof. And the proper formal cause
thereof is Good Works, proceeding from this Principle of Grace and Love. Hence
are they the Righteousness wherewith Believers are Righteous before God:
Whereby they merit eternal life. The Righteousness of Works they call it, and
suppose it taught by the Apostle James. This they constantly affirm to make us
justos ex injustis, wherein they are followed by others. For this is the way
that most of them take to salve the seeming repugnancy between the Apostle Paul
and James. Paul they say treats of the first Justification only, whence he
excludes all Works, for it is by Faith in the manner before described. But
James treats of the second Justification, which is by good Works. So Bellar.
lib. 2. cap. 16. and lib. 4. cap. 18. And it is the express Determination of
those at Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 10. This distinction was coined unto no other
end, but to bring in Confusion into the whole Doctrine of the Gospel.
Justification through the free Grace of God by Faith in the Blood of Christ is
evacuated by it. Sanctification is turned into a Justification, and corrupted
by making the fruits of it meritorious. The whole nature of Evangelical
Justification consisting in the gratuitous pardon of Sin and the Imputation of
Righteousness, as the Apostle expressly affirms, and the declaration of a
Believing Sinner to be Righteous thereon, as the Word alone signifies, is
utterly defeated by it.

Howbeit others have embraced this distinction also, though not absolutely in
their sense. So do the Socinians. Yea it must be allowed in some sense by all
that hold our inherent Righteousness to be the cause of, or to have any
influence into our Justification before God. For they do allow of a
Justification which in order of nature is antecedent unto Works truly Gracious
and Evangelical. But consequential unto such Works, there is a Justification
differing at least in degree, if not in nature and kind upon the difference of
its formal cause which is our new Obedience from the former. But they mostly
say, it is only the continuation of our Justification and the increase of it as
to degrees, that they intend by it. And if they may be allowed to turn
Sanctification into Justification, and to make a progress therein, or an
increase thereof, either in the root or fruit to be a new Justification, they
may make twenty Justifications as well as two for ought I know. For therein the
inward man is renewed day by day. 2 Cor. 4.16. and Believers go from strength
to strength, are changed from Glory to Glory; 2 Cor. 3.18. by the Addition of
one Grace unto another in their exercise. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. and increasing
with the increase of God. Col. 2.19. do in all things grow up into him who is
the Head. Ephesians. 4.15. And if their Justification consist herein, they are
justified anew every day. I shall therefore do these two things. (1) Show that
this distinction is both unscriptural and irrational. (2) Declare what is the
continuation of our Justification, and whereon it does depend.

Justification by Faith in the Blood of Christ, may be considered either as to
the nature and essence of it, or as unto its Manifestation and Declaration. The
Manifestation of it is twofold. (1) Initial in this life. (2) Solemn and
complete at the day of Judgment, whereof we shall treat afterward. The
Manifestation of it in this life respects either, the Souls and Consciences of
them that are justified, or others, that is the Church and the World. And each
of these have the name of Justification assigned unto them, though our real
Justification before God be always one and the same. But a man may be really
justified before God, and yet not have the evidence or assurance of it in his
own mind. Wherefore that evidence or assurance is not of the nature or essence
of that Faith whereby we are Justified, nor does necessarily accompany our
Justification. But this Manifestation of a man's own Justification unto himself,
although it depends on many especial causes, which are not necessary unto his
Justification absolutely before God, is not a second Justification when it is
attained; but only the Application of the former unto his Conscience by the
Holy Ghost. There is also a Manifestation of it with respect unto others, which
in like manner depends on other causes then does our Justification before God
absolutely; yet is it not a second Justification. For it depends wholly on the
visible effects of that Faith whereby we are justified, as the Apostle James
instructs us; yet is it only our single Justification before God, evidenced and
declared, unto his Glory, the benefit of others, and increase of our own Reward.

There is also a twofold Justification before God mentioned in the Scripture.
(1) By the works of the Law. Romans 2.13. chap. 10.5. Matthew. 19.15, 16, 17, 18,
19. Hereunto is required an absolute conformity unto the whole Law of God in
our natures, all the faculties of our Souls, all the principles of our moral
operations, with perfect actual Obedience unto all its commands, in all
instances of Duty, both for matter and manner. For he is cursed who continues
not in all things that are written in the Law to do them. And he that breaks
any one Commandment is guilty of the breach of the whole Law. Hence the Apostle
concludes, that none can be Justified by the Law, because all have sinned. (2)
There is a Justification by Grace through Faith in the Blood of Christ, whereof
we treat. And these ways of Justification are contrary, proceeding on terms
directly contradictory, and cannot be made consistent with, or subservient one
to the other. But as we shall manifest afterward the confounding of them both,
by mixing them together, is that which is aimed at in this distinction of a
first and second Justification. But whatever respects it may have, that
Justification which we have before God, in his sight through Jesus Christ, is
but one, and at once full and complete, and this distinction is a vain and fond
invention: For

1. As it is explained by the Papists it is exceedingly derogatory to the merit
of Christ. For it leaves it no effect toward us, but only the infusion of an
habit of Charity. When that is done, all that remains with respect unto our
Salvation is to be wrought by our selves. Christ has only merited the first
Grace for us, that we therewith, and thereby may merit life eternal. The merit
of Christ being confined in its effect unto the first Justification, it has no
immediate influence into any Grace, Privilege, Mercy, or Glory that follow
thereon; but they are all effects of that second Justification which is purely
by works. But this is openly contrary unto the whole tenor of the Scripture.
For although there be an order of Gods appointment, wherein we are to be made
partakers of Evangelical Privileges in Grace and Glory, one before another,
yet are they all of them the immediate effects of the death and obedience of
Christ; who has obtained for us eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.12. and is the
Author of eternal Salvation unto all that do obey him, Chap. 5.9. Having by
one offering for ever perfected them that are Sanctified. And those who allow
of a secondary, if not of a second Justification by our own inherent personal
Righteousnesses, are also guilty hereof, though not in the same degree with
them. For whereas they ascribe unto it, our acquitment from all charge of Sin
after the first Justification, and a Righteousness accepted in Judgment, in the
Judgment of God, as if it were complete and perfect, whereon depends our final
Absolution and Reward, it is evident that the immediate efficacy of the
satisfaction and merit of Christ, has its bounds assigned unto it in the first
Justification; which whether it be taught in the Scripture or no, we shall
afterward enquire.

2. More by this distinction is ascribed unto our selves working by virtue of
inherent Grace, as unto the merit and procurement of spiritual and eternal
good, than unto the Blood of Christ. For that only procures the first Grace and
Justification for us. Thereof alone it is the meritorious cause; or as others
express it, we are made partakers of the effects of it in the pardon of Sins
past. But by virtue of this Grace, we do our selves obtain, procure or merit
another, a second, a complete, Justification, the continuance of the favor of
God, and all the fruits of it, with life eternal and Glory. So do our works at
least perfect and complete the merit of Christ, without which it is imperfect.
And those who assign the continuation of our Justification wherein all the
effects of Divine Favor and Grace are contained unto our own personal
Righteousness, as also final Justification before God as the pleadable cause of
it, do follow their steps unto the best of my understanding. But such things as
these, may be disputed; in debates of which kind it is incredible almost what
influence on the minds of men, Traditions, Prejudices, Subtilty of Invention
and Arguing do obtain, to divert them from real thoughts of the things about
which they contend, with respect unto themselves and their own condition. If by
any means such persons can be called home unto themselves, and find leisure to
think how, and by what means they shall come to appear before the High God, to
be freed from the sentence of the Law, and the Curse due to Sin, to have a
pleadable Righteousness at the Judgment Seat of God before which they stand,
especially if a real sense of these things be implanted on their minds by the
convincing power of the Holy Ghost, all their subtle Arguments and Pleas for
the mighty efficacy of their own personal Righteousness, will sink in their
minds like Water at the return of the Tide, and leave nothing but Mud and
Defilement behind them.

3. This Distinction of two Justifications as used and improved by those of the
Roman Church, leaves us indeed no Justification at all. Something there is in
the branches of it, of Sanctification, but of Justification nothing at all.
Their first Justification in the infusion of an habit or principle of Grace,
unto the expulsion of all habits of Sin, is Sanctification and nothing else.
And we never did contend that our Justification in such a sense, if any will
take it in such a sense, does consist in the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ. And this Justification, if any will needs call it so, is capable of
degrees, both of increase in its self, and of exercise in its fruits, as was
newly declared. But not only to call this our Justification, with a general
respect unto the notion of the word, as a making of us personally and
inherently Righteous, but to plead that this is the Justification through Faith
in the Blood of Christ, declared in the Scripture, is to exclude the only true
Evangelical Justification from any place in Religion. The second Branch of the
distinction has much in it like unto Justification by the Law, but nothing of
that which is declared in the Gospel. So that this Distinction instead of
coining us two Justification according to the Gospel, has left us none at all.
For

4. There is no countenance given unto this Distinction in the Scripture. There
is indeed mention therein, as we observed before, of a double Justification;
the one by the Law, the other according unto the Gospel. But that either of
these should on any account be sub-distinguished into a first and second of the
same kind, that is either according unto the Law or the Gospel, there is
nothing in the Scripture to intimate. For this second Justification is no way
applicable unto what the Apostle James discourses on that Subject. He treats
of Justification; but speaks not one word of an increase of it, or addition
unto it, of a first or second. Besides he speaks expressly of him that boasts of
Faith, which being without works is a dead Faith. But he who has the first
Justification by the confession of our Adversaries, has a true living Faith,
formed and enlivened by Charity. And he uses the same Testimony concerning the
Justification of Abraham that Paul does, and therefore does not intend another
but the same, though in a diverse respect. Nor does any Believer learn the least
of it in his own experience; nor without a design to serve a farther turn,
would it ever have entered the minds of sober men on the reading of the
Scripture. And it is the bane of spiritual Truth, for men in the pretended
Declaration of it, to coin arbitrary distinctions without Scripture ground for
them, and obtrude them as belonging unto the Doctrine they treat of. They serve
unto no other end or purpose, but only to lead the minds of men from the
substance of what they ought to attend unto, and to engage all sorts of Persons
in endless strifes and contentions. If the Authors of this Distinction would
but go over the places in the Scripture where mention is made of our
Justification before God, and make a distribution of them unto the respective
parts of their Distinction, they would quickly find themselves at an
unrelievable loss.

5. There is that in the Scripture ascribed unto our first Justification, if
they will needs call it so, as leaves no room for their second feigned
Justification. For the sole foundation and pretense of this Distinction, is a
denial of those things to belong unto our Justification by the Blood of Christ,
which the Scripture expressly assigns unto it. Let us take out some instances of
what belongs unto the first, and we shall quickly see how little it is, yea
that there is nothing left for the pretended second Justification. For (1)
Therein do we receive the complete pardon and forgiveness of our Sins. Romans
4.4, 6, 7. Ephesians. 1.7. Chap. 4.32. Act. 26.18. (2) Thereby are we made
Righteous; Romans 5.19. Chap. 10.4. And (3) are freed from Condemnation,
Judgment, and Death. Joh. 3.16, 19. Chap. 5.25. Romans 8.1. (4) Are Reconciled
unto God; Romans 5.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.21, 22. And (5) have peace with him, and
access into the favor wherein we stand by Grace, with the advantages and
consolations that depend thereon in a sense of his Love. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
And (6) we have Adoption therewithal and all its privileges; John 1.12. And in
particular (7) a Right and Title unto the whole inheritance of Glory; Act.
26.18. Romans 8.17. And (8) hereon eternal life does follow; Romans 8.30. Chap.
6.23. Which things will be again immediately spoken unto upon another occasion.
And if there be any thing now left for their second Justification to do as
such, let them take it as their own; these things are all of them ours, or do
belong unto that one Justification which we do assert. Wherefore it is evident
that either the First Justification overthrows the Second, rendering it
needless; or the Second destroys the First, by taking away what essentially
belongs unto it; we must therefore part with the one or the other, for
consistent they are not. But that which gives countenance unto the Fiction and
Artifice of this Distinction and a great many more, is a dislike of the
Doctrine of the Grace of God, and Justification from thence by Faith in the
Blood of Christ, which some endeavor hereby to send out of the way upon a
pretended sleeveless Errand, whilst they dress up their own Righteousness in
its Robes, and exalt it into the Room and Dignity thereof.

But there seems to be more of reality and difficulty in what is pleaded
concerning the continuation of our Justification. For those that are freely
justified, are continued in that state until they are glorified. By
Justification they are really changed into a new spiritual state and condition,
and have a new Relation given them unto God and Christ, unto the Law and the
Gospel. And it is enquired what it is whereon their Continuation in this state
does on their part depend; or what is required of them that they may be
justified unto the End. And this as some say is not Faith alone, but also the
works of sincere Obedience. And none can deny but that they are required of all
them that are justified, whilst they continue in a state of Justification on
this side Glory, which next and immediately ensues thereunto. But whether upon
our Justification at first before God, Faith be immediately dismissed from its
place and office, and its work be given over unto works, so as that the
continuation of our Justification should depend on our own personal Obedience,
and not on the renewed Application of Faith unto Christ and his Righteousness,
is worth our enquiry. Only I desire the Reader to observe that which was the
necessity of owning a personal Obedience in justified persons, is on all hands
absolutely agreed, the seeming difference that is herein, concerns not the
substance of the Doctrine of Justification, but the manner of expressing our
conceptions concerning the order of the Disposition of Gods Grace, and our own
Duty, unto Edification, wherein I shall use my own liberty, as it is meet
others should do theirs. And I shall offer my thoughts hereunto in the ensuing
observations.

1. Justification is such a work as is at once completed in all the causes,
and the whole effect of it, though not as unto the full possession of all that
it gives Right and Title unto. For (1) All our sins past, present, and to come,
were at once imputed unto and laid upon Jesus Christ; in what sense, we shall
afterward enquire. He was wounded for our Transgressions, He was bruised for
our Iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes are we healed. All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has made to meet on Him the Iniquities of us
all, Isa. 53.6, 7. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree,
1 Pet. 2.24. The Assertions being indefinite without exception or limitation,
are equivalent unto Vniversals. All our sins were on him, he bare them All at
once, and therefore once died for all. (2) He did therefore at once finish
Transgression, made an End of sin, made Reconciliation for Iniquity, and
brought in everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. At once he expiated all our
sins; for by himself he purged our sins, and then sat down at the right hand
of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. And we are sanctified or dedicated unto God
through the offering of the Body of Christ once for all; for by one Offering he
has perfected (consummated, completed as unto their spiritual state) them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10.10.14. He never will do more than he has actually
done already for the Expiation of all our sins from first to last; for there
remains no more sacrifice for sin. I do not say that hereupon our
Justification is complete, but only that the meritorious procuring cause of it
was at once completed, and is never to be renewed or repeated any more; All
the enquiry is concerning the renewed Application of it unto our Souls and
Consciences, whether that be by Faith alone, or by the works of Righteousness
which we do. (3) By our actual Believing with Justifying Faith, believing on
Christ, or his Name, we do receive him, and thereby on our first Justification
become the Sons of God; Joh. 1.12. That is, joint heirs with Christ, and heirs
of God; Romans 8.17. Hereby we have a Right unto, and an Interest in all the
Benefits of his Mediation; which is to be at once completely justified. For in
him we are complete, Col. 2.10. For by the Faith that is in him we do receive
the forgiveness of sins, and a lot or inheritance among all them that are
sanctified; Act. 26.18. being immediately justified from all things from which
we could not be justified by the Law, Act. 13.39. yea God thereon blesses us
with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. All
these things are absolutely inseparable from our first believing in him, and
therefore our Justification is at once complete. In particular (4) On our
Believing, all our sins are forgiven. He has quickened you together with him,
having forgiven you all Trespasses, Col. 2.13, 14, 15. For in him we have
Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according unto the
riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. which one place obviates all the petulant
exceptions of some against the consistency of the free Grace of God in the
pardon of sins, and the satisfaction of Christ in the procurement thereof. (5)
There is hereon nothing to be laid unto the charge of them that are so
justified. For he that believes has Everlasting Life, and shall not come into
Condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life, Joh. 5.24. And who shall lay
any thing unto the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that Justifies, it is
Christ that died, Romans 8.33, 34. and there is no condemnation unto them that
are in Christ Jesus, ver. 1. For being justified by Faith we have peace with
God, chap. 5.1. And (6) we have that Blessedness hereon whereof in this life we
are capable, Romans 4.5, 6. From all which it appears that our Justification is
at once complete. And (7) it must be so or no man can be justified in this
world. For no time can be assigned, nor measure of Obedience be limited,
whereon it may be supposed that any one comes to be Justified before God who is
not so on his first Believing. For the Scripture does no where assign any such
time or measure. And to say that no man is completely justified in the sight of
God in this life, is at once to overthrow all that is taught in the Scriptures
concerning Justification, and therewithal all peace with God and comfort of
Believers. But a man acquitted upon his legal trial, is at once discharged of
all that the Law has against him.

2. Upon this complete Justification, Believers are obliged unto universal
Obedience unto God. The Law is not abolished but established by Faith. It is
neither abrogated nor dispensed withal by such an Interpretation as should
take off its obligation in any thing that it requires, nor as to the degree and
manner wherein it requires it. Nor is it possible it should be so. For it is
nothing but the Rule of that Obedience which the nature of God and man make
necessary from the one to the other. And that is an Antinomianism of the worst
sort, and most derogatory unto the Law of God, which affirms it to be divested
of its power, to oblige unto perfect Obedience, so as that what it is not so,
shall (as it were in despite of the Law) be accepted as if it were so, unto
the End for which the Law requires it. There is no medium, but that either the
Law is utterly abolished, and so there is no sin, for where there is no Law
there is no Transgression; or it must be allowed to require the same Obedience
that it did at its first Institution; and unto the same degree. Neither is it
in the power of any man living to keep his Conscience from judging and
condemning that, whatever it be, wherein he is convinced that he comes short of
the perfection of the Law. Wherefore,

3. The Commanding Power of the Law in positive precepts and prohibitions which
Justified Persons are subject unto, does make and constitute all their
inconformities unto it to be no less truly and properly sins in their own
nature, than they would be if their persons were obnoxious unto the Curse of
it. This they are not, nor can be; for to be obnoxious unto the Curse of the
Law, and to be justified, are contradictory; but to be subject to the Commands
of the Law, and to be justified are not so. But it is a subjection to the
commanding power of the Law, and not an obnoxiousness unto the Curse of the
Law, that constitutes the nature of sin in its Transgression. Wherefore that
complete Justification which is at once, though it dissolve the Obligation on
the sinner unto punishment by the Curse of the Law, yet does it not annihilate
the commanding Authority of the Law, unto them that are justified, that what is
sin in others, should not be so in them. See Romans 8.1.33, 34.

Hence in the first Justification of believing sinners, all future sins are
remitted as unto any actual Obligation unto the Curse of the Law, unless they
should fall into such sins as should ipso facto, forfeit their justified
estate, and transfer them from the Covenant of Grace, into the Covenant of
Works, which we believe that God in his Faithfulness will preserve them from.
And although sin cannot be actually pardoned before it be actually committed;
yet may the obligation unto the Curse of the Law be virtually taken away from
such sins in justified persons as are consistent with a justified estate, or
the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, antecedently unto their actual commission.
God at once in this sense forgiveth all their Iniquities, and heals all their
Diseases, redeemeth their life from Destruction, and crowns them with loving
kindness and mercies, Psalm. 103.2, 3. Future sins are not so pardoned as that
when they are committed they should be no sins, which cannot be, unless the
commanding power of the Law be abrogated. But their respect unto the Curse of
the Law, or their power to oblige the justified person thereunto is taken away.

Still there abides the true nature of sin in every inconformity unto, or
transgression of the Law in justified persons, which stands in need of daily
actual pardon. For there is no man that lives and sins not, and if we say
that we have no sin, we do but deceive our selves. None are more sensible of
the Guilt of sin, none are more troubled for it, none are more earnest in
supplications for the pardon of it, than justified persons. For this is the
effect of the Sacrifice of Christ applied unto the Souls of Believers, as the
Apostle declares, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 14. that it does take away
Conscience, condemning the Sinner for sin, with respect unto the Curse of the
Law; But it does not take away Conscience, condemning sin in the Sinner, which
on all considerations of God and themselves, of the Law and the Gospel,
requires Repentance on the part of the sinner, and actual pardon on the part of
God.

Whereas therefore one Essential part of Justification consists in the pardon
of our sins, and sins cannot be actually pardoned before they are actually
committed, our present enquiry is, whereon the continuation of our
Justification does depend, notwithstanding the Interveniency of sin after we
are justified, whereby such sins are actually pardoned, and our persons are
continued in a state of Acceptance with God, and have their right unto Life
and Glory uninterrupted. Justification is at once complete, in the Imputation
of a perfect Righteousness, the Grant of a Right and Title unto the heavenly
Inheritance, the actual pardon of all past sins, and the virtual pardon of
future sins, but how or by what means, on what terms and conditions this state
is continued unto those who are once justified, whereby their Righteousness is
everlasting, their Title to Life and Glory indefeazable, and all their sins are
actually pardoned, is to be enquired.

For answer unto this enquiry, I say (1) It is God that Justifies, and
therefore the continuation of our Justification is his Act also. And this on
his part depends on the immutability of his Counsel, the unchangeableness of
the everlasting Covenant, which is ordered in all things and sure, the
Faithfulness of his Promises, the Efficacy of his Grace, his complacency in the
Propitiation of Christ, with the power of his Intercession, and the irrevocable
Grant of the Holy Ghost unto them that do believe; which things are not of our
present enquiry.

2. Some say that on our part the continuation of this state, of our
Justification, depends on the Condition of Good works, that is, that they are
of the same consideration and use with Faith it self herein. In our
Justification it self there is, they will grant, somewhat peculiar unto Faith;
but as unto the continuation of our Justification, Faith and Works have the
same influence into it. Yea, some seem to ascribe it distinctly unto Works in
an especial manner, with this only proviso, that they be done in Faith. For my
part I cannot understand that the continuation of our Justification has any
other dependencies, than has our Justification it self. As Faith alone is
required unto the one, so Faith alone is required unto the other, although its
operations and effects in the discharge of its duty and office in
Justification, and the continuation of it are diverse, nor can it otherwise be.
To clear this Assertion two things are to be observed.

1. That the continuation of our Justification is the continuation of the
Imputation of Righteousness and the pardon of sins. I do still suppose the
imputation of Righteousness to concur unto our Justification, although we have
not yet examined what Righteousness it is that is imputed. But that God in our
Justification imputes Righteousness unto us, is so expressly affirmed by the
Apostle, as that it must not be called in question. Now the first act of God in
the imputation of Righteousness cannot be repeated. And the actual pardon of
sin after Justification, is an effect and consequent of that imputation of
Righteousness. If any man sin, there is a Propitiation; deliver him, I have
found a Ransom. Wherefore unto this actual pardon, there is nothing required,
but the application of that Righteousness which is the cause of it, and this is
done by Faith only.

2. The Continuation of our Justification, is before God, or in the sight of
God no less than our absolute Justification is. We speak not of the sense and
evidence of it unto our own Souls unto peace with God; nor of the evidencing
and manifestation of it unto others by its effects; but of the continuance of
it in the sight of God. Whatever therefore is the means, condition, or cause
hereof, is pleadable before God, and ought to be pleaded unto that purpose. So
then the enquiry is,

What it is that, when a Justified person is guilty of Sin (as guilty he is
more or less every day) and his Conscience is pressed with a sense thereof, as
that only thing which can endanger or intercept his justified Estate, his
Favor with God, and Title unto Glory, he betakes himself unto, or ought so to
do, for the continuance of his State, and pardon of his Sins, what he pleads
unto that purpose, and what is available thereunto. That this is not his own
Obedience, his personal Righteousness, or fulfilling the condition of the new
Covenant, is evident, from (1) the experience of Believers themselves; (2)
Testimony of Scripture, and (3) the Example of them whose cases are recorded
therein.

1. Let the experience of them that do believe be enquired into; for their
Consciences are continually exercised herein. What is it that they betake
themselves unto, what is it that they plead with God, for the continuance of
the pardon of their Sins, and the acceptance of their persons before him? Is it
any thing but Sovereign Grace and Mercy, through the Blood of Christ? Are not
all the Arguments which they plead unto this end, taken from the Topics, of
the name of God, his Mercy, Grace, Faithfulness, tender Compassion, Covenant
and Promises, all manifested, and exercised in and through the Lord Christ and
his mediation alone? Do they not herein place their only trust and confidence
for this end, that their Sins may be pardoned, and their persons, though every
way unworthy in themselves be accepted with God? Does any other thought enter
into their Hearts? Do they plead their own Righteousness, Obedience, and Duties
to this purpose? Do they leave the prayer of the Publican, and betake
themselves unto that of the Pharisee? And is it not of Faith alone, which is
that Grace whereby they apply themselves unto the Mercy or Grace of God through
the mediation of Christ? It is true that Faith herein, works and acts it
self in and by Godly sorrow, Repentance, Humiliation, Self-judging, and
Abhorrency, Fervency in Prayer and Supplications with an humble waiting for an
Answer of Peace from God, with engagements unto renewed Obedience. But it is
Faith alone that makes Applications unto Grace in the Blood of Christ, for the
continuation of our justified Estate, expressing it self in those other ways
and effects mentioned, from none of which a Believing Soul does expect the
Mercy aimed at.

2. The Scripture expressly does declare this to be the only way of the
continuation of our Justification. 1 John 2.1, 2. These things write I unto
you, that you sin not. And if any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. It is
required of those that are justified, that they sin not; it is their duty not
to sin; but yet it is not so required of them, as that if in any thing they
fail of their Duty they should immediately lose the Privilege of their
Justification. Wherefore on a supposition of sin, if any man sin, (as there is
no man that lives and sins not) what way is prescribed for such persons to
take, what are they to apply themselves unto, that their sin may be pardoned,
and their acceptance with God continued; that is, for the continuation of their
Justification? The course in this case directed unto by the Apostle, is none
other but the Application of our Souls by Faith unto the Lord Christ, as our
Advocate with the Father, on the account of the Propitiation that he has made
for our Sins. Under the consideration of this double Act of his Sacerdotal
Office, his Oblation and Intercession, he is the Object of our Faith in our
absolute Justification, and so he is as unto the continuation of it. So our
whole progress in our justified Estate in all the degrees of it is ascribed
unto Faith alone.

It is no part of our enquiry, what God requires of them that are justified.
There is no Grace, no Duty, for the substance of them, nor for the manner of
their performance, that are required either by the Law or the Gospel, but they
are obliged unto them. Where they are omitted, we acknowledge that the Guilt of
sin is contracted, and that attended with such Aggravations, as some will not
own or allow to be confessed unto God himself. Hence in particular the Faith
and Grace of Believers, do constantly and deeply exercise themselves in Godly
sorrow, Repentance, Humiliation for sin, and confession of it before God, upon
their Apprehensions of its Guilt. And these Duties are so far necessary unto
the continuation of our Justification, as that a justified Estate cannot
consist with the Sins and Vices that are opposite unto them. So the Apostle
affirms, that if we live after the flesh, we shall dye; Romans 8.13. He that does
not carefully avoid falling into the Fire or Water, or other things immediately
destructive of life natural, cannot live. But these are not the things whereon
life does depend. Nor have the best of our Duties any other respect unto the
continuation of our Justification, but only as in them we are preserved from
those things which are contrary unto it, and destructive of it. But the sole
Question is upon what the continuation of our Justification does depend, not
concerning what Duties are required of us, in the way of our Obedience. If this
be that which is intended in this position, the continuation of our
Justification depends on our own Obedience and Good Works, or that our own
Obedience and Good Works are the Condition of the continuation of our
Justification, namely, that God does indispensably require Good Works and
Obedience in all that are justified, so that a justified estate is inconsistent
with the neglect of them; it is readily granted, and I shall never contend with
any about the way whereby they choose to express the conceptions of their minds.
But if it be enquired what it is whereby we immediately concur in a way of Duty
unto the continuation of our justified estate, that is, the pardon of our sins
and acceptance with God, we say it is such alone. For the Just shall live by
Faith, Romans 1.17. And as the Apostle applies this Divine Testimony to prove our
first or absolute Justification to be by Faith alone; So does he also apply it
unto the continuation of our Justification, as that which is by the same means
only, Heb. 10.38, 39. Now the Just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them that draw
back unto perdition: But of them that believe, unto the saving of the Soul. The
drawing back to perdition includes the loss of a justified Estate really so or
in Profession. In opposition thereunto the Apostle places Believing unto the
saving of the Soul; that is, unto the continuation of Justification unto the
end. And herein it is, that the Just live by Faith, and the loss of this life
can only be by unbelief. So the life which we now live in the flesh, is by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us, Gal. 2.20. The
life which we now lead in the flesh, is the continuation of our Justification,
a life of Righteousness and Acceptance with God, in opposition unto a life by
the works of the Law, as the next words declare, ver. 21. I do not frustrate
the Grace of God, for if Righteousness came by the Law, then is Christ dead in
vain; and this life is by Faith in Christ as he loved us, and gave himself for
us, that is, as he was a Propitiation for our sins. This then is the only way,
means, and cause on our part of the preservation of this life, of the
continuance of our Justification; and herein are we kept by the power of God
through Faith unto Salvation. Again; if the continuation of our Justification
depends on our own works of Obedience, then is the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us only with respect unto our Justification at first, or our first
Justification as some speak. And this indeed is the Doctrine of the Roman
School. They teach that the Righteousness of Christ is so far imputed unto us,
that on the account thereof God gives unto us Justifying Grace, and thereby the
Remission of Sin in their sense, whence they allow it the meritorious cause of
our Justification. But on a supposition thereof, or the reception of that
Grace, we are continued to be justified before God by the works we perform by
virtue of that Grace received. And though some of them rise so high as to
affirm, that this Grace and the works of it, need no farther respect unto the
Righteousness of Christ, to deserve our second Justification and life eternal;
as does Vasquez expressly, in 1.2. q. 114. Disp. 222. cap. 3. Yet many of them
affirm that it is still from the consideration of the merit of Christ that they
are so meritorious. And the same, for the substance of it, is the Judgment of
some of them, who affirm the continuation of our Justification to depend on our
own works, setting aside that ambiguous term of merit. For it is on the account
of the Righteousness of Christ they say, that our own works, or imperfect
obedience, is so accepted with God, as that the continuation of our
Justification depends thereon. But the Apostle gives us another account hereof;
Romans 5.1, 2, 3. For he distinguishes three things; our Access into the Grace
of God. (2) Our standing in that Grace. (3) Our Glorying in that station
against all opposition. By the first he expresses our absolute Justification.
By the second our continuation in the state whereinto we are admitted thereby;
and by the third, the assurance of that continuation, notwithstanding all the
oppositions we meet withal. And all these he ascribes equally unto Faith,
without the intermixture of any other cause or condition. And other places
express to the same purpose might be pleaded.

3. The examples of them that did believe and were justified which are recorded
in the Scripture, do all bear witness unto the same Truth. The continuation of
the Justification of Abraham before God, is declared to have been by Faith
only; Romans 4.3. For the instance of his Justification given by the Apostle from
Genesis 15.6. was long after he was justified absolutely. And if our first
Justification and the continuation of it, did not depend absolutely on the same
cause, the instance of the one could not be produced for a proof, of the way
and means of the other, as here they are. And David when a justified Believer,
not only places the Blessedness of man in the free Remission of sins, in
opposition unto his own works in general; Romans 4.6, 7. but in his own
particular case, ascribes the continuation of his Justification and
acceptance before God, unto Grace, Mercy, and forgiveness alone, which are no
otherwise received but by Faith. Psalm. 130.3, 4, 5. Psalm. 143.2. All other
works and duties of obedience do accompany Faith in the continuation of our
justified estate, as necessary effects and fruits of it, but not as causes,
means, or conditions whereon that effect is suspended. It is patient waiting by
Faith, that brings in the full accomplishment of the Promises, Heb. 6.12, 16.
Wherefore there is but one Justification, and that of one kind only, wherein we
are concerned in this Disputation. The Scripture makes mention of no more; and
that is the Justification of an ungodly person by Faith. Nor shall we admit of
the consideration of any other. For if there be a second Justification, it must
be of the same kind with the first or of another; if it be of the same kind,
then the same person is often justified with the same kind of Justification, or
at least more than once; and so on just reason ought to be often Baptized; If
it be not of the same kind, then the same person is justified before God with
two sorts of Justification, of both which the Scripture is utterly silent. And
the continuation of our Justification depends solely on the same causes with
our Justification it self.

CHAP. VI. Evangelical Personal Righteousness, the Nature and Use of it. Final
Judgment, and its respect unto Justification.
THe things which we have discoursed concerning the first and second
Justification, and concerning the continuation of Justification, have no other
Design, but only to clear the principal subject whereof we treat, from what
does not necessarily belong unto it. For until all things that are either
really heterogeneous or otherwise superfluous, are separated from it, we cannot
understand aright the true state of the Question about the nature and causes of
our Justification before God. For we intend one only Justification, namely,
that whereby God at once freely by his Grace justifies a convinced sinner
through Faith in the Blood of Christ. Whatever else any will be pleased to call
Justification, we are not concerned in it, nor are the Consciences of them that
believe. To the same purpose we must therefore briefly also consider what is
usually disputed about our own personal Righteousness, with a Justification
thereon, as also what is called sentential Justification at the day of
Judgment. And I shall treat no farther of them in this place, but only as it is
necessary to free the principal subject under consideration, from being
intermixed with them, as really it is not concerned in them. For what Influence
our own personal Righteousness has into our Justification before God, will be
afterward particularly examined. Here we shall only consider such a notion of
it, as seems to enterfere with it, and disturb the right understanding of it.
But yet I say concerning this also, that it rather belongs unto the Difference
that will be among us in the Expression of our conceptions about spiritual
things whilst we know but in part, than unto the substance of the Doctrine it
self. And on such differences no breach of Charity can ensue, whilst there is a
mutual Grant of that liberty of mind, without which it will not be preserved
one moment.

It is therefore by some apprehended that there is an Evangelical
Justification, upon our Evangelical Personal Righteousness. This they
distinguish from that Justification which is by Faith through the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, in the sense wherein they do allow it. For the
Righteousness of Christ is our Legal Righteousness, whereby we have pardon of
sin, and acquitment from the sentence of the Law, on the account of his
satisfaction and merit. But moreover they say, that as there is a Personal
inherent Righteousness required of us, so there is a Justification by the
Gospel thereon. For by our Faith and the plea of it, we are justified from the
charge of Unbelief; by our sincerity and the plea of it, we are justified from
the charge of Hypocrisy; and so by all other Graces and Duties from the charge
of the contrary sins in Commission or Omission, so far as such sins are
inconsistent with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. How this differs from
the second Justification before God, which some say we have by works on the
supposition of the pardon of sin for the satisfaction of Christ, and the
infusion of an habit of Grace enabling us to perform those Works, is declared
by those who so express themselves.

Some add, that this inherent personal Evangelical Righteousness, is the
condition on our part of our legal Righteousness, or of the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto our Justification, or the pardon of sin. And those
by whom the satisfaction and merit of Christ are denied, make it the only and
whole condition of our absolute Justification before God. So speak all the
Socinians constantly. For they deny our Obedience unto Christ to be either the
meritorious or efficient cause of our Justification; only they say it is the
Condition of it, without which God has decreed that we shall not be made
partakers of the Benefit thereof. So does Socinus himself, De Justificat. page
17. Sunt opera nostra, id est, ut dictum fuit, Obedientia quam Christo
praestamus, licet nec efficiens nec meritoria, tamen causa est (ut vocant) sine
qua non, Justificationis coram Deo, atque aeternae nostrae. Again, page 14.
inter Opuscul. Vt cavendum est ne vitae sanctitatem atque innocentiam effectum
Justificationis nostrae coram Deo esse credamus, neque illam nostrae coram Deo
Justificationis causam efficientem aut impulsivam esse affirmemus; sed
tantummodo causam sine qua eam Justificationem nobis non contingere decrevit
Deus. And in all their discourses to this purpose, they assert our personal
Righteousness and Holiness, or our Obedience unto the commands of Christ, which
they make to be the Form and Essence of Faith, to be the Condition whereon we
obtain Justification or the Remission of sins. And indeed considering what
their Opinion is concerning the person of Christ, with their denial of his
satisfaction and merit, it is impossible they should frame any other Idea of
Justification in their minds. But what some among our selves intend by a
compliance with them herein, who are not necessitated thereunto by a
prepossession with their Opinions about the Person and Mediation of Christ, I
know not. For as for them, all their notions about Grace, Conversion to God,
Justification, and the like Articles of our Religion, they are nothing but what
they are necessarily cast upon by their Hypothesis about the Person of Christ.

At present I shall only enquire into that peculiar Evangelical Justification
which is asserted to be the effect of our own Personal Righteousness, or to be
granted us thereon. And hereunto we may observe.

1. That God does require in and by the Gospel a sincere Obedience of all that
do believe, to be performed in and by their own Persons, though through the
Aids of Grace supplied unto them by Jesus Christ. He requires indeed
Obedience, Duties, and Works of Righteousness in and of all Persons whatever.
But the consideration of them which are performed before believing, is excluded
by all from any causality or interest in our Justification before God. At least
whatever any may discourse of the necessity of such Works in a way of
preparation unto believing (whereunto we have spoken before) none bring them
into the verge of Works Evangelical, or Obedience of Faith, which would imply a
contradiction. But that the Works enquired after are necessary unto all
Believers, is granted by all; on what Grounds and unto what Ends, we shall
enquire afterward; they are declared, Ephesians. 2.10.

2. It is likewise granted that Believers, from the performance of this
Obedience, or these Works of Righteousness are denominated Righteous in the
Scripture, and are personally and internally Righteous, Luke 1.6. Joh. 3.7. But
yet this denomination is no where given unto them, with respect unto Grace
habitually inherent, but unto the effects of it in Duties of Obedience, as in
the places mentioned. They were both Righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. The latter words give the
Reason of the former, or their being esteemed Righteous before God. And he that
does Righteousness is Righteous; the denomination is from doing. And Bellarmine
endeavoring to prove that it is habitual not actual Righteousness, which is as
he speaks, the formal cause of our Justification before God, could not produce
one Testimony of Scripture wherein any One is denominated Righteous from
habitual Righteousness. De Justificat. lib. 2. cap. 15. but is forced to
attempt the proof of it with this absurd Argument, namely, that we are
justified by the Sacraments, which do not work in us Actual but Habitual
Righteousness. And this is sufficient to discover the insufficiency of a
Pretense for any Interest of our own Righteousness from this Denomination of
being Righteous thereby, seeing it has not respect unto that which is the
principal part thereof.

3. This Inherent Righteousness, taking it for that which is habitual and
actual, is the same with our Sanctification; neither is there any difference
between them, only they are diverse names of the same thing. For our
Sanctification is the inherent Renovation of our Natures, exerting and acting
it self in newness of Life, or Obedience unto God in Christ, and works of
Righteousness. But Sanctification and Justification are in the Scripture
perpetually distinguished, whatever respect of causality the one of them may
have unto the other. And those who do confound them, as the Papists do, do not
so much dispute about the Nature of Justification, as endeavor to prove that
indeed there is no such thing as Justification at all. For that which would
serve most to enforce it, namely, the pardon of sin, they place in the
exclusion and extinction of it, by the Infusion of inherent Grace, which does
not belong unto Justification.

4. By this inherent Personal Righteousness, we may be said several ways to be
justified. As (1) In our own Consciences, in as much as it is an Evidence in us
and unto us, of our Participation of the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and of
our Acceptance with him, which has no small Influence into our Peace. So
speaks the Apostle; Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the
Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World, 2. Cor. 1.12. who yet
disclaims any confidence therein as unto his Justification before God. For
says he, although I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, 1
Cor. 4.4. (2) Hereby may we be said to be justified before men; that is,
acquitted of evils laid unto our charge, and approved as righteous and
unblameable. For the state of things is so in the World, as that the Professors
of the Gospel ever were and ever will be, evil spoken of as evil doers. The
Rule given them to acquit themselves, so as that at length they may be
acquitted and justified by all that are not absolutely blinded and hardened in
wickedness, is that of an holy and fruitful walking in abounding in good works,
1 Pet. 2.12. chap. 3.16. And so is it with respect unto the Church, that we be
not judged dead, barren Professors, but such as have been made partakers of the
like precious Faith with others. Show me thy Faith by thy Works, Jam. 2.
Wherefore (3) This Righteousness is pleadable unto our Justification against
all the charges of Satan, who is the great Accuser of the Brethren, of all that
believe. Whether he manage his charge privately in our Consciences, which is as
it were before God, as he charged Job, or by his instruments in all manner of
reproaches and calumnies, whereof some in this Age have had experience in an
eminent manner, this Righteousness is pleadable unto our Justification.

On a supposition of these things, wherein our personal Righteousness is
allowed its proper place and use (as shall afterward be more fully declared) I
do not understand that there is an Evangelical Justification whereby Believers
are by and on the account of this personal inherent Righteousness justified in
the sight of God; nor does the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto
our absolute Justification before him depend thereon. For,

1. None have this personal Righteousness but they are antecedently justified
in the sight of God. It is wholly the Obedience of Faith, proceeding from true
and saving Faith in God by Jesus Christ. For as it was said before, Works
before Faith, are as by general consent excluded from any Interest in our
Justification, and we have proved that they are neither Conditions of it,
Dispositions unto it, nor Preparations for it, properly so called. But every
true Believer is immediately justified on his Believing. Nor is there any
moment of time wherein a man is a true Believer, according as Faith is required
in the Gospel, and yet not be justified. For as he is thereby united unto
Christ, which is the foundation of our Justification by him, so the whole
Scripture testifies, that he that believes is justified; or that there is an
infallible connection in the Ordination of God between true Faith and
Justification. Wherefore this personal Righteousness cannot be the condition of
our Justificaion before God, seeing it is consequential thereunto. What may be
pleaded in exception hereunto from the supposition of a second Justification,
or differing causes of the beginning and continuation of Justification, has
been already disproved.

2. Justification before God is a freedom and absolution from a Charge before
God, at least it is contained therein. And the Instrument of this charge must
either be the Law or the Gospel. But neither the* Law nor the Gospel, do before
God, or in the sight of God, charge true Believers with Unbelief, Hypocrisy,
or the like. For who shall lay any thing unto the charge of Gods Elect, who are
once justified before him? Such a charge may be laid against them by Satan, by
the Church sometimes on mistake, by the World, as it was in the case of Job,
against which this Righteousness is pleadable. But what is charged immediately
before God, is charged by God himself, either by the Law or the Gospel; and the
Judgment of God is according unto Truth. If this charge be by the Law, by the
Law we must be justified. But the plea of sincere Obedience will not justify
us by the Law. That admits of none in satisfaction unto its demands, but that
which is complete and perfect. And where the Gospel lays any thing unto the
charge of any Persons before God, there can be no Justification before God,
unless we shall allow the Gospel to be the Instrument of a false Charge. For
what should justify him whom the Gospel condemns? And if it be a Justification
by the Gospel from the charge of the Law, it renders the death of Christ of no
effect. And a Justification without a Charge, is not to be supposed.

3. Such a Justification as that pretended, is altogether needless and useless.
This may easily be evinced from what the Scripture asserts unto our
Justification in the sight of God by Faith in the Blood of Christ. But this
has been spoken to before on another occasion. Let that be considered, and it
will quickly appear, that there is no place nor use for this new Justification
upon our personal Righteousness, whether it be supposed antecedent and
subordinate thereunto, or consequential and perfective thereof.

4. This pretended Evangelical Justification has not the Nature of any
Justification that is mentioned in the Scripture; that is, neither that by the
Law, nor that provided in the Gospel. Justification by the Law is this; The man
that does the Works of it shall live in them. This it does not pretend unto.
And as unto Evangelical Justification, it is every way contrary unto it. For
therein the Charge against the person to be justified is true; namely, that he
has sinned, and is come short of the Glory of God. In this it is false,
namely, that a Believer is an Unbeliever; A sincere Person an Hypocrite, one
fruitful in good Works, altogether barren. And this false charge is supposed to
be exhibited in the name of God, and before him. Our Acquitment in true
Evangelical Justification is by Absolution or pardon of sin; here by a
Vindication of our own Righteousness. There the plea of the person to be
justified is, Guilty, all the World is become guilty before God; but here the
plea of the person on his Trial is not Guilty, whereon the proofs and evidences
of Innocence and Righteousness do ensue; But this is a Plea which the Law will
not admit, and which the Gospel disclaims.

5. If we are justified before God on our own personal Righteousness, and
pronounced Righteous by him on the account thereof, then God enters into
Judgment with us on something in our selves, and acquits us thereon. For
Justification is a juridical Act in and of that Judgment of God which is
according unto Truth. But that God should enter into Judgment with us, and
justify us with respect unto what he judges on, or our personal
Righteousness, the Psalmist does not believe, Psalm. 130.2, 3. Psalm. 143.2. nor
did the Publican, Luke 18.

6. This personal Righteousness of ours cannot be said to be a subordinate
Righteousness, and subservient unto our Justification by Faith in the Blood of
Christ. For therein God justifies the ungodly, and imputes Righteousness unto
him that works not. And besides it is expressly excluded from any
consideration in our Justification, Ephesians. 2.7, 8.

7. This Personal inherent Righteousness wherewith we are said to be justified
with this Evangelical Justification, is our own Righteousness. Personal
Righteousness and our own Righteousness, are expressions equivalent. But our
own Righteousness is not the material cause of any Justification before God.
For (1) It is unmeet so to be. Isa. 54.6. (2) It is directly opposed unto that
Righteousness whereby we are justified, as inconsistent with it unto that end,
Phil. 3.9. Romans 10.3, 4.

It will be said that our own Righteousness is the Righteousness of the Law;
but this Personal Righteousness is Evangelical. But (1) It will be hard to
prove, that our Personal Righteousness is any other but our own Righteousness;
and our own Righteousness is expressly rejected from any Interest in our
Justification, in the places quoted. (2) That Righteousness which is
Evangelical in respect of its efficient cause, its motives and some especial
Ends, is legal in respect of the formal Reason of it, and our Obligation unto
it. For there is no Instance of Duty belonging unto it, but in general we are
obliged unto its performance by virtue of the first Commandment, to take the
Lord for our God. Acknowledging therein his essential verity and sovereign
Authority; we are obliged to believe all that he shall reveal, and to obey in
all that he shall command. (3) The Good Works rejected from any Interest in our
Justification, are those whereunto we are created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.8,
9. the Works of Righteousness which we have done, Tit. 3.5. wherein the
Gentiles are concerned, who never sought for Righteousness by the Works of the
Law, Romans 9.30. But it will yet be said that these things are evident in
themselves. God does require an Evangelical Righteousness in all that do
believe. This Christ is not, nor is it the Righteousness of Christ. He may be
said to be our legal Righteousness, but our Evangelical Righteousness he is
not. And so far as we are Righteous with any Righteousness, so far we are
justified by it. For according unto this Evangelical Righteousness, we must be
tried; if we have it we shall be acquitted, and if we have it not, we shall be
condemned. There is therefore a Justification according unto it.

I answer. (1) According to some Authors or Maintainers of this Opinion, I see
not but that the Lord Christ is as much our Evangelical Righteousness as he is
our Legal. For our Legal Righteousness he is not in their Judgment, by a proper
Imputation of his Righteousness unto us, but by the Communication of the fruits
of what he did and suffered unto us. And so he is our Evangelical Righteousness
also. For our Sanctification is an effect or fruit of what he did and suffered
for us. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Tit. 2.14.

2. None have this Evangelical Righteousness, but those who are in order of
nature at least, justified before they actually have it. For it is that which
is required of all that do believe, and are justified thereon. And we need not
much enquire how a man is justified, after he is justified.

3. God has not appointed this Personal Righteousness in order unto our
Justification before him in this life, though he have appointed it, to evidence
our Justification before others, and even in his sight, as shall be declared.
He accepts of it, approves of it, upon the account of the free Justification of
the person, in and by whom it is wrought. So he had respect unto Abel and his
Offering. But we are not acquitted by it from any real charge in the sight of
God, nor do receive Remission of sins on the account of it. And those who place
the whole of Justification in the Remission of sins, making this personal
Righteousness the condition of it, as the Socinians do, leave not any place for
the Righteousness of Christ in our Justification.

4. If we are in any sense justified hereby in the sight of God, we have
whereof to boast before him. We may not have so absolutely and with respect
unto merit, yet we have so comparatively, and in respect of others, who cannot
make the same plea for their Justification. But all boasting is excluded. And
it will not relieve to say, that this personal Righteousness, is of the free
Grace and Gift of God unto some, and not unto others; for we must plead it as
our Duty, and not as Gods Grace.

5. Suppose a person freely Justified by the Grace of God through Faith in the
Blood of Christ, without respect unto any Works, Obedience, or Righteousness of
his own: we do freely grant; (1) That God does indispensably require personal
Obedience of him, which may be called his Evangelical Righteousness; (2) That
God does approve of, and accept in Christ this Righteousness so performed; (3)
That hereby that Faith whereby we are justified is evidenced, proved,
manifested, in the sight of God and men. (4) That this Righteousness is
pleadable unto an acquitment against any charge from Satan, the World, or our
own Consciences; (5) That upon it, we shall be declared Righteous at the last
day, and without it none shall so be. And if any shall think meet from hence to
conclude unto an Evangelical Justification, or call Gods acceptance of our
Righteousness by that name, I shall by no means contend with them. And
wherever this enquiry is made, not how a sinner guilty of death and obnoxious
unto the Curse, shall be pardoned, acquitted and justified, which is by the
Righteousness of Christ alone imputed unto him; but how a man that professes
Evangelical Faith, or Faith in Christ, shall be tried, judged, and whereon as
such he shall be justified, we grant that it is and must be by his own personal
sincere Obedience.

And these things are spoken, not with a design to contend with any, or to
oppose the opinions of any; but only to remove from the principal question in
hand, those things which do not belong unto it.

A very few words will also free our enquiry from any concernment, in that
which is called sentential Justification, at the day of Judgment. For of what
nature soever it be, the person concerning whom that sentence is pronounced,
was (1) actually and completely justified before God in this World; (2) made
partaker of all the Benefits of that Justification, even unto a blessed
Resurrection in Glory; ( it is raised in Glory; 1 Cor. 15.) (3) The Souls of
the most will long before have enjoyed a blessed Rest with God, absolutely
discharged and acquitted from all their labors, and all their sins; There
remains nothing but an actual Admission of the whole person into eternal Glory.
Wherefore this Judgment can be no more but declaratory unto the glory of God,
and the everlasting Refreshment of them that have believed. And without
reducing of it unto a new Justification, as it is no where called in the
Scripture; the ends of that solemn Judgment, in the manifestation of the Wisdom
and Righteousness of God, in appointing the way of Salvation by Christ, as well
as in giving of the Law; the public conviction of them, by whom the Law has
been transgressed and the Gospel despised; the vindication of the
Righteousness, power and wisdom of God in the rule of the World by his
providence, wherein for the most part, his paths unto all in this life are in
the deep, and his footsteps are not known; the Glory and Honor of Jesus
Christ, triumphing over all his Enemies, then fully made his footstool; and the
glorious exaltation of Grace in all that do Believe, with sundry other things
of an alike tendency unto the ultimate manifestation of Divine Glory in the
Creation and Guidance of all things, are sufficiently manifest.

And whence it appears, how little force there is in that Argument which some
pretend to be of so great weight in this cause. As every one (they say) shall
be judged of God at the last day, in the same way and manner, or on the same
Ground is he justified of God in this life. But by Works and not by Faith
alone, every one shall be judged at the last day; Wherefore by Works and not by
Faith alone every one is justified before God in this life. For

1. It is no where said that we shall be judged at the last day, ex operibus;
but, only that God will render unto men secundum opera. But God does not
justify any in this life secundum opera; Being justified freely by his Grace,
And, not according to the Works of Righteousness which we have done. And we are
every where said to be justified in this life, ex fide, per fidem, but no where
propter fidem; or that God justifies us secundum fidem; by Faith; but not for
our Faith, nor according unto our Faith. And we are not to depart from the
expressions of the Scripture where such a difference is constantly observed.

2. It is somewhat strange that a man should be judged at the last day, and
justified in this life, just in the same way and manner, that is with respect
unto Faith and Works, when the Scripture does constantly ascribe our
Justification before God unto Faith without Works; and the Judgment at the last
day is said to be according unto Works, without any mention of Faith.

3. If Justification and eternal Judgment proceed absolute-on the same Grounds,
Reasons, and Causes, then if men had not done what they shall be condemned for
doing at the last day, they should have been justified in this life. But many
shall be condemned only for sins against the light of nature, Romans 2.12. as
never having the written Law or Gospel made known unto them. Wherefore unto
such persons, to abstain from sins against the light of nature, would be
sufficient unto their Justification, without any knowledge of Christ or the
Gospel.

4. This Proposition, that God pardons men their Sins, gives them the Adoption
of Children with a right unto the Heavenly Inheritance according to their
Works; is not only foraign to the Gospel, but contradictory unto it, and
destructive of it, as contrary unto all express Testimonies of the Scripture
both in the old Testament and the new, where these things are spoken of. But
that God judges all men, and renders unto all men at the last Judgment
according unto their Works, is true and affirmed in the Scripture.

5. In our Justification in this life by Faith, Christ is considered as our
Propitiation and Advocate, as he who has made Atonement for sin, and brought
in everlasting Righteousness. But at the last day, and in the last Judgment he
is considered only as the Judge.

6. The end of God in our Justification is the Glory of his Grace; Ephesians. 1.6.
But the end of God in the last Judgment is the Glory of his remunerative
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.

7. The Representation that is made of the final Judgment, Math. 7. and Chap.
25. is only of the visible Church. And therein the plea of Faith as to the
profession of it is common unto all, and is equally made by all. Upon that plea
of Faith, it is put unto the trial whether it were sincere true Faith or no, or
only that which was dead and barren. And this trial is made solely by the
fruits and effects of it, and otherwise in the public declaration of things
unto all, it cannot be made. Otherwise the Faith whereby we are justified comes
not into Judgment at the last day. See Joh. 5.24. with Mark. 16.16.

CHAP. VII. Imputation, and the Nature of it; with the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ in particular.
THe first express Record of the Justification of any sinner is of Abraham.
Others were justified before him from the Beginning, and there is that affirmed
of them, which sufficiently evidenceth them so to have been. But this
Prerogative was reserved for the Father of the Faithful, that his Justification
and the express way and manner of it, should be first entered on the Sacred
Record. So it is Genesis 15.6. He believed in the Lord, and it was counted unto
him for Righteousness. (...) was accounted unto him, or imputed unto him for
Righteousness. (...). It was counted, reckoned, imputed. And it was not written
for his sake alone, that it was imputed unto him, but for us also unto whom it
shall be imputed if we believe, Romans 4.23, 24. Wherefore the first express
Declaration of the nature of Justification in the Scripture, affirms it to be
by Imputation; The Imputation of somewhat unto Righteousness. And this done in
that place and instance, which is Recorded on purpose, as the president and
example of all those that shall be justified. As he was justified so are we,
and no otherwise.

Under the new Testament there was a necessity of a more full and clear
Declaration of the Doctrine of it. For it is among the first and most principal
parts of that Heavenly mystery of Truth which was to be brought to light by the
Gospel. And besides there was from the first a strong and Dangerous Opposition
made unto it. For this matter of Justification, the Doctrine of it, and what
necessarily belongs thereunto, was that whereon the Jewish Church broke off
from God, refused Christ and the Gospel, perishing in their sins; as is
expressly declared, Romans 9.31, 10.3, 4. And in like manner a dislike of it, an
Opposition unto it, ever was and ever will be a principle and cause of the
Apostasy of any professing Church, from Christ and the Gospel, that falls
under the power and deceit of them; as it fell out afterward in the Churches
of the Galatians. But in this state the Doctrine of Justification was fully
declared, stated, and vindicated by the Apostle Paul in a peculiar manner. And
he does it especially by affirming and proving that we have the Righteousness
whereby and wherewith we are justified by Imputation; or that our Justification
consists in the non-Imputation of sin, and the Imputation of Righteousness.

But yet, although the first Recorded instance of Justification, and which was
so recorded, that it might be an example and represent the Justification of all
that should be justified unto the end of the World, is expressed by Imputation,
and Righteousness imputed, and the Doctrine of it in that great case, wherein
the eternal welfare of the Church of the Jews, or their ruin was concerned, is
so expressed by the Apostle; yet is it so fallen out in our days that nothing
in Religion is more maligned, more reproached, more despised, then the
Imputation of Righteousness unto us, or an Imputed Righteousness. A putative
Righteousness, the shadow of a dream, a fancy, a mummery, an imagination, say
some among us. An opinion, foeda, execranda, pernitiosa, detestanda, says
Socinus. And opposition arises unto it every day from great variety of
principles. For those by whom it is opposed and rejected can by no means agree
what to set up in the place of it.

However, the weight and importance of this Doctrine is on all hands
acknowledged, whether it be true or false. It is not a dispute about Notions,
Terms, and Speculations, wherein Christian Practice is little or not at all
concerned, (of which nature many are needlessly contended about) but such as
has an immediate influence into our whole present Duty, with our eternal
Welfare or Ruin. Those by whom this Imputation of Righteousness is rejected,
do affirm that the Faith and Doctrine of it, do overthrow the necessity of
Gospel Obedience, of personal Righteousness, and good Works, bringing in
Antinomianism, and Libertinism in life. Hereon it must of necessity be
destructive of Salvation, in those who believe it, and conform their Practice
thereunto. And those on the other hand by whom it is believed, seeing they
judge it impossible that any man should be justified before God any other way,
but by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, do accordingly judge,
that without it none can be saved. Hence a Learned man of late concludes his
Discourse concerning it; Hactenus de Imputatione Justitiae Christi, sine qua
nemo unquam aut salvatus est, aut salvari queat. Justificat. Paulin. cap. 8.
Thus far of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, without which no man
was ever saved, nor can any so be. They do not think nor judge, that all those
are excluded from salvation, who cannot apprehend, or to deny the Doctrine of
the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as by them declared. But they
judge that they are so, unto whom that Righteousness is not really imputed; nor
can they do otherwise, whilst they make it the foundation of all their own
Acceptance with God and eternal salvation. These things greatly differ. To
believe the Doctrine of it, or not to believe it, as thus or thus explained, is
one thing; and to enjoy the thing, or not enjoy it, is another. I no way doubt,
but that many men do receive more Grace from God, than they understand or will
own; and have a greater efficacy of it in them, than they will believe. Men may
be really saved, by that Grace which Doctrinally they do deny; and they may be
justified by the Imputation of that Righteousness which in opinion they deny to
be imputed. For the Faith of it, is included in that general Assent which they
give unto the truth of the Gospel, and such an Adherence unto Christ may ensue
thereon, as that their mistake of the way whereby they are saved by him, shall
not defraud them of a real Interest therein. And for my part, I must say, that
notwithstanding all the disputes that I see and read about Justification (some
whereof are full of offense and scandal) I do not believe but that the Authors
of them, (if they be not Socinians throughout, denying the whole merit and
satisfaction of Christ) do really trust unto the mediation of Christ for the
pardon of their Sins, and Acceptance with God, and not unto their own Works or
Obedience. Nor will I believe the contrary, until they expressly declare it. Of
the Objection on the other hand, concerning the danger of the Doctrine of the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, in reference unto the necessity of
Holiness, and works of Righteousness, we must treat afterward.

The Judgment of the Reformed Churches herein is known unto all, and must be
confessed, unless we intend by vain cavils to increase and perpetuate
contentions. Especially the Church of England is in her Doctrine express as
unto the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, both active and passive as
it is usually distinguished. This has been of late so fully manifested out of
her Authentic Writings, that is, the Articles of Religion, and Books of
Homilies, and other Writings publicly authorized, that it is altogether
needless to give any farther Demonstration of it. Those who pretend themselves
to be otherwise minded, are such as I will not contend withal. For to what
purpose is it to dispute with men who will deny the Sun to shine, when they
cannot bear the heat of its beams. Wherefore in what I have to offer on this
subject, I shall not in the least depart from the ancient Doctrine of the
Church of England; yea I have no design but to declare and vindicate it, as God
shall enable.

There are indeed sundry differences among Persons Learned, Sober, and Orthodox
(if that term displease not) in the way and manner of the Explication of the
Doctrine of Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, who
yet all of them agree in the substance of it, in all those things wherein the
Grace of God, the Honor of Christ, and the Peace of the Souls of men are
principally concerned. As far as it is possible for me, I shall avoid the
concerning of my self at present, in these Differences. For unto what purpose
is it to contend about them, whilst the substance of the Doctrine it self is
openly opposed and rejected? why should we debate about the order and
beautifying of the Rooms in an House, whilst Fire is set unto the whole? when
that is well quenched, we may return to the consideration of the best means for
the disposal and use of the several parts of it.

There are two grand Parties by whom the Doctrine of Justification by the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ is opposed, namely, the Papists and
the Socinians. But they proceed on different principles, and unto different
Ends. The design of the one is to exalt their own Merits, of the other to
destroy the merit of Christ. But besides these who trade in company, we have
many Interlopers, who coming in on their hand, do make bold to borrow from
both, as they see occasion. We shall have to do with them all in our progress;
not with the Persons of any, nor the way and manner of their expressing
themselves, but the Opinions of all of them so far as they are opposite unto
the Truth. For it is that which wise men despise and good men bewail, to see
persons pretending unto Religion and Piety, to cavil at Expressions, to contend
about Words, to endeavor the fastening of Opinions on men which they own not,
and thereon mutually to revile one another, publishing all to the World, as
some great achievement or victory. This is not the way to teach them truths of
the Gospel, nor to promote the Edification of Church. But in general, the
Importance of the cause to be pleaded, the Greatness of the opposition that is
made unto the Truth, and the high concernment of the Souls of Believers, to be
rightly instructed in it, do call for a renewed Declaration and Vindication of
it. And what I shall attempt unto this purpose, I do it under this persuasion,
that the life and continuance of any Church on the one hand, and its Apostasy
or Ruin on the other, do depend in an eminent manner on the Preservation or
Rejection of the Truth in this Article of Religion; (and I shall add) as it
has been professed, received, and believed in the Church of England in former
days.

The first thing we are to consider is the meaning of these words to Impute and
Imputation. For from a mere plain Declaration hereof, it will appear that
sundry things charged on a supposition of the Imputation we plead for, are vain
and groundless, or the Charge it self is so.

(...) The word first used to this purpose, signifies to think, to esteem, to
judge, or to refer a thing or matter unto any; to impute, or to be imputed for
Good or Evil. See Levit. 7.18. chap. 17.4. And Psalm. 106.31. (...) and it was
counted, reckoned, imputed unto him for Righteousness. To judge or esteem this
or that Good or Evil, to belong unto him, to be his. The Lxx. express it by
(...) and (...); as do the Writers of the New Testament also. And these are
rendered by reputare, imputare, acceptum far, tribuere, assignare, ascribere.
But there is a different signification among these words; In particular, to be
reputed Righteous, and to have Righteousness imputed, differ, as cause and
effect. For that any may be reputed Righteous, that is, be judged or esteemed
so to be, there must be a real foundation of that Reputation, or it is a
mistake, and not a right Judgment; as a man may be reputed to be wise, who is a
fool, or reputed to be rich, who is a beggar. Wherefore he that is reputed
Righteous, must either have a Righteousness of his own, or another antecedently
imputed unto him, as the foundation of that Reputation. Wherefore to impute
Righteousness unto one that has none of his own, is not to repute him to be
Righteous, who is indeed Unrighteous, but it is to communicate a Righteousness
unto him, that he may rightly and justly be esteemed, judged, or reputed
Righteous.

Imputare, is a word that the Latin Tongue owns in the sense wherein it is
used by Divines. Optime de pessimis meruisti, ad quos pervenerit incorrupta
rerum fides, magno Authori suo imputata. Senec. ad Mart. And Plin. lib. 18.
cap. 1. In his Apology for the Earth our common Parent, nostris eam criminibus
urgemus, culpamque nostram illi imputamus.

In their sense, to impute any thing unto another, is if it be evil, to charge
it on him, to burden him with it; so says Pliny, we impute our own faults to
the Earth, or charge them upon it. If it be Good, it is to ascribe it unto him
as his own, whether originally it were so or no; magno Authori imputata.
Vasquez, in Thom. 22. Tom. 2. Disp. 132. attempts the sense of the word, but
confounds it with reputare. Imputare aut reputare quidquam alicui, est idem
atque inter ea quae sunt ipsius, and ad eum pertinent, connumerare and
recensere. This is reputare properly, imputare includes an Act antecedent unto
this accounting or esteeming a thing to belong unto any Person.

But whereas that may be imputed unto us which is really our own antecedently
unto that Imputation, the word must needs have a double sense, as it has in
the Instances given out of Latin Authors now mentioned. And,

1. To Impute unto us that which was really ours, antecedently unto that
Imputation, includes two things in it. (1) An Acknowledgment or Judgment, that
the thing so imputed is really and truly ours, or in us. He that Imputes Wisdom
or Learning unto any man, does in the first place acknowledge him to be Wise or
Learned. (2) A dealing with them according unto it, whether it be Good or Evil.
So when upon a Trial a man is acquitted because he is found Righteous; first he
is judged and esteemed Righteous, and then dealt with as a Righteous Person;
his Righteousness is imputed unto him. See this exemplified, Genesis 30.33.

2. To Impute unto us that which is not our own antecedently unto that
Imputation, includes also in it two things. (1) A Grant or Donation of the
thing it self unto us to be ours, on some just Ground and Foundation. For a
thing must be made ours, before we can justly be dealt withal according unto
what is required on the Account of it. (2) A Will of dealing with us, or an
actual dealing with us according unto that which is so made ours. For in this
matter whereof we treat, the most Holy and Righteous God does not justify any,
that is, absolve them from sin, pronounce them Righteous, and thereon grant
unto them Right and Title unto Eternal Life, but upon the interveniency of a
true and complete Righteousness, truly and completely made the Righteousness of
them that are to be justified, in order of nature antecedently unto their
Justification. But these things will be yet made more clear by Instances, and
it is necessary they should be so.

1. There is an Imputation unto us of that which is really our own, inherent in
us, performed by us, antecedently unto that Imputation, and this whether it be
Evil or Good. The Rule and Nature hereof is given and expressed, Ezekiel. 18.20.
The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, the Wickedness of the
Wicked shall be upon him. Instances we have of both sorts. (1) In the
Imputation of sin, when the Person guilty of it, is so judged and reckoned a
sinner, as to be dealt withal accordingly. This Imputation Shimei deprecated,
2 Samuel 19.19. He said unto the King, Let not my Lord impute Iniquity unto me,
((...) the word used in the expression of the Imputation of Righteousness. Genesis
15.6.) neither do thou remember what thy Servant did perversely; For thy
Servant does know that I have sinned. He was Guilty, and acknowledged his
Guilt, but deprecates the Imputation of it, in such a sentence concerning him,
as his sin deserved. So Stephen deprecated the Imputation of sin unto them that
stoned him, whereof they were really guilty, Act. 7.60. Lay not this sin to
their charge; impute it not unto them. As on the other side Zechariah the Son
of Jehojada, who died in the same cause, and the same kind of death with
Stephen, prayed that the sin of those which slew him might be charged on them,
2 Chronicles. 24.22. Wherefore to impute sin, is to lay it unto the charge of any,
and to deal with them according unto its desert.

To impute that which is Good unto any, is to judge and acknowledge it so to be
theirs, and thereon to deal with them in whom it is, according unto its respect
unto the Law of God. The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him. So
Jacob provided that his Righteousness should answer for him, Genesis 30.33. And we
have an Instance of it in Gods dealing with men, Psalm. 106.31. Then stood up
Phineas and executed Judgment, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness.
Notwithstanding it seemed that he had not sufficient warrant for what he did,
yet God that knew his heart, and what Guidance of his own spirit he was under,
approved his fact as Righteous, and gave him a Reward testifying that
Approbation.

Concerning this Imputation it must be observed, that whatever is our own
antecedently thereunto, which is an Act of God thereon, can never be imputed
unto us for any thing more or less than what it is really in it self. For this
Imputation consists of two parts, or two things concur thereunto. (1) A
Judgment of the thing to be ours, to be in us, or to belong unto us. (2) A Will
of dealing with us, or an actual dealing with us according unto it. Wherefore
in the Imputation of any thing unto us, which is ours, God esteems it not to
be other than it is. He does not esteem that to be a perfect Righteousness
which is imperfect; so to do might argue either a mistake of the thing judged
on, or perverseness in the Judgment it self upon it. Wherefore if, as some say,
our own Faith and Obedience are imputed unto us for Righteousness, seeing they
are imperfect they must be imputed unto us for an imperfect Righteousness, and
not for that which is perfect. For that Judgment of God which is according unto
Truth, is in this Imputation. And the Imputation of an imperfect Righteousness
unto us, esteeming it only as such, will stand us in little stead in this
matter. And the Acceptilation which some plead, (traducing a fiction in humane
Laws, to interpret the mystery of the Gospel) does not only overthrow all
Imputation, but the satisfaction and merit of Christ also. And it must be
observed, that this Imputation is a mere Act of Justice, without any mixture of
Grace, as the Apostle declares, Romans 11.6. For it consists of these two parts.
(1) An acknowledging and judging that to be in us which is truly so. (2) A Will
of dealing with us according unto it; both which are Acts of Justice.

The Imputation unto us of that which is not our own, antecedently unto that
Imputation, at least not in the same manner as it is afterward, is various
also, as unto the Grounds and Causes that it proceeds upon. Only it must be
observed, that no Imputation of this kind, is to account them, unto whom any
thing is imputed, to have done the things themselves which are imputed unto
them. That were not to impute but to err in Judgment, and indeed utterly to
overthrow the whole nature of Gracious Imputation. But it is to make that to be
ours by Imputation, which was not ours before, unto all ends and purposes
whereunto it would have served, if it had been our own, without any such
Imputation.

It is therefore a manifest mistake of their own which some make the Ground of
a Charge on the Doctrine of Imputation. For the say, if our sins were imputed
unto Christ, then must he be esteemed to have done what we have done amiss, and
so be the greatest sinner that ever was; and on the other side, if his
Righteousness be imputed unto us, then are we esteemed to have done what he
did, and so to stand in no need of the pardon of sin. But this is contrary unto
the nature of Imputation, which proceeds on no such Judgment, but on the
contrary, that we our selves have done nothing of what is imputed unto us; nor
Christ any thing of what was imputed unto him.

To declare more distinctly the nature of this Imputation, I shall consider the
several kinds of it, or rather the several grounds whence it proceeds. For this
Imputation unto us, of what is not our own antecedent unto that Imputation, may
be either, (1) Ex justitia, or (2) Ex voluntaria sponsione, or (3) Ex injuria,
or (4) Ex gratia; all which shall be exemplified. I do not place them thus
distinctly, as if they might not some of them concur in the same Imputation,
which I shall manifest that they do. But I shall refer the several kinds of
Imputation, unto that which is the next cause of every one.

1. Things that are not our own originally, personally, inherently, may yet be
imputed unto us ex justitia, by the Rule of Righteousness. And this may be done
upon a double Relation unto those whose they are; (1) Foederal, (2) Natural.
(1) Things done by one may be imputed unto others, propter relationem
foederalem, because of a Covenant Relation between them. So the sin of Adam
was, and is imputed unto all his Posterity, as we shall afterward more fully
declare* And the Ground hereof is, that we stood all in the same Covenant with
him, who was our Head and Representative therein. The corruption and
Depravation of nature which we derive from Adam is imputed unto us, with the
first kind of Imputation, namely, of that which is ours antecedently unto that
Imputation. But his actual sin is imputed unto us, as that which becomes ours
by that Imputation, which before it was not. Hence says Bellarmine himself;
Peccatum Adami ita posteris omnibus imputatur, ac si omnes idem peccatum
patravissent. De Amiss. Great. lib. 4. cap. 10. The sin of Adam is so imputed
unto all his Posterity, as if they had all committed the same sin. And he gives
us herein the true nature of Imputation, which he fiercely disputes against in
his Books of Justification. For the Imputation of that sin unto us, as if we
had committed it, which he acknowledges, includes both a Transcription of that
sin unto us, and a dealing with us, as if we had committed it; which is the
Doctrine of the Apostle Romans 5.

2. There is an Imputation of sin unto others, ex justitia propter Relationem
naturalem, on the account of a natural Relation between them, and those who had
actually contracted the Guilt of it. But this is so only with respect unto some
outward Temporary effects of it. So God speaks concerning the Children of the
Rebellious Israelites in the Wilderness. Your Children shall wander in the
Wilderness Forty years, and bear your Whoredoms, Numb. 14.33. Your sin shall be
so far imputed unto your Children, because of their Relation unto you, and your
Interest in them, as that they shall suffer for them in an afflictive condition
in the Wilderness. And this was just, because of the Relation between them; as
the same procedure of Divine Justice is frequently declared in other places of
the Scripture. So where there is a due foundation of it, Imputation is an Act
of Justice.

2. Imputation may justly ensue, ex voluntaria sponsione; when one freely and
willingly undertakes to answer for another. An illustrious instance hereof we
have in that passage of the Apostle unto Philemon, in the behalf of Onesimus;
ver. 18. If he have wronged the, or owes thee ought, (...), impute it unto me,
put it on my account. He supposes that Philemon might have a double Action
against Onesimus. (1) Injuriarum, of wrongs; (...), if he has dealt unjustly
with the or by the, if he has so wronged the as to render himself obnoxious
unto punishment; (2) Damni, or of loss; (...), if he owes thee ought, be a
debtor unto the, which made him liable to payment or restitution. In this state
the Apostle interposeth himself by a voluntary sponsion, to undertake for
Onesimus. I Paul have written it with my own hand (...) I Paul will answer for
the whole. And this he did by the Transcription of both the debts of Onesimus
unto himself; For the crime was of that nature as might be taken away by
compurgation, being not Capital. And the Imputation of them unto him, was made
just by his voluntary undertaking of them. Account me, says he, the Person
that has done these things; and I will make satisfaction, so that nothing be
charged on Onesimus. So Judah voluntarily undertook unto Jacob, for the safety
of Benjamin, and obliged himself unto perpetual Guilt in case of failure; Genesis
43.9. I will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him, if I bring
him not unto the, and set him before thee, (...) I will sin, or be a sinner
before thee always; be guilty and as we say, bear the blame. So he expresses
himself again unto Joseph, Chap. 44.32. It seems this is the nature and office
of a Surety; what he undertaketh for, is justly to be required at his hand, as
if he had been originally and personally concerned in it. And this voluntary
sponsion was one ground of the Imputation of our sin unto Christ. He took on
him the person of the whole Church that had sinned, to answer for what they had
done against God and the Law. Hence that Imputation was fundamentaliter ex
compacto, ex voluntaria sponsione, it had its foundation in his voluntary
undertaking. But on supposition hereof; it was actually ex justitia, it being
Righteous that he should answer for, and make good what he had so undertaken,
the Glory of Gods Righteousness and Holiness being greatly concerned herein.

3. There is an Imputation, ex injuria; when that is laid unto the charge of
any, whereof he is not Guilty: So Bathsheba says unto David; it shall come to
pass that when my Lord the King shall sleep with his Fathers, that I and my Son
Solomon shall be (...) Sinners; 1 Kings 1.21. shall be dealt with as Offenders,
as guilty persons, have sin imputed unto us, on one pretense or other unto our
Destruction. We shall be sinners; be esteemed so, and be dealt withal
accordingly. And we may see that in the Phrase of the Scripture the
Denomination of sinners, follows the Imputation, as well as the inhesion of
sin; which will give light unto that place of the Apostle, he was made sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5.21. This kind of Imputation has no place in the Judgment of God.
It is far from him, that the Righteous should be as the Wicked.

4. There is an Imputation, ex mera Gratia, of mere Grace and Favor. And this
is, when that which antecedently unto this Imputation was no way ours, not
inherent in us, not performed by us, which we had no Right nor Title unto, is
granted unto us, made ours, so as that we are judged of, and dealt with
according unto it. This is that Imputation in both branches of it, Negative in
the non-Imputation of sin, and positive in the Imputation of Righteousness,
which the Apostle so vehemently pleads for, and so frequently asserteth, Romans
4. For he both affirms the thing it self, and declares that it is of mere
Grace, without respect unto any thing within our selves. And if this kind of
Imputation cannot be fully exemplified in any other instance, but this alone,
whereof we treat, it is because the foundation of it in the mediation of Christ
is singular, and that which there is nothing to parallel in any other case
among men.

From what has been discoursed concerning the nature and grounds of
Imputation, sundry things are made evident which contribute much light unto the
truth which we plead for, at least unto the right understanding and stating of
the matter under debate. As

1. The Difference is plain between the Imputation of any works of our own unto
us, and the Imputation of the Righteousness of Faith without works. For the
Imputation of works unto us, be they what they will, be it Faith it self as a
work of Obedience in us, is the Imputation of that which was ours, before such
Imputation. But the Imputation of the Righteousness of Faith, or the
Righteousness of God which is by Faith, is the Imputation of that which is made
ours by virtue of that Imputation. And these two Imputation differ in their
whole kind. The one is a judging of that to be in us, which indeed is so, and
is ours, before that judgment be passed concerning it, the other is a
Communication of that unto us, which before was not ours. And no man can make
sense of the Apostles discourse, that is, he cannot understand any thing of it,
if he acknowledge not that the Righteousness he treats of is made ours by
Imputation, and was not ours, antecedently thereunto.

2. The Imputation of works, of what sort soever they be, of Faith it self as a
work, and all the Obedience of Faith, is ex justitia, and not ex gratia: of
Right and not of Grace. However the bestowing of Faith on us, and the working
of Obedience in us, may be of Grace; yet the Imputation of them unto us, as in
us, and as ours, is an act of Justice. For this Imputation as was showed, is
nothing but a Judgment that such and such things are in us, or are ours, which
truly and really are so, with a treating of us according unto them. This is an
Act of Justice, as it appears in the Description given of that Imputation. But
the Imputation of Righteousness mentioned by the Apostle is as unto us ex mera
Gratia, of mere Grace, as he fully declares, (...). And moreover he declares,
that these two sorts of Imputation are inconsistent and not capable of any
composition, so that any thing should be partly of the one, and partly of the
other, Romans 11.6. If by Grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise Grace is
no more Grace; but if it be of works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise works
is no more works. For instance, if Faith it self as a work of ours be imputed
unto us, it being ours antecedently unto that Imputation, it is but an
acknowledgment of it to be in us and ours, with an ascription of it unto us for
what it is. For the ascription of any thing unto us for what it is not, is no
Imputation but mistake. But this is an Imputation ex justitia, of works; and so
that which is of mere Grace, can have no place, by the Apostles Rule. So the
Imputation unto us of what is in us, is exclusive of Grace, in the Apostles
sense. And on the other hand; If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed unto
us, it must be ex mera Gratia; of mere Grace; For that is imputed unto us,
which was not ours, antecedently unto that Imputation, and so is communicated
unto us thereby. And here is no place for works, nor for any pretense of them.
In the one way the foundation of Imputation is in our selves, in the other it
is in another, which are irreconcilable.

3. Herein both these kinds of Imputation do agree. Namely, in that whatever is
imputed unto us, it is imputed for what it is, and not for what it is not. If
it be a perfect Righteousness that is imputed unto us, so it is esteemed and
judged to be, and accordingly are we to be dealt withal, even as those who
have a perfect Righteousness. And if that which is imputed as Righteousness
unto us be imperfect, or imperfectly so, then as such must it be judged when it
is imputed; and we must be dealt withal as those which have such an imperfect
Righteousness, and no otherwise. And therefore whereas our inherent
Righteousness is imperfect, (they are to be pityed or despised, not to be
contended withal, that are otherwise minded) if that be imputed unto us, we
cannot be accepted on the account thereof as perfectly Righteous, without an
Error in Judgment.

4. Hence the true Nature of that Imputation which we plead for (which so many
cannot or will not understand) is manifest, and that both negatively and
positively. For (1) negatively; (1) It is not a judging or esteeming of them to
be Righteous who truly and really are not so. Such a Judgment is not reducible
unto any of the Grounds of Imputation beforementioned. It has the nature of
that which is ex injuria, or a false charge, only it differs materially from
it. For that respects evil, this that which is good. And therefore the clamor
of the Papists and others are mere effects of Ignorance or Malice, wherein they
cry out ad ravim, that we affirm God to esteem them to be Righteous, who are
wicked, sinful and polluted. But this falls heavily on them who maintain that
we are justified before God by our own inherent Righteousness; For then a man
is judged Righteous, who indeed is not so. For he who is not perfectly
Righteous, cannot be Righteous in the sight of God unto Justification. (2) It
is not a naked Pronunciation or Declaration of any one to be Righteous, without
a just and sufficient foundation for the Judgment of God declared therein. God
declares no man to be Righteous but he who is so; the whole Question being, how
he comes so to be. (3) It is not the Transmission or Transfusion of the
Righteousness of another into them that are to be justified, that they should
become perfectly and inherently Righteous thereby. For it is impossible that
the Righteousness of one should be transfused into another, to become his
subjectively and inherently. But it is a great mistake on the other hand, to
say that therefore the Righteousness of one can no way be made the
Righteousness of another; which is to deny all Imputation.

Wherefore (2) Positively; This Imputation is an Act of God ex mera Gratia, of
his mere Love and Grace, whereby on the consideration of the Mediation of
Christ, he makes an effectual Grant and Donation of a true, real, perfect
Righteousness, even that of Christ himself unto all that do believe, and
accounting it as theirs, on his own gracious Act, both absolves them from sin,
and grants them Right and Title unto Eternal Life. Hence,

4. In this Imputation, the thing it self is first imputed unto us, and not any
of the Effects of it, but they are made ours by virtue of that Imputation. To
say that the Righteousness of Christ, that is, his Obedience and Sufferings are
imputed unto us only as unto their effects, is to say that we have the benefit
of them, and no more; but Imputation it self is denied. So say the Socinians,
but they knew well enough, and ingenuously grant, that they overthrow all true
real Imputation thereby. Nec enim ut per Christi justitiam justificemur, opus
est ut illius Justitia, nostra fiat justitia; sed sufficit ut Christi justitia
sit causa nostrae Justificationis; and hactenus possumus tibi concedere,
Christi justitiam esse nostram justitiam, quatenus nostrum in bonum
justitiamque redundat; verum tu proprie nostram, id est, nobis attributam
ascriptamque intelligis, says Schlictingius; Disp. pro Socin. ad Meisner. page
250. And it is not pleasing to see some among our selves with so great
confidence take up the sense and words of these men in their Disputations
against the Protestant Doctrine in this cause, that is, the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, as unto its effects, has
this sound sense in it; namely, that the effects of it are made ours, by reason
of that Imputation. It is so imputed, so reckoned unto us of God, as that he
really communicates all the effects of it unto us. But to say the Righteousness
of Christ is not imputed unto us, only its effects are so, is really to
overthrow all Imputation. For (as we shall see) the effects of the
Righteousness of Christ cannot be said properly to be imputed unto us; and if
his Righteousness it self be not so, Imputation has no place herein, nor can
it be understood why the Apostle should so frequently assert it as he does,
Romans 4. And therefore the Socinians who expressly oppose the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, and plead for a Participation of its effects or
benefits only, do wisely deny any such kind of Righteousness of Christ, namely,
of satisfaction and merit, (or that the Righteousness of Christ as wrought by
him, was either satisfactory or meritorious) as alone may be imputed unto us.
For it will readily be granted, that what alone they allow the Righteousness of
Christ to consist in, cannot be imputed unto us, whatever benefit we may have
by it. But I do not understand how those who grant the Righteousness of Christ
to consist principally in his satisfaction for us or in our stead, can conceive
of an Imputation of the effects thereof unto us, without an Imputation of the
thing it self. Seeing it is for that as made ours, that we partake of the
Benefits of it. But from the Description of Imputation and the Instances of it,
it appears that there can be no Imputation of any thing, unless the thing it
self be imputed, nor any Participation of the Effects of any thing, but what is
grounded on the Imputation of the thing it self. Wherefore in our particular
case, no Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ is allowed, unless we grant
it self to be imputed; nor can we have any Participation of the effects of it,
but on the supposition and foundation of that Imputation. The impertinent
Cavils that some of late have collected from the Papists and Socinians, that if
it be so, then are we as Righteous as Christ himself, that we have redeemed the
World, and satisfied for the sins of others, that the pardon of sin is
impossible, and Personal Righteousness needless, shall afterward be spoken
unto, so far as they deserve.

All that we now aim to demonstrate, is only, that either the Righteousness of
Christ it self is imputed unto us, or there is no Imputation in the matter of
our Justification, which whether there be or no, is another Question afterward
to be spoken unto. For as was said, the effects of the Righteousness of Christ,
cannot be said properly to be imputed unto*us. For Instance, Pardon of sin is a
great effect of the Righteousness of Christ. Our sins are pardoned on the
account thereof. God for Christ's sake forgiveth us all our sins. But the pardon
of sin cannot be said to be imputed unto us, nor is so. Adoption,
Justification, Peace with God, all Grace and Glory, are effects of the
Righteousness of Christ. But that these things are not imputed unto us, nor can
be so, is evident from their Nature: But we are made Partakers of them all,
upon the account of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, and
no otherwise.

Thus much may suffice to be spoken of the Nature of Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, the Grounds, Reasons, and Causes whereof, we shall in
the next place enquire into. And I doubt not but we shall find in our Enquiry,
that it is no such figment, as some Ignorant of these things do imagine, but on
the contrary, an Important Truth immixed with the most fundamental Principles
of the mystery of the Gospel, and inseparable from the Grace of God in Christ
Jesus.

CHAP. VIII. Imputation of the sins of the Church unto Christ. Grounds of it.
The Nature of his Suretyship. Causes of the New Covenant. Christ and the Church
one mystical Person; Consequents thereof.
THose who believe the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto
Believers, for the Justification of Life, do also unanimously profess, that the
sins of all Believers were imputed unto Christ. And this they do on many
Testimonies of the Scripture directly witnessing thereunto, some whereof shall
be pleaded and vindicated afterward. At present we are only on the
consideration of the general notion of these things, and the Declaration of the
nature of what shall be proved afterward. And in the first place we shall
enquire into the foundation of this Dispensation of God, and the Equity of it,
or the Grounds whereinto it is resolved, without an understanding whereof, the
thing it self cannot be well apprehended.

The principal Foundation hereof is, that Christ and the Church, in this
Design, were one mystical Person, which state they do actually coalesce in,
through the uniting Efficacy of the Holy Spirit. He is the Head, and Believers
are the members of that one Person, as the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
Hence as what he did is imputed unto them, as if done by them, so what they
deserved on the Account of sin was charged upon him. So is it expressed by a
Learned Prelate; Nostram causam sustinebat, qui nostram sibi Carnem aduniverat,
and ita nobis arctissimo vinculo conjunctus, and (...), quae erant nostra fecit
sua. And again; Quid mirum si in nostra persona constitutus, nostram carnem
indutus, etc. Montacut. Origin. Ecclesiast. The Ancients speak to the same
purpose. Leo. Sermon. 17. Ideo se humanae infirmitati virtus divina conseruit, ut
dum Deus sua facit esse quae nostra sunt, nostra faceret esse quae sua sunt.
And also Sermo. 16. Caput nostrum Dominus Jesus Christus omnia in se corporis
sui membra transformans, quod olim in Psalmo eructaverat, id in supplicio
crucis sub Redemptorum suorum voce clamavit. And so speaks Augustine to the
same purpose; Epist. 120. ad Honoratum; Audimus vocem corporis, ex ore capitis;
Ecclesia in illo patiebatur, quando pro Ecclesia patiebatur, etc. We hear the
voice of the Body from the mouth of the Head. The Church suffered in him, when
he suffered for the Church; as he suffers in the Church, when the Church
suffers for him. For as we have heard the voice of the Church in
Christ-suffering, my God, my Lord, why have thou forsaken me; look upon me; so
we have heard the voice of Christ in the Church-suffering, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me. But we may yet look a little backward and farther into the
sense of the ancient Church herein. Christus, says Irenaeus, omnes Gentes
exinde ab Adam disper sas, and Generationem hominum in semet ipso recapitulatus
est; unde a Paulo Typus futuri dictus est ipse Adam; lib. 3. cap. 33. And
again; Recapitulans universum hominum genus in se ab initio usque ad finem,
recapitulatus est and mortem ejus. In this of Recapitulation there is no doubt
but he had respect unto the (...), mentioned, Ephesians. 1.10. And it may be this
was that which Origin intended aenigmatically, by saying, the Soul of the first
Adam was the Soul of Christ, as it is charged on him. And Cyprian, Epist. 63.
on bearing about the Administration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; nos
omnes portabat Christus; qui and peccata nostra portabat. He bare us, or
suffered in our person, when he bare our sins. Whence Athanasius affirms of the
voice he used on the Cross; (...), We suffered in him. Eusebius speaks many
things to this purpose. Demonstrat. Evangel. lib. 10. cap. 1. Expounding those
words of the Psalmist, Heal my Soul, for, or as he would read them, if, I have
sinned against thee; and applying them unto our Savior in his sufferings; He
says thus, (...); because he took of our sins to himself; communicated our
sins to himself; making them his own; For so he adds, (...), making our sins
his own. And because in his following words he fully expresses what I design
to prove, I shall transcribe them at large, (...).

I have transcribed this passage at large, because, as I said, what I intend to
prove in the present discourse is declared fully therein. Thus therefore he
speaks. How then did he make our sins to be his own, and how did he bear our
Iniquities? Is it not from thence, that we are said to be his Body, as the
Apostle speaks, You are the Body of Christ, and members, for your part, or of
one another; and as when one member suffers, all the members do suffer; so the
many members, sinning and suffering, He according unto the Laws of sympathy in
the same body, (seeing that being the Word of God, he would take the form of a
Servant, and be joined unto the common habitation of us all (in the same
nature) took the sorrows or labors of the suffering members on him, and made
all their Infirmities his own, and according to the Laws of humanity (in the
same body) bare our sorrow and labor for us. And the Lamb of God did not only
these things for us, but he underwent torments, and was punished for us; that
which he was no ways exposed unto for himself, but we were so by the multitude
of our sins; and thereby he became the cause of the pardon of our sins; namely,
because he underwent Death, Stripes, Reproaches, translating the thing which we
had deserved unto himself; and was made a Curse for us, taking unto himself the
Curse that was due to us; For what was he, but (a substitute for us) a price of
Redemption for our Souls? In our person therefore the Oracle speaks, -- whilst
freely uniting himself unto us, and us unto himself, and making our (sins or
passions his own) I have said Lord be merciful unto me, heal my Soul, for I
have sinned against thee.

That our sins were transferred unto Christ and made his, that thereon he
underwent the punishment that was due unto us for them: and that the Ground
hereof, whereinto its Equity is resolved, is the Union between him and us, is
fully declared in this Discourse. So says the Learned and Pathetical Author of
the Homilies on Math. 5. in the works of Chrysostom, Hom. 54. which is the last
of them. In carne sua omnem carnem suscepit, crucifixus, omnem carnem
crucifixit in se. He speaks of the Church. So they speak often others of them;
that he bare us, that he took us with him on the Cross, that we were all
crucified in him; as Prospher; He is not saved by the Cross of Christ, who is
not crucified in Christ. Resp. ad cap. Gal. cap. 9.

This then I say is the Foundation of the Imputation of the sins of the Church
unto Christ, namely, that he and it are one Person, the Grounds whereof we must
enquire into.

But hereon sundry Discourses do ensue, and various Enquiries are made. What a
Person is, in what sense, and how many senses that word may be used; what is
the true notion of it, what is a natural Person, what a legal, civil, or
political Person; in the Explication whereof some have fallen into mistakes.
And if we should enter into this Field, we need not fear matter enough of
debate and altercation. But I must needs say, that these things belong not unto
our present occasion; nor is the Union of Christ and the Church illustrated,
but obscured by them. For Christ and Believers are neither one natural Person,
nor a legal or political Person, nor any such Person as the Laws, Customs, or
Usages of men do know or allow of. They are one mystical Person, whereof
although there may be some imperfect Resemblances found in natural or political
Unions, yet the Union from whence that Denomination is taken between him and
us, is of that nature, and arises from such Reasons and Causes, as no Personal
Union among men, (or the Union of many persons) has any concernment in. And
therefore as to the Representation of it unto our weak understandings unable to
comprehend the depth of Heavenly mysteries, it is compared unto Unions of
diverse kinds and natures. So is it represented by that of Man and Wife; not
unto those mutual affections which give them only a moral Union, but from the
extraction of the first Woman, from the flesh and bone of the first man, and
the Institution of God for the Individual Society of Life thereon. This the
Apostle at large declares, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Whence he
concludes, that from the Union thus represented, we are members of his Body, of
his flesh and of his bone, ver. 30. or have such a Relation unto him, as Eve
had to Adam, when she was made of his flesh and bone; and so was one flesh with
him. So also it is compared unto the Union of the Head and Members of the same
natural Body, 1 Cor. 12.12. and unto a political Union also between a Ruling or
political Head, and its political Members; but never exclusively unto the Union
of a natural Head, and its Members comprised in the same Expression, Ephesians.
4.15. Col. 2.19. And so also unto sundry things in nature, as a Vine and its
Branches, Joh. 15.1, 2, 3. And it is declared by the Relation that was between
Adam and his posterity, by Gods Institution and the Law of Creation; Romans 5.12.
etc. And the Holy Ghost by representing the Union that is between Christ and
Believers, by such a variety of Resemblances, in things agreeing only in the
common or general notion of Union on various Grounds, does sufficiently
manifest that it is not of, nor can be reduced unto any one kind of them. And
this will yet be made more evident by the consideration of the Causes of it,
and the Grounds whereinto it is resolved. But whereas it would require much
time and diligence to handle them at large, which the mention of them here
being occasional, will not admit, I shall only briefly refer unto the Heads of
them.

1. The first spring or cause of this Union, and of all the other causes of it,
lies in that eternal compact that was between the Father and the Son,
concerning the Recovery and Salvation of fallen mankind. Herein among other
things as the effects thereof, the Assumption of our nature, (the foundation of
this Union) was designed. The nature and terms of this Compact, Counsel, and
Agreement, I have declared elsewhere, and therefore must not here again insist
upon it. But the Relation between Christ and the Church, proceeding from hence,
and so being an effect of infinite Wisdom, in the Counsel of the Father and
Son, to be made effectual by the Holy Spirit, must be distinguished from all
other Unions or Relations whatever.

2. The Lord Christ as unto the nature which he was to assume, was hereon
predestined unto Grace and Glory. He was (...) foreordained, predestined,
before the foundation of the World; 1 Pet. 1.20. That is, he was so as unto his
Office, so unto all the Grace and Glory required thereunto, and consequent
thereon. All the Grace and Glory of the Humane Nature of Christ, was an effect
of free Divine preordination. God chose it from all Eternity, unto a
participation of all which it received in time. Neither can any other cause of
the Glorious Exaltation of that portion of our nature, be assigned.

3. This Grace and Glory whereunto he was preordained, was twofold. (1) That
which was peculiar unto himself; (2) That which was to be Communicated, by and
through him unto the Church. Of the first sort was the (...) the Grace of
Personal Union, that single effect of Divine Wisdom, (whereof there is no
shadow nor Resemblance in any other works of God, either of Creation,
Providence, or Grace) which his nature was filled withal. Full of Grace and
Truth. And all his personal Glory, Power, Authority, and Majesty as Mediator in
his Exaltation at the right hand of God, which is expressive of them all, does
belong hereunto. These things were peculiar unto him, and all of them effects
of his eternal Predestination. But (2) He was not thus predestined
absolutely, but also with respect unto that Grace and Glory which in him and by
him, was to be communicated unto the Church. And he was so:

1. As the Pattern and Exemplary cause of our Predestination; For we are
predestined to be conformed unto the Image of the Son of God, that he might
be the first born among many Brethren. Romans 8.29. Hence he shall even change
our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, Phil.
3.21. That when he appears, we may be every way like him. 1 John 3.2.

2. As the means and cause of Communicating all Grace and Glory unto us. For we
are chosen in him before the foundation of the World, that we should be Holy,
and predestined unto the Adoption of Children by him. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. He
was designed as the only procuring cause, of all spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly things unto those who are chosen in him. Wherefore

3. He was thus foreordained as the Head of the Church, it being the design of
God to gather all things into an Head in him, Ephesians. 1.10.

4. All the Elect of God were in his eternal purpose and design, and in the
everlasting Covenant between the Father and the Son, committed unto him to be
delivered from Sin, the Law, and Death, and to be brought into the enjoyment of
God. Thine they were, and thou gave them unto me. Joh. 17.6. Hence was that
love of his unto them, wherewith he loved them and gave himself for them,
antecedently unto any good or love in them, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Gal. 2.20. Rev.
1.5, 6.

5. In the prosecution of this design of God, and in the accomplishment of the
everlasting Covenant, in the fullness of Time he took upon him our Nature, or
took it into personal subsistence with himself. The especial Relation that
ensued hereon between him and the Elect Children, the Apostle declares at
large, Heb. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And I refer the Reader unto our
exposition of that place.

6. On these Foundations he undertook to be the Surety of the new Covenant,
Heb. 7.22. Jesus was made a Surety of a better Testament. This alone of all the
fundamental considerations of the Imputation of our sins unto Christ, I shall
insist upon, on purpose to obviate or remove, some mistakes about the Nature of
his Suretiship, and the respect of it unto the Covenant, whereof he was the
Surety. And I shall borrow what I shall offer hereon, from our exposition of
this passage of the Apostle on the seventh Chapter of this Epistle not yet
published, with very little variation from what I have discoursed on that
occasion, without the least respect unto, or prospect of any treating on our
present subject.

The word (...), is no where found in the Scripture, but in this place only.
But the advantage which some would make from thence, namely, that it being but
one place wherein the Lord Christ is called a Surety, it is not of much force,
or much to be insisted on, is both unreasonable and absurd. For (1) this one
place is of Divine Revelation, and therefore is of the same Authority with
twenty Testimonies unto the same purpose. One Divine Testimony makes our Faith
no less necessary, nor does one less secure it from being deceived, then an
hundred.

2. The signification of the word is known, from the use of it, and what it
signifies among men, that no question can be made of its sense and importance,
though it be but once used; And this on any occasion removes the Difficulty and
Danger, (...). (3) The thing it self intended is so fully declared by the
Apostle in this place, and so plentifully taught in other places of the
Scripture, as that the single use of this word, may add light, but can be no
prejudice unto it.

Something may be spoken unto the signification of the word (...)* which will
give light into the thing intended by it. (...) is Vola manus, the palm of the
hand; Thence is (...), or (...), to deliver into the hand. (...) is of the same
signification. Hence being a Surety is interpreted by striking the hand, Prove.
6.1. My Son if thou be Surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand,
with a Stranger. So it answers the Hebrew (...) which the Lxx render (...)
Prove. 6.1. Chap. 17.18. Chap. 20.19. and by (...) Nehem. 5.3. (...) Originally
signifies to mingle, or a mixture of any things or persons. And thence from the
conjunction and mixture that is between a Surety and him for whom he is a
Surety, whereby they coalesce into one person, as unto the ends of that
Suretiship; it is used for a Surety, or to give Surety. And he that was, or did
(...) a Surety, or become a Surety, was to answer for him, for whom he was so,
whatsoever befell him. So is it described, Genesis 43.9. in the words of Judah
unto his Father Jacob, concerning Benjamin. (...) I will be Surety for him; of
my hand shall thou require him. In undertaking to be Surety for him, as unto
his safety and preservation, he engages himself to answer for all that should
befall him, for so he adds; if I bring him not unto the, and set him before
the, let me be guilty for ever. And on this ground he entreats Joseph, that he
might be a Servant and a Bondsman in his stead, that he might go free and return
unto his Father, Genesis 44.32, 33. This is required unto such a Surety, that he
undergo and answer all that he for whom he is a Surety is liable unto, whether
in things criminal, or civil, so far as the Suretiship does extend. A Surety is
an undertaker for another, or others who thereon is justly and legally to
answer what is due to them, or from them. Nor is the Word otherwise used. See
Job. 17.3. Prove. 6.1. Chap. 11.15. Chap. 17.11. Chap. 20.16. Chap. 27.13. So
Paul became a Surety unto Philemon for Onesimus, ver. 17. (...) is Sponsio,
Expromissio, Fidejussio; an undertaking or giving Security for any thing or
Person unto another, whereon an Agreement did ensue. This in some cases was by
Pledges, or an Earnest, Isa. 36.8. (...) Give Surety, Pledges, Hostages, for
the true performance of conditions. Hence is (...) a Pledge or Earnest, Ephesians.
1.14. Wherefore (...) is Sponsor, Fidejussor, Praes, One that voluntarily takes
on himself the cause or condition of another, to answer, undergo, or pay what
he is liable unto, or to see it done, whereon he becomes justly and legally
obnoxious unto performance; In this sense is the word here used by the Apostle,
for it has no other.

In our present enquiry into the nature of this Suretiship of Christ, the whole
will be resolved into this one question, namely, whether the Lord Christ was
made a Surety only on the part of God unto us, to assure us, that the Promise
of the Covenant on his part should be accomplished; or also and principally an
undertaker on our part, for the performance of what is required, if not of us,
yet with respect unto us, that the Promise may be accomplished. The first of
these is vehemently asserted by the Socinians, who are followed by Grotius and
Hammond in their Annotations on this place.

The words of Schlictingius are, Sponsor foederis appellatur Jesus, quod nomine
Dei nobis spoponderit, id est fidem fecerit, Deum foederis promissiones
servaturum. Non vero quasi pro nobis spoponderit Deo, nostrorumve debitorum
solutionem in se receperit. Nec enim nos misimus Christum sed Deus, cujus
nomine Christus ad nos venit, foedus nobiscum panxit, ejusque promissiones
ratas fore spopondit and in se recepit; ideoque nec sponsor simpliciter, sed
foederis sponsor nominatur; spopondit autem Christus pro foederis divini
veritate, non tantum quatenus id firmum ratumque fore verbis perpetuo testatus
est; sed etiam quatenus muneris sui fidem, maximis rerum ipsarum comprobavit
Documentis, cum perfecta vitae innocentia and Sanctitate, cum divinis plane
quae patravit operibus; cum mortis adeo truculentae, quam pro Doctrinae suae
veritate subijt, perpessione. After which he subjoyns a long Discourse about
the Evidences which we have of the veracity of Christ. And herein we have a
brief account of their whole Opinion concerning the Mediation of Christ. The
words of Grotius are; spopondit Christus, i.e. Nos certos Promissi fecit, non
solis verbis, sed perpetua vitae Sanctitate, morte ob id tolerata and miraculis
plurimis; which are an Abridgment of the Discourse of Schlictingius. To the
same purpose Dr. Hammond expounds it, that he was a Sponsor or Surety for God
unto the confirmation of the Promises of the Covenant.

On the other hand the generality of Expositors, ancient and modern, of the
Roman and Protestant Churches on the place affirm, that the Lord Christ as the
Surety of the Covenant, was properly a Surety or undertaker unto God for us,
and not a Surety and undertaker unto us for God. And because this is a matter
of Great Importance, wherein the Faith and Consolation of the Church is highly
concerned, I shall insist a little upon it.

And first, we may consider the Argument that is produced to prove that Christ
was only a Surety for God unto us. Now this is taken neither from the Name nor
Nature of the Office or work of Surety, nor from the Nature of the Covenant,
whereof he was a Surety, nor of the Office wherein he was so. But the sole
Argument insisted on is; That we do not give Christ as a Surety of the Covenant
unto God, but he gives him unto us, and therefore he is a Surety for God and
the accomplishment of his Promises, and not for us to pay our debts, or to
answer what is required of us.

But there is no force in this Argument. For it belongs not unto the nature of
a Surety, by whom he is or may be designed unto his Office and Work therein.
His own voluntary susception of the Office and Work, is all that is required,
however he may be designed or induced to undertake it. He who of his own accord
does voluntarily undertake for another, on what Grounds, Reasons, or
Considerations soever he does so, is his Surety. And this the Lord Christ did
in the behalf of the Church. For when it was said, Sacrifice and burnt-Offering
and whole burnt-Offerings for sin, God would not have, or accept as sufficient
to make the Atonement that he required, so as that the Covenant might be
established and made effectual unto us, then said he, Lo I come to do thy Will
O God, Heb. 10.5.6. He willingly and voluntarily out of his own abundant
goodness and love, took upon him to make Atonement for us, wherein he was our
Surety. And accordingly this undertaking is ascribed unto that love which he
exercised herein, Gal. 2.20. 1 John 3.16. Rev. 1.5. And there was this in it
moreover, that he took upon him our nature or the Seed of Abraham, wherein he
was our Surety. So that although we neither did nor could appoint him so to be,
yet he took from us, that wherein and whereby he was so, which is as much as if
we had designed him unto his work, as to the true Reason of his being our
Surety. Wherefore notwithstanding those antecedent Transactions that were
between the Father and him in this matter, it was the voluntary Engagement of
himself to be our Surety, and his taking our nature upon him for that end,
which was the formal Reason of his being enstated in that Office.

It is indeed weak and contrary unto all common experience, that none can be a
Surety for others, unless those others design him and appoint him so to be. The
principal instances of Suretiship in the World, have been by the voluntary
undertaking of such as were no way procured so to do by them for whom they
undertook; And in such undertakings he unto whom it is made, is no less
considered, than they for whom it is made. As when Judah on his own accord
became a Surety for Benjamin, he had as much respect unto the satisfaction of
his Father, as the safety of his Brother. And so the Lord Christ, in his
undertaking to be a Surety for us, had respect unto the Glory of God before our
safety.

1. We may consider the Arguments whence it is evident that he neither was, nor
could be a Surety unto us for God, but was so for us unto God. For

1. (...) or (...) a Surety, is one that undertaketh for another wherein he is
defective really or in Reputation. Whatever that undertaking be, whether in
words of Promise, or in depositing of real security in the hands of an
Arbitrator, or by any other personal Engagement of life and body, it respects
the defect of the person for whom any one becomes a surety. Such an one is
Sponsor, or Fidejussor, in all Good Authors and common use of speech. And if
any one be of absolute credit himself, and of a Reputation every way
unquestionable, there is no need of a surety, unless in case of mortality. The
words of a surety in the behalf of another whose Ability or Reputation is
dubious, are, ad me recipio, fac^et, aut faciam. And when (...) is taken
adjectively, as sometimes, it signifies satisdationibus obnoxious; liable to
payments for others, that are non-solvent.

2. God can therefore have no surety properly, because there can be no
Imagination of any defect on his part. There may be indeed a Question whether
any Word or Promise, be a Word or Promise of God. To assure us hereof, it is
not the Work of a surety, but only any one, or any means that may give evidence
that so it is, that is, of a Witness. But upon a supposition that what is
proposed in his Word or Promise, there can be no Imagination or fear of any
defect on his part, so as that there should be any need of a surety for the
performance of it. He does therefore make use of Witnesses to confirm his Word;
that is, to testify that such Promises he has made, and so he will do. So the
Lord Christ was his Witness, Isa. 43.10. Ye are my Witnesses says the Lord,
and my Servant whom I have chosen. But they were not all his sureties. So he
affirms, that he came into the World to bear witness unto the Truth, Joh.
18.37. that is, the Truth of the Promises of God; for he was the Minister of
the Circumcision for the Truth of the Promises of God unto the Fathers, Romans
15.8. But a surety for God, properly so called, he was not, nor could be. The
distance and difference is wide enough between a witness and a surety. For a
surety must be of more Ability, or more Credit and Reputation than he or those
for whom he is a surety, or there is no need of his suretiship; or at least he
must add unto their credit, and make it better than without him. This none can
be for God, no not the Lord Christ himself, who in his whole work was the
Servant of the Father. And the Apostle does not use this word in general
improper sense for any one that by any means gives Assurance of any other
thing, for so he had ascribed nothing peculiar unto Christ. For in such a sense
all the Prophets and Apostles were sureties for God, and many of them confirmed
the Truth of his Word and Promises, with the laying down of their lives. But
such a surety he intends as undertaketh to do that for others which they cannot
do for themselves; or at least are not reputed to be able to do what is
required of them.

3. The Apostle had before at large declared, who, and what was Gods surety in
this mattter of the Covenant, and how impossible it was that he should have any
other. And this was himself alone, interposing himself by his Oath. For in this
cause, because he had none greater to swear by, he swear by himself, chap.
6.13, 14. Wherefore if God would give any other surety besides himself, it must
be one greater than He. This being every way impossible, he swears by himself
only. Many ways he may and does use for the declaring and testifying of his
Truth unto us, that we may know and believe it to be his Word; and so the Lord
Christ in his Ministry was the principal witness of the Truth of God. But other
surety than himself he can have none. And therefore,

4. When he would have us in this matter not only come unto the full Assurance
of Faith concerning his Promises, but also to have strong consolation therein,
he resolves it wholly into the Immutability of his counsel, as declared by his
Promise and Oath. chap. 6.18, 19. So that neither is God capable of having any
surety properly so called, neither do we stand in need of any on his part for
the confirmation of our Faith in the highest degree.

5. We on all accounts stand in need of a surety for us, or on our behalf.
Neither without the Interposition of such a surety, could any Covenant between
God and us be firm and stable, or an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. In the first Covenant made with Adam there was no surety, but
God and men were the immediate Covenanters. And although we were then in a
state and condition able to perform and answer all the Terms of the Covenant,
yet was it broken and disannulled. If this came to pass by the failure of the
Promise of God, it was necessary that on the making of a new Covenant he should
have a surety to undertake for him, that the Covenant might be stable and
everlasting. But this is false and blasphemous to imagine. It was man alone who
failed and broke that Covenant. Wherefore it was necessary that upon the making
of the New Covenant, and that with a design and purpose that it should never be
disannulled as the former was, that we should have a surety and undertaker for
us. For if that first Covenant was not firm and stable because there was no
surety to undertake for us, notwithstanding all that Ability which we had to
answer the terms of it; how much less can any other be so, now our Natures are
become depraved and sinful? Wherefore we alone were capable of a surety
properly so called, for us, we alone stood in need of him, and without him the
Covenant could not be firm, and inviolate on our parts. The surety therefore of
this Covenant is so with God for us.

6. It is the Priesthood of Christ that the Apostle treats of in this place,
and that alone. Wherefore he is a surety as he is a Priest, and in the
discharge of that Office, and therefore is so with God on our behalf. This
Schlictingius observes, and is aware what will ensue against his pretensions,
which he endeavors to obviate. Mirum (says he) porro alicui videri posset cur
Divinus Author de Christi sacerdotio in superioribus and in sequentibus agens,
derepente eum sponsorem foederis non vero sacerdotem vocet? Cur non dixerit
tanto praestantioris foederis factus est sacerdos Jesus? hoc enim plane
requirere videtur totus orationis contextus. Credibile est in voce sponsionis
sacerdotium quoque Christi intelligi. Sponsoris enim non est alieno nomine
quippiam promittere, and fidem suam pro alio interponere; sed etiam, si ita res
ferat, alterius nomine id quod spopondit praestare. In rebus quidem humanis, si
id non praestet is pro quo sponsor fidejussit; hic vero propter contrariam
causam (nam prior hic locum habere non potest) nempe quatenus ille pro quo
spopondit Christus per ipsum Christum promissa sua nobis exhibet; qua in re
praecipue Christi sacerdotium continetur.

Ans. (1) It may indeed seem strange unto any one who imagines Christ to be
such a surety as he does, why the Apostle should so call him, and so introduce
him in the Description of his Priestly Office, as that which belongs
thereunto. But grant what is the proper Work and Duty of a surety, and who the
Lord Jesus was a surety for, and it is evident that nothing more proper or
pertinent could be mentioned by him, when he was in the Declaration of that
office. (2) He confesses that by his Exposition of this suretiship of Christ,
as making him a surety for God, he contradicts the nature and only notion of
a surety among men. For such a one he acknowledges does nothing but in the
defect and unability of them for whom he is engaged, and does undertake. He is
to pay that which they owe, and to do what is to be done by them, which they
cannot perform. And if this be not the notion of a surety in this place, the
Apostle makes use of a word no where else used in the whole Scripture, to teach
us that which it does never signify among men, which is improbable and absurd.
For the sole Reason why he did make use of it was, that from the nature and
notion of it amongst men in others cases, we may understand the signification
of it; what he intends by it, and what under that name he ascribes unto the
Lord Jesus. (3) He has no way to solve the Apostles mention of Christ being a
surety in the description of his Priestly Office, but by overthrowing the
Nature of that Office also. For to confirm this absurd notion that Christ as a
Priest was a surety for God, he would have us believe that the Priesthood of
Christ consists in his making effectual unto us the Promises of God, or his
effectual communicating of the Good things promised unto us; the falsehood of
which notion really destructive of the Priesthood of Christ, I have elsewhere
at large detected and confuted. Wherefore seeing the Lord Christ is a surety of
the Covenant as a Priest, and all the sacerdotal Actings of Christ have God for
their immediate Object, and are performed with him on our behalf, he was a
surety for us also.

A Surety, Sponsor, Vas, Praes, Fidejussor, for us, the Lord Christ was, by his
voluntary undertaking out of his rich Grace and Love, to do, answer, and
perform all that is required on our parts, that we may enjoy the Benefits of
the Covenant, the Grace and Glory prepared, proposed, and promised in it, in
the way and manner determined on by Divine Wisdom. And this may be reduced unto
two Heads. 1. His answering for our Transgressions against the first Covenant.
2. His purchase and procurement of the Grace of the New. He was made a Curse
for us, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon us, Gal. 3.13, 1, 15.

1. He undertook as they surety of the Covenant to answer for all the sins of
those who are to be, and are made partakers of the Benefits of it. That is, to
undergo the punishment due unto their sins; to make atonement for them, by
offering himself a propitiatory sacrifice for the Expiation of their sins,
redeeming them by the Price of his Blood from their state of misery and bondage
under the Law and the Curse of it, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 10, Math. 20.28. 1 Timothy
2.6. 1 Cor. 6.20. Romans 3.25, 26. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 8.2, 3. 2 Cor. 5.19,
20, 21. Gal. 3.13. And this was absolutely necessary that the Grace and Glory
prepared in the Covenant might be communicated unto us. Without this
undertaking of his, and performance of it, the Righteousness and Faithfulness
of God would not permit, that sinners, such as had Apostatized from him,
despised his Authority and rebelled against him, falling thereby under the
sentence and curse of the Law, should again be received into his Favor, and
made Partakers of Grace and Glory. This therefore the Lord Christ took upon
himself, as the surety of the Covenant.

2. That those who were to be taken into this Covenant should receive Grace
enabling them to comply with the Terms of it, fulfill its Conditions, and yield
the Obedience which God required therein. For by the Ordination of God, he was
to procure, and did merit and procure for them the Holy Spirit, and all needful
supplies of Grace to make them new Creatures, and enable them to yield
Obedience unto God from a new principle of spiritual Life* and that faithfully
unto the End. So was he the surety of this better Testament. But all things
belonging hereunto will be handled at large in the place from whence as I said
these are taken, as suitable unto our present occasion.

But some have other notions of these things. For they say, that Christ by his
Death, and his Obedience therein, whereby he offered himself a sacrifice of
sweet smelling savor unto God, procured for us the New Covenant, or as one
speaks, all that we have by the Death of Christ is, that thereunto we owe the
Covenant of Grace. For herein he did and suffered what God required and freely
appointed him to do and suffer. Not that the Justice of God required any such
thing with respect unto their sins for whom he died, and in whose stead, or to
bestead whom, he suffered, but what by a free Constitution of Divine Wisdom and
Sovereignty was appointed unto him. Hereon, God was pleased to remit the Terms
of the Old Covenant, and to enter into a New Covenant with mankind upon Terms
suited unto our Reason, possible unto our Abilities, and every way advantageous
unto us. For these Terms are Faith and sincere Obedience, or such an Assent
unto the Truth of Divine Revelations, as is effectual in Obedience unto the
Will of God contained in them, upon the encouragement given thereunto in the
Promises of Eternal Life, or a future Reward made therein. On the performance
of these Conditions our Justification, Adoption, and future Glory do depend;
For they are that Righteousness before God, whereon he pardons our sins, and
accepts our persons, as if we were perfectly Righteous. Wherefore by this
procuring the New Covenant for us, which they ascribe unto the death of Christ,
they intend the abrogation of the old Covenant, or of the Law, or at least such
a Derogation from it, that it shall no more oblige us either unto sinless
Obedience or Punishment, nor require a perfect Righteousness unto our
Justification before God; and the Constitution of a new Law of Obedience
accommodated unto our present state and condition, on whose observance all the
Promises of the Gospel do depend.

Others say, that in the death of Christ there was real satisfaction made unto
God; not to the Law, or unto God according to what the Law required; but unto
God absolutely. That is, He did what God was well pleased and satisfied
withal, without any respect unto his Justice or the Curse of the Law. And they
add, that hereon the whole Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, so far,
as that we are made Partakers of the Benefits thereof. And moreover, that the
way of the Communication of them unto us, is by the New Covenant which by his
Death the Lord Christ procured. For the Conditions of this Covenant are
established in the Covenant it self, whereon God will bestow all the Benefits
and Effects of it upon us, which are Faith and Obedience. Wherefore what the
Lord Christ has done for us is thus far accepted as our legal Righteousness,
as that God upon our Faith and Obedience with respect thereunto, does release
and pardon all our sins of Omission and Commission. Upon this pardon there is
no need of any positive perfect Righteousness unto our Justification or
Salvation, but our own personal Righteousness is accepted with God in the room
of it, by virtue of the New Covenant which Christ has procured. So is the
Doctrine hereof stated by Cursellaeus, and those that join with him, or follow
him.

Sundry things there are in these Opinions that deserve an Examination; and
they will most, if not all of them, occur unto us in our progress. That which
alone we have occasion to enquire into with respect unto what we have
discoursed concerning the Lord Christ as surety of the Covenant, and which is
the Foundation of all that is asserted in them, is, That Christ by his death
procured the New Covenant for us; which, as one says, is all that we have
thereby; which if it should prove otherwise, we are not beholding unto it for
any thing at all. But these things must be examined. And,

1. The Terms of procuring the New Covenant are ambiguous. It is not as yet
(that I know of) by any declared how the Lord Christ did procure it; whether he
did so by his Satisfaction and Obedience, as the meritorious cause of it, or by
what other kind of causality. Unless this be stated we are altogether uncertain
what Relation of the New Covenant unto the Death of Christ is intended. And to
say that thereunto we owe the New Covenant, does not mend the matter, but
rather render the Terms more ambiguous. Neither is it declared whether the
Constitution of the Covenant, or the Communication of the Benefits of it are
intended. It is yet no less general, That God was so well pleased with what
Christ did, as that hereon he made and entered into a New Covenant with
mankind. This they may grant who yet deny the whole satisfaction and merit of
Christ. If they mean that the Lord Christ by his Obedience and Suffering did
meritoriously procure the making and establishing of the New Covenant, which
was all that he so procured, and the entire effect of his death, what they say
may be understood, but the whole Nature of the Mediation of Christ is
overthrown thereby.

2. This Opinion is liable unto a great Prejudice, in that whereas it is in
such a Fundamental Article of our Religion, and about that wherein the Eternal
Welfare of the Church is so nearly concerned, there is no mention made of it in
the Scripture. For is it not strange that if this be, as some speak, the sole
effect of the Death of Christ, whereas sundry other things are frequently in
the Scripture ascribed unto it, as the effects and fruits thereof, that this
which is only so should be no where mentioned, neither in express words, nor
such as will allow of this sense by any just or lawful consequence. Our
Redemption, Pardon of sins, the Renovation of our Natures, our Sanctification,
Justification, Peace with God, Eternal Life, are all jointly and severally
assigned thereunto in places almost without number. But it is no where said in
the Scripture, that Christ by his death, merited, procured, obtained, the New
Covenant; or that God should enter into a New Covenant with mankind; yea as we
shall see, that which is contrary unto it, and inconsistent with it, is
frequently asserted.

3. To clear the Truth herein, we must consider the several notions and causes
of the New Covenant; with the true and real respect of the Death of Christ
thereunto. And it is variously represented unto us.

1. In the Designation and Preparation of its Terms and Benefits in the Counsel
of God. And this although it have the nature of an Eternal Decree, yet is it
not the same with the Decree of Election, as some suppose. For that properly
respects the subjects or persons for whom Grace and Glory are prepared. This is
the Preparation of that Grace and Glory, as to the way and manner of their
communication. Some learned men do judge that this counsel and purpose of the
Will of God, to give Grace and Glory in and by Jesus Christ unto the Elect in
the way and by the means by him prepared, is formally the Covenant of Grace, or
at least that the substance of the Covenant is comprised therein. But it is
certain, that more is required to complete the whole nature of a Covenant. Nor
is this purpose or counsel of God called the Covenant in the Scripture, but is
only proposed as the spring and fountain of it, Ephesians. 1. ^^ 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11. Unto the full Exemplification of the Covenant of Grace, there is
required the Declaration of this Counsel of Gods Will, accompanied with the
means and powers of its Accomplishment, and the Prescription of the ways
whereby we are so to be interessed in it, and made partakers of the Benefits of
it. But in the enquiry after the procuring cause of the New Covenant, it is the
first thing that ought to come under consideration. For nothing can be the
procuring cause of the Covenant which is not so of this spring and fountain of
it, of this Idea of it in the mind of God, of the preparation of its Terms and
Benefits. But this is no where in the Scripture affirmed to be the effect of
the Death or Mediation of Christ; and to ascribe it thereunto, is to overthrow
the whole freedom of eternal Grace and Love. Neither can any thing that is
absolutely Eternal, as is this Decree and Counsel of God, be the effect of, or
procured by any thing that is external and temporal.

2. It may be considered with respect unto the foederal Transactions between
the Father and the Son, concerning the Accomplishment of this Counsel of his
Will. What these were, wherein they did consist, I have declared at large;
Exercitat. Vol. 2. Neither do I call this the Covenant of Grace absolutely, nor
is it so called in the Scripture. But yet some will not distinguish between the
Covenant of the Mediator and the Covenant of Grace, because the promises of the
Covenant absolutely are said to be made to Christ, Gal. 3.16. and he is the
(...), or first subject of all the Grace of it. But in the Covenant of the
Mediator, Christ stands alone for himself, and undertakes for himself alone,
and not as the Repretsentive of the Church. But this he is in the Covenant of
Grace. But this is that wherein it had its designed establishment as unto all
the ways, means, and ends of its Accomplishment; and all things so disposed as
that it might be effectual unto the eternal Glory of the Wisdom, Grace,
Righteousness and Power of God. Wherefore the Covenant of Grace could not be
procured by any means or cause, but that which was the cause of this Covenant
of the Mediator, or of God the Father with the Son, as undertaking the work of
Mediation. And as this is no where ascribed unto the Death of Christ in the
Scripture, so to assert it, is contrary unto all spiritual Reason and
Understanding. Who can conceive that Christ by his death should procure the
Agreement between God and him, that he should dye.

3. With respect unto the Declaration of it by especial Revelation. This we may
call Gods making or establishing of it, if we please; though making of the
Covenant in Scripture, is applied principally, if not only, unto its execution
or actual Application unto Persons, 2 Samuel 23.5. Jerem. 32.40. This Declaration
of the Grace of God, and the provision in the Covenant of the Mediator for the
making of it effectual unto his Glory, is most usually called the Covenant of
Grace. And this is twofold,

1. In the way of a singular and absolute Promise; so was it first: declared
unto, and established with Adam, and afterward with Abraham. The Promise is
the Declaration of the Purpose of God before declared, or the free
Determination and Counsel of his Will, as to his dealing with sinners on the
supposition of the Fall, and their forfeiture of their first Covenant state.
Hereof the Grace and Will of God was the only cause, Heb. 8.8. And the Death of
Christ could not be the means of its procurement, For he himself and all that
he was to do for us, was the substance of that Promise. And this Promise as it
is declarative of the Purpose or Counsel of the Will of God, for the
Communication of Grace and Glory unto sinners, in and by the mediation of
Christ, according to the Ways and on the Terms prepared and disposed in his
Sovereign Wisdom and Pleasure, is formally the New Covenant, though something
yet is to be added to complete its Application unto us. Now the substance of
the first Promise, wherein the whole Covenant of Grace was virtually comprised,
directly respected and expressed, the giving of him for the Recovery of Mankind
from sin and misery by his death, Genesis 3.15. Wherefore if he, and all the
Benefits of his Mediation, his Death and all the Effects of it, be contained in
the Promise of the Covenant, that is, in the Covenant it self, then was not his
death the procuring cause of that Covenant, nor do we owe it thereunto.

2. In the additional prescription of the way and means whereby it is the Will
of God, that we shall enter into a Covenant state with him, or be interessed in
the Benefits of it. This being virtually comprised in the absolute Promise (for
every Promise of God does tacitly require Faith and Obedience in us) is
expressed in other places by the way of the Condition required on our part.
This is not the Covenant, but the Constitution of the Terms on our part,
whereon we are made Partakers of it. Nor is the Constitution of these Terms, an
effect of the death of Christ, or procured thereby. It is a mere effect of the
Sovereign Grace and Wisdom of God. The things themselves as bestowed on us,
communicated unto us, wrought in us by Grace, are all of them effects of the
death of Christ; but the Constitution of them to be the Terms and Conditions of
the Covenant is an Act of mere Sovereign Wisdom and Grace. God so loved the
world as to send his only begotten Son to dye, not that Faith and Repentance
might be the means of Salvation, but that all his Elect might believe, and that
all that believe might not perish, but have Life Everlasting. But yet it is
granted that the Constitution of these Terms of the Covenant does respect the
foederal Transaction between the Father and the Son, wherein they were ordered
to the praise of the Glory of Gods Grace; and so although their constitution
was not the procurement of his Death, yet without respect unto it, it had not
been. Wherefore the sole cause of Gods making the New Covenant, was the same
with that of giving Christ himself to be our Mediator, namely, the Purpose,
Counsel, Goodness, Grace and Love of God, as it is every where expressed in the
Scripture.

4 thly, The Covenant may be considered as unto the actual Application of the
Grace, Benefit and Privileges of it unto any persons, whereby they are made
real partakers of them, or are taken into Covenant with God. And this alone in
the Scripture is intended by Gods making a Covenant with any. It is not a
general Revelation, or Declaration of the Terms and Nature of the Covenant
(which some call an universal conditional Covenant, on what Grounds they know
best, seeing the very formal nature of making a Covenant with any, includes the
actual Acceptance of it, and Participation of the Benefits of it by them) but
a Communication of the Grace of it, accompanied with a prescription of
Obedience, that is Gods making his Covenant with any, as all Instances of it in
the Scripture do declare.

It may be therefore enquired, what respect the Covenant of Grace has unto the
Death of Christ, or what Influence it has thereunto.

I answer, supposing what is spoken of his being a surety thereof* it has a
threefold respect thereunto.

1. In that the Covenant, as the Grace and Glory of it were prepared in the
Counsel of God, as the Terms of it, was fixed in the Covenant of the Mediator,
and as it was declared in the Promise, was confirmed, ratified, and made
irrevocable thereby. This our Apostle insists upon at large, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. And he compares his Blood in his Death and Sacrifice of himself,
unto the Sacrifices and their Blood whereby the Old Covenant was confirmed,
purified, dedicated or established, ver. 18, 19. Now these Sacrifices did not
procure that Covenant, or prevail with God to enter into it; but only ratified
and confirmed it; and this was done in the New Covenant by the Blood of Christ.

2. He thereby underwent and performed all that which in the Righteousness and
Wisdom of God was required, that the Effects, Fruits, Benefits and Grace,
intended, designed, and prepared in the New Covenant might be effectually
accomplished, and communicated unto sinners. Hence although he procured not the
Covenant for us by his death, yet he was in his Person, Mediation, Life and
Death, the only cause and means whereby the whole Grace of the Covenant is made
effectual unto us. For,

3. All the Benefits of it were procured by him; that is, all the Grace, Mercy,
Privileges and Glory that God has prepared in the Counsel of his Will, that
were fixed as unto the way of this communication in the Covenant of the
Mediator, and proposed in the Promises of it, are purchased, merited, and
procured by his Death; and effectually communicated or applied unto all the
Covenanters by virtue thereof, with others of his Mediatory Acts. And this is
much more an eminent procuring of the New Covenant, than what is pretended
about the procurement of its Terms and Conditions. For if he should have
procured no more but this, if we owe this only unto his Mediation, that God
would thereon, or did grant and establish this Rule, Law, and Promise, that
whoever ever believed should be saved, it were possible that no one should be
saved thereby; yea if he did no more, considering our state and condition, it
was impossible that any one should so be.

To give the sum of these things, it is inquired with respect unto which of
these considerations of the new Covenant, it is affirmed that it was procured
by the Death of Christ. If it be said, that it is with respect unto the actual
communication of all the Grace and Glory prepared in the Covenant, and proposed
unto us in the Promises of it; it is most true. All the Grace and Glory
promised in the Covenant was purchased for the Church by Jesus Christ. In this
sense by his Death he procured the new Covenant. This the whole Scripture from
the Beginning of it in the first Promise unto the end of it, does bear witness
unto. For it is in him alone that God blesses us with all spiritual Blessings
in Heavenly things. Let all the good things that are mentioned or promised in
the Covenant expressly, or by just consequence, be summed up, and it will be no
hard matter to demonstrate concerning them all, and that both jointly and
severally, that they were all procured for us by the Obedience and Death of
Christ.

But this is not that which is intended. For most of this Opinion do deny, that
the Grace of the Covenant in Conversion unto God, the Remission of sins,
Sanctification, Justification, Adoption, and the like, are the effects or
procurements of the Death of Christ. And they do on the other hand declare,
that it is Gods making of the Covenant which they do intend: that is the
contrivance of the terms and conditions of it, with their proposal unto mankind
for their Recovery. But herein there is (...). For

1. The Lord Christ himself, and the whole work of his Mediation, as the
Ordinance of God for the Recovery and Salvation of lost Sinners, is the first
and principal promise of the Covenant. So his Exhibition in the flesh, his work
of Mediation therein with our deliverance thereby, was the subject of that
first Promise, which virtually contained this whole Covenant. So he was of the
Renovation of it unto Abraham when it was solemnly confirmed by the Oath of
God, Gal. 3.16, 17. And Christ did not by his Death procure the promise of his
Death, nor of his Exhibition in the flesh, or his coming into the World, that
he might dye.

2. The making of this Covenant is every where in the Scripture ascribed (as is
also the sending of Christ himself to dye) unto the Love, Grace and Wisdom of
God alone; no where unto the Death of Christ, as the actual Communication of
all Grace and Glory are. Let all the places be considered, where either the
giving of the Promise, the sending of Christ, or the making of the Covenant are
mentioned, either expressly or virtually, and in none of them are they assigned
unto any other cause, but the Grace, Love, and Wisdom of God alone, all to be
made effectual unto us, by the Mediation of Christ.

3. The assignation of the sole end of the Death of Christ to be the
procurement of the new Covenant in the sense contended for, does indeed
evacuate all the virtue of the Death of Christ and of the Covenant it self. For
(1) the Covenant which they intend, is nothing but the Constitution and
proposal of new Terms and Conditions for life and salvation unto all men. Now
whereas the acceptance and accomplishment of these conditions, depend upon the
Wills of men no way determined by effectual Grace, it was possible that
notwithstanding all Christ did by his Death, yet no one Sinner might be saved
thereby, but that the whole end and design of God therein might be frustrate.
(2) Whereas the substantial advantage of these conditions lies herein, that
God will now for the sake of Christ, accept of an Obedience, inferior unto that
required in the Law, and so as that the Grace of Christ does not raise up all
things unto a Conformity and compliance with the Holiness and Will of God
declared therein, but accommodate all things unto our present condition,
nothing can be invented more dishonorable to Christ and the Gospel. For what
does it else but make Christ the Minister of sin, in disanulling the Holiness
that the Law requires, or the Obligation of the Law unto it, without any
provision of what might answer, or come into the Room of it, but that which is
incomparably less worthy. Nor is it consistent with Divine Wisdom, Goodness,
and Immutability, to appoint unto mankind a Law of Obedience, and cast them all
under the severest penalty upon the Transgression of it, when he could in
Justice and Honor, have given them such a Law of Obedience, whose observance
might consist with many failings and sins. For if he have done that now, he
could have done so before, which how far it reflects on the Glory of the Divine
Properties might be easily manifested. Neither does this fond Imagination
comply with those Testimonies of Scripture, that the Lord Christ came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, that he is the end of the Law, and that by
Faith the Law is not disanulled but established.

Lastly, the Lord Christ was the Mediator and Surety of the new Covenant, in
and by whom it was ratified, confirmed and established; and therefore by him
the Constitution of it was not procured. For all the Acts of his Office belong
unto that Mediation; And it cannot be well apprehended how any Act of Mediation
for the Establishment of the Covenant and rendering it effectual, should procure
it.

But to return from this Digression; That wherein all the precedent causes of
the Union between Christ and Believers, whence they become one mystical person,
do center, and whereby they are rendered a complete foundation of the Imputation
of their sins unto him, and of his Righteousness unto them, is the
Communication of his Spirit, the same Spirit that dwells in him, unto them,
to abide in, to animate and guide the whole mystical Body and all its Members.
But this has of late been so much spoken unto, as that I shall do no more but
mention it.

On the considerations insisted on, whereby the Lord Christ became one mystical
Person with the Church, or bare the Person of the Church in what he did as
Mediator, in the Holy Wise disposal of God as the Author of the Law, the
supreme Rector or Governor of all mankind, as unto their Temporal and Eternal
concernments, and by his own consent, the sins of all the Elect were imputed
unto him. This having been the Faith and Language of the Church in all Ages,
and that derived from and founded in express Testimonies of Scripture, with all
the Promises and Presignations of his Exhibition in the flesh from the
beginning, cannot now with any Modesty be expressly denied. Wherefore the
Socinians themselves grant that our sins may be said to be imputed unto Christ,
and he to undergo the punishment of them, so far as that all things which
befell him Evil and Afflictive in this life, with the Death which he underwent,
were occasioned by our sins. For had not we sinned, there had been no need of,
nor occasion for his suffering. But notwithstanding this concession they
expressly deny his satisfaction, or that properly he underwent the punishment
due unto our sins; wherein they deny also all Imputation of them unto him.
Others say that our sins were imputed unto him, quoad reatum poenae, but not
quoad reatum culpae. But I must acknowledge that unto me this distinction gives
inanem sine mente sonum. The substance of it is much insisted on by
Feuardentius, Dialog. 5. page 467. And he is followed by others. That which he
would prove by it, is, That the Lord Christ did not present himself before the
Throne of God, with the burden of our sins upon him, so as to answer unto the
Justice of God for them. Whereas therefore reatus, or guilt, may signify
either Dignitatem poenae or obligationem ad poenam, as Bellarmine
distinguishes, de Amiss. Great. lib. 7. cap. 7. with respect unto Christ, the
latter only is to be admitted. And the main Argument he and others insist upon,
is this; That if our sins be imputed unto Christ, as unto the guilt of the
fault, as they speak, then he must be polluted with them, and thence be
denominated a sinner in every kind. And this would be true, if our sins could
be Communicated unto Christ by Transfusion, so as to be his inherently and
subjectively. But their being so only by Imputation gives no countenance unto
any such pretense. However there is a notion of legal uncleanness, where there
is no inherent defilement. So the Priest who offered the Red Heifer to make
Atonement, and he that burned her, were said to be unclean, Numb. 19.7, 8. But
hereon they say, that Christ dyed and suffered upon the special Command of God,
not that his Death and Suffering were any way due upon the account of our sins;
or required in Justice, which is utterly to overthrow the satisfaction of
Christ.

Wherefore the design of this distinction, is to deny the Imputation of the
guilt of our sins unto Christ, and then in what tolerable sense can they be
said to be imputed unto him, I cannot understand. But we are not tied up unto
Arbitrary distinction, and the sense that any are pleased to impose on the
terms of them. I shall therefore first enquire into the meaning of these words,
guilt and guilty, whereby we may be able to judge of what it is, which in this
Distinction is intended.

The Hebrews have no other word to signify guilt or guilty but (...). And this
they use both for sin, the guilt of it, the punishment due unto it, and a
Sacrifice for it. Speaking of the guilt of Blood, they use not any word to
signify guilt, but only say (...) it is Blood to him. So David prays deliver
me (...) from Blood, which we render Blood-guiltiness, Psalm. 51.14. And this
was, because by the Constitution of God, he that was guilty of Blood, was to
dye by the hand of the Magistiate, or of God himself. But (...) Ascham is no
where used for guilt, but it signifies the Relation of the sin intended unto
punishment. And other significations of it will be in vain sought for in the
old Testament.

In the new Testament, he that is guilty, is said to be (...), Romans 3.19. that
is, obnoxious to Judgment or vengeance for sin; one that (...), as they speak,
Act. 28.4. whom vengeance will not suffer to go unpunished. And (...), 1 Cor.
11.27. a word of the same signification. Once by (...), Matthew. 23.18. to owe,
to be indebted to Justice. To be obnoxious, liable unto Justice, Vengeance,
Punishment for sin, is to be guilty.

Reus, guilty in the Latin is of a large signification. He who is Crimini
obnoxious, or Poenae propter Crimen, or Voti debtor, or Promissi, or officij ex
sponsione, is called, Reus. Especially every sponsor or Surety, is Reus in the
Law. Cum servus pecuniam pro liberate pactus est, and ob eam rem, Reum
dederit, (that is, sponsorem, expromissorem) quamvis servus ab alio manumissus
est, Reus tamen obligabitur. He is Reus who ingageth himself for any other, as
to the matter of his engagement. And the same is the use of the word in the
best Latin Authors. Opportuna loca dividenda Praefectis esse ac suae quique
partis tutandae reus sit. Live. de Bello Punic. lib. 5. That every Captain
should so take care of the Station committed to him, as that if any thing
happened amiss, it should be imputed unto him. And the same Author again, at
quicunque aut propinquitate aut affinitate regiam contigissent, alienae culpae
rei trucidarentur, should be guilty of the fault of another, (by Imputation)
and suffer for it. So that in the Latin Tongue he is Reus, who for himself or
any other is obnoxious unto Punishment or payment.

Reatus is a word of late Admission into the Latin Tongue, and was formed of
Reus. So Quintilian informs us in his Discourse of the use of obsolete and new
words, lib. 8. cap. 3. Quae vetera nunc sunt, fuerunt olim nova; quaedam in usu
perquam recentia. Messalla primus Reatum, munerarium Augustus dixerunt; To
which he adds Piratica, Musica, and some others then newly come into use. But
Reatus at its first Invention was of no such signification as it is now applied
unto. I mention it only to show, that we have no reason to be obliged unto men's
Arbitrary use of words. Some Lawyers first used it, pro crimine, a fault,
exposing unto Punishment. But the Original Invention of it continued by long
use, was to express the outward state and condition of him who was Reus, after
he was first charged in a cause criminal before he was acquitted or condemned.
Those among the Romans who were made Rei by any public Accusation, did betake
themselves unto a poor squalid Habit, a sorrowful countenance, suffering their
Hair and Beards to go undressed; Hereby on Custom and Usage, the people who
were to judge on their cause, were inclined to compassion. And Milo furthered
his sentence of Banishment, because he would not submit to this custom which
had such an appearance of Pusillanimity and baseness of Spirit. This state of
sorrow and trouble so expressed, they called Reatus and nothing else. It came
afterward to denote their state who were committed unto custody in order unto
their Trial, when the Government ceased to be popular, wherein alone the other
Artifice was of use. And if this word be of any use in our present Argument, it
is to express the state of men after Conviction of sin, before their
Justification. That is their Reatus, the condition wherein the proudest of them
cannot avoid to express their inward sorrow and anxiety of mind, by some
outward evidences of them. Beyond this we are not obliged by the use of this
word, but must consider the thing it self which* now we intend to express
thereby.

Guilt in the Scripture is the Respect of sin unto the sanction of the Law,
whereby the sinner becomes obnoxious unto punishment. And to be guilty is to be
(...), liable unto punishment for sin, from God, as the supreme Lawgiver and
Judge of all. And so guilt or Reatus is well defined to be obligatio ad poenam,
propter culpam, aut admissam in se, aut imputatam, just aut injuste. For so
Bathsheba says unto David, that she and her Son Solomon should be (...)
Sinners, that is, be esteemed guilty or liable unto punishment for some evil
laid unto their charge, 1 Kings 1.21. And the distinction of Dignitas poenae,
and obligatio ad poenam, is but the same thing in diverse words. For both do but
express the Relation of sin unto the sanction of the Law, or if they may be
conceived to differ, yet are they inseparable; for there can be no obligatio ad
poenam, where there is not dignitas poenae.

Much less is there any thing of weight in the distinction of Reatus culpae,
and Reatus poenae. For this Reatus culpae is nothing but dignitas poenae
propter culpam. Sin has other considerations, namely, its formal nature, as it
is a Transgression of the Law; and the stain or filth that it brings upon the
Soul; but the guilt of it, is nothing but its respect unto punishment from the
sanction of the Law. And so indeed Reatus culpae, is Reatus poenae; the guilt
of sin, is its desert of punishment. And where there is not this Reatus culpae,
there can be no poena, no punishment properly so called. For poena is vindicta
noxae, the revenge due to sin. So therefore there can be no punishment, nor
Reatus poenae, the guilt of it, but where there is Reatus culpae; or sin
considered with its guilt. And the Reatus poenae, that may be supposed without
the guilt of sin, is nothing but that obnoxiousness unto afflictive evil on the
occasion of sin, which the Socinians admit with respect unto the suffering of
Christ, and yet execrate his satisfaction.

And if this distinction should be apprehended to be of Reatus, from its formal
respect unto sin and punishment, it must in both parts of the Distinction be of
the same signification, otherwise there is an equivocation in the subject of
it. But reatus poenae is a liableness, an obnoxiousness unto punishment
according to the sentence of the Law; that whereby a sinner becomes (...). And
then Reatus culpae must be an obnoxiousness unto sin, which is uncouth. There
is therefore no Imputation of sin, where there is no Imputation of its Guilt.
For the Guilt of Punishment, which is not its respect unto the desert of sin,
is a plain fiction, there is no such thing in rerum natura. There is no Guilt
of sin, but its Relation unto Punishment.

That therefore which we affirm herein is, That our sins were so transferred on
Christ, as that thereby he became (...), Reus, responsible unto God, and
obnoxious unto punishment in the justice of God for them. He was alienae culpae
reus. Perfectly innocent in himself; but took our Guilt on him, or our
obnoxiousness unto punishment for sin. And so he may be, and may be said to be
the greatest Debtor in the World who never borrowed nor owed one farthing on
his own account, if he become surety for the greatest Debt of others. So Paul
became a Debtor unto Philemon, upon his undertaking for Onesimus, who before
owed him nothing.

And two things concurred unto this Imputation of sin unto Christ. (1) The Act
of God imputing it. (2) The voluntary Act of Christ himself in the undertaking
of it, or admitting of the charge.

1. The Act of God in this Imputation of the Guilt of our sins unto Christ, is
expressed by his laying all our Iniquities upon him, making him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin, and the like. For (1) as the supreme Governor, Lawgiver,
and Judge of all, unto whom it belonged to take care that his holy Law was
observed, or the offenders punished, He admitted upon the Transgression of it,
the sponsion and suretiship of Christ to answer for the sins of men, Heb. 10.5,
6, 7. (2) In order unto this End, he made him under the Law, or gave the Law
power over him, to demand of him, and inflict on him the penalty which was due
unto the sins of them for whom he undertook, Gal. 3.13. chap. 4.4, 5. (3) For
the Declaration of the Righteousness of God in this setting forth of Christ to
be a Propitiation, and to bear our Iniquities, the Guilt of our sins was
transferred unto him in an Act of the Righteous Judgment of God, accepting and
esteeming of him as the Guilty person; as it is with public sureties in every
case.

2. The Lord Christ voluntary susception of the state and condition of a
surety, or undertaker for the Church, to appear before the Throne of Gods
Justice for them, to answer whatever was laid unto their charge, was required
hereunto. And this he did absolutely. There was a concurrence of his own Will
in and unto all those Divine Acts whereby he and the Church were constituted
one mystical person. And of his own Love and Grace did he as our surety stand
in our stead before God, where he made Inquisition for sin; He took it on
himself, as unto the punishment which it deserved. Hence it became just and
righteous that he should suffer, the just for the unjust, that he might bring
us unto God. For if this be not so, I desire to know what is become of the
Guilt of the sins of Believers; If it were not transferred on Christ, it
remains still upon themselves, or it is nothing. It will be said that Guilt is
taken away by the free pardon of sin. But if so, there was no need of
punishment for it at all; which is indeed what the Socinians plead, but by
others is not admitted. For if punishment be not for Guilt, it is not
punishment.

But it is fiercely objected against what we have asserted, that if the Guilt
of our sins was imputed unto Christ, then was he constituted a sinner thereby;
for it is the Guilt of sin that makes any one to be truly a sinner. This is
urged by Bellarmin; lib. 2. de Justificat. not for its own sake, but to
disprove the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us, as it is continued by
others with the same design. For, says he, if we be made Righteous, and the
Children of God through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, then was
he made a sinner, and quod horret animus cogitare, filius Diaboli; by the
Imputation of the Guilt of our sins, or our Unrighteousness unto him. And the
same Objection is pressed by others, with instances of consequences, which for
many Reasons I heartily wish had been forborne. But I answer,

1. Nothing is more absolutely true, nothing is more sacredly or assuredly
believed by us, then, that nothing which Christ did or suffered, nothing that
he undertook or underwent, did or could constitute him, subjectively,
inherently, and thereon personally a sinner, or guilty of any sin of his own.
To bear the Guilt or Blame of other men's faults, to be alienae culpae reus,
makes no man a sinner, unless he did unwisely or irregularly undertake it. But
that Christ should admit of any thing of sin in himself, as it is absolutely
inconsistent with the Hypostatical Union, so it would render him unmeet for all
other Duties of his Office, Heb. 7.25, 26. And confess it has always seemed
scandalous unto me, that Socinus, Crellius, and Grotius, do grant that in some
sense Christ suffered for his own sins, and would prove it from that very place
wherein it is positively denied, Heb. 7.27. This ought to be sacredly fixed,
and not a word used, nor thought entertained of any possibility of the
contrary, upon any supposition whatever.

2. None ever dreamed of a Transfusion or propagation of sin from us unto
Christ, such as there was from Adam unto us. For Adam was a common person unto
us, we are not so to Christ; yea he is so to us; and the Imputation of our sins
unto him, as a singular Act of Divine Dispensation, which no evil consequent
can ensue upon.

3. To imagine such an Imputation of our sins unto Christ, as that thereon they
should cease to be our sins, and become his absolutely, is to overthrow that
which is affirmed. For on that supposition Christ would not suffer for our
sins, for they ceased to be ours, antecedently unto his suffering. But the
Guilt of them was so transferred unto him, that through his suffering for it,
it might be pardoned unto us.

These things being premised, I say,

1. There is in sin a Transgression of the Preceptive part of the Law, and
there is an obnoxiousness unto the Punishment from the Sanction of it. It is
the first that gives sin its formal nature, and where that is not subjectively,
no person can be constituted formally a sinner. However, any one may be so
denominated as unto some certain end or purpose, yet without this, formally a
sinner none can be, whatever be imputed unto them. And where that is, no
non-imputation of sin as unto punishment, can free the person in whom it is,
from being formally a sinner. When Bathsheba told David that she and her Son
Solomon should be (...) sinners, by having crimes laid unto their charge; and
when Judah told Jacob, that he would be a sinner before him always on the
account of any evil that befell Benjamin, (it should be imputed unto him) yet
neither of them could thereby be constituted a sinner formally. And on the
other hand, when Shimei desired David not to impute sin unto him, whereby he
escaped present punishment yet did not that non-imputation free him formally
from being a sinner. Wherefore sin under this consideration as a Transgression
of the Preceptive part of the Law, cannot be communicated from one unto
another, unless it be by the propagation of a vitiated Principle or Habit. But
yet neither so will the personal sin of one as inherent in him, ever come to be
the personal sin of another. Adam has upon his personal sin communicated a
vicious, depraved, and corrupted nature unto all his Posterity; and besides,
the guilt of his actual sin is imputed unto them, as if it had been committed
by every one of them. But yet his particular personal sin, neither ever did,
nor ever could become the personal sin of any one of them, any otherwise than
by the Imputation of its guilt unto them. Wherefore our sins neither are, nor
can be so imputed unto Christ, as that they should become subjectively his, as
they are a Transgression of the Preceptive part of the Law. A Physical
Translation or Transfusion of sin is in this case naturally and spiritually
impossible; and yet on a supposition thereof alone, do the horrid consequences
mentioned depend. But the guilt of sin is an external respect of it, with
regard unto the sanction of the Law only. This is separable from sin, and if it
were not so no one sinner could either be pardoned or saved. It may therefore
be made another by Imputation, and yet that other not rendered formally a
sinner thereby. This was that which was imputed unto Christ, whereby he was
rendered obnoxious unto the Curse of the Law. For it was impossible that the Law
should pronounce any accursed but the guilty; nor would do so, Deuteronomy. 27.26.

2. There is a great difference between the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ unto us, and the Imputation of our sins unto Christ; so as that he
cannot in the same manner be said to be made a sinner by the one, as we are
made Righteous by the other. For our sin was imputed unto Christ only, as he
was our Surety for a time, to this end, that he might take it away, destroy it
and abolish it. It was never imputed unto him, so as to make any alteration
absolutely in his personal state and condition. But his Righteousness is
imputed unto us, to abide with us, to be ours always, and to make a total
change in our state and condition as unto our Relation unto God. Our sin was
imputed unto him, only for a season, not absolutely, but as he was a Surety,
and unto the special end of destroying it; and taken on him, on this condition
that his Righteousness should be made ours for ever. All things are otherwise
in the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us, which respects us absolutely,
and not under a temporary capacity, abides with us for ever, changes our state
and relation unto God, and is an effect of super-abounding Grace.

But it will be said, that if our sins as to the guilt of them were imputed
unto Christ, then God must hate Christ. For he hates the guilty. I know not
well how I come to mention these things, which indeed I look upon as cavils,
such as men may multiply if they please, against any part of the mysteries of
the Gospel. But seeing it is mentioned, it may be spoken unto. And

1. It is certain that the Lord Christ's taking on him the guilt of our sins,
was an high act of Obedience unto God, Heb. 10.5, 6. And for which the Father
loved him, Joh. 10.17, 18. There was therefore no reason why God should hate
Christ, for his taking on him our Debt and the payment of it, in an Act of the
highest Obedience unto his will. (2) God in this matter is considered as a
Rector, Ruler and Judge. Now it is not required of the severest Judge, that as
a Judge he should hate the guilty person, no although he be guilty Originally
by Inhaesion and not by Imputation. As such, he has no more to do, but
consider the guilt, and pronounce the sentence of punishment. But (3) suppose a
person out of an Heroic generosity of mind should become an (...) for another,
for his friend, for a good man, so as to answer for him with his life, as Judah
undertook to be for Benjamin as to his liberty, which when a man has lost, he
is civilly dead, and capite diminutus, would the most cruel Tyrant under Heaven
that should take away his life, in that case hate him; would he not rather
admire his worth and virtue. As such an one it was that Christ suffered, and no
otherwise. (4) All the force of this exception depends on the ambiguity of the
word hate. For it may signify either an aversation or detestation of mind, or
only a will of punishing, as in God mostly it does. In the first sense there
was no ground why God should hate Christ on this Imputation of guilt unto him;
whereby he became non propriae sed alienae culpae Reus. Sin inherent renders
the Soul polluted, abominable, and the only Object of Divine Aversation. But
for him who was perfectly Innocent, Holy, Harmless, undefiled in himself, who
did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, to take upon him the
guilt of other sins, thereby to comply with and accomplish the design of God
for the manifestation of his Glory and infinite Wisdom, Grace, Goodness, Mercy,
and Righteousness, unto the certain expiation and destruction of sin, nothing
could render him more glorious and lovely in the sight of God or man. But for a
will of punishing in God, where sin is imputed, none can deny it, but they must
therewithal openly disavow the satisfaction of Christ.

The heads of some few of those Arguments wherewith the Truth we have asserted
is confirmed, shall close this Discourse.

1. Unless the guilt of sin was imputed unto Christ, sin was not imputed unto
him in any sense; For the punishment of sin is not sin; nor can those who are
otherwise minded, declare what it is of sin, that is imputed. But the Scripture
is plain, that God laid on him the Iniquity of us all, and made him to be sin
for us, which could not otherwise be but by Imputation.

2. There can be no punishment but with respect unto the guilt of sin
personally contracted, or imputed. It is guilt alone that gives what is
materially evil and afflictive, the formal nature of punishment and nothing
else. And therefore those who understand full well the Harmony of things and
Opinions, and are free to express their minds, do constantly declare, that if
one of these be denied, the other must be so also; and if one be admitted they
must both be so. If guilt was not imputed unto Christ, he could not, as they
plead well enough, undergo the punishment of sin; much he might do and suffer
on the occasion of sin, but undergo the punishment due unto sin he could not.
And if it should be granted that the guilt of sin was imputed unto him, they
will not deny but that he underwent the punishment of it; and if he underwent
the punishment of it, they will not deny but that the guilt of it was imputed
unto him; For these things are inseparably related.

3. Christ was made a Curse for us, the Curse of the Law; as is expressly
declared, Gal. 3.13, 14. But the Curse of the Law respects the guilt of sin
only; So as that where that is not, it cannot take place in any sense, and
where that is, it does inseparably attend it, Deuteronomy. 27.26.

4. The express Testimonies of the Scripture unto this purpose cannot be
evaded, without an open wresting of their words and sense. So God is said to
make all our Iniquities to meet with upon him; and he bare them on him as his
burden, for so the word signifies, Isa. 53.6. God has laid on him, (...) the
Iniquity, that is, the guilt of us all, ver. 11. (...) and their sin or guilt
shall he bear. For that is the intendment of (...), where joined with any other
word that denotes sin as it is in those places, Psalm. 32.5. thou forgavest
(...) the Iniquity of my sin, that is, the guilt of it, which is that alone
that is taken away by pardon. That his Soul was made an Offering for the guilt
of sin, that he was made sin, that sin was condemned in his flesh, etc.

5. This was represented in all the Sacrifices of old, especially the great
Anniversary, on the day of expiation, with the Ordinance of the Escape Goat, as
has been before declared.

6. Without a supposition hereof it cannot be understood, how the Lord Christ
should be our (...) or suffer (...), in our stead, unless we will admit the
exposition of Mr. Ho. a late Writer, who reckoning up how many things the Lord
Christ did in our stead, adds as the sense thereof, that is to bestead us; then
which if he can invent any thing more fond and senseless, he has a singular
faculty in such an Employment.

CHAP. IX. The formal cause of Justification; or, The Righteousness on the
Account whereof Believers are justified before God. Objection answered.
THe principal differences about the Doctrine of Justification are reducible
unto three Heads. (1) The nature of it; namely, whether it consist in an
internal change of the Person justified by the infusion of an Habit of inherent
Grace or Righteousness; or whether it be a Forensick Act, in the judging,
esteeming, declaring, and pronouncing such a person to be Righteous, thereon
absolving him from all his sins, giving unto him Right and Title unto life.
Herein we have to do only with those of the Church of Rome, all others, both
Protestants and Socinians being agreed on the Forensick sense of the word, and
the nature of the thing signified thereby. And this I have already spoken unto,
so far as our present design does require, and that I hope with such evidence
of Truth, as cannot well be gainsayed. Nor may it be supposed that we have too
long insisted thereon, as an opinion which is obsolete, and long since
sufficiently confuted. I think much otherwise, and that those who avoid the
Romanists in these Controversies, will give a greater appearance of fear, than
of contempt. For when all is done, if free Justification through the Blood of
Christ and the Imputation of his Righteousness, be not able to preserve its
station, in the minds of men, the Popish Doctrine of Justification must and
will return upon the world, with all the concomitants and consequences of it.
Whilst any knowledge of the Law or Gospel is continued amongst us, the
Consciences of men will at one time or other, living or dying, be really
affected with a sense of sin, as unto its guilt and danger. Hence that Trouble
and those Disquietments of mind will ensue, as will force men, be they never so
unwilling, to seek after some Relief and Satisfaction. And what will not men
attempt, who are reduced to the condition expressed, Micah. 6.7, 8. Wherefore
in this case, if the true and only relief of distressed Consciences, of sinners
who are weary and heavy laden be hid from their eyes; if they have no
apprehension of, nor trust in that which alone they may oppose unto the
sentence of the Law, and interpose betweens Gods Justice and their Souls,
wherein they may take shelter from the storms of that wrath which abides on
them that believe not; they will betake themselves unto any thing which
confidently tenders them present ease and relief. Hence many persons living all
their days in an ignorance of the Righteousness of God, are oftentimes on their
sick Beds, and in their dying hours, proselyted unto a confidence in the ways
of Rest and Peace, which the Romanists impose upon them. For such seasons of
advantage do they wait for, unto the Reputation as they suppose of their own
Zeal, in truth unto the scandal of Christian Religion. But finding at any time
the Consciences of men under disquietments, and ignorant of, or disbelieving
that Heavenly relief which is provided in the Gospel, they are ready with their
Applications and Medicines, having on them pretended Approbations of the
experience of many Ages, and an innumerable company of devout Souls in them.
Such is their Doctrine of Justification, with the Addition of those other
Ingredients of Confession, Absolution, Penances or Commutations, Aids from
Saints and Angels, especially the blessed Virgin, all warmed by the Fire of
Purgatory, and confidently Administered unto Persons, sick of Ignorance,
Darkness and Sin. And let none please themselves in the Contempt of these
things. If the truth concerning Evangelical Justification be once disbelieved
among us, or obliterated by any Artifices, out of the minds of men, unto these
things at one time or other, they must and will betake themselves. For the new
Schemes and Projections of Justification which some at present would supply us
withal, they are now way suited, nor able to give Relief or Satisfaction unto a
Conscience really troubled for Sin, and seriously enquiring how it may have
Rest and Peace with God. I shall take the boldness therefore to say, whoever be
offended at it; that if we lose the ancient Doctrine of Justification through
Faith in the Blood of Christ, and the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us,
public profession or Religion, will quickly issue in Popery, or Atheism, or at
least in what is the next door unto it, (...).

The second principal Controversy is about the formal cause of Justification,
as it is expressed and stated by those of the Roman Church. And under these
terms some Protestant Divines have consented to debate the matter in
difference. I shall not interpose into a strife of words. So the Romanists will
call, that which we enquire after. Some of ours say the Righteousness of Christ
imputed; some, the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, is the formal
cause of our Justification; some, that there is no formal cause of
Justification, but this is that which supplies the place and use of a formal
cause, which is the Righteousness of Christ. In none of these things will I
concern my self, though I judge what was mentioned in the last place, to be
most proper and significant.

The substance of the enquiry wherein alone we are concerned is; what is that
Righteousness whereby, and wherewith, a Believing sinner, is justified before
God; or whereon he is accepted with God, has his sins pardoned, is received
into Grace and Favor, and has a Title given him unto the Heavenly
Inheritance. I shall no otherwise propose this enquiry, as knowing that it
contains the substance of what convinced sinners do look after in and by the
Gospel.

And herein it is agreed by all, the Socinians only excepted, that the
Procatarctical or procuring cause of the pardon of our sins and acceptance with
God, is the satisfaction and merit of Christ. Howbeit it cannot be denied, but
that some retaining the names of them, do seem to renounce or disbelieve the
things themselves. But we need not to take any notice thereof, until they are
free more plainly to express their minds. But as concerning the Righteousness
it self enquired after, there seems to be a difference among them, who yet all
deny it to be the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us. For those of the
Roman Church plainly say, that upon the infusion of an habit of Grace, with the
expulsion of sin and the Renovation of our natures thereby, which they call the
first Justification, we are actually justified before God, by our own works of
Righteousness. Hereon they dispute about the merit and satisfactoriness of
those works, with their condignity of the Reward of eternal life. Others as the
Socinians openly disclaim all merit in our works; only some, out of Reverence
as I suppose, unto the Antiquity of the word, and under the shelter of the
Ambiguity of its signification, have faintly attempted an accommodation with
it. But in the substance of what they assent unto this purpose, to the best of
my understanding they are all agreed. For what the Papists call Justitia
Operum, the Righteousness of works, they call a personal inherent Evangelical
Righteousness, whereof we have spoken before. And whereas the Papists say, that
this Righteousness of Works is not absolutely perfect, nor in it self able to
justify us in the sight of God, but owes all its worth and dignity unto this
purpose unto the merit of Christ, they affirm that this Evangelical
Righteousness is the condition whereon we enjoy the Benefits of the
Righteousness of Christ, in the pardon of our sins, and the acceptance of our
Persons before God. But as unto those who will acknowledge no other
Righteousness wherewith we are justified before God, the meaning is the same,
whether we say that on the Condition of this Righteousness we are made
partakers of the Benefits of the Righteousness of Christ; or that it is the
Righteousness of Christ which makes this Righteousness of ours accepted with
God. But these things must afterward more particularly be enquired into.

3. The third Enquiry wherein there is not an Agreement in this matter is, upon
a supposition of a necessity, that he who is to be justified, should one way or
other be interessed in the Righteousness of Christ, what it is that on our part
is required thereunto. This some say to be Faith alone, others Faith and Works
also, and that in the same kind of necessity and use. That whose consideration
we at present undertake, is the second thing proposed. And indeed, herein lies
the substance of the whole controversy about our Justification before God,
upon the determination and stating whereof, the determination of all other
incident Questions does depend.

This therefore is that which herein I affirm. The Righteousness of Christ (in
his Obedience and Suffering for us) imputed unto Believers, as they are united
unto him by his spirit, is that Righteousness whereon they are justified before
God, on the Account whereof their sins are pardoned, and a Right is granted
them into the Heavenly Inheritance.

This Position is such as wherein the substance of that Doctrine in this
important Article of Evangelical Truth which we plead for, is plainly and fully
expressed. And I have chosen the rather thus to express it, because it is that
Thesis wherein the Learned Davenant laid down that common Doctrine of the
Reformed Churches whose defense he undertook. This is the shield of Truth in
the whole cause of Justification, which whilst it is preserved safe, we need
not trouble our selves about the Differences that are among Learned men, about
the most proper stating and declaration of some lesser concernments of it. This
is the Refuge, the only Refuge of distressed Consciences, wherein they may find
Rest and Peace.

For the confirmation of this Assertion, I shall do these three things. (1)
Reflect on what is needful unto the Explanation of it. (2) Answer the most
important general Objections against it. (3) Prove the Truth of it by Arguments
and Testimonies of the holy Scripture.

As to the first of these, or what is necessary unto the Explanation of this
Assertion, it has been sufficiently spoken unto in our foregoing Discourses.
The Heads of some things only shall at present be called over.

1. The Foundation of the Imputation asserted, is Union. Hereof there are many
Grounds and Causes as has been declared. But that which we have immediate
respect unto as the Foundation of this Imputation, is that whereby the Lord
Christ and Believers do actually coalesce into one mystical Person. This is by
the Holy Spirit inhabiting in him as the Head of the Church in all fullness, and
in all Believers according to their measure, whereby they became members of his
mystical Body. That there is such an Union between Christ and Believers, is the
Faith of the Catholic Church, and has been so in all Ages. Those who seem in
our days to deny it or question it, either know not what they say, or their
minds are influenced by their Doctrine, who deny the Divine Persons of the Son,
and of the Spirit. Upon supposition of this Union, Reason will grant the
Imputation pleaded for to be reasonable; at least, that there is such a
peculiar Ground for it, as is not to be exemplified in any things natural or
political among men.

2. The Nature of Imputation has been fully spoken unto before, and thereunto
I refer the Reader for the understanding of what is intended thereby.

3. That which is imputed is the Righteousness of Christ; and briefly I
understand hereby, his whole Obedience unto God in all that he did and suffered
for the Church. This I say is imputed unto Believers, so as to become their
only Righteousness before God unto the Justification of Life.

If beyond these things any Expressions have been made use of in the
Explanation of this Truth, which have given occasion unto any Differences or
Contests, although they may be true and defensible against Objections, yet
shall not I concern my self in them. The substance of the Truth as laid down,
is that whose Defense I have undertaken, and where that is granted or consented
unto, I will not contend with any about their way and methods of its
Declaration, nor defend the Terms and Expressions that have by any been made
use of therein. For instance. Some have said, that what Christ did and
suffered, is so imputed unto us, as that we are judged and esteemed in the
sight of God to have done or suffered our selves in him. This I shall not
concern my self in. For although it may have a sound sense given unto it, and
is used by some of the Ancients, yet because offense is taken at it, and the
substance of the Truth we plead for is better otherwise expressed, it ought not
to be contended about. For we do not say that God judges or esteems that we
did and suffered in our own persons what Christ did and suffered, but only that
he did it and suffered it in our stead. Hereon God makes a Grant and Donation
of it unto Believers upon their Believing, unto their Justification before him.
And the like may be said of many other Expressions of the like nature.

These things being premised, I proceed unto the consideration of the general
objections that are urged against the Imputation we plead for. And I shall
insist only on some of the principal of them, and whereinto all others may be
resolved; for it were endless to go over all that any man's Invention can
suggest unto him of this kind. And some general considerations we must take
along with us herein. As,

1. The Doctrine of Justification is a part, yea an eminent part of the mystery
of the Gospel. It is no marvel therefore if it be not so exposed unto the
common notions of Reason, as some would have it to be. There is more required
unto the true spiritual understanding of such mysteries; yea unless we intend
to renounce the Gospel, it must be asserted, that Reason as it is corrupted,
and the mind of man destitute of Divine supernatural Revelation, do dislike
every such Truth, and rise up in Enmity against it. So the Scripture directly
affirms, Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. Hence are the Minds and Inventions of men wonderful fertile in coining
Objections against Evangelical Truths, and raising cavils against them. Seldom
to this purpose do they want an endless number of sophistical Objections, which
because they know no better, they themselves judge insoluble. For carnal Reason
being once set at liberty under the false notion of Truth, to act it self
freely and boldly against spiritual mysteries, is subtle in its arguings, and
pregnant in its Invention of them. How endless, for instance, are the Sophisms
of the Socinians against the Doctrine of the Trinity, and how do they triumph
in them as unanswerable. Under the shelter of them they despise the force of
the most evident Testimonies of the Scripture, and those multiplied on all
occasions. In like manner they deal with the Doctrine of the satisfaction of
Christ, as the Pelagians of old did with that of his Grace. Wherefore he that
will be startled at the Appearance of subtle or plausible Objections, against
any Gospel mysteries that are plainly revealed, and sufficiently attested in
the Scripture, is not likely to come unto much stability in his Profession of
them.

3. The most of the Objections which are levied against the Truth in this
cause, do arise from the want of a due comprehension of the order of the work
of Gods Grace, and of our compliance therewithal in a way of Duty as was
before observed. For they consist in opposing those things one to another as
inconsistent, which in their proper place and order are not only consistent,
but mutually subservient unto one another; and are found so in the Experience
of them that truly believe. Instances hereof have been given before, and others
will immediately occur. Taking the consideration of these things with us, we
may see as the Rise, so of what force the Objections are.

4. Let it be considered that the Objections which are made use of against the
Truth we assert, are all of them taken from certain consequences, which as it
is supposed, will ensue on the Admission of it. And as this is the only
expedient to perpetuate controversies, and make them endless, so to my best
observation I never yet met with any one, but that to give an Appearance of
force unto the absurdity of the consequences from whence he argues, he framed
his suppositions, or the state of the Question, unto the disadvantage of them
whom he opposed; a course of proceeding which I wonder Good men are not either
weary, or ashamed of.

1. It is objected, that the Imputation of the Righteousness of of Christ does
overthrow all Remission of sins on the part of God. This is pleaded for by
Socinus, De Servator. lib. 4. cap. 2, 3, 4. and by others it is also made use
of. A confident Charge this seems to them who steadfastly believe that without
this Imputation, there could be no Remission of sin. But they say, That he who
has a Righteousness imputed unto him that is absolutely perfect, so as to be
made his own, needs no pardon, has no sin that should be forgiven, nor can he
ever need forgiveness. But because this Objection will occur unto us again in
the vindication of one of our ensuing Arguments, I shall here speak briefly
unto it.

1. Grotius shall answer this Objection; says he, Cum duo nobis peperisse
Christum dixerimus, impunitatem and praemium, illud satisfactioni, hoc merito
Christi distinct tribuit vetus Ecclesia. Satisfactio consistit in peccatorum
Translatione, meritum in perfectissimae Obedientiae pro nobis praestitae
Imputatione. Praefat. ad lib. de satisfact. Whereas we have said that Christ
has procured or brought forth two things for us, freedom from punishment, and
a reward, the ancient Church attributes the one of them distinctly unto his
satisfaction, the other unto his merit. Satisfaction consists in the
Translation of sins (from us unto him) merit in the Imputation of his most
perfect Obedience performed for us, unto us. In his Judgment the Remission of
sins, and the Imputation of Righteousness, were as consistent as the
satisfaction and merit of Christ, as indeed they are.

2. Had we not been sinners, we should have had no need of the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ to render us Righteous before God. Being so, the
first End for which it is imputed, is the pardon of sin; without which we could
not be Righteous by the Imputation of the most perfect Righteousness. These
things therefore are consistent, namely, that the satisfaction of Christ should
be imputed unto us for the pardon of sin, and the Obedience of Christ be
imputed unto us, to render us Righteous before God. And they are not only
consistent, but neither of them singly were sufficient unto our Justification.

2. It is pleaded by the same Author and others; That the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, overthrows all necessity of Repentance for sin, in
order unto the Remission or Pardon thereof, yea renders it altogether
needless. For what need has he of Repentance for sin, who by the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, is esteemed completely Just and Righteous in the
sight of God. If Christ satisfied for all sins in the Person of the Elect; if
as our Surety he paid all our Debts, and if his Righteousness be made ours
before we repent, then is all Repentance needless. And these things are much
enlarged on by the same Author in the place beforementioned.

Ans. (1) It must be remembered, that we require Evangelical Faith in order of
nature antecedently unto our Justification by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto us, which also is the condition of its
continuation. Wherefore whatever is necessary thereunto, is in like manner
required of us in order unto Believing. Amongst these, there is a sorrow for
sin, and a Repentance of it. For whosoever is convinced of sin in a due manner,
so as to be sensible of its Evil and Guilt, both as in its own nature it is
contrary unto the preceptive part of the Holy Law, and in the necessary
consequences of it, in the wrath and curse of God, cannot but be perplexed in
his mind, that he has involved himself therein. And that posture of mind will
be accompanied with shame, fear, sorrow, and other afflictive passions. Hereon
a Resolution does ensue, utterly to abstain from it for the future, with
sincere endeavors unto that purpose, issuing if there be time and space for
it, in Reformation of Life. And in a sense of sin, Sorrow for it, Fear
concerning it, Abstinence from it, and Reformation of Life, a Repentance true
in its kind does consist. This Repentance is usually called legal, because its
motives are principally taken from the Law; but yet there is moreover required
unto it that temporary Faith of the Gospel which we have before described. And
as it does usually produce great effects in the confession of sin, Humiliation
for it, and change of life, as in Ahab and the Ninevites, so ordinarily it
precedeth true saving Faith, and Justification thereby. Wherefore the necessity
hereof, is no way weakened by the Doctrine of the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, yea it is strengthened and made effectual thereby. For
without it, in the order of the Gospel, an interest therein is not to be
attained. And this is that which in the Old Testament is so often proposed as
the means and conditions of turning away the Judgments and Punishments
threatened unto sin. For it is true and sincere in its kind; neither do the
Socinians require any other Repentance unto Justification. For as they deny
true Evangelical Repentance in all the especial causes of it, so that which may
and does precede Faith in order of nature. is all that they require. This
Objection therefore as managed by them, is a causless vain pretense.

2. Justifying Faith includes in its nature the entire principle of
Evangelical Repentance, so as that it is utterly impossible that a man should
be a true Believer, and not at the same instant of time be truly penitent. And
therefore are they so frequently conjoined in the Scripture as one simultaneous
Duty. Yea the call of the Gospel unto Repentance is a call to Faith, acting it
self by Repentance. So the sole Reason of that Call unto Repentance which the
forgiveness of sins is annexed unto, ( Act. 2.38.) is the Proposal of the
Promise which is the Object of Faith, ver. 39. And those Conceptions and
Affections which a man has about sin, with a sorrow for it and Repentance of
it, upon a legal Conviction, being enlivened and made Evangelical by the
Introduction of Faith as a new Principle of them, and giving new Motives unto
them, do become Evangelical; so impossible is it that Faith should be without
Repentance. Wherefore although the first Act of Faith, and its only proper
exercise unto Justification, does respect the Grace of God in Christ and the
way of Salvation by him, as proposed in the Promise of the Gospel, yet is not
this conceived in order of time to precede its actings in self-displicency,
godly sorrow, and universal conversion from sin unto God; nor can it be so,
seeing it virtually and radically contains all of them in it self. However
therefore Evangelical Repentance is not the Condition of our Justification, so
as to have any direct Influence thereinto; nor are we said any where to be
justified by Repentance; nor is it conversant about the proper object which
alone the Soul respects therein; nor is a direct and immediate giving Glory
unto God, on the account of the way and work of his Wisdom and Grace in Christ
Jesus, but a consequent thereof; nor is that Reception of Christ which is
expressly required unto our Justification, and which alone is required
thereunto; yet is it in the Root, Principle, and Promptitude of mind for its
exercise, in every one that is justified, then when he is justified. And it is
peculiarly proposed with respect unto the Forgiveness of sins, as that without
which it is impossible we should have any true sense or comfort of it in our
Souls; but it is not so as any part of that Righteousness on the consideration
whereof our sins are pardoned, nor as that whereby we have an Interest therein.
These things are plain in the divine method of our Justification, and the order
of our Duty prescribed in the Gospel; as also in the experience of them that do
believe. Wherefore considering the necessity of legal Repentance unto
Believing, with the sanctification of the Affections exercised therein by
Faith, whereby they are made Evangelical, and the nature of Faith as including
in it a principle of universal conversion unto God, and in especial of that
Repentance, which has for its principal motive the Love of God, and of Jesus
Christ, with the Grace from thence communicated, all which are supposed in the
Doctrine pleaded for, the necessity of true Repentance is immoveably fixed on
its proper Foundation.

3. As unto what was said in the Objection concerning Christ's suffering in the
Person of the Elect, I know not whether any have used it or no, nor will I
contend about it. He suffered in their stead; which all sorts of Writers
ancient and modern so express, in his suffering he bare the Person of the
Church. The meaning is what was before declared. Christ and Believers are one
mystical Person, one spiritually animated Body, Head and Members. This I
suppose will not be denied; To do so, is to overthrow the Church and the Faith
of it. Hence what he did and suffered is imputed unto them. And it is granted
that as the Surety of the Covenant he paid all our Debts, or answered for all
our faults; and that his Righteousness is really communicated unto us. Why then
say some, there is no need of Repentance, all is done for us already. But why
so, why must we assent to one part of the Gospel unto the exclusion of another?
Was it not free unto God to appoint what way, method and order he would,
whereby these things should be communicated unto us? nay upon the supposition
of the design of his Wisdom and Grace, these two things were necessary.

1. That this Righteousness of Christ should be communicated unto us, and be
made ours in such a way and manner, as that he himself might be glorified
therein, seeing he has disposed all things in this whole Economy, unto the
praise of the Glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.6. This was to be done by Faith on
our part. It is so, it could be no otherwise. For that Faith whereby we are
justified, is our giving unto God the Glory of his Wisdom, Grace and Love. And
whatever does so, is Faith, and nothing else is so.

2. That whereas our nature was so corrupted and depraved, as that continuing
in that state, it was not capable of a Participation of the Righteousness of
Christ, or any benefit of it, unto the Glory of God, and our own Good, it was
in like manner necessary that it should be renewed and changed. And unless it
were so, the Design of God in the Mediation of Christ, which was the entire
Recovery of us unto himself could not be attained. And therefore as Faith,
under the formal consideration of it was necessary unto the first end, namely,
that of giving Glory unto God, so unto this latter end, it was necessary that
this Faith should be accompanied with, yea and contain in it self the seeds of
all those other Graces wherein the Divine Nature does consist, whereof we are
to be made Partakers. Not only therefore the thing it self, or the
communication of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, but the way and manner,
and means of it, do depend on Gods Sovereign order and disposal. Wherefore
although Christ did make satisfaction unto the Justice of God for all the sins
of the Church, and that as a common person, (for no man in his Wits can deny
but that he who is a Mediator and a Surety, is in some sense a common person)
and although he did pay all our Debts, yet does the particular Interest of this
or that man, in what he did and suffered, depend on the way, means, and order
designed of God unto that end. This and this alone gives the true necessity of
all the Duties which are required of us, with their order and their ends.

3 ly, It is objected, That the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ,
which we defend, overthrows the necessity of Faith it self. This is home
indeed. Aliquid adhaerebit, is the Design of all these Objections. But they
have Reason to plead for themselves who make it. For on this supposition, they
say, the Righteousness of Christ is ours before we do believe. For Christ
satisfied for all our sins, as if we had satisfied in our own persons. And he
who is esteemed to have satisfied for all his sins in his own person, is
acquitted from them all, and accounted just, whether he believe or no; nor is
there any Ground or Reason why he should be required to believe. If therefore
the Righteousness of Christ be really ours, because in the judgment of God we
are esteemed to have wrought it in him, then it is ours before we do believe.
If it be otherwise, then it is plain that that, Righteousness it self can never
be made ours by believing; only the fruits and effects of it may be suspended
on our Believing, whereby we may be made Partakers of them. Yea if Christ made
any such satisfaction for us as is pretendrd, it is really ours, without any
farther Imputation. For being performed for us and in our stead, it is the
highest injustice not to have us accounted pardoned and acquitted, without any
farther either Imputation on the part of God, or Faith on ours. These things I
have transcribed out of Socinus, De Servator. lib. 4. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5. which I
would not have done, but that I find others to have gone before me therein,
though to another purpose. And he concludes with a confidence which others also
seem in some measure to have learned of him. For he says unto his Adversary,
Haec tua, tuorumque sententia, adeo foeda and execrabilis est, ut
pestilentiorem errorem post homines natos in populo Dei extitisse non credam;
speaking of the satisfaction of Christ and the Imputation of it unto Believers.
And indeed his Serpentine wit was fertile in the Invention of cavils against
all the mysteries of the Gospel. Nor was he obliged by any one of them, so as
to contradict himself in what he opposed concerning any other of them. For
denying the Deity of Christ, his Satisfaction, Sacrifice, Merit, Righteousness,
and overthrowing the whole nature of his Mediation, nothing stood in his way
which he had a mind to oppose. But I somewhat wonder how others can make use of
his Inventions in this kind, who if they considered aright their proper
tendency, they will find them to be absolutely destructive of what they seem to
own. So it is in this present Objection against the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ; If it has any force in it, as indeed it has not, it
is to prove that the satisfaction of Christ was impossible; and so he intended
it. But it will be easily removed.

I answer first in general; that the whole fallacy of this Objection lies in
the opposing one part of the design and method of Gods grace in this mystery of
our Justification, unto another; or the taking of one part of it to be the
whole, which as to its Efficacy and Perfection depends on somewhat else. Hereof
we warned the Reader in our previous discourses. For the whole of it is a
supposition, that the satisfaction of Christ, if there be any such thing, must
have its whole effect, without Believing on our part, which is contrary unto
the whole Declaration of the will of God in the Gospel. But I shall principally
respect them who are pleased to make use of this Objection, and yet do not deny
the satisfaction of Christ. And I say

1. When the Lord Christ died for us, and offered himself as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, God laid all our sins on him. Isa. 53.6. And he then bare them all
in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Then he suffered in our stead, and
made full satisfaction for all our sins; For he appeared to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. and by one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are Sanctified, Chap. 10.14. He whose sins were not actually and
absolutely satisfied for, in that one Offering of Christ, shall never have them
expiated unto Eternity. For henceforth he dies no more, there is no more
Sacrifice for sin. The Repetition of a Sacrifice for sin, which must be the
Crucifying of Christ afresh, overthrowes the foundation of Christian Religion.

2. Notwithstanding this full plenary satisfaction once made for the sins of
the World that shall be saved; yet all men continue equally to be born by
nature Children of Wrath, and whilst they believe not, the Wrath of God abides
on them, Joh. 3.36. that is, they are obnoxious unto, and under the Curse of
the Law. Wherefore on the only making of that satisfaction, no one for whom it
was made in the design of God, can be said to have suffered in Christ, nor to
have an interest in his satisfaction, nor by any way or means be made partaker
of it antecedently unto another Act of God in its Imputation unto him. For this
is but one part of the purpose of Gods Grace, as unto our Justification by the
Blood of Christ, namely, that he by his death should make satisfaction for our
sins. Nor is it to be separated from what also belongs unto it, in the same
purpose of God. Wherefore from the Position or Grant of the satisfaction of
Christ, no Argument can be taken unto the negation of a consequential Act of
its Imputation unto us; nor therefore of the necessity of our Faith in the
believing and receiving of it, which is no less the appointment of God, than it
was that Christ should make that satisfaction. Wherefore

3. That which the Lord Christ paid for us, is as truly paid, as if we had paid
it our selves. So he speaks, Psalm. 69.5. (...) He made no spoil of the glory of
God, what was done of that nature by us, he returned it unto him. And what he
underwent and suffered, he underwent and suffered in our stead. But yet the act
of God in laying our sins on Christ, conveyed no actual Right and Title to us,
unto what he did and suffered. They are not immediately thereon, nor by virtue
thereof ours, or esteemed ours, because God has appointed somewhat else, not
only antecedent thereunto, but as the means of it, unto his own Glory. These
things both as unto their being and order, depend on the free Ordination of
God. But yet,

4. It cannot be said that this satisfaction was made for us on such a
condition as should absolutely suspend the event, and render it uncertain
whether it should ever be for us or no. Such a constitution may be Righteous in
pecuniary solutions. A man may lay down a great sum of money for the discharge
of another, on such a condition as may never be fulfilled. For on the absolute
failure of the condition, his money may and ought to be restored unto him,
whereon he has received no injury or damage. But in poenal suffering for
crimes and sins, there can be no righteous constitution that shall make the
event and efficacy of it to depend on a Condition absolutely uncertain, and
which may not come to pass or be fulfilled. For if the Condition fail, no
Recompense can be made unto him that has suffered. Wherefore the way of the
Application of the satisfaction of Christ unto them for whom it was made, is
sure and steadfast in the purpose of God.

5. God has appointed that there shall be an immediate Foundation of the
Imputation of the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ unto us, whereon we
may be said to have done and suffered in him, what he did and suffered in our
stead, by that Grant, Donation, and Imputation of it unto us; or that we may be
interessed in it, that it may be made ours, which is all we contend for. And
this is our actual coalescency into one mystical person with him by Faith.
Hereon does the necessity of Faith originally depend. And if we shall add
hereunto the necessity of it likewise unto that especial Glory of God which he
designs to exalt in our Justification by Christ, as also unto all the ends of
our Obedience unto God, and the Renovation of our Natures into his Image, its
station is sufficiently secured against all Objections. Our actual Interest in
the satisfaction of Christ, depends on our actual Insertion into his mystical
Body by Faith, according to the Appointment of God.

4 thly. It is yet objected, That if the Righteousness of Christ be made ours,
we may be said to be Saviors of the World as he was, or to save others as he
did. For he was so and did so by his Righteousness and no otherwise. This
Objection also is of the same nature with those foregoing, a mere Sophistical
Cavil. For,

1. The Righteousness of Christ is not transfused into us, so as to be made
inherently and subjectively ours, as it was in him, and which is necessarily
required unto that effect, of saving others thereby. Whatever we may do, or be
said to do with respect unto others, by virtue of any power or quality inherent
in our selves, we can be said to do nothing unto others, or for them, by virtue
of that which is imputed unto us, only for our own benefit. That any
Righteousness of ours should benefit another, it is absolutely necessary that
it should be wrought by our selves.

2. If the Righteousness of Christ could be transfused into us, and be made
inherently ours, yet could we not be, nor be said to be the Saviors of others
thereby. For our nature in our individual persons, is not subjectum capax, or
capable to receive and retain a Righteousness useful and effectual unto that
end. This capacity was given unto it in Christ by virtue of the Hypostatical
Union, and no otherwise. The Righteousness of Christ himself as performed in
the Humane Nature, would not have been sufficient for the Justification and
Salvation of the Church, had it not been the Righteousness of his Person, who
is both God and Man; for God redeemed his Church with his own Blood.

3. This Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, as unto its ends
and use, has its measure from the Will of God, and his purpose in that
Imputation. And this is, that it should be the Righteousness of them unto whom
it is imputed, and nothing else.

4. We do not say that the Righteousness of Christ as made absolutely for the
whole Church, is imputed unto every Believer. But his satisfaction for every
one of them in particular, according unto the Will of God, is imputed unto
them; not with respect unto its general ends, but according unto every ones
particular Interest. Every Believer has his own Homer of this Bread of Life;
and all are justified by the same Righteousness.

The Apostle declares, as we shall prove afterward, that as Adams actual sin
is imputed unto us unto condemnation, so is the Obedience of Christ imputed
unto us, to the Justification of life. But Adams sin is not so imputed unto any
person, as that he should then and thereby be the cause of sin and condemnation
unto all other persons in the World; but only that he himself should become
Guilty before God thereon. And so is it on the other side. And as we are made
Guilty by Adams actual sin which is not inherent in us, but only imputed unto
us; so are we made Righteous by the Righteousness of Christ which is not
inherent in us, but only imputed unto us. And imputed unto us it is, because
himself was Righteous with it, not for himself but for us.

It is yet said, That if we insist on personal Imputation unto every Believer
of what Christ did, or if any Believer be personally Righteous in the very
individual Acts of Christ's Righteousness, many Absurdities will follow. But it
was observed before; that when any design to oppose an Opinion from the
absurdities which they suppose would follow upon it, they are much inclined so
to state it, as that at least they may seem so to do. And this oftimes the most
worthy and candid Persons are not free from in the heat of Disputation. So I
fear it is here fallen out. For as unto personal Imputation I do not well
understand it. All Imputation is unto a person, and is the Act of a person, be
it of what, and what sort it will, but from neither of them can be denominated
a Personal Imputation. And if an Imputation be allowed that is not unto the
persons of men, namely, in this case unto all Believers, the nature of it has
not yet been declared as I know of.

That any have so expressed the Imputation pleaded for, That every Believer
should be personally Righteous in the very individual Acts of Christ's
Righteousness, I know not; I have neither read nor heard any of them who have
so expressed their mind. It may be some have done so; but I shall not undertake
the defense of what they have done. For it seems not only to suppose that
Christ did every individual Act which in any instance is required of us, but
also that those Acts are made our own inherently; both which are false and
impossible. That which indeed is pleaded for in this Imputation, is only this;
That what the Lord Christ did and suffered as the Mediator and Surety of the
Covenant in answer unto the Law, for them and in their stead, is imputed unto
every one of them unto the Justification of Life. And sufficient this is unto
that end without any such supposals. (1) From the Dignity of the Person who
yielded his Obedience, which rendered it both satisfactory and meritorious, and
imputable unto many. (2) From the Nature of the Obedience it self, which was a
perfect compliance with, a fulfilling of, and satisfaction unto the whole Law
in all its demands. This on the supposition of that Act of Gods Sovereign
Authority, whereby a Representative of the whole Church was introduced to
answer the Law, is the Ground of his Righteousness being made theirs, and being
every way sufficient unto their Justification. (3) From the constitution of
God, that what was done and suffered by Christ as a public person and our
surety, should be reckoned unto us as if done by our selves. So the sin of Adam
whilst he was a public Person, and represented his whole Posterity, is imputed
unto us all, as if we had committed that actual sin. This Bellarmin himself
frequently acknowledges. Peccavimus in primo homine quando ille peccavit, and
illa ejus praevaricatio nostra etiam praevaricatio fuit. Non enim vere per
Adami inobedientiam constitueremur peccatores, nisi inobedientia illius nostra
etiam inobedientia esset. De Amiss. Great. and Stat. Peccat. lib. 5. cap. 18.
And elsewhere, That the actual sin of Adam is imputed unto us, as if we all had
committed that actual sin; that is, broken the whole Law of God. And this is
that whereby the Apostle illustrates the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ unto Believers; and it may on as good grounds be charged with
absurdities as the other. It is not therefore said that God judges that we
have in our own persons done those very Acts, and endured that penalty of the
Law which the Lord Christ did and endured. For this would overthrow all
Imputation; But what Christ did and suffered, that God imputes unto Believers
unto the Justification of Life, as if it had been done by themselves; and his
Righteousness as a public person is made theirs by Imputation, even as the sin
of Adam whilst a public person, is made the sin of all his Posterity by
Imputation.

Hereon none of the absurdities pretended, which are really such, do at all
follow. It does not so, that Christ in his own person performed every
individual Act that we in our circumstances are obliged unto in a way of Duty;
nor was there any need that so he should do. This Imputation, as I have showed,
stands on other Foundations. Nor does it follow, that every saved Persons
Righteousness before God is the same identically and numerically with Christ's
in his public capacity as Mediator; For this Objection destroys it self, by
affirming that as it was his, it was the Righteousness of God-Man; and so it
has an especial nature as it respects or relates unto his Person. It is the
same that Christ in his public capacity did work or effect. But there is a
wide difference in the consideration of it, as his absolutely and as made ours.
It was formally inherent in him, is only materially imputed unto us. Was
actively his, is passively ours; was wrought in the Person of God-man; for the
whole Church, is imputed unto each single Believer, as unto his own concernment
only. Adams sin as imputed unto us, is not the sin of a Representative, though
it be of his that was so; but is the particular sin of every one of us. But
this Objection must be further spoken unto where it occurs afterward. Nor will
it follow, that on this supposition we should be accounted to have done, that
which was done long before we were in a capacity of doing any thing. For what
is done for us and in our stead, before we are in any such capacity may be
imputed unto us, as is the sin of Adam. And yet there is a manifold sense
wherein men may be said to have done what was done for them, and in their name
before their actual existence; so that therein is no absurdity. As unto what is
added by the way that Christ did not do nor suffer the Idem that we were
obliged unto; whereas he did what the Law required, and suffered what the Law
threatened unto the disobedient, which is the whole of what we are obliged unto,
it will not be so easily proved; nor the Arguments very suddenly answered
whereby the contrary has been confirmed. That Christ did sustain the place of
a surety, or was the surety of the New Covenant, the Scripture does so expressly
affirm, that it cannot be denied. And that there may be sureties in cases
criminal, as well as civil and pecuniary, has been proved before. What else
occurs about the singularity of Christ's Obedience as he was Mediator, proves
only that his Righteousness as formally and inherently his, was peculiar unto
himself, and that the Adjuncts of it which arise from its relation unto his
person, as it was inherent in him, are not communicable unto them to whom it is
imputed.

It is moreover urged, That upon the supposed Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ, it will follow that every Believer is justified by the works of the
Law. For the Obedience of Christ was a legal Righteousness, and if that be
imputed unto us, then are we justified by the Law, which is contrary unto
express Testimonies of Scriptures in many places. Ans. (1) I know nothing more
frequent in the Writings of some Learned Men, then that the Righteousness of
Christ is our legal Righteousness; who yet I presume are able to free
themselves of this Objection. (2) If this do follow in the true sense of being
justified by the Law, or the Works of it, so denied in the Scripture, their
weakness is much to be pitied who can see no other way whereby we may be freed
from an Obligation to be justified by the Law, but by this Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ. (3) The Scripture which affirms that by the deeds of
the Law no man can be justified, affirms in like manner, that by Faith we do
not make void the Law, but establish it; that the Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in us; that Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and
is the End of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do believe. And that the
Law must be fulfilled or we cannot be justified, we shall prove afterward. (4)
We are not hereon justified by the Law or the Works of it, in the only sense of
that Proposition in the Scripture, and to coin new senses or significations of
it, is not safe. The meaning of it in the Scripture is, that only the doers of
the Law shall be justified, Romans 2.13. and that he that does the things of it
shall live by them, chap. 10.5. namely, in his own person, by the way of
personal Duty which alone the Law requires. But if we who have not fulfilled
the Law in the way of inherent personal Obedience, are justified by the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, then are we justified by
Christ and not by the Law. But it is said, that this will not relieve. For if
his Obedience be so imputed unto us, as that we are accounted by God in
Judgment to have done what Christ did, it is all one upon the matter, and we
are as much justified by the Law, as if we had in our own proper persons
performed an unsinning Obedience unto it. This I confess I cannot understand.
The Nature of this Imputation is here represented as formerly, in such a way as
we cannot acknowledge; from thence alone this inference is made, which yet in
my judgment does not follow thereon. For grant an Imputation of the
Righteousness of another unto us, be it of what nature it will, all
Justification by the Law and Works of it in the sense of the Scripture is gone
for ever. The Admission of Imputation takes off all power from the Law to
justify; for it can justify none, but upon a Righteousness that is originally
and inherently his own. The man that does them shall live in them. If the
Righteousness that is imputed be the Ground and Foundation of our
Justification, and made ours by that Imputation, state it how you will, that
Justification is of Grace and not of the Law. However, I know not of any that
say we are accounted of God in Judgment personally to have done what Christ
did; and it may have a sense that is false; namely, that God should judge us in
our own persons to have done those Acts which we never did. But what Christ did
for us and in our stead, is imputed and communicated unto us, as we coalesce
into one mystical person with him by Faith, and thereon are we justified. And
this absolutely overthrows all Justification by the Law or the Works of it;
though the Law be established, fulfilled and accomplished, that we may be
justified.

Neither can any on the supposition of the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ truly stated, be said to merit their own Salvation. Satisfaction and
Merit are Adjuncts of the Righteousness of Christ as formally inherent in his
own person; and as such it cannot be transfused into another. Wherefore as it
is imputed unto individual Believers, it has not those properties accompanying
of it which belong only unto its existence in the person of the Son of God. But
this was spoken unto before, as much also of what was necessary to be here
repeated.

These Objections I have in this place taken notice of, because the answers
given unto them do tend to the farther explanation of that Truth, whose
confirmation by Arguments and Testimonies of Scripture I shall now proceed unto.

CHAP. X. Arguments for Justification by the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ. The first Argument from the Nature and Use of our own Personal
Righteousness.
THere is a Justification of convinced sinners on their Believing. Hereon are
their sins pardoned, their persons accepted with God, and a Right is given unto
them, unto the Heavenly Inheritance. This state they are immediately taken into
upon their Faith, or Believing in Jesus Christ. And a state it is of actual
peace with God. These things at present I take for granted, and they are the
Foundation of all that I shall plead in the present Argument. And I do take
notice of them because some seem, to the best of my understanding, to deny any
real actual Justification of sinners on their Believing in this life. For they
make Justification to be only a general conditional sentence declared in the
Gospel, which as unto its Execution, is delayed unto the day of Judgment. For
whilst men are in this world, the whole Condition of it being not fulfilled,
they cannot be partakers of it, or be actually and absolutely justified. Hereon
it follows, that indeed there is no real state of assured Rest and Peace with
God by Jesus Christ, for any persons in this life. This at present I shall not
dispute about, because it seems to me to overthrow the whole Gospel, the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the comfort of Believers about which I hope
we are not as yet called to contend.

Our Enquiry is, how convinced sinners do on their Believing obtain the
Remission of sins, Acceptance with God, and a Right unto Eternal Life. And if
this can no other way be done, but by the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ unto them, then thereby alone are they justified in the sight of God.
And this Assertion proceeds on a supposition that there is a Righteousness
required unto the Justification of any person whatever. For whereas God in the
Justification of any person, does declare him to be acquitted from all crimes
laid unto his charge, and to stand as Righteous in his sight, it must be on the
consideration of a Righteousness, whereon any man is so acquitted and declared;
for the Judgment of God is according unto Truth. This we have sufficiently
evidenced before in that juridical procedure wherein the Scripture represents
unto us the Justification of a Believing sinner. And if there be no other
Righteousness whereby we may be thus justified, but only that of Christ imputed
unto us, then thereby must we be justified or not at all. And if there be any
such other Righteousness, it must be our own, inherent in us, and wrought out
by us. For these two kinds inherent and imputed Righteousness, our own and
Christ's divide the whole nature of Righteousness, as to the End enquired after.
And that there is no such inherent Righteousness, no such Righteousness of our
own whereby we may be justified before God, I shall prove in the first place.
And I shall do it, first from express Testimonies of Scripture, and then from
the consideration of the thing it self. And two things I shall premise hereunto.

1. That I shall not consider this Righteousness of our own absolutely in it
self, but as it may be conceived to be improved and advanced by its Relation
unto the satisfaction and merit of Christ; For many will grant that our
inherent Righteousness is not of it self sufficient to justify us in the sight
of God. But take it as it has value and worth communicated unto it from the
merit of Christ, and so it is accepted unto that End, and judged worthy of
Eternal Life. We could not merit Life and Salvation, had not Christ merited
that Grace for us whereby we may do so; and merited also that our Works should
be of such a Dignity with respect unto Reward. We shall therefore allow what
worth can be reasonably thought to be communicated unto this Righteousness from
its respect unto the Merit of Christ.

2. Whereas persons of all sorts and parties do take various ways in the
assignation of an interest in our Justification unto our own Righteousness, so
as that no parties are agreed about it, nor many of the same mind among
themselves, as might easily be manifested in the Papists, Socinians, and
others, I shall so far as it is possible in the ensuing Arguments have respect
unto them all. For my design is to prove, that it has no such Interest in our
Justification before God, as that the Righteousness of Christ should not be
esteemed the only Righteousness whereon we are justified.

And first, we shall produce some of those many Testimonies which may be
pleaded unto this purpose, Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou Lord should mark
Iniquities, O Lord, who should stand? But there is Forgiveness with thee that
thou may be feared. There is an Enquiry included in these words, how a man,
how any man may be justified before God; how he may stand, that is, in the
presence of God, and be accepted with him; How he shall stand in Judgment, as
it is explained, Psalm. 1.5. The wicked shall not stand in the Judgment, shall
not be acquitted on their Trial. That which first offers it self unto this
End, is his own Obedience. For this the Law requires of him in the first place,
and this his own Conscience calls upon him for. But the Psalmist plainly
declares that no man can thence manage a plea for his Justification with any
success. And the Reason is, because notwithstanding the best of the Obedience
of the best of men, there are Iniquities found with them against the Lord their
God. And if men come to their Trial before God whether they shall be justified
or condemned, these also must be heard and taken into the Account. But then no
man can stand, no man can be justified as it is elsewhere expressed. Wherefore
the wisest and safest course is, as unto our Justification before God, utterly
to forego this plea, and not to insist on our own Obedience, least our sins
should appear also, and be heard. No Reason can any man give on his own
Account, why they should not so be. And if they be so, the best of men will be
cast in their Trial, as the Psalmist declares.

Two things are required in this Trial that a sinner may stand. (1) That his
Iniquities be not observed, for if they be so, he is lost for ever. (2) That a
Righteousness be produced and pleaded that will endure the Trial. For
Justification is upon a Justifying Righteousness. For the first of these, the
Psalmist tells us it must be through pardon or forgiveness. But there is
Forgiveness with thee, wherein lies our only relief against the condemnatory
sentence of the Law with respect unto our Iniquities; that is, through the
Blood of Christ; for in him we have Redemption through his Blood, even the
Forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. The other cannot be our own Obedience, because
of our Iniquities. Wherefore this the same Psalmist directs us unto, Psalm.
71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of they
Righteousness, of thine only. The Righteousness of God, and not his own, yea in
opposition unto his own, is the only plea that in this case he would insist
upon.

If no man can stand a Trial before God upon his own Obedience, so as to be
justified before him, because of his own personal Iniquities; and if our only
plea in that case be the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of God only
and not our own, then is there no personal inherent Righteousness in any
Believers whereon they may be justified; which is that which is to be proved.

The same is again asserted by the same Person, and that more plainly and
directly, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified. This Testimony is the more to be
considered, because as it is derived from the Law, Exodus 34.7. so it is
transferred into the Gospel, and twice urged by the Apostle unto the same
purpose, Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16.

The Person who insists on this plea with God, professes himself to be his
Servant. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant; that is, one that loved him,
feared him, yielded all sincere Obedience. He was not an Hypocrite, not an
unbeliever, not an unregenerate person, who had performed no Works but such as
were legal, such as the Law required, and such as were done in the strength of
the Law only; such works as all will acknowledge to be excluded from our
Justification; and which as many judge, are only those which are so excluded.
David it was, who was not only converted, a true Believer, had the Spirit of
God, and the Aids of special Grace in his Obedience, but had this Testimony
unto his sincerity, that he was a man after Gods own Heart. And this witness
had he in his own Conscience of his Integrity, Uprightness, and personal
Righteousness, so as that he frequently avows them, appeals unto God concerning
the Truth of them, and pleads them as a Ground of Judgment between him and his
Adversaries. We have therefore a case stated in the Instance of a sincere and
eminent Believer, who excelled most in inherent personal Righteousness.

This Person under these circumstances, thus testified unto both by God and in
his own Conscience, as unto the sincerity, yea as unto the eminency of his
Obedience; considers how he may stand before God, and be justified in his
sight. Why does he not now plead his own merits; and that if not ex condigno,
yet at least ex congruo, he deserved to be acquitted and justified. But he left
this plea for that Generation of men that were to come after, who would
justify themselves, and despise others. But suppose he had no such confidence
in the merit of his Works as some have now attained unto, yet why he does not
freely enter into Judgment with God, put it unto the Trial whether he should be
justified or no, by pleading that he had fulfilled the Condition of the New
Covenant, that Everlasting Covenant which God made with him, ordered in all
things and sure? For upon a supposition of the procurement of that Covenant,
and the Terms of it by Christ, (for I suppose the virtue of that Purchase he
made of it, is allowed to extend unto the Old Testament) this was all that was
required of him? Is it not to be feared that he was one of them who see no
necessity, or leave none of Personal Holiness and Righteousness, seeing he
makes no mention of it, now it should stand him in the greatest stead? At least
he might plead his Faith as his own Duty and Work, to be imputed unto him for
Righteousness? But whatever the Reason be, he waves them all, and absolutely
deprecates a Trial upon them. Come not, says he, O Lord, into Judgment with
thy Servant, as it is promised that he who believes should not come into
Judgment, Joh. 5.24.

And if this Holy Person renounce the whole consideration of all his personal
inherent Righteousness, in every kind, and will not insist upon it under any
pretense, in any place, as unto any use in his Justification before God, we may
safely conclude there is no such Righteousness in any whereby they may be
justified. And if men would but leave those shades and coverts under which they
hide themselves in their Disputations, if they would forego those pretenses and
Distinctions wherewith they delude themselves and others, and tell us plainly
what plea they dare make in the presence of God, from their own Righteousness
and Obedience that they may be justified before him, we should better
understand their minds than now we do. There is one I confess, who speaks with
some confidence unto this purpose. And that is Vasquez the Jesuit; in 1.2.
Disp. 204. cap. 4. Inhaerens Justitia ita reddit animam justam and sanctam, ac
proinde filiam Dei, ut hoc ipso reddat eam heredem, and dignam aeterna Gloria;
imo ipse Deus efficere non potest ut hujusmodi justus dignus non sit aeterna
beatitudine. Is it not sad that David should discover so much Ignorance of the
worth of his inherent Righteousness, and discover so much pusillanimity with
respect unto his Trial before God, whereas God himself could not otherwise
order it, but that he was and must be worthy of eternal Blessedness?

The Reason the Psalmist gives why he will not put it unto the Trial whether he
should be acquitted or justified upon his own obedience, is this general Axiom;
for in thy sight, or before thee, shall no man living be justified. This must
be spoken absolutely, or with respect unto some one way or cause of
Justification. If it be spoken absolutely, then this work cease for ever, and
there is indeed no such thing as Justification before God. But this is contrary
unto the whole Scripture, and destructive of the Gospel. Wherefore it is spoken
with respect unto our own Obedience and works. He does not pray absolutely that
he would not enter into Judgment with him, for this were to forego his
Government of the world, but that he would not do so on the account of his own
Dutys and Obedience. But if so be these Dutys and Obedience did answer in any
sense or way, what is required of us as a Righteousness unto Justification,
there was no Reason why he should deprecate a Trial by them or upon them. But
whereas the Holy Ghost does so positively affirm, that no man living shall be
justified in the sight of God, by or upon his own Works or Obedience, it is I
confess mavelous unto me, that some should so intepret the Apostle James, as
if he affirmed the express contrary. Namely, that we are justified in the sight
of God by our own Works, whereas indeed he says no such thing. This therefore
is an Eternal Rule of Truth, by, or upon his Obedience, no man living can be
justified in the sight of God. It will be said that if God enter into Judgment
with any on their own Obedience by and according to the Law, then indeed none
can be justified before him. But God judging according to the Gospel, and the
terms of the new Covenant, men may be justified upon their own Duties, Works,
and Obedience. Ans. (1) The negative Assertion is general, and unlimited; that
no man living shall (on his own Works or Obedience) be justified in the sight
of God. And to limit it unto this or that way of Judging, is not to distinguish
but to contradict the Holy Ghost. (2) The Judgment intended is only with
respect unto Justification, as is plain in the words. But there is no Judgment
on our Works or Obedience, with respect unto Righteousness and Justification,
but by the proper Rule and Measure of them, which is the Law. If they will not
endure the Trial by the Law, they will endure no Trial as unto Righteousness
and Justification in the sight of God. (3) The Prayer and Plea of the Psalmist
on this supposition, are to this purpose; O Lord enter not into Judgment with
thy servant, by or according unto the Law; but enter into Judgment with me, on
my own Works and Obedience according to the Rule of the Gospel; for which he
gives this Reason, because in thy sight shall no man living be justified; which
how remote it is from his Intention need not be declared. (4) The Judgment of
God unto Justification according to the Gospel, does not proceed on our Works
of Obedience, but upon the Righteousness of Christ, and our interest therein by
Faith, as is too evident to be modestly denied. Notwithstanding this exception,
therefore hence we argue.

If the most Holy of the servants of God, in and after a course of sincere
fruitful Obedience, testified unto by God himself, and Witnessed in their own
Consciences, that is, whilst they have the greatest evidences of their own
sincerity, and that indeed they are the servants of God, do renounce all
thoughts of such a Righteousness thereby, as whereon in any sense they may be
justified before God; then there is no such Righteousness in any, but it is the
Righteousness of Christ alone imputed unto us whereon we are so justified. But
that so they do, and ought all of them so to do, because of the general Rule
here laid down, that in the sight of God no man living shall be justified, is
plainly affirmed in this Testimony.

I no way doubt but that many learned men, after all their Pleas for an
Interest of Personal Righteousness and Works in our Justification before God,
do as unto their own practice betake themselves unto this method of the
Psalmist, and cry as the Prophet Daniel does in the name of the Church; we do
not present our supplications before thee for our own Righteousness, but for
thy great mercies, Chap. 9.18. And therefore Job (as we have formerly observed)
after a long and earnest defense of his own Faith, Integrity, and Personal
Righteousness, wherein he justified himself against the charge of Satan and
men, being called to plead his cause in the sight of God, and declare on what
grounds he expected to be justified before him, renounceth all his former
Pleas, and betakes himself unto the same with the Psalmist, Chap. 40.4. Chap.
42.6.

It is true in particular cases, and as unto some especial end in the
Providence of God, a man may plead his own Integrity and Obedience before God
himself. So did Hezekiah when he prayed for the sparing of his life, Isa. 38.3.
Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. This I say
may be done with respect unto temporal Deliverance, or any other particular end
wherein the glory of God is concerned. So was it greatly in sparing the life of
Hezekiah at that time. For whereas he had with great Zeal and Industry reformed
Religion and restored the true worship of God, the cutting him off in the midst
of his days, would have occasioned the Idolatrous multitude to have reflected
on him as one dying under a token of Divine displeasure. But none ever made
this Plea before God, for the absolute Justification of their persons. So
Nehemiah in that great contest which he had about the worship of God, and the
service of his house, pleads the Remembrance of it before God, in his
Justification against his Adversaries, but resolves his own personal acceptance
with God into pardoning mercy, and spare me according unto the multitude of thy
mercies, Chap. 13.22.

Another Testimony we have unto the same purpose, in the Prophet Isaiah,
speaking in the name of the Church, Cap. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing,
and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. It is true the Prophet does in
this place make a deep confession of the sins of the people. But yet withal he
joins himself with them, and asserts the especial Interest of those concerning
whom he speaks by Adoption; that God was their Father, and they his people,
Chap. 63.16. Chap. 64.8, 9. And the Righteousness of all that are the Children
of God are of the same kind; however they may differ in Degrees, and some of
them may be more Righteous than others. But it is all of it described to be
such, as that we cannot I think justly, expect Justification in the sight of
God, upon the account of it. But whereas the consideration of the nature of our
inherent Righteousness belongs unto the second way of the confirmation of our
present Argument, I shall not farther here insist on this Testimony.

Many others also unto the same purpose, I shall wholly omit; namely, all those
wherein the Saints of God, or the Church, in an humble acknowledgment and
confession of their own sins, do betake themselves unto the Mercy and Grace of
God alone, as dispensed through the Mediation and Blood of Christ; and all
those wherein God promises to pardon and blot out our Iniquities for his own
sake, for his names sake; to bless the people not for any good that was in
them, nor for their Righteousness, nor for their Works, the consideration
whereof he excludes from having any influence into any actings of his Grace
toward them; And all those wherein God expresses his Delight in them alone,
and his Approbation of them who hope in his mercy, trust in his name, betaking
themselves unto him as their only Refuge, pronouncing them accursed who trust
in any thing else, or glory in themselves; such as contain singular promises
unto them that betake themselves unto God, as Fatherless, Hopeless, and lost in
themselves.

There is none of the Testimonies which are multiplied unto this purpose, but
they sufficiently prove, that the best of Gods Saints, have not a Righteousness
of their own, whereon they can in any sense be justified before God. For they
do all of them in the places referred unto, renounce any such Righteousness of
their own, all that is in them, all that they have done or can do, and betake
themselves unto Grace and Mercy alone. And whereas, as we have before proved,
God in the Justification of any does exercise Grace toward them with respect
unto a Righteousness, whereon he declares them Righteous and accepted before
him, they do all of them respect a Righteousness which is not inherent in us
but imputed us.

Herein lies the substance of all that we enquire into, in this matter of
Justification. All other disputes about qualifications, conditions, causes
(...) any kind of Interest for own Works and Obedience in our Justification
before God, are but the speculations of men at ease. The Conscience of a
convinced sinner, who presents himself in the presence of God, finds all
practically reduced unto this one point, namely, whether he will trust unto his
own personal inherent Righteousness, or in a full Renuntiation of it, betake
himself unto the Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ alone. In other
things he is not concerned. And let men phrase his own Righteousness unto him
as they please, let them pretend it meritorious, or only Evangelical not legal,
only an accomplishment of the condition of the new Covenant, a cause without
which he cannot be justified, it will not be easy to frame his mind unto any
confidence in it, as unto Justification before God; So as not to deceive him in
the Issue.

The second part of the present Argument is taken from the nature of the thing
it self, or the consideration of this personal inherent Righteousness of our
own, what it is and wherein it does consist, and of what use it may be in our
Justification. And unto this purpose it may be observed.

1. That we grant an inherent Righteousness in all that do believe, as has
been before declared. For the fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness and
Righteousness and Truth, Ephesians. 5.9. Being made free from sin, we become the
Servants of Righteousness, Romans 6.20. And our Duty it is to follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Meekness, 1 Timothy 2.22. And although
Righteousness be mostly taken for an especial Grace, or Duty, distinct from
other Graces and Duties, yet we acknowledge that it may be taken for the whole
of our Obedience before God; and the word is so used in the Scripture, where
our own Righteousness is opposed unto the Righteousness of God. And it is
either Habitual or Actual. There is an Habitual Righteousness inherent in
Believers, as they have put on the new man which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. As they are the Workmanship of
God created in Jesus Christ unto good Works, Chap. 2.8. And there is an Actual
Righteousness consisting in those good Works whereunto we are so created, or
the fruits of Righteousness, which are to the praise of God by Jesus Christ.
And concerning this Righteousness it may be observed; (1) That men are said in
the Scripture, to be just or righteous by it, but no one is said to be
justified by it before God. (2) That it is not ascribed unto, or found in any,
but those that are actually justified in order of nature antecedent thereunto.

This being the constant Doctrine of all the reformed Churches and Divines, it
is an open Calumny whereby the contrary is ascribed unto them, or any of those
who believe the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto our
Justification before God. So Bellarmine affirms that no Protestant Writers
acknowledge an inherent Righteousness, but only Bucer and Chemnitius when there
is no one of them, by whom either the thing it self, or the necessity of it is
denied. But some excuse may be made for him, from the manner whereby they
expressed themselves, wherein they always carefully distinguished between
inherent Holiness, and that Righteousness whereby we are justified. But we are
now told by one, that if we should affirm it an Hundred times he could scarce
believe us. This is somewhat severe; for although he speaks but to one, yet the
charge falls equally upon all who maintain that Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ, which he denies; who being at least the generality of all Protestant
Divines, they are represented either as so foolish, as not to know what they
say, or so dishonest as to say one thing and believe another. But he endeavors
to justify his censure by sundry Reasons; And first he says, that inherent
Righteousness can on no other account be said to be ours, than that by it we
are made Righteous, that is, that it is the condition of our Justification
required in the new Covenant. This being denied, all inherent Righteousness is
denied. But how is this proved? what if one should say, that every Believer is
inherently Righteous, but yet that this inherent Righteousness was not the
condition of his Justification, but rather the consequent of it, and that it is
no where required in the new Covenant as the condition of our Justification,
how shall the contrary be made to appear? The Scripture plainly affirms that
there is such an inherent Righteousness in all that believe; and yet as plainly
that we are justified before God, by Faith without works. Wherefore that it is
the condition of our Justification and so antecedent unto it, is expressly
contrary unto that of the Apostle; unto him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted unto him for
Righteousness, Romans 4.5. Nor is it the condition of the Covenant it self, as
that whereon the whole Grace of the Covenant is suspended. For as it is
habitual wherein the Denomination of Righteous is principally taken, it is a
Grace of the Covenant it self, and so not a condition of it, Jerem. 31.33.
Chap. 32.39. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. If no more be intended, but that it is as
unto its actual exercise what is indispensably required of all that are taken
into Covenant, in order unto the complete ends of it, we are agreed. But hence
it will not follow that it is the condition of our Justification. It is added,
that all Righteousness respects a Law and a Rule, by which it is to be tried.
And he is Righteous, who has done these things which that Law requires, by
whose Rule he is to be judged. But (1) This is not the way whereby the
Scripture expresses our Justification before God, which alone is under
consideration; namely, that we bring unto it a personal Righteousness of our
own, answering the Law whereby we are to be judged. Yea an Assertion to this
purpose is foreign to the Gospel, and destructive of the Grace of God by Jesus
Christ. (2) It is granted, that all Righteousness respects a Law as the Rule of
it; And so does this whereof we speak, namely, the Moral Law, which being the
sole eternal unchangeable Rule of Righteousness, if it do not in the substance
of it answer thereunto, a Righteousness it is not. But this it does, in as
much, as that so far as it is is habitual, it consists in the Renovation of the
Image of God, wherein that Law is written in our Hearts; and all the actual
Duties of it are as to the substance of them, what is required by that Law. But
as unto the manner of its communication unto us, and of its performance by us
from Faith in God by Jesus Christ, and Love unto him, as the Author and
Fountain of all the Grace and Mercy procured and administered by him, it has
respect unto the Gospel. What will follow from hence? why that he is just that
does those things which that Law requires whereby he is to be judged. He is so
certainly. For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of
the Law shall be justified, Romans 2.13. So Moses describes the Righteousness of
the Law, that the man that does those things shall live in them, Romans 10.5. But
although the Righteousness whereof we discourse, be required by the Law, as
certainly it is, for it is nothing but the Law in our hearts, from whence we
walk in the ways and keep the Statutes or Commandments of God; yet does it not
so answer the Law, as that any man can be justified by it. But then it will be
said, that if it does not answer that Law and Rule whereby we are to be judged,
then it is no Righteousness; for all Righteousness must answer the Law whereby
it is required. And I say it is most true, it is no perfect Righteousness; it
does not so answer the Rule and Law, as that we can be justified by it, or
safely judged on it. But so far as it does answer the Law, it is a
Righteousness, that is, imperfectly so, and therefore is an imperfect
Righteousness; which yet gives the Denominati- of Righteous unto them that
have it, both absolutely and comparatively. It is said therefore, that it is
the Law of Grace or the Gospel from whence we are denominated Righteous with
this Righteousness. But that we are by the Gospel denominated Righteous from
any Righteousness that is not required by the moral Law, will not be proved.
Nor does the Law of Grace or the Gospel any where require of us, or prescribe
unto us this Righteousness, as that whereon we are to be justified before God.
It requires Faith in Christ Jesus, or the receiving of him as he is proposed in
the Promises of it, in all that are to be justified. It requires in like manner
Repentance from dead works in all that believe; as also the fruits of Faith,
Conversion unto God, and Repentance, in the works of Righteousness, which are
to the praise of God by Jesus Christ; with perseverance therein unto the end.
And all this may, if you please, be called our Evangelical Righteousness, as
being our Obedience unto God according to the Gospel. But yet the Graces and
Duties wherein it does consist, do no more perfectly answer the commands of the
Gospel, then they do those of the moral Law. For that the Gospel abates from
the Holiness of the Law, and makes that to be no sin which is sin by the Law,
or approves absolutely of less intension or lower degrees in the Love of God,
than the Law does, is an impious Imagination.

And that the Gospel requires all these things entirely and and equally, as the
Condition of our Justification before God, and so antecedently thereunto, is
not yet proved, nor ever will be. It is hence concluded, That this is our
Righteousness, according unto the Evangelical Law which requires it, by this we
are made Righteous, that is, not guilty of the nonperformance of the condition
required in that Law. And these things are said to be very plain. So no doubt
they seemed unto the Author; unto us they are intricate and perplexed. However,
I wholly deny that our Faith, Obedience, and Righteousness, considered as ours,
as wrought by us, although they are all accepted with God through Jesus Christ
according to the Grace declared in the Gospel, do perfectly answer the commands
of the Gospel, requiring them of us, as to matter, manner, and degree, and that
therefore it is utterly impossible that they should be the cause or condition
of our Justification before God. Yet in the Explanation of these things, it is
added by the same Author, that our maimed and imperfect Righteousness is
accepted unto Salvation, as if it were every way absolute and perfect, for that
so it should be, Christ has merited by his most perfect Righteousness. But it
is Justification and not Salvation that alone we discourse about; and that the
works of Obedience or Righteousness, have another respect unto Salvation, then
they have unto Justification, is too plainly and too often expressed in the
Scripture, to be modestly denied. And if this weak and imperfect Righteousness
of ours, be esteemed and accepted as every way perfect before God, then either
it is because God judges it to be perfect, and so declares us to be most just,
and justified thereon in his sight, or he judges it not to be complete and
perfect, yet declares us to be perfectly Righteous in his sight thereby.
Neither of these I suppose can well be granted. It will therefore be said, it
is neither of them; but Christ has obtained by his complete and most perfect
Righteousness and Obedience, that this lame and imperfect Righteousness of ours
should be accepted as every way perfect. And if it be so, it may be some will
think it best not to go about by this weak halt, and imperfect Righteousness,
but as unto their Justification betake themselves immediately unto the most
perfect Righteousness of Christ, which I am sure the Scripture encourages them
unto. And they will be ready to think, that the Righteousness which cannot
justify it self, but must be obliged unto Grace and Pardon through the merits
of Christ, will never be able to justify them. But what will ensue on this
Explanation of the Acceptance of our imperfect Righteousness unto Justification
upon the merit of Christ? This only so far as I can discern, that Christ has
merited and procured, either that God should judge that to be perfect which is
imperfect, and declare us perfectly Righteous when we are not so, or that he
should judge the Righteousness still to be imperfect (as it is) but declare us
to be perfectly Righteous with and by this imperfect Righteousness. These are
the plain paths that men walk in, who cannot deny but that there is a
Righteousness required unto our Justification, or that we may be declared
Righteous before God, in the sight of God, according unto the Judgment of God,
yet denying the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, will allow
of no other Righteousness unto this end, but that which is so weak and
imperfect as that no man can justify it in his own Conscience, nor without a
frenzy of pride, can think or imagine himself perfectly Righteous thereby.

And whereas it is added, that he is blind who sees not that this Righteousneso
of ours is subordinate unto the Righteousness of Christ, I must acknowledge my
self otherwise minded, notwithstanding the severity of this censure. It seems
to me, that the Righteousness of Christ is subordinate unto this Righteousness
of our own, as here it is stated, and not the contrary. For the end of all is
our Acceptance with God as Righteous. But according unto these thoughts, it is
our own Righteousnesses whereon we are immediately accepted with God as
Righteous.

Only Christ has deserved by his Righteousness, that our Righteousness may be
so accepted, and is therefore as unto the End of our Justification before God,
subordinate thereunto.

But to return from this Digression, and to proceed unto our Argument. This
personal inherent Righteousness which according to the Scripture we allow in
Believers, is not that whereby, or wherewith, we are justified before God. For
it is not perfect, nor perfectly answers any Rule of Obedience that is given
unto us, and so cannot be our Righteousness before God unto our Justification.
Wherefore we must be justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us,
or be justified without respect unto any Righteousness, or not be justified at
all. And a threefold imperfection does accompany it.

First, as to the Principle of it, as it is habitually resident in us. For (1)
There is a contrary principle of sin abiding with it in the same subject whilst
we are in this World. For contrary Qualities may be in the same subject whilst
neither of them is in the highest Degree. So it is in this case, Gal. 5.17. For
the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. (2) None of the Faculties of our Souls are perfectly renewed whilst we
are in this World. The inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. And we
are always to be purging our selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, 2
Cor. 7.1. And hereunto belongs whatever is spoken in the Scripture, whatever
Believers find in themselves by experience of the Remainders of
In-dwelling-sin, in the Darkness of our minds, whence at best we know but in
part, and through Ignorance are ready to wander out of the way, Heb. 5.2. in
the Deceitfulness of the Heart, and disorder of Affections. I understand not
how any one can think of pleading his own Righteousness in the sight of God, or
suppose that he can be justified by it upon this single account of the
Imperfection of its Inherent Habit or Principle. Such notions arise from the
Ignorance of God and our selves, or the want of a due consideration of the one
and the other. Neither can I apprehend how a thousand Distinctions can safely
introduce it into any place or consideration in our Justification before God.
He that can search in any measure by a spiritual light into his own Heart and
Soul, will find, God be merciful to me a sinner, a better plea than any he can
be furnished withal from any worth of his own. What is man that he should be
clean, and he that is born of a woman that he should be righteous, Job 15.14,
15, 16. chap. 18.19. Hence says Gregory in Job 9. lib. 9. cap. 14. Vt saepe
diximus omnis Justitia humana injustitia esse convincitur si distinct
judicetur. Bernard speaks to the same purpose, and almost in the same words,
Sermon. 1. fest. omn. sanct. Quid potest esse omnis humana justitia coram Deo?
nonne juxta Prophetam, velut pannus menstruatus reputabitur; and si distinct
judicetur, injustitia invenietur omnis Justitia nostra and minus habens. A man
cannot be justified in any sense by that Righteousness which upon Trial will
appear rather to be an Unrighteousness.

2. It is imperfect with respect unto every Act and Duty of it, whether
internal or external. There is Iniquity cleaving unto our holy things, and all
our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. It has been often and well
observed, that if a man, the best of men, were left to choose the best of his
works that ever he performed, and thereon to enter into Judgment with God, if
only under this notion, that he has answered and fulfilled the Condition
required of him, as unto his Acceptance with God, it would be his wisest
course, (at least it would be so in the Judgment of Bellarmin) to renounce it,
and betake himself unto Grace and Mercy alone.

3. It is imperfect by reason of the Incursion of actual sins. Hence our
Savior has taught us continually to pray for the forgiveness of our sins; and
if we say, that we have no sin we deceive our selves; for in many things we
offend all. And what confidence can be placed in this Righteousness, which
those who plead for it in this cause, acknowledge to be weak, maimed, and
imperfect.

I have but touched on these things, which might have been handled at large,
and are indeed of great consideration in our present Argument. But enough has
been spoken to manifest, that although this Righteousness of Believers be on
other accounts like the fruit of the Vine, that glads the Heart of God and man,
yet as unto our Justification before God, it is like the Wood of the Vine, a
pin is not to be taken from it to hang any weight of this cause upon.

Two things are pleaded in the behalf of this Righteousness and its Influence
into our Justification. (1) That it is absolutely complete and perfect. Hence
some say that they are perfect and sinless in this life. They have no more
concern in the mortification of sin, nor of growth in Grace. And indeed this is
the only rational pretense of ascribing our Justification before God thereunto.
For were it so with any, what should hinder him from being justified thereon
before God, but only that he has been a sinner, which spoils the whole market.
But this vain Imagination is so contrary unto the Scripture, and the Experience
of all that know the Terror of the Lord, and what it is to walk humbly before
him, as that I shall not insist on the Refutation of it.

2. It is pleaded, that although this Righteousness be not an exact fulfilling
of the moral Law, yet is it the Accomplishment of the Condition of the New
Covenant, or entirely answers the Law of Grace, and all that is required of
us therein.

Ans. 1. This wholly takes away sin and the pardon of it, no less then does the
conceit of sinless perfections which we now rejected. For if our Obedience do
answer the only Law and Rule of it whereby it is to be tried, measured and
judged, then is there no sin in us, nor need of pardon. No more is required of
any man to keep him absolutely free from sin, but that he fully answer, and
exactly comply with the Rule and Law of his Obedience whereby he must be
judged. On this supposition therefore there is neither sin, nor any need of the
pardon of it. To say that there is still both sin, and need of pardon with
respect unto the moral Law of God, is to confess that Law to be the Rule of our
Obedience, which this Righteousness does no way answer; and therefore none by
it can be justified in the sight of God.

2. Although this Righteousness be accepted in justified persons by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, yet consider the principle of it, with all the Acts
and Duties wherein it does consist, as they are required and prescribed in the
Gospel unto us, and they do neither jointly nor severally fulfill and and answer
the commands of the Gospel no more then they do the commands of the Law.
Wherefore they cannot all of them constitute a Righteousness consisting in an
exact conformity unto the Rules of the Gospel, or the Law of it. For it is
impious to imagine that the Gospel requiring any Duty of us, suppose the Love
of God, does make any Abatement, as unto the matter, manner, or degrees of
perfection in it, from what was required by the Law. Does the Gospel require a
lower degree of Love to God, a less perfect Love than the Law did? God forbid.
The same may be said concerning the inward frame of our natures, and all other
Duties whatever; wherefore although this Righteousness is accepted in justified
Persons, (as God had respect unto Abel, and then unto his Offering) in the way
and unto the ends that shall be afterward declared; yet as it relates unto the
commands of the Gospel, both it and all the Duties of it, are no less
imperfect, then it would be, if it should be left unto its Trial by the Law of
Creation only.

3. I know not what some men intend. On the one hand they affirm that our Lord
Jesus Christ has enlarged and heightened the spiritual sense of the moral Law,
and not only so, but added unto it new precepts of more exact Obedience than it
did require. But on the other they would have him to have brought down or taken
off the Obligation of the Law, so as that a man according as he has adapted it
unto the use of the Gospel, shall be judged of God to have fulfilled the whole
Obedience which it requires, who never answered any one precept of it according
unto its original sense and obligation. For so it must be, if this imperfect
Righteousness be on any account esteemed a fulfilling of the Rule of our
Obedience, as that thereon we should be justified in the sight of God.

4. This opinion puts an irreconcilable Difference between the Law and the
Gospel, not to be composed by any distinctions. For according unto it, God
declares by the Gospel a man to be perfectly Righteous, justified and blessed,
upon the consideration of a Righteousness that is imperfect; and in the Law he
pronounces every one accursed who continues not in all things required by it,
and as they are therein required. But it is said that this Righteousness is no
otherwise to be considered, but as the condition of the new Covenant whereon we
obtain Remission of sins on the sole account of the satisfaction of Christ
wherein our Justification does consist.

Ans. 1. Some indeed do say so, but not all, not the most, not the most learned
with whom in this controversy we have to do. And in our Pleas for what we
believe to be the Truth, we cannot always have respect unto every private
opinion whereby it is opposed. (2) That Justification consists only in the
pardon of sin, is so contrary to the signification of the Word, the constant
use of it in the Scripture, the common notion of it amongst mankind, the sense
of men in their own Consciences who find themselves under an Obligation unto
Duty, and express Testimonies of the Scripture, as that I somewhat wonder, how
it can be pretended. But it shall be spoken unto elsewhere. (3) If this
Righteousness, be the fulfilling of the condition of the new Covenant whereon
we are justified, it must be in it self such as exactly answers some Rule or
Law of Righteousness and so be perfect, which it does not; and therefore cannot
bear the place of a Righteousness in our Justification. (4) That this
Righteousness is the condition of our Justification before God, or of that
interest in the Righteousness of Christ whereby we are justified, is not
proved, nor ever will be.

I shall briefly add two or three considerations excluding this personal
Righteousness from its pretended interest in our Justification, and close this
Argument.

1. That Righteousness which neither answers the Law of God, nor the end of
God in our Justification by the Gospel, is not that whereon we are Justified.
But such is this inherent Righteousness of Believers, even of the best of them.
(1) That it answers not the Law of God, has been proved from its
Imperfection. Nor will any sober person pretend that it exactly and perfectly
fulfills the Law of our Creation. And this Law cannot be disanulled whilst the
Relation of Creator and Rewarder on the one hand, and of Creatures capable of
Obedience and Rewards on the other between God and us does continue. Wherefore
that which answers not this Law will not justify us. For God will not
abrogate that Law, that the Transgressors of it may be justified. Do we says
the Apostle (by the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works) make void
the Law? God forbid; yea we establish it, Romans 3.31. (2) That we should be
justified with respect unto it, answers not the end of God in our
Justification by the Gospel. For this is to take away all glorying in our
selves, and all occasion of it, every thing that might give countenance unto
it, so as that the whole might be to the praise of his own Grace by Christ,
Romans 3.27. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. How it is Faith alone that gives glory to God
herein, has been declared in the Description of its nature. But it is evident
that no man has, or can have possibly any other, any greater occasion of
boasting in himself, with respect unto his Justification, then that he is
justified on his performance of that condition of it, which consists in his own
personal Righteousness.

2. No man was ever justified by it in his own Conscience, much less can he be
justified by it in the sight of God. For God is greater then our Hearts and
knows all things. There is no man so Righteous, so Holy in the whole World,
nor ever was, but his own Conscience would charge him in many things with his
coming short of the Obedience required of him, in matter or manner, in the kind
or degrees of perfection. For there is no man that lives and sins not.
Absolutely, Nemo absolvitur se judice. Let any man be put unto a Trial in
himself whether he can be justified in his own Conscience, by his own
Righteousness, and he will be cast in the Trial at his own Judgment seat. And
he that does not thereon conclude, that there must be another Righteousness
whereby he must be justified, that originally and inherently is not his own,
will be at a loss for peace with God. But it will be said, that men may be
justified in their Consciences, that they have performed the condition of the
new Covenant, which is all that is pleaded with respect unto this
Righteousness. And I no way doubt but that men may have a comfortable
persuasion of their own sincerity in Obedience, and satisfaction in the
Acceptance of it with God. But it is when they try it, as an effect of Faith,
whereby they are justified, and not as the condition of their Justification.
Let it be thus stated in their minds that God requires a personal
Righteousness in order unto their Justification, whereon their Determination
must be, this is my Righteousness which I present unto God that I may be
justified, and they will find difficulty in arriving at it, if I be not much
mistaken.

3. None of the Holy men of old whose Faith and Experience are recorded in the
Scripture, did ever plead their own personal Righteousness under any Notion of
it, either as to the merit of their Works, or as unto their complete
performance of what was required of them as the condition of the Covenant in
order unto their Justification before God. This has been spoken unto before.

CHAP. XI. The nature of the Obedience that God requires of us. The Eternal
obligation of the Law thereunto.
OUr second Argument shall be taken from the nature of that Obedience or
Righteousness which God requires of us, that we may be accepted of him and
approved by him. This being a large subject if fully to be handled, I shall
reduce what is of our present concernment in it, unto some special Heads or
Observations.

1. God being a most perfect, and therefore a most free Agent, all his actings
toward mankind, all his dealings with them, all his Constitutions and Laws
concerning them, are to be resolved into his own Sovereign will and pleasure.
No other reason can be given of the Original, of the whole Systeme of them.
This the Scripture testifies unto, Psalm. 115.3.135.6. Prove. 16.4. Ephesians. 1.9,
11. Rev. 4.11. The being, existence, and natural circumstances of all
Creatures, being an effect of the free Counsel and pleasure of God, all that
belongs unto them must be ultimately resolved thereinto.

2. Upon a supposition of some free Acts of the will of God and the execution
of them, constituting an order in the things that outwardly are of him, and
their mutual respect unto one another, some things may become necessary in this
Relative state, whose being was not absolutely necessary in its own nature. The
order of all things and their mutual respect unto one another, depends on Gods
free Constitution, no less then their being absolutely. But upon a supposition
of that Constitution, things have in that order, a necessary Relation one to
another, and all of them unto God. Wherefore

3. It was a free Sovereign act of Gods will to create, effect or produce such
a Creature as man is; that is, of a nature intelligent, rational, capable of
moral Obedience with Rewards and Punishments. But on supposition hereof, man so
freely made, could not be governed any other ways but by a moral Instrument of
Law or Rule, influencing the rational faculties of his Soul unto Obedience, and
guiding him therein. He could not in that constitution be contained under the
Rule of God, by a mere Physical influence, as are all irrational or brute
Creatures. To suppose it, is to deny or destroy, the essential faculty and
powers wherewith he was created. Wherefore on the supposition of his being, it
was necessary that a Law or Rule of Obedience should be prescribed unto him,
and be the Instrument of Gods Government toward him.

4. This necessary Law, so far forth as it was necessary, did immediately and
unavoidably ensue upon the constitution of our natures in Relation unto God.
Supposing the nature, being, and properties of God, with the works of Creation
on the one hand; and suppose the being, existence and the nature of man, with
his necessary Relation unto God, on the other, and the Law whereof we speak is
nothing but the Rule of that Relation, which can neither be, nor be preserved
without it. Hence is this Law eternal, indispensable, admitting of no other
variation, than does the Relation between God and man, which is a necessary
exurgence from their distinct natures and properties.

5. The substance of this Law was, that man adhering unto God, absolutely,
universally, unchangeably, uninterruptedly, in trust, love, and fear, as the
chiefest good, the first Author of his being, of all the present and future
Advantages whereof it was capable, should yield Obedience unto him, with
respect unto his infinite Wisdom, Righteousness and Almighty Power, to protect,
reward, and punish, in all things known to be his will and pleasure, either by
the light of his own mind, or especial Revelation made unto him. And it is
evident that no more is required unto the constitution and establishment of
this Law, but that God be God, and Man be Man, with the necessary Relation that
must thereon ensue between them. Wherefore

6. This Law does eternally and unchangeably oblige all men unto Obedience to
God; even that Obedience which it requires, and in the manner wherein it
requires it. For both the substance of what it requires, and the manner of the
performance of it, as unto measures and degrees, are equally necessary and
unalterable, upon the suppositions laid down. For God cannot deny himself, nor
is the nature of man changed as unto the essence of it whereunto alone respect
is had in this Law, by any thing that can fall out. And although God might
superadd unto the original Obligations of this Law, what Arbitrary commands he
pleased, such as did not necessarily proceed or arise from the Relation between
him and us, which might be, and be continued without them; yet would they be
resolved into that Principle of this Law, that God in all things was absolutely
to be trusted and obeyed.

7. Known unto God are all his Works from the foundation of the World. In the
constitution of this order of things he made it possible, and foresaw it would
be future, that man would rebel against the preceptive power of this Law, and
disturb that order of things wherein he was placed under his moral Rule. This
gave occasion unto that effect of infinite Divine Righteousness, in
constituting the punishment that man should fall under upon his Transgression
of this Law. Neither was this an effect of Arbitrary will and pleasure, any
more than the Law it self was. Upon the supposition of the Creation of man, the
Law mentioned was necessary from all the Divine Properties of the nature of
God; And upon a supposition that man would Transgress that Law, God being now
considered as his Ruler and Governor, the Constitution of the punishment due
unto his Sin and Transgression of it, was a necessary effect of Divine
Righteousness. This it would not have been, had the Law it self been Arbitrary.
But that being necessary, so was the penalty of this Transgression. Wherefore
the constitution of this penalty, is liable to no more change, alteration, or
abrogation, then the Law it self, without an alteration in the state and
relation between God and man.

8. This is that Law, which our Lord Jesus Christ came not to destroy, but to
fulfill, that he might be the end of it for Righteousness unto them that do
believe. This Law he abrogated not, nor could do so without a Destruction of
the Relation that is between God and man, arising from or ensuing necessarily
on their distinct Beings and Properties. But as this cannot be destroyed, so
the Lord Christ came unto a contrary end; namely, to repair and restore it
where it was weakened. Wherefore

9. This Law, the Law of Sinless perfect Obedience, with its sentence of the
punishment of Death on all Transgressors, does and must abide in force for ever
in this World; For there is no more required hereunto, but that God be God, and
Man be Man. Yet shall this be farther proved.

1. There is nothing, not one word in the Scripture intimating any alteration
in, or Abrogation of this Law; so as that any thing should not be duty which it
makes to be duty, or any thing not be sin, which it makes to be sin, either as
unto matter or degrees, or that the thing which it makes to be sin, or which is
sin by the Rule of it, should not merit and deserve that punishment which is
declared in the sanction of it, or threatened by it. The wages of sin is Death.
If any Testimony of Scripture can be produced unto either of these purposes;
namely, that either any thing is not sin, in the way of Omission or Commission,
in the matter or manner of its performance, which is made to be so by this Law,
or that any such sin, or any thing that would have been sin by this Law, is
exempted from the punishment threatened by it, as unto merit or desert, it shall
be attended unto. It is therefore in universal force toward all mankind. There
is no Relief in this case; But behold the Lamb of God.

In exception hereunto it is pleaded, that when it was first given unto Adam,
it was the Rule and Instrument of a Covenant between God and man, a Covenant of
Works and perfect Obedience. But upon the entrance of sin, it ceased to have
the nature of a Covenant unto any. And it is so ceased, that on an impossible
supposition, that any man should fulfill the perfect Righteousness of it, yet
should he not be justified or obtain the benefit of the Covenant thereby. It is
not therefore only become ineffectual unto us as a Covenant by reason of our
weakness and disability to perform it, but it is ceased in its own nature so to
be. But these things as they are not unto our present purpose, so are they
wholly unproved. For

1. Our Discourse is not about the Foederal adjunct of the Law, but about its
moral nature only. It is enough, that as a Law, it continues to oblige all
mankind unto perfect Obedience, under its Original penalty. For hence it will
unavoidably follow, that unless the commands of it be complied withal and
fulfilled, the penalty will fall on all that Transgress it. And those who grant
that this Law is still in force as unto its being a Rule of Obedience, or as
unto its requiring Duties of us, do grant all that we desire. For it requires
no Obedience, but what it did in its Original constitution, that is sinless and
perfect; and it requires no Duty, nor prohibits any sin, but under the Penalty
of Death upon disobedience.

2. It is true, that he who is once a sinner, if he should afterward yield all
that perfect Obedience unto God that the Law requires, he could not thereby
obtain the Benefit of the Promise of the Covenant. But the sole Reason of it
is, because he is antecedently a sinner, and so obnoxious unto the Curse of the
Law. And no man can be obnoxious unto its Curse, and have a right unto its
Promise at the same time. But so to lay the supposition, that the same person
is by any means free from the Curse due unto sin, and then to deny that upon
the performance of that perfect sinless Obedience which the Law requires, that
he should not have right unto the Promise of Life thereby, is to deny the Truth
of God, and to reflect the highest dishonor upon his Justice. Jesus Christ
himself was justified by this Law. And it is immutably true, that he who does
the things of it shall live therein.

3. It is granted, that man continued not in the Observation of this Law, as it
was the Rule of the Covenant between God and him. The Covenant it was not, but
the Rule of it, which that it should be was superadded unto its Being as a Law.
For the Covenant comprised things that were not any part of a Result from the
necessary Relation of God and Man. Wherefore man by his sin as unto Demerit,
may be said to break this Covenant, and as unto any Benefit unto themselves to
disannul it. It is also true, that God did never formally and absolutely renew
or give again this Law as a Covenant a second time. Nor was there any need that
so he should do, unless it were declaratively only, for so it was renewed at
Sinai. For the whole of it being an Emanation of Eternal Right and Truth, it
abides and must abide in full force for ever. Wherefore it is only thus far
broke as a Covenant, that all Mankind having sinned against the Commands of it,
and so by Guilt, with the Impotency unto Obedience which ensued thereon,
defeated themselves of any Interest in its Promise, and possibility of
attaining any such interest, they cannot have any Benefit by it. But as unto
its power to oblige all mankind unto Obedience, and the unchangeable Truth of
its Promises and Threatenings, it abides the same as it was from the Beginning.

2 ly, Take away this Law, and there is left no standard of Righteousness unto
mankind, no certain boundaries of Good and Evil, but those pillars whereon God
has fixed the Earth are left to move and flote up and down like the Isle of
Delos in the Sea. Some say, the Rule of Good and Evil unto men is not this Law
in its original constitution, but the Light of Nature, and the Dictates of
Reason. If they mean that Light which was primogenial and concreated with our
natures, and those Dictates of Right and Wrong which Reason originally
suggested and approved, they only say in other words, that this Law is still
the unalterable Rule of Obedience unto all mankind. But if they intend the
remaining Light of Nature that continues in every individual in this depraved
state thereof, and that under such additional Depravations as Traditions,
Customs, Prejudices, and Lusts of all sorts, have affixed unto the most, there
is nothing more irrational, and it is that which is charged with no less
inconvenience than that it leaves no certain Boundaries of Good and Evil. That
which is Good unto one, will on this Ground be in its own nature evil unto
another, and so on the contrary; and all the Idolaters that ever were in the
World might on this pretense be excused.

3 ly, Conscience bears witness hereunto. There is no Good nor Evil required or
forbidden by this Law, that upon the Discovery of it* any man in the World can
persuade or bribe his Conscience not to comply with it in Judgment, as unto his
concernment therein. It will accuse and excuse, condemn and free him, according
to the sentence of this Law, let him do what he can to the contrary.

In brief it is acknowledged, that God by virtue of his supreme Dominion over
all, may in some Instances change the nature and order of things, so as the
Precepts of the Divine Law shall not in them operate in their ordinary
efficacy. So was it in the case of his command unto Abraham to slay his Son,
and unto the Israelites to rob the Egyptians. But on a supposition of the
continuance of that order of things which this Law is the preservative of, such
is the intrinsic nature of the Good and Evil commanded and forbidden therein,
that it is not the subject of divine Dispensation, as even the Schoolmen
generally grant.

10. From what we have discoursed two things do unavoidably ensue.

1. That whereas all mankind have by sin fallen under the Penalty threatened
unto the Transgression of this Law; and suffering of this Penalty which is
Eternal Death, being inconsistent with Acceptance before God, or the enjoyment
of Blessedness, it is utterly impossible that any one individual person of the
posterity of Adam should be justified in the sight of God, accepted with him or
blessed by him, unless this Penalty be answered, undergone, and suffered by
them or for them; the (...) herein is not to be abolished but established.

2. That unto the same End of Acceptance with God, Justification before him,
and Blessedness from him, the Righteousness of this Eternal Law must be
fulfilled in us, in such a way, as that in the Judgment of God which is
according unto Truth, we may be esteemed to have fulfilled it, and be dealt
with accordingly. For upon a supposition of a failure herein, the sanction of
the Law is not Arbitrary, so as that the Penalty may or may not be inflicted,
but necessary from the Righteousness of God as the supreme Governor of all.

11. About the first of these our Controversy is with the Socinians only, who
deny the satisfaction of Christ, and any necessity thereof. Concerning this I
have treated elsewhere at large, and expect not to see an Answer unto what I
have disputed on that Subject. As unto the latter of them, we must enquire how
we may be supposed to comply with the Rule, and answer the Righteousness of
this unalterable Law, whose Authority we can no way be exempted from. And that
which we plead is, that the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ imputed unto
us; His Obedience as the surety of the New Covenant, granted unto us, made ours
by the gracious Constitution, Sovereign Appointment and Donation of God, is
that whereon we are judged and esteemed to have answered the Righteousness of
the Law. By the Obedience of One many are made Righteous, Romans 5.19. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. And hence we argue.

If there be no other way whereby the Righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled
in us, without which we cannot be justified, but must fall inevitably under the
Penalty threatened unto the Transgression of it, but only the Righteousness of
Christ imputed unto us, then is that the sole Righteousness whereby we are
justified in the sight of God; But the former is true, and so therefore is the
latter.

12. On the supposition of this Law, and its original obligation unto Obedience
with its Sanction and Threatenings, there can be but one of three ways whereby
we may come to be justified before God, who have sinned, and are no way able in
our selves to perform the Obedience for the future which it does require. And
each of them have a respect unto a Sovereign Act of God with reference unto
this Law. The first is the Abrogation of it, that it should no more oblige us
either unto Obedience or Punishment. This we have proved impossible; and they
will woefully deceive their own Souls, who shall trust unto it. The second is by
transferring of its Obligation unto the End of Justification on a surety or
common undertaker. This is that which we plead for, as the substance of the
mystery of the Gospel, considering the Person and Grace of this Undertakers or
Surety. And herein all things do tend unto the Exaltation of the Glory of God
in all the holy properties of his nature, with the fulfilling and establishing
of the Law it self, Math. 5.17. Romans 3.31. chap. 8.4. chap. 10.3, 4. The third
way is by an Act of God toward the Law, and another toward us, whereby the
nature of the Righteousness which the Law requires is changed; which we shall
examine as the only reserve against our present Argument.

3. It is said therefore that by our own personal Obedience we do answer the
Righteousness of the Law so far as it is required of us. But whereas no sober
person can imagine that we can, or that any one in our lapsed condition ever
did yield in our own persons that perfect sinless Obedience unto God which is
required of us in the Law of Creation, two things are supposed that our
Obedience, such as it is, may be accepted with God as if it were sinless and
perfect. For although some will not allow that the Righteousness of Christ is
imputed unto us for what it is, yet they contend that our own Righteousness is
imputed unto us for what it is not. Of these things the one respects the Law,
the other our Obedience.

14. That which respects the Law is not the Abrogation of it. For although
this would seem the most expedite way for the Reconciliation of this
Difficulty, namely, that the Law of Creation is utterly abrogated by the
Gospel, both as unto its Obligation unto Obedience and Punishment; and no Law
to be continued in force but that which requires only sincere Obedience of us,
whereof there is as unto Duties the manner of their performance, not any
absolute Rule or Measure, yet this is not by many pretended. They say not that
this Law is so abrogated, as that it should not have the power and efficacy of
a Law toward us. Nor is it possible it should be so; nor can any pretense be
given how it should so be. It is true, it was broken by man, is so by us all,
and that with respect unto its principal End of our Subjection unto God, and
dependence upon him, according to the Rule of it. But it is foolish to think
that the fault of those unto whom a Righteous Law is rightly given, should
abrogate or disannul the Law it self. A Law that is good and just may cease and
expire as unto any power of Obligation upon the ceasing or expiration of the
Relation which it did respect. So the Apostle tells us, that when the Husband
of a Woman is dead, she is free from the Law of her Husband, Romans 7.2. But the
Relation between God and us, which was constituted in our first Creation, can
never cease. But a Law cannot be abrogated without a new Law given, and made by
the same, or an equal power that made it, either expressly revoking it, or
enjoining things inconsistent with it, and contradictory unto its observation.
In the latter way the Law of Mosaical Institutions was abrogated and
disannulled. There was not any positive Law made for the taking of it away; but
the Constitution and Introduction of a new way of Worship by the Gospel
inconsistent with it, and contrary unto it, deprived it of all its obligatory
power and efficacy. But neither of these ways has God taken away the
obligation of the Original Law of Obedience, either as unto Duties or
Recompenses of Reward. Neither is there any direct Law made for its Abrogation;
nor has he given any new Law of moral Obedience either inconsistent with, or
contrary unto it. Yea in the Gospel it is declared to be established and
fulfilled.

It is true, as was observed before, that this Law was made the Instrument of a
Covenant between God and Man; and so there is another Reason of it; For God
has actually introduced another Covenant inconsistent with it, and contrary
unto it. But yet neither does this instantly and ipso facto free all men unto
the Law, in the way of a Covenant. For unto the Obligation of a Law there is no
more required, but that the matter of it be Just and Righteous, that it be
given or made by him who has just Authority so to give or make it, and be
sufficiently declared unto them who are to be obliged by it. Hence the making
and promulgation of a new Law, does ipso facto abrogate any former Law that is
contrary unto it, and frees all men from Obedience unto it, who were before
obliged by it. But in a Covenant it is not so. For a Covenant does not operate
by mere Sovereign Authority; it becomes not a Covenant without the consent of
them with whom it is made. Wherefore no Benefit accrues unto any, or freedom
from the Old Covenant, by the constitution of the new, unless he has actually
complied with it, has chosen it, and is interested in it thereby. The first
Covenant made with Adam, we did in him consent unto, and accept of. And therein
notwithstanding our sin, do we and must we abide, that is, under the Obligation
of it unto Duty and Punishment, until by Faith we are made partakers of the
new. It cannot therefore be said, that we are not concerned in the fulfilling
of the Righteousness of this Law, because it is abrogated.

15. Nor can it be said that the Law has received a new Interpretation,
whereby it is declared, that it does not oblige, nor shall be construed for the
future to oblige any unto sinless and perfect Obedience, but may be complied
with on far easier terms. For the Law being given unto us when we were sinless,
and on purpose to continue and preserve us in that condition, it is absurd to
say that it did not oblige us unto sinless Obedience; and not an
Interpretation, but a plain Depravation of its sense and meaning. Nor is any
such thing once intimated in the Gospel. Yea the Discourses of our Savior upon
the Law, are absolutely destructive of any such Imagination. For whereas the
Scribes and Pharisees had attempted by their false Glosses and Interpretations
to accommodate the Law unto the Inclinations and Lusts of men, (a course since
pursued both notionally and practically, as all who design to burden the
Consciences of men with their own commands, do endeavor constantly to
recompense them, by an Indulgence with respect unto the commands of God) He on
the contrary rejects all such pretended Epikeia's and Interpretations,
restoring the Law unto its pristine Crown, as the Jews Tradition is, that the
Messiah shall do.

16. Nor can a Relaxation of the Law be pretended, if there be any such thing
in Rule. For if there be, it respects the whole being of the Law, and consists
either in the suspension of its whole Obligation, at least for a season, or the
substitution of another person to answer its demands who was not in the
original Obligation, in the room of them that were. For so some say, that the
Lord Christ was made under the Law for us by an Act of Relaxation of the
original Obligation of the Law; how properly, ipsi viderint. But here in no
sense it can have place.

17. The Act of God toward the Law in this case intended, is, a Derogation
from its obliging power as unto Obedience. For whereas it did originally oblige
unto perfect sinless Obedience, in all Duties, both as unto their substance,
and the manner of their performance, it shall be allowed to oblige us still
unto Obedience, but not unto that which is absolutely the same, especially not
as unto the compleatness and perfection of it. For if it do so, either it is
fulfilled in the Righteousness of Christ for us, or no man living can ever be
justified in the sight of God. Wherefore by an Act of Derogation from its
Original power, it is provided, that it shall oblige us still unto Obedience,
but not that which is absolutely sinless and perfect; but although it be
performed with less intension of Love unto God, or in a lower Degree, then it
did at first require, so it be sincere and universal as unto all the parts of
it, it is all that the Law now requires of us. This is all that it now
requires, as it is adapted unto the service of the new Covenant, and made the
Rule of Obedience according to the Law of Christ. Hereby is its preceptive
part, so far as we are concerned in it, answered and complied withal. Whether
these things are so or no, we shall see immediately in a few words.

18. Hence it follows, that the act of God with respect unto our Obedience, is
not an act of Judgment according unto any Rule or Law of his own; but an
Acceptilation, or an esteeming, accounting, accepting that as perfect, or in
the Room of that which is perfect, which really and in truth is not so.

19. It is added that both these depend on, and are the procurements of the
Obedience, suffering, and merits of Christ. For on their account it is, that
our weak and imperfect Obedience, is accepted as if it were perfect, and the
power of the Law, to require Obedience absolutely perfect is taken away. And
these being the effects of the Righteousness of Christ, that Righteousness may
on their account, and so far, be said to be imputed unto us.

20. But notwithstanding the great endeavors that have been used to give a
color of Truth unto these things, they are both of them but fictions and
imaginations of men that have no ground in the Scripture, nor do comply with
the experience of them that believe. For to touch a little on the latter, in
the first place; There is no true Believer but has these two things fixed in
his mind and conscience.

1. That there is nothing in principles, habits, qualities, oractions, wherein
he comes short of a perfect compliance with the Holy Law of God, even as it
required perfect Obedience, but that it has in it the nature of sin, and that
in it self deserving the Curse annexed Originally unto the breach of that Law.
They do no therefore apprehend that its Obligation is taken off, weakened or
derogated from in any thing. (2) That there is no Relief for him, with respect
unto what the Law requires, or unto what it threatens, but by the Mediation of
Jesus Christ alone, who of God is made Righteousness unto him. Wherefore they
do not rest in, or on the acceptance of their own Obedience such as it is, to
answer the Law, but trust unto Christ alone for their acceptance with God.

21. They are both of them doctrinally untrue; For as unto the former; (1) It
is unwritten. There is no Intimation in the Scripture of any such Dispensation
of God with reference unto the Original Law of Obedience. Much is spoken of our
Deliverance from the Curse of the Law by Christ, but of the Abatement of its
preceptive power nothing at all. (2) It is contrary to the Scripture. For it is
plainly affirmed that the Law is not to be abolished, but fulfilled; not to be
made void, but to be established; that the Righteousness of it must be
fulfilled in us. (3) It is a supposition both unreasonable and impossible. For
(1) the Law was a Representation unto us of the Holiness of God, and his
Righteousness in the Government of his Creatures. There can be no Alteration
made herein, seeing with God himself there is no variableness nor shadow of
changing. (2) It would leave no standard of Righteousness, but only a Lesbian
Rule, which turns and apply's it self unto the light and abilities of men, and
leaves at least as many various measures of Righteousness as there are
Believers in the World. (3) It includes a variation in the center of all
Religion, which is the natural* and moral Relation of men unto God. For so
there must be, if all that was once necessary thereunto, do not still continue
so to be. (4) It is dishonorable unto the mediation of Christ. For it makes
the principal end of it to be, that God should accept of a Righteousness unto
our Justification, inexpressibly beneath that which he required in the Law of
our Creation. And this in a sense makes him the Minister of sin, or that he
has procured an Indulgence unto it; not by the way of satisfaction and pardon
whereby he takes away the guilt of it from the Church; but by taking from it
its nature and demerit, so as that what was so originally should not continue
so to be, or at least not to deserve the punishment it was first threatened
withal. (5) It reflects on the goodness of God himself. For on this supposition
that he has reduced his Law into that state and order, as to be satisfied by
an observation of it so weak, so imperfect, accompanied with so many failures
and sins, as it is with the Obedience of the best men in this World, (whatever
thoughts unto the contrary the Frenzy of Pride may suggest unto the minds of
any) what reason can be given consistent with his goodness, why he should give
a Law at first of perfect Obedience, which one sin laid all mankind under the
penalty of unto their Ruin?

22. All these things and sundry others of the same kind, do follow also on the
second supposition of an Acceptilation or an Imaginary estimation of that as
perfect, which is imperfect, as sinless which is attended with sins
innumerable. But the Judgment of God is according unto Truth; neither will he
reckon that unto us for a perfect Righteousness in his sight, which is so
imperfect as to be like tattered Rags, especially, having promised unto us,
Robes of Righteousness and Garments of Salvation.

That which necessarily follows on these Discourses is, That there is no
other way whereby the original, immutable Law of God, may be established, and
fulfilled with respect unto us, but by the Imputation of the perfect Obedience
and Righteousness of Christ, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness unto
all that do believe.

CHAP. XII. The Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto the Law, Declared
and Vindicated.
FRom the foregoing General Argument, another does issue in Particular, with
respect unto the Imputation of the Active Obedience or Righteousness of Christ
unto us, as an Essential part of that Righteousness whereon we are justified
before God. And it is as follows, If it were necessary that the Lord Christ,
as our Surety, should undergo the penalty of the Law for us, or in our stead,
because we have all sinned; then it was necessary also, that as our Surety he
should yield obedience unto the preceptive part of the Law for us also: And if
the Imputation of the former be needful for us unto our Justification before
God, then is the Imputation of the latter also necessary unto the same End and
Purpose. For why was it necessary, or why would God have it so, that the Lord
Christ, as the Surety of the Covenant should undergo the curse and penalty of
the Law, which we had incurred the guilt of, by sin, that we may be justified
in his sight? Was it not, that the Glory and Honor of his Righteousness, as the
Author of the Law, and the Supreme Governor of all Mankind, thereby might not
be violated in the absolute impunity of the infringers of it: And if it were
requisite unto the glory of God, that the penalty of the Law should be
undergone for us, or suffered by our Surety in our stead, because we had
sinned: Wherefore is it not as requisite unto the glory of God, that the
preceptive part of the Law be complied withal for us, in as much as obedience
thereunto is required of us? And as we are no more able of our selves to fulfill
the Law, in a way of obedience, then to undergo the penalty of it, so as that
we may be justified thereby: So no Reason can be given, why God is not as much
concerned in Honor and Glory, that the preceptive power and part of the Law be
complied withal, by perfect Obedience, as that the Sanction of it be
established by undergoing the penalty of it. Upon the same Grounds therefore,
that the Lord Christ's suffering the penalty of the Law for us, was necessary
that we might be justified in the sight of God, and that the satisfaction he
made thereby be imputed unto us, as we our selves had made satisfaction unto
God, as Bellarmine speaks and grants: On the same it was equally necessary,
that is, as unto the glory and honor of the Legislator and Supreme Governor of
all by the Law, that he should fulfill the Preceptive part of it, in his perfect
obedience thereunto, which also is to be imputed unto us for our Justification.

Concerning the first of these, namely, the satisfaction of Christ, and the
Imputation of it unto us, our principal Difference is with the Socinians. And I
have elsewhere written so much in the vindication of the Truth therein, that I
shall not here again reassume the same Argument: It is here therefore taken for
granted, although I know that there are some different Apprehensions about the
notion of Christ's suffering in our stead, and of the Imputation of those
sufferings unto us. But I shall here take no notice of them, seeing I press
this Argument no farther, but only so far forth, that the obedience of Christ
unto the Law, and the Imputation thereof unto us, is no less necessary unto our
Justification before God, then his suffering of the penalty of the Law, and the
Imputation thereof unto us, unto the same end. The nature of this Imputation,
and what it is formally that is imputed, we have considered elsewhere.

That the Obedience of Christ the Mediator is thus imputed unto us, shall be
afterward proved in particular by Testimonies of the Scripture. Here I intend
only the vindication of the Argument as before laid down, which will take us up
a little more time then ordinary. For there is nothing in the whole Doctrine of
Justification, which meets with a more fierce and various opposition: But the
Truth is great and will prevail.

The things that are usually objected and vehemently urged against the
Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto our Justification, may be reduced
unto three heads. (1.) That it is impossible. (2.) That it is useless. (3.)
That it is pernicious to believe it. And if the Arguments used for the
inforcement of those Objections, be as cogent as the charge it self is fierce
and severe, they will unavoidably overthrow the persuasions of it in the minds
of all sober persons. But there is oft-times a wide difference between what is
said, and what is proved, as will appear in the present case.

1. It is pleaded impossible on this single ground; namely, That the Obedience
of Christ unto the Law was due from him on his own account, and performed by
him for himself, as a man made under the Law. Now what was necessary unto
himself, and done for himself, cannot be said to be done for us, so as to be
imputed unto us.

2. It is pretended to be useless from hence, because all our sins of omission
and commission being pardoned in our Justification on the account of the Death
and satisfaction of Christ, we are thereby made completely righteous; so as
that there is not the least necessity for, or use of the Imputation of the
Obedience of Christ unto us.

3. Pernicious also they say it is, as that which takes away the necessity of
our own personal Obedience, introducing Antinomianism, Libertinism, and all
manner of evils.

For this last part of the charge, I refer it unto its proper place: For
although it be urged by some against this part of the Doctrine of Justification
in a peculiar manner, yet is it managed by others, against the whole of it. And
although we should grant, that the Obedience of Christ unto the Law, is not
imputed unto us unto our Justification, yet shall we not be freed from
disturbance by this false accusation; unless we will renounce the whole of the
satisfaction and merit of Christ also: And we intend not to purchase our Peace
with the whole World, at so dear a rate. Wherefore I shall in its proper place
give this part of the charge its due consideration, as it reflects on the whole
Doctrine of Justification, and all the causes thereof, which we believe and
profess.

The first part of this charge, concerning the Impossibility of the Imputation
of the obedience of Christ unto us, is insisted on by Socinus de Servat. part
3. cap. 5. And there has been nothing since pleaded unto the same purpose, but
what has been derived from him, or wherein, at least, he has not prevented
the Inventions of other Men, and gone before them. And he makes this
consideration the principal engine wherewith he endeavors the overthrow of the
whole Doctrine of the merit of Christ. For he supposes, that if all he did in
a way of Obedience, was due from himself on his own Account, and was only the
duty which he owed unto God for himself in his station and circumstances, as a
Man in this World, it cannot be meritorious for us, nor any way imputed unto
us. And in like manner to weaken the Doctrine of his Satisfaction, and the
Imputation thereof unto us, he contends that Christ offered as a Priest for
himself, in that kind of offering which he made on the Cross. Part. 2. cap. 22.
And his real opinion was, that whatever was of offering or sacrifice in the
Death of Christ, it was for himself; that is, it was an Act of Obedience unto
God which pleased him, as the savor of a sweet smelling Sacrifice. His offering
for us, is only the presentation of himself in the presence of God in Heaven;
now he has no more to do for himself in a way of Duty. And the truth is, if
the Obedience of Christ had respect unto himself only; that is, If he yielded
it unto God, on the necessity of his condition, and did not do it for us, I see
no foundation left to assert his merit upon, no more then I do for the
Imputation of it unto them that believe.

That which we plead is, That the Lord Christ fulfilled the whole Law for us;
he did not only undergo the penalty of it due unto our sins, but also yielded
that perfect Obedience which it did require. And herein I shall not immix my
self in the debate of the distinction between the Active and Passive Obedience
of Christ. For he exercised the highest Active Obedience in his suffering, when
he offered himself to God through the Eternal Spirit. And all his Obedience,
considering his Person was mixed with suffering, as a part of his Exinanition
and Humiliation; whence it is said, That though he were a Son, yet learned he
obedience by the things that he suffered. And however, doing and suffering are
in various categories of things, yet Scripture testimonies are not to be
regulated by Philosophical artifices and terms. And it must needs be said, that
the Sufferings of Christ as they were purely penal, are imperfectly called His
passive Righteousness. For all Righteousness is either in habit, or in action,
whereof suffering is neither; nor is any Man righteous, or so esteemed from
what he suffers. Neither do sufferings give satisfaction unto the commands of
the Law, which require only Obedience. And hence it will unavoidably follow,
that we have need of more then the mere sufferings of Christ, whereby we may be
justified before God, if so be that any Righteousness be required thereunto.
But the whole of what I intend is, That Christ's fulfilling of the Law in
Obedience unto its commands, is no less imputed unto us for our Justification,
then his undergoing the Penalty of it is.

I cannot but judge it sounds ill in the ears of all Christians, That the
Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ as our Mediator and Surety unto the whole
Law of God, was for himself alone, and not for us; or that what he did therein,
was not that he might be the end of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do
believe, nor a means of the fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law in us;
especially considering, that the Faith of the Church is, That he was given to
us, born to us; that for us Men, and for our salvation he came down from
Heaven, and did, and suffered what was required of him. But whereas some who
deny the Imputation of the Obedience of Christ, unto us for our Justification,
do insist principally on the second thing mentioned, namely, the unusefulness
of it, I shall under this first part of the charge, consider only the Arguings
of Socinus, which is the whole of what some at present do endeavor to perplex
the truth withal.

To this purpose is his discourse, Part 3. cap. 5. de Servat. Jam vero
manifestum est, Christum quia homo natus fuerat, and quidem, ut inquit Paulus,
factus sub lege, legi divinae inquam, quae aeterna and immutabilis est, non
minus quam caeteri homines obnoxium fuisse. Alioqui potuisset Christus aeternam
Dei legem negligere, sive etiam universam si voluisset infringere, quod impium
est vel cogitare. Immo ut supra alicubi explicatum fuit, nisi ipse Christus
legi divinae servandae obnoxious fuisset, ut ex Pauli verbis colligitur, non
potuisset iis, qui ei legi servandae obnoxii sunt, opem far and eos ad
immortalitatis firmam spem traducere. Non differebat igitur hac quidem ex
part, Christus quando homo natus erat a caeteris hominibus. Quocirca nec etiam
pro aliis, magis quam quilibet alius homo, legem divinam conservando
satisfacere potuit, quippe qui ipse eam servare omnino debuit. I have
transcribed his words, that it may appear with whose weapons some young
Disputers, among our selves, do contend against the Truth.

The substance of his Plea is, That our Lord Jesus Christ was for himself, or
on his own account, obliged unto all that obedience which he performed. And
this he endeavors to prove with this Reason, Because if it were otherwise, then
he might, if he would, have neglected the while Law of God, and have broken it
at his pleasure. For he forgot to consider, That if he were not obliged unto it
upon his own account, but was so on ours, whose cause he had undertaken, the
obligation on him unto most perfect obedience, was equal to what it would have
been, had he been originally obliged on his own account. However hence he
infers, that what he did, could not be for us, because it was so for himself,
no more then what any other man is bound to do in a way of duty for himself,
can be esteemed to have been done also for another. For he will allow of none
of those considerations of the Person of Christ which makes what he did and
suffered, of another nature and efficacy, then what can be done or suffered by
any other Man. All that he adds, in the process of his discourse, is, That what
ever Christ did that was not required by the Law in general, was upon the
especial command of God, and so done for himself; whence it cannot be imputed
unto us. And hereby he excludes the Church from any benefit by the Mediation of
Christ, but only what consists in his Doctrine, Example, and the Exercise of
his Power in Heaven for our good, which was the thing that he aimed at: But we
shall consider those also which make use of his Arguments, though not as yet
openly unto all his Ends.

To clear the Truth herein, the things ensuing must be observed.

1. The Obedience we treat of, was the Obedience of Christ the Mediator. But
the Obedience of Christ as the Mediator of the Covenant, was the Obedience of
his Person: For God redeemed his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20.28. It was
performed in the Humane Nature, but the Person of Christ was he that performed
it. As in the Person of a Man, some of his acts, as to the immediate principle
of operation, are acts of the Body, and some are so of the Soul; yet in their
performance and accomplishment, are they the acts of the Person. So the Acts of
Christ in his Mediation, as to their (...) or immediate operation, were the
actings of his distinct Natures; some of the Divine, and some of the Humane,
immediately. But as unto their (...), and the perfecting efficacy of them, they
were the Acts of his whole Person: His Acts who was that Person, and whose
Power of Operation was a property of his Person. Wherefore the Obedience of
Christ which we plead to have been for us, was the Obedience of the Son of God;
but the Son of God was never absolutely made (...) under the Law, nor could be
formally obliged thereby. He was indeed, as the Apostle witnesses, made so in
his Humane Nature, wherein he performed this Obedience, made of a Woman, made
under the Law, Gal. 4.4. He was so far forth made under the Law, as he was made
of a Woman. For in his Person he abode Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2.28. And
therefore of the whole Law. But the Obedience it self, was the Obedience of
that Person, who never was, nor ever could absolutely be made under the Law, in
his whole Person. For the Divine Nature cannot be subjected unto an outward
work of its own, such as the Law is; nor can it have an Authoritative
commanding power over it, as it must have, if it were made (...) under the Law.
Thus the Apostle argues, That Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, because he was then
in his Loins, when Abraham himself paid Tithes unto Melchisedec, Heb. 7. And
thence he proves, That he was inferior unto the Lord Christ, of whom
Melchisedec was a Type. But may it not thereon be replied, that then no less
the Lord Christ was in the Loins of Abraham then Levi: For verily, as the same
Apostle speaks; he took on him the Seed of Abraham. It is true therefore, that
he was so in respect of his Humane Nature; but as he was typed and represented
by Melchisedec in his whole Person, without Father, without Mother, without
Genealogy, without beginning of Days or End of Life: So he was not absolutely
in Abraham's Loins, and was exempted from being tithed in him. Wherefore the
Obedience whereof we treat, being not the Obedience of the Humane Nature
abstractedly, however performed in and by the Humane Nature, but the Obedience
of the Person of the Son of God, however the Humane Nature was subject to the
Law, (in what Sense, and unto what Ends shall be declared afterward) it was
not for himself, nor could be for himself, because his whole Person was not
obliged thereunto. It is therefore a fond thing to compare the Obedience of
Christ, with that of any other Man, whose whole person is under the Law. For
although that may not be for himself and others, (which yet we shall show that
in some cases it may;) yet this may, yea must be for others, and not for
himself. This then we must strictly hold unto. If the Obedience that Christ
yielded unto the Law were for himself, whereas it was the Act of his Person,
his whole Person, and the Divine Nature therein, were made under the Law, which
cannot be. For although it is acknowledged, that in the Ordination of God, his
Exinanition was to precede his Glorious Majestical Exaltation, as the Scripture
witnesses. Phil. 2.9. Luke 24.26. Romans 14.9. yet absolutely his Glory was an
immediate consequent of the Hypostatical Union. Heb. 1.6. Matthew. 2.11.

Socinus, I confess, evades the force of this Argument, by denying the Divine
Person of Christ. But in this Disputation I take that for granted, as having
proved it elsewhere, beyond what any of his followers are able to contradict.
And if we may not build on Truths by him denied, we shall scarce have any one
principle of Evangelical Truth left us to prove any thing from. However, I
intend them only at present, who concur with him in the matter under debate,
but renounce his opinion concerning the Person of Christ.

2. As our Lord Jesus Christ owed not in his own Person this Obedience for
himself, by virtue of any Authority or Power that the Law had over him, so he
designed and intended it not for himself, but for us. This added unto the
former consideration, gives full evidence unto the Truth pleaded for: For if he
was not obliged unto it for himself, his Person that yielded it, not being
under the Law; and if he intended it not for himself, then it must be for us,
or be useless: It was in our Humane Nature, that he performed all this
Obedience. Now the susception of our Nature, was a voluntary Act of his own,
with reference unto some end and purpose; and that which was the end of the
Assumption of our Nature, was in like manner the End of all that he did
therein. Now it was for us, and not for himself, that he assumed our nature;
nor was any thing added unto him thereby: Wherefore in the issue of his Work,
he proposes this only unto himself, That he may be glorified with that Glory
which he had with the Father, before the World was, by the removal of that veil
which was put upon it in his Exinanition. But that it was for us, That he
assumed our nature, is the foundation of Christian Religion; as it is asserted
by the Apostle, Heb. 2.14. Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.

Some of the Ancient Schoolmen disputed, That the Son of God should have been
incarnate, although Man had not sinned and fallen. The same opinion was
fiercely pursued by Osiander as I have elsewhere declared; but none of them once
imagined, that he should have been so made Man, as to be made under the Law,
and be obliged thereby unto that Obedience which now he has performed: But
they judged that immediately he was to have been a Glorious Head unto the whole
Creation. For it is a common notion and presumption of all Christians, but only
such as will sacrifice such notions unto their own private conceptions, That
the Obedience which Christ yielded unto the Law on the Earth, in the state and
condition wherein he yielded it, was not for himself, but for the Church, which
was obliged unto perfect Obedience, but was not able to accomplish it. That
this was his sole End and Design in it, is a Fundamental Article, if I mistake
not, of the Creed of most Christians in the World; and to deny it, does
consequentially overthrow all the Grace and Love both of the Father, and Son in
his Mediation.

It is said, That this Obedience was necessary as a Qualification of his
Person, that he might be meet to be a Mediator for us; and therefore was for
himself. It belongs unto the necessary constitution of his Person, with respect
unto his Mediatory Work: But this I positively deny. The Lord Christ was every
way meet for the whole Work of Mediation, by the ineffable union of the Humane
Nature with the Divine, which exalted it in Dignity, Honor, and Worth, above
any thing, or all things that insued thereon. For hereby he became in his whole
Person the object of all Divine Worship and Honor; for when he brings the first
begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him.
Again, That which is an effect of the Person of the Mediator as constituted
such, is not a qualification necessary unto its constitution; that is, what he
did as Mediator, did not concur to the making of him meet so to be. But of this
Nature was all the Obedience which he yielded unto the Law, for as such, It
became him to fulfill all Righteousness.

Whereas therefore he was neither made Man, nor of the Posterity of Abraham for
himself, but for the Church, namely, to become thereby the Surety of the
Covenant, and Representative of the whole, his obedience as a Man unto the Law
in general, and as a Son of Abraham unto the Law of Moses, was for us, and not
for himself; so designed, so performed, and without a respect unto the Church,
was of no use unto himself. He was born to us, and given to us, lived for us,
and died for us, obeyed for us, and suffered for us; that by the obedience of
one, many might be made Righteous. This was the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ;
and this is the Faith of the Catholic Church. And what he did for us, is
imputed unto us. This is included in the very notion of his doing it for us,
which cannot be spoken in any sense, unless that which he so did, be imputed
unto us. And I think Men ought to be wary, that they do not by distinctions and
studied evasions, for the defense of their own private opinions, shake the
Foundations of Christian Religion. And I am sure it will be easier for them, as
it is in the Proverb, To wrest the Club out of the hand of Hercules, then to
dispossess the minds of true Believers of this persuasion: That what the Lord
Christ did in Obedience unto God according unto the Law, he designed in his
Love and Grace to do it for them. He needed no Obedience for himself, he came
not into a capacity of yielding Obedience for himself, but for us; and
therefore for us it was, that he fulfilled the Law in Obedience unto God
according unto the terms of it. The Obligation that was on him unto Obedience,
was originally no less for us, no less needful unto us, no more for himself, no
more necessary unto him, then the obligation that was on him as the Surety of
the Covenant, to suffer the penalty of the Law, was either the one, or the
other.

3. Setting aside the consideration of the Grace and Love of Christ, and the
compact between the Father and the Son, as unto his undertaking for us, which
undeniably proves all that he did in the pursuit of them to be done for us, and
not for himself: I say setting aside the consideration of these things, and the
Humane Nature of Christ, by virtue of its union with the Person of the Son of
God, had a right unto, and might have immediately been admitted into the
highest Glory whereof it was capable, without any antecedent Obedience unto the
Law. And this is apparent from hence, In that from the first instant of that
Union, the whole Person of Christ with our Nature existing therein, was the
object of all Divine worship from Angels and Men, wherein consists the highest
Exaltation of that Nature.

It is true, there was a peculiar Glory that he was actually to be made
Partaker of, with respect unto his antecedent Obedience and Suffering. Phil.
2.8, 9. The Actual Possession of this Glory was in the Ordination of God, to be
consequential unto his obeying and suffering, not for himself, but for us. But
as unto the right and capacity of the Humane Nature in it self, all the Glory
whereof it was capable, was due unto it from the instant of its union. For it
was therein exalted above the condition that any Creature is capable of by mere
Creation. And it is but a Socinian fiction, that the first Foundation of the
Divine Glory of Christ was laid in his Obedience, which was only the way of his
Actual Possession of that part of his Glory, which consists in his Mediatory
Power and Authority over all. The Real Foundation of the whole, was laid in the
Union of his Person; whence he prays that the Father would glorify him, (as
unto manifestation) with that Glory which he had with him before the World was.

I will grant, that the Lord Christ was Viator whilst he was in this World,
and not absolutely Possessor; yet I say withal he was so, not that any such
condition was necessary unto him for himself; but he took it upon him by
especial Dispensation for us. And therefore the Obedience he performed in that
condition, was for us, and not for himself.

4. It is granted therefore, that the Humane Nature of Christ was made (...),
as the Apostle affirms, That which, was made of a Woman, was made under the
Law. Hereby Obedience became necessary unto him, as he was, and whilst he was
Viator. But this being by especial Dispensation, intimated in the expression of
it, He was made under the Law, namely, as he was made of a Woman, by especial
Dispensation and Condescension expressed, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. The Obedience he
yielded thereon, was for us, and not for himself. And this is evident from
hence, For he was so made under the Law, as that not only he owed Obedience
unto the Precepts of it, but he was made obnoxious unto its Curse. But I
suppose it will not be said, that he was so for himself, and therefore not for
us. We owed Obedience unto the Law, and were obnoxious unto the Curse of it, or
(...). Obedience was required of us, and was as necessary unto us, if we would
enter into life, as the answering of the Curse for us was, if we would escape
Death eternal. Christ as our Surety, is made under the Law for us, whereby he
becomes liable and obliged unto the Obedience which the Law required, and unto
the penalty that it threatened. Who shall now dare to say, that he underwent the
Penalty of the Law for us indeed, but he yielded Obedience unto it for himself
only? The whole Harmony of the Work of his Mediation, would be disordered by
such a supposition.

Judah, the Son of Jacob, undertook to be a Bondsman instead of Benjamine his
Brother, that he might go free, Genesis 44.33. There is no doubt but Joseph might
have accepted of the stipulation. Had he done so, the service and bondage he
undertook, had been necessary unto Judah, and righteous for him to bear;
howbeit he had undergone it, and performed his duty in it, not for himself, but
for his Brother Benjamine; and unto Benjamine, it would have been imputed in
his liberty. So when the Apostle Paul wrote those words unto Philemon
concerning Onesimus, (...), Verse. 18. If he has wronged thee, dealt
unrighteously or injuriously with thee, or owes thee ought, wherein thou have
suffered loss by him, put it on my account, or impute it all unto me; I will
repay it, or answer for it all. He supposes that Philemon might have a double
action against Onesimus; the one injuriarum, and the other damni or debiti, of
wrong and injury, and of loss or debt; which are distinct actions in the Law:
If he has wronged thee, or owes the ought. Hereon he proposes himself, and
obliges himself by his express Obligation (...). I Paul have written it with
my own hand, that he would answer for both, and pay back a valuable
consideration if required. Hereby was he obliged in his own person to make
satisfaction unto Philemon; but yet he was to do it for Onesimus, and not for
himself. Whatever Obedience therefore was due from the Lord Christ, as to his
Humane Nature whilst in the form of a servant, either as a Man, or as an
Israelite, seeing he was so not necessarily by the necessity of nature for
himself, but by voluntary condescension and stipulation for us, for us it was,
and not for himself.

5. The Lord Christ in his Obedience was not a private, but a public person.
He obeyed as he was the Surety of the Covenant, as the Mediator between God and
Man. This I suppose will not be denied. He can by no imagination be considered
out of that capacity. But what a public person does as a public person, that
is, as a Representative of others, and an undertaker for them, whatever may be
his own concernment therein, he does it not for himself, but for others. And if
others were not concerned therein, if it were not for them, what he does would
be of no use or signification. Yea, it implies a contradiction that any one
should do any thing as a public person, and do it for himself only. He who is
a public person, may do that wherein he alone is concerned, but he cannot do
so as he is a public person. Wherefore as Socinus, and those that follow him
would have Christ to have offered for himself, which is to make him a Mediator
for himself, his offering being a Mediatory act, which is both foolish and
impious; so to affirm his Mediatory Obedience, his Obedience as a public
person, to have been for himself, and not for others, has but little less of
impiety in it.

6. It is granted, That the Lord Christ having an Humane Nature, which was a
Creature, it was impossible but that it should be subject unto the Law of
Creation. For there is a Relation that does necessarily arise from, and depend
upon the Beings of a Creator and a Creature. Every rational Creature is
eternally obliged from the Nature of God, and its Relation thereunto, to love
him, obey him, depend upon him, submit unto him, and to make him its End,
Blessedness, and Reward. But the Law of Creation thus considered, does not
respect the World, and this life only, but the future state of Heaven, and
Eternity also. And this Law, the Humane Nature of Christ is subject unto, in
Heaven and Glory, and cannot but be so, whilst it is a Creature, and not God,
that is, whilst it has its own Being. Nor do any Men fancy such a transfusion
of divine properties into the Humane Nature of Christ, as that it should be
self-subsisting, and in it self absolutely immense; for this would openly
destroy it. Yet none will say, that he is now (...) under the Law, in the sense
intended by the Apostle. But the Law in the sense described, the Humane Nature
of Christ was subject unto on its own account, whilst he was in this World.
And this is sufficient to answer the Objection of Socinus, mentioned at the
entrance of this Discourse; namely, That if the Lord Christ were not obliged
unto Obedience for himself, then might he, if he would, neglect the whole Law,
or infringe it. For besides that it is a foolish imagination concerning that
holy thing which was hypostatically united unto the Son of God, and thereby
rendered incapable of any deviation from the Divine Will; the eternal
indispensible Law of Love, Adherence, and Dependence on God, under which the
Humane Nature of Christ was, and is as a Creature, gives sufficient security
against such Suppositions.

But there is another consideration of the Law of God, namely, as it is
imposed, on Creatures by especial dispensation, for some time, and for some
certain end; with some Considerations, Rules, and Orders, that belong not
essentially unto the Law, as before described. This is the nature of the
Written Law of God, which the Lord Christ was made under, not necessarily as a
Creature, but by especial dispensation. For the Law, under this consideration,
is presented unto us as such, not absolutely and eternally, but whilst we are
in this World, and that with this especial end, that by Obedience thereunto, we
may obtain the reward of Eternal Life. And it is evident, that the Obligation
of the Law, under this consideration, cease when we come to the enjoyment of
that Reward. It obliges us no more formally by its command, Do this and live,
when the life promised, is enjoyed. In this sense the Lord Christ was not made
subject unto the Law for himself, nor did yield obedience unto it for himself.
For he was not obliged unto it by virtue of his created condition. Upon the
first instant of the Union of his natures, being holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners, he might, notwithstanding the Law that he was made
subject unto, have been stated in Glory. For he that was the object of all
Divine Worship, needed not any new Obedience, to procure for him a state of
Blessedness. And had he naturally, merely by virtue of his being a Creature
been subject unto the Law in this sense, he must have been so eternally, which
he is not. For those things which depend solely on the Natures of God and the
Creature, are eternal and immutable. Wherefore, as the Law in this sense was
given unto us, not absolutely, but with respect unto a future state and reward;
so the Lord Christ did voluntarily subject himself unto it for us, and his
Obedience thereunto was for us, and not for himself. These things added unto
what I have formerly written on this subject, whereunto nothing has been
opposed, but a few impertinent cavils, are sufficient to discharge the first
part of that charge laid down before, concerning the impossibility of the
Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto us; which indeed is equal unto the
Impossibility of the Imputation of the Disobedience of Adam unto us; whereby
the Apostle tells us, That we were all made sinners.

The second part of the Objection or Charge against the Imputation of the
Obedience of Christ unto us, is, That it is useless unto the persons that are
to be justified. For whereas they have in their Justification the pardon of all
their sins, they are thereby righteous, and have a right or title unto Life and
Blessedness: For he who is so pardoned, as not to be esteemed guilty of any sin
of omission or commission, wants nothing that is requisite thereunto. For he is
supposed to have done all that he ought, and to have omitted nothing required
of him in a way of duty. Hereby he becomes not unrighteous, and to be not
unrighteous, is the same as to be righteous. As he that is not dead, is alive.
Neither is there, nor can there be any middle state between Death and life.
Wherefore those who have all their sins forgiven, have the Blessedness of
Justification; and there is neither need, nor use of any farther Imputation of
Righteousness unto them. And sundry other things of the same nature, are urged
unto the same purpose, which will be all of them either obviated in the ensuing
discourse, or answered elsewhere.

Answ. This cause is of more importance, and more evidently stated in the
Scriptures, than to be turned into such niceties, which have more of
Philosophical subtilty, than Theological solidity, in them. This exception
therefore might be dismissed without farther answer, than what is given us in
the known rule, That a truth well established and confirmed, is not to be
questioned, much less relinquished on every intangling sophism, though it
should appear insoluble. But as we shall see, there is no such difficulty in
these arguings, but what may easily be discussed. And because the matter of the
Plea contained in them, is made use of by sundry learned Persons who yet agree
with us in the substance of the Doctrine of Justification, namely, that it is
by Faith alone, without Works, through the Imputation of the Merit and
Satisfaction of Christ. I shall as briefly as I can discover the mistakes that
it proceeds upon.

1. It includes a supposition, That he who is pardoned his sins of omission and
commission, is esteemed to have done all that is required of him, and to have
committed nothing that is forbidden. For without this supposition, the bare
pardon of sin, will neither make, constitute, nor denominate any Man righteous.
But this is far otherwise, nor is any such thing included in the nature of
Pardon. For in the Pardon of sin, neither God nor Man do judge, That he who
has sinned, has not sinned; which must be done, if he who is pardoned be
esteemed to have done all that he ought, and to have done nothing that he ought
not to do. If a Man be brought on his trial for any evil fact, and being
legally convicted thereof, is discharged by Sovereign Pardon; it is true, that
in the eye of the Law, he is looked upon as an innocent man, as unto the
punishment that was due unto him; but no Man thinks that he is made righteous
thereby, or is esteemed not to have done that which really he has done, and
whereof he was convicted. Joab and Abiathar the Priest were at the same time
guilty of the same crime. Solomon gives order that Joab be put to death for his
crime; but unto Abiathar he gives a Pardon. Did he thereby make, declare or
constitute him righteous? Himself expresses the contrary, affirming him to be
unrighteous and guilty, only he remitted the punishment of his fault. 1 King.
2.26. Wherefore the Pardon of sin discharges the guilty person from being
liable or obnoxious unto Anger, Wrath, or Punishment, due unto his sin; but it
does not suppose, nor infer in the least, that he is thereby or ought thereon
to be esteemed or adjudged to have done no evil, and to have fulfilled all
righteousness. Some say, Pardon gives a righteousness of Innocence, but not of
Obedience. But it cannot give a Righteousness of Innocence, absolutely, such as
Adam had. For he had actually done no evil. It only removes guilt, which is
the respect of sin unto punishment, ensuing on the Sanction of the Law. And
this Supposition which is an evident mistake, animates this whole Objection.

The like may be said of what is in like manner supposed, namely, That not to
be unrighteous, which a man is on the pardon of sin, is the same with being
righteous. For if not to be unrighteous be taken privatively, it is the same
with being just or righteous: For it supposes, that he who is so, has done
all the duty that is required of him, that he may be righteous. But not to be
unrighteous negatively, as the expression is here used, it does not do so. For
at best it supposes no more, but that a Man as yet has done nothing actually
against the Rule of Righteousness. Now this may be when yet he has performed
none of the duties that are required of him to constitute him righteous,
because the times and occasions of them, are not yet. And so it was with Adam
in the state of Innocence; which is the height of what can be attained by the
complete pardon of sin.

2. It proceeds on this Supposition, That the Law, in case of sin, does not
oblige unto punishment and obedience both; so as that it is not satisfied,
fulfilled, or complied withal, unless it be answered with respect unto both,
For if it does so, then the pardon of sin, which only frees us from the penalty
of the Law, does yet leave it necessary, that Obedience be performed unto it,
even all that it does require. But this, in my judgment, is an evident mistake,
and that such as does not establish the Law, but make it void. And this I shall
demonstrate.

1. The Law has two parts or powers. (1.) Its preceptive part, commanding and
requiring obedience, with a promise of life annexed: Do this and live. (2.) The
sanction on supposition of disobedience, binding the sinner unto punishment, or
a meet recompense of reward. In the day thou sinnest, thou shall die. And every
Law properly so called, proceeds on these suppositions of obedience or
disobedience, whence its commanding and punishing Power are inseparate from its
Nature.

2. This Law, whereof we speak, was first given unto Man in innocence; and
therefore the first power of it, was only in act: It obliged only unto
Obedience. For an innocent person could not be obnoxious unto its sanction,
which contained only an obligation unto punishment, on supposition of
disobedience. It could not therefore oblige our first Parents unto Obedience
and Punishment both, seeing its Obligation unto Punishment could not be in
actual force, but on supposition of actual disobedience. A Moral Cause of, and
Motive unto Obedience it was, and had an influence into the preservation of Man
from sin. Unto that end it was said unto him, In the day thou eatest, thou
shall surely die. The neglect hereof, and of that ruling influence which it
ought to have had on the minds of our first Parents, opened the door unto the
entrance of sin. But it implies a contradiction, that an innocent person should
be under an actual obligation unto punishment from the sanction of the Law. It
bound only unto Obedience, as all Laws, with Penalties, do before their
transgression. But

3. On the committing of sin, (and it is so with every one that is guilty of
sin) Man came under an actual obligation unto punishment. This is no more
questionable than whether at first he was under an Obligation unto Obedience.
But then the Question is, whether the first Intention and Obligation of the Law
unto Obedience, does cease to affect the sinner, or continue so, as at the same
time to oblige him unto Obedience and Punishment, both its Powers being in act
toward him. And hereunto I say

1. Had the Punishment threatened, been immediately inflicted unto the utmost
of what was contained in it, this could have been no Question. For Man had died
immediately both temporally and eternally, and been cast out of that state
wherein alone he could stand in any relation unto the preceptive power of the
Law. He that is finally executed, has fulfilled the Law so, as that he ows no
more obedience unto it.

But 2. God in his Wisdom and Patience, has otherwise disposed of things. Man
is continued a Viator still in the way unto his end, and not fully stated in
his eternal and unchangeable condition, wherein neither Promise nor Threatening;
Reward nor Punishment could be proposed unto him. In this condition he falls
under a twofold consideration. (1.) Of a guilty person, and so is obliged unto
the full punishment, that the Law threatens. This is not denied. (2.) Of a Man,
a Rational Creature of God, not yet brought unto his Eternal End.

3. In this state, the Law is the only instrument and means of the continuance
of the Relation between God and him. Wherefore under this consideration it
cannot but still oblige him unto Obedience, unless we shall say, that by his
sin he has exempted himself from the Government of God. Wherefore it is by the
Law, that the Rule and Government of God over Men, is continued whilst they
are in statu Viatorum: For every Disobedience, every Transgression of its Rule
and Order as to its commanding Power casts us afresh, and further, under its
Power of obliging unto Punishment.

Neither can these things be otherwise; neither can any Man living, not the
worst of Men, choose but judge himself whilst he is in this World, obliged to
give Obedience unto the Law of God, according to the notices that he has of it
by the light of nature or otherwise. A wicked servant that is punished for his
fault, if it be with such a punishment as yet continues his Being, and his
state of servitude is not by his Punishment freed from an Obligation unto Duty,
according unto the Rule of it. Yea, his Obligation unto Duty, with respect unto
that crime for which he was punished, is not dissolved, until his punishment be
capital, and so put an end unto his state. Wherefore seeing that by the pardon
of sin, we are freed only from the Obligation unto Punishment, there is
moreover required unto our Justification, an Obedience unto what the Law
requires.

And this greatly strengthens the Argument, in whose Vindication we are
engaged; for we being sinners, we were obnoxious both unto the Command and
Curse of the Law. Both must be answered, or we cannot be justified. And as the
Lord Christ could not by his most perfect Obedience, satisfy the Curse of the
Law, dying thou shall die; so by the utmost of his suffering, he could not
fulfill the command of the Law, Do this and live. Passion as Passion is not
Obedience, though there may be Obedience in suffering, as there was in that of
Christ unto the height. Wherefore as we plead that the Death of Christ is
imputed unto us for our Justification, so we deny that it is imputed unto us
for our Righteousness. For by the Imputation of the Sufferings of Christ, our
sins are remitted or pardoned, and we are delivered from the Curse of the Law,
which he underwent. But we are not thence esteemed just or righteous, which we
cannot be without respect unto the fulfilling of the Commands of the Law, or
the Obedience by it required. The whole matter is excellently expressed by
Grotius in the words before alleged, Cum duo nobis peperisse Christum
dixerimus impunitatem and praemium, illud satisfactioni hoc merito Christi
distinct tribuit vetus Ecclesia. Satisfactio consistit in meritorum
translatione, meritum in perfectissimae obedientiae pro nobis praestitae
imputatione.

3. The Objection mentioned proceeds also on this Supposition, That pardon of
sin gives title unto Eternal Blessedness in the enjoyment of God: For
Justification does so, and according to the Authors of this opinion, no other
Righteousness is required thereunto but pardon of sin. That Justification does
give Right and Title unto Adoption, Acceptance with God, and the Heavenly
Inheritance, I suppose will not be denied, and it has been proved already.
Pardon of sin depends solely on the death or suffering of Christ: In whom we
have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his Grace. Ephesians. 1.7. But suffering for Punishment gives Right and
Title unto nothing, only satisfies for something; nor does it deserve any
Reward: It is no where said, Suffer this and live, but Do this and live.

These things, I confess, are inseparably connected in the Ordinance,
Appointment, and Covenant of God. Whosoever has his sins pardoned, is accepted
with God, has Right unto Eternal Blessedness. These things are inseparable,
but they are not one and the same. And by reason of their inseparable Relation,
are they so put together by the Apostle. Romans 4.6, 7, 8. Even as David also
describes the Blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered: Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin. It is
the Imputation of Righteousness, that gives Right unto Blessedness; but pardon
of sin is inseparable from it, and an effect of it, both being opposed unto
Justification by Works, or an Internal Righteousness of our own. But it is one
thing to be freed from being liable unto Eternal Death; and another to have
Right and Title unto a Blessed and Eternal Life. It is one thing to be redeemed
from under the Law, that is the Curse of it; another to receive the Adoption of
Sons. One thing to be freed from the Curse, another to have the Blessing of
Abraham come upon us; as the Apostle distinguishes these things. Gal. 3.13,
14. and 4.4, 5, And so does our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 26.18. That they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance (a Lot and Right to the
Inheritance) amongst them that are sanctified by Faith that is in me. (...)
which we have by Faith in Christ is only a dismission of sin from being
pleadable unto our condemnation; on which account there is no condemnation unto
them that are in Christ Jesus. But a Right and Title unto Glory, or the
Heavenly Inheritance, it gives not. Can it be supposed, that all the great and
glorious effects of present Grace and future Blessedness, should follow
necessarily on, and be the effect of mere pardon of sin? Can we not be
pardoned, but we must thereby of necessity be made Sons, Heirs of God, and
Coheirs with Christ?

Pardon of sin is in God, with respect unto the sinner, a free gratuitous Act;
Forgiveness of sin through the riches of his Grace. But with respect unto the
satisfaction of Christ, it is an Act in Judgment. For on the consideration
thereof as imputed unto him, does God absolve and acquit the sinner upon his
trial. But pardon on a juridical trial, on what consideration soever it be
granted, gives no right nor title unto any favor, benefit, or privilege, but
only mere deliverance. It is one thing to be acquitted before the Throne of a
King of Crimes, laid unto the charge of any Man, which may be done by clemency,
or on other considerations; another to be made his Son by Adoption, and Heir
unto his Kingdom.

And these things are represented unto us in the Scripture, as distinct and
depending on distinct causes. So are they in the Vision concerning Joshua the
High Priest. Zech. 3.4 5 And he answered and spoke unto those that stood before
him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him: And unto him he said,
Behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee; and I will cloth thee
with change of raiment. And I said, Let them set a fair Miter upon his Head; so
they set a fair Miter on his Head, and clothed him with garments. It has been
generally granted, That we have here a Representation of the Justification of a
sinner before God. And the taking away of filthy garments, is expounded by the
passing away of iniquity. When a Man's filthy garments are taken away, he is no
more defiled with them; but he is not thereby clothed. This is an additional
grace and favor thereunto, namely to be clothed with change of garments. And
what this raiment is, is declared Isa. 61.10. He has clothed me with the
garments of Salvation, he has covered me with the robe of Righteousness, which
the Apostle alludes unto Phil. 3.9. Wherefore these things are distinct;
namely, the taking away of the filthy garments, and the clothing of us with
change of raiment; or the pardon of sin, and the robe of Righteousness; by the
one are we freed from Condemnation, by the other have we right unto Salvation.
And the same is in like manner represented Ezekiel. 16.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

This place I had formerly urged to this purpose about Communion with God, p.
187. which Mr. Hotch. in his usual manner attempts to answer. And to omit his
reviling expressions, with the crude unproved assertion of his own conceits,
his answer is, That by the change of raiment mentioned in the Prophet, our own
personal righteousness is intended. For he acknowledges that our Justification
before God is here represented. And so also he expounds the place produced in
the confirmation of the Exposition given, Isai. 61.10. where this change of
raiment is called The garments of Salvation, and the robe of Righteousness; and
thereon affirms, That our Righteousness it self, before God, is our Personal
Righteousness, p. 203. That is, in our Justification before him, which is the
only thing in question. To all which Presumptions, I shall oppose only the
testimony of the same Prophet, which he may consider at his leisure, and which,
at one time or other he will subscribe unto. Chap. 64.6. We are all as an
unclean thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags. He who can make
garments of Salvation, and robes of Righteousness of these filthy rags, has a
skill in composing Spiritual Vestments that I am not acquainted withal. What
remains in the Chapter wherein this Answer is given unto that testimony of the
Scripture, I shall take no notice of, it being after his accustomed manner,
only a perverse wresting of my words unto such a sense, as may seem to
countenance him in casting a reproach upon my self and others.

There is therefore no force in the comparing of these things unto life and
death natural, which are immediately opposed; So that he who is not dead is
alive, and he who is alive, is not dead, there being no distinct state between
that of life and death. For these things being of different natures, the
comparison between them is no way argumentative. Though it may be so in things
natural, it is otherwise in things Moral and Political, where a proper
Representation of Justification may be taken, as it is forensick. If it were
so, that there is no difference between being acquitted of a crime at the Bar
of a Judge, and a Right unto a Kingdom, nor different state between these
things, it would prove, that there is no intermediate estate between being
pardoned, and having a Right unto the Heavenly Inheritance. But this is a fond
imagination.

It is true, That Right unto Eternal Life, does succeed unto freedom from the
guilt of Eternal Death. That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified. But it does not so do, out of a
necessity in the nature of the things themselves, but only in the free
constitution of God. Believers have the pardon of sin, and an immediate Right
and Title unto the favor of God, the Adoption of Sons, and Eternal Life. But
there is another state in the nature of the things themselves, and this might
have been so actually, had it so seemed good unto God: For who sees not, that
there is a Status or Conditio Personae, wherein he is neither under the guilt
of Condemnation, nor has an immediate Right and Title unto Glory, in the way
of Inheritance. God might have pardoned Men all their sins past, and placed
them in a state and condition of seeking Righteousness for the future, by the
Works of the Law, that so they might have lived: For this would answer the
original state of Adam. But God has not done so; true; but whereas he might
have done so, it is evident that the disposal of Men into this state and
condition of Right unto Life and Salvation, does not depend on, nor proceed
from the pardon of sin, but has another cause, which is the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto us, as he fulfilled the Law for us.

And in truth, this is the opinion of the most of our Adversaries in this
cause: For they do contend, that over and above the remission of sin, which
some of them say is absolute, without any respect unto the merit or
satisfaction of Christ, others refer it unto them; they all contend that there
is moreover, a Righteousness of Works required unto our Justification; only
they say, this is our own incomplete, imperfect Righteousness, imputed unto us,
as if it were perfect, that is, for what it is not; and not the Righteousness
of Christ imputed unto us for what it is.

From what has been discoursed, it is evident that unto our Justification
before God, is required, Not only that we be freed from the damnatory sentence
of the Law, which we are by the pardon of sin, but moreover, that the
Righteousness of the Law be fulfilled in us, or, that we have a Righteousness
answering the Obedience that the Law requires, whereon our acceptance with God,
through the riches of his Grace, and our Title unto the heavenly Inheritance do
depend. This we have not in and of our selves, nor can attain unto, as has
been proved. Wherefore the perfect Obedience and Righteousness of Christ is
imputed unto us, or in the sight of God we can never be Justified.

Nor are the cavilling Objections of the Socinians, and those that follow them,
of any force against the Truth herein. They tell us that the Righteousness of
Christ can be imputed but unto one, if unto any. For who can suppose that the
same Righteousness of One should become the Righteousness of many, even of all
that believe. Besides he performed not all the Duties that are required of us
in all our Relations, he being never placed in them. These things I say, are
both foolish and impious, destructive unto the whole Gospel. For all things
here depend on the Ordination of God. It is his Ordinance that as through the
offense of One many are dead; so his Grace, and the Gift of Grace, through one
man Christ Jesus has abounded unto many; and as by the Offense of one Judgment
came upon all men unto Condemnation, so by the Righteousness of One, the free
Gift came upon all unto the Righteousness of life, and by the Obedience of One
many are made Righteous; as the Apostle argues Romans 5. For God sent his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, that the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. Romans 8.3, 4. For he was the End of the Law (the whole
End of it) for Righteousness unto them that do believe, Chap. 10.4. This is the
Appointment of the Wisdom, Righteousness and Grace of God, that the whole
Righteousness and Obedience of Christ should be accepted as our complete
Righteousness before him, imputed unto us by his Grace, and applied unto us or
made ours through believing, and consequently unto all that believe. And if the
actual Sin of Adam be imputed unto us all, who derive our Nature from him unto
Condemnation, though he sinned not in our Circumstances and Relations, is it
strange that the actual Obedience of Christ should be imputed unto them who
derive a Spiritual Nature from him, unto the Justification of life? Besides
both the Satisfaction and Obedience of Christ, as relating unto his person,
were in some sense infinite, that is, of an infinite Value, and so cannot be
considered in Parts, as though one Part of it were imputed unto one, and
another unto another, but the whole is imputed unto every one that does
believe; And if the Israelites could say, that David was worth ten thousand of
them, 2 Samuel 21.3. we may well allow the Lord Christ, and so what he did and
suffered, to be more than us all, and all that we can do and suffer.

There are also sundry other mistakes that concur unto that part of the Charge
against the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, which we have
now considered. I say of his Righteousness; for the Apostle in this case uses
those two words (...), and (...) Righteousness and Obedience, as (...), of the
same signification, Romans 5.18, 19. such are those, that Remission of Sin and
Justification are the same, or that Justification consists only in the
Remission of Sin; that Faith it self as our Act and Duty, being it is the
Condition of the Covenant, is imputed unto us for Righteousness or that we have
a personal inherent Righteousness of our own, that one way or other is our
Righteousness before God unto Justification; either a Condition it is, or a
Disposition unto it; or has a congruity in deserving the Grace of
Justification, or a downright merit of Condignity thereof. For all these are
but various expressions of the same thing, according unto the Variety of the
Conceptions of the Minds of men about it. But they have been all considered and
removed in our precedent Discourses.

To close this Argument, and our Vindication of it, and therewithal to obviate
an Objection, I do acknowledge that our Blessedness and life eternal is in the
Scripture oftimes ascribed unto the death of Christ: But it is so (1.) (...) as
the principal Cause of the whole, and as that without which no imputation of
Obedience could have justified us; for the Penalty of the Law was indispensibly
to be undergone. (2.) It is so (...); not exclusively unto all Obedience
whereof mention is made in other Places, but as that whereunto it is
inseparably conjoined, Christus in vita passivam habuit actionem; in morte
passionem activam sustinuit; dum salutem operaretur in medio terrae. Bernard.
And so it is also ascribed unto his Resurrection (...) with respect unto
Evidence and Manifestation. But the Death of Christ exclusively as unto his
Obedience is no where asserted as the Cause of eternal life, comprizing that
exceeding Weight of Glory wherewith it is accompanied.

Hitherto we have treated of and Vindicated the Imputation of the Active
Obedience of Christ unto us, as the Truth of it was deduced from the preceding
Argument about the Obligation of the Law of Creation. I shall now briefly
confirm it with other Reasons and Testimonies.

1. That which Christ the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, did do in
Obedience unto God, in the discharge and Performance of his Office, that he did
for us, and that is imputed unto us. This has been proved already, and it has
too great an Evidence of Truth to be denied. He was born to us, given to us.
Isa. 9.6. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned
sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
Romans 8.3, 4. Whatever is spoken of the Grace, Love and Purpose of God in
sending or giving his Son, or of the Love, Grace and Condescension of the Son
in coming and undertaking of the Work of Redemption designed unto him, or of
the Office it self of a Mediator or Surety, gives Testimony unto this
Assertion. Yea, it is the Fundamental Principle of the Gospel, and of the Faith
of all that truly believe. As for those by whom the Divine Person and
Satisfaction of Christ are denied, whereby they evert the whole Work of his
Mediation, we do not at present consider them. Wherefore what he so did, is to
be enquired into. And

1. The Lord Christ our Mediator and Surety was in his Humane Nature made (...)
under the Law, Gal. 4.1. That he was not so for himself by the necessity of his
Condition, we have proved before. It was therefore for us. But as made under
the Law, he yielded Obedience unto it; this therefore was for us, and is
imputed unto us. The exception of the Socinians that it is the Judicial Law
only that is intended, is too frivolous to be insisted on. For he was made
under that Law whose Curse we are delivered from. And if we are delivered only
from the Curse of the Law of Moses, wherein they contend that there was neither
Promises nor Threatening of eternal things, of any thing beyond this present
life, we are still in our Sins, under the Curse of the Moral Law,
notwithstanding all that he has done for us. It is excepted with no color of
sobriety, that he was made under the Law only as to the Curse of it. But it is
plain in the Text, that Christ was made under the Law as we are under it. He
was made under the Law to redeem them that were under the Law. And if he was
not made so as we are, there is no consequence from his being made under it,
unto our Redemption from it. But we were so under the Law, as not only to be
obnoxious unto the Curse, but so as to be obliged unto all the Obedience that
it required, as has been proved. And if the Lord Christ has redeemed us only
from the Curse of it by undergoing it, leaving us in our selves to answer its
Obligation unto Obedience, we are not freed nor delivered. And the Expression
of under the Law does in the first place and properly signify being under the
obligation of it unto Obedience, and consequentially only with a respect unto
the Curse. Gal. 4.21. Tell me ye that desire to be (...) under the Law; They
did not desire to be under the Curse of the Law, but only its Obligation unto
Obedience; which in all usage of Speech, is the first proper sense of that
Expression. Wherefore the Lord Christ being made under the Law for us, he
yielded perfect Obedience unto it for us, which is therefore imputed unto us.
For that what he did, was done for us, depends solely on Imputation.

2. As he was thus made under the Law, so he did actually fulfill it by his
Obedience unto it. So he testifies concerning himself; Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to
fulfill, Mat. 5.17. These Words of our Lord Jesus Christ as recorded by the
Evangelist, the Jews continually object against the Christians, as
contradictory to what they pretend to be done by him, namely that he has
destroyed and taken away the Law. And Maimonides in his Treatise De fundamentis
Legis, has many blasphemous Reflections on the Lord Christ as a false Prophet
in this matter. But the Reconciliation is plain and easy. There was a twofold
Law given unto the Church. The Moral and the Ceremonial Law. The first as we
have proved is of an eternal Obligation. The other was given only for a Time.
That the latter of these was to be taken away and abolished the Apostle proves
with invincible Testimonies out of the Old Testament against the obstinate
Jews, in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. Yet was it not to be taken away without
its Accomplishment when it ceased of it self. Wherefore our Lord Christ did no
otherwise dissolve or destroy that Law, but by the Accomplishment of it; and so
he did put an end unto it, as is fully declared, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. But the
Law (...), that which obliges all men unto Obedience unto God always, he came
not (...) to destroy; that is (...), to abolish it, as an (...) is ascribed
unto the Mosaical Law, Heb. 9. (In the same sense is the Word used, Matthew.
24.2. Chap. 26.6 Chap. 27.40. Mark 13.2. Chap. 14.58. Chap. 15. 29. Luke 21.6.
Acts 5.38, 39. Chap. 6.14. Romans 14.20. 2 Cor. 5.1. Gal. 2.18. mostly with an
Accusative Case, of the things spoken of.) or (...), which the Apostle denis to
be done by Christ, and Faith in him, Romans 3.31. (...). Do we then make void the
Law through Faith? God forbid; yea we establish the Law. (...) is to confirm
its Obligation unto Obedience, which is done by Faith only with respect unto
the Moral Law, the other being evacuated as unto any Power of obliging unto
Obedience. This therefore is the Law which our Lord Christ affirms that he
came, not to destroy; so he expressly declares in his ensuing discourse, showing
both its Power of obliging us always unto Obedience, and giving an Exposition
of it. This Law the Lord Christ came (...), in the Scripture is the same with
(...) in other Writers; that is, to yield full perfect Obedience unto the
Commands of the Law, whereby they are absolutely fulfilled; (...), is not to
make the Law perfect; for it was always (...), a perfect Law, Jam. 1.25. but to
yield perfect Obedience unto it; the same that our Savior calls (...), Mat.
3.15. to fulfill all Righteousness; that is, by Obedience unto all Gods Commands
and Institutions, as is evident in the Place. So the Apostle uses the same
Expression, Romans 13.8. he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.

It is a vain exception that Christ fulfilled the Law by his Doctrine, in the
Exposition of it. The Opposition between the Words (...) and (...) to fulfill
and to destroy, will admit of no such sense. And our Savior himself expounds
this fulfilling of the Law, by doing the Commands of it, v. 19. Wherefore the
Lord Christ as our Mediator and Surety fulfilling the Law by yielding perfect
Obedience thereunto, he did it for us, and to us it is imputed.

This is plainly affirmed by the Apostle, Romans 5.18, 19. Therefore as by the
Offense of one Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation, even so by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all men unto Justification of
life. For as by the disobedience of One many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of One shall many be made Righteous. The full plea from and
Vindication of this Testimony, I refer unto its proper place in the Testimonies
given unto the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto our Justification
in general. Here I shall only observe that the Apostle expressly and in terms
affirms that by the Obedience of Christ, we are made Righteous or Justified,
which we cannot be but by the Imputation of it unto us. I have met with nothing
that had the appearance of any sobriety for the eluding of this express
Testimony, but only, that by the Obedience of Christ, his death and sufferings
are intended, wherein he was obedient unto God; as the Apostle says, he was
Obedient unto death; the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. But yet there is herein
no color of probability. For, 1. It is acknowledged that there was such a near
conjunction and alliance between the Obedience of Christ, and his Sufferings,
that though they may be distinguished, yet can they not be separated. He
suffered in the whole course of his obedience, from the Womb to the Cross; and
he obeyed in all his sufferings unto the last moment wherein he expired. But
yet are they really things distinct, as we have proved; and they were so in
him, who learned obedience by the things that he suffered. Heb. 5.8. (2.) In
this place (...), Ver. 19. And (...), Ver. 18. are the same: Obedience and
Righteousness. By the Righteousness of One, and by the Obedience of One, are
the same. But suffering, as suffering is not (...), is not Righteousness. For
if it were, then every one that suffers what is due to him, should be
righteous, and so be justified, even the Devil himself. (3) The Righteousness
and Obedience here intended, are opposed (...), to the offense. By the offense
of One; But the offense intended was an actual Transgression of the Law; so is
(...), a fall from or a fall in the Course of Obedience. Wherefore the (...) or
Righteousness must be an actual Obedience unto the Commands of the Law, or the
force of the Apostles Reasoning and Antithesis cannot be understood. (4.)
Particularly it is such an Obedience as is opposed unto the disobedience of
Adam. One man's Disobedience, one man's Obedience. But the disobedience of Adam
was an actual Transgression of the Law; and therefore the Obedience of Christ
here intended, was his active Obedience unto the Law; which is that we plead
for. And I shall not at present farther pursue the Argument, because the force
of it in the confirmation of the Truth contended for, will be included in those
that follow.

CHAP. XIII. The nature of Justification proved from the difference of the
Covenants.
THat which we plead in the third place unto our Purpose, is the Difference
between the two Covenants. And herein it may be observed;

1. That by the two Covenants I understand those which were absolutely given
unto the whole Church, and were all to bring it (...) unto a complete and
perfect State; that is the Covenant of Works, or the Law of our Creation as it
was given unto us, with Promises and Threatenings, or Rewards and Punishments
annexed unto it: and the Covenant of Grace revealed and proposed in the first
Promise. As unto the Covenant of Sinai, and the New Testament as actually
confirmed in the Death of Christ, with all the Spiritual Privileges thence
emerging, and the differences between them, they belong not unto our present
Argument.

2. The whole entire Nature of the Covenant of Works consisted in this; That
upon our personal obedience, according unto the Law and Rule of it, we should
be accepted with God, and rewarded with him. Herein the essence of it did
consist. And whatever Covenant proceeds on these terms, or has the nature of
them in it, however it may be varied, with Additions or Alterations, is the
same Covenant still, and not another. As in the Renovation of the Promise
wherein the Essence of the Covenant of Grace was contained, God did oft-times
make other Additions unto it, as unto Abraham and David; yet was it still the
same Covenant for the substance of it, and not another; so whatever Variations
may be made in, or Additions unto the Dispensation of the first Covenant, so
long as this Rule is retained, Do this and live; it is still the same Covenant,
for the Substance and Essence of it.

3. Hence two things belonged unto this Covenant. (1.) That all things were
transacted immediately between God and Man. There was no Mediator in it, no one
to undertake any thing, either on the part of God or Man, between them. For the
whole depending on every ones Personal obedience, there was no place for a
Mediator. (2.) That nothing but perfect sinless obedience would be accepted
with God, or preserve the Covenant in its Primitive state and condition. There
was nothing in it as to pardon of sin, no provision for any defect in Personal
obedience.

4. Wherefore this Covenant being once established between God and Man, there
could be no new Covenant made, unless the Essential Form of it were of another
nature; namely, that our own Personal obedience be not the rule and cause of
our Acceptance and Justification before God. For whilst this is so, as was
before observed, the Covenant is still the same; however the Dispensation of it
may be reformed or reduced, to suit unto our present state and condition. What
Grace soever might be introduced into it, that could not be so, which excluded
all Works from being the cause of our Justification. But if a new Covenant be
made, such Grace must be provided as is absolutely inconsistent with any Works
of ours, as unto the first ends of the Covenant, as the Apostle declares, Romans
11.6.

5. Wherefore the Covenant of Grace, supposing it a new, real, absolute
Covenant, and not a Reformation of the Dispensation of the old, or a Reduction
of it unto the use of our present condition (as some imagine it to be) must
differ in the Essence, Substance, and Nature of it from that first Covenant of
Works. And this it cannot do, if we are to be justified before God on our
Personal obedience, wherein the essence of the first Covenant consisted. If
then the Righteousness wherewith we are justified before God, be our own, our
own Personal Righteousness; we are yet under the first Covenant, and no other.

6. But things in the new Covenant are indeed quite otherwise. For (1.) it is
of Grace, which wholly excludes Works; that is, so of Grace, as that our own
works are not the means of Justification before God; as in the places before
alleged. (2.) It has a Mediator and Surety, which is built alone on this
Supposition, That what we cannot do in our selves which was originally required
of us, and what the Law of the first Covenant cannot enable us to perform, that
should be performed for us, by our Mediator and Surety. And if this be not
included in the very first notion of a Mediator and Surety, yet it is in that
of a Mediator or Surety that does voluntarily interpose himself upon an open
acknowledgment, that those for whom he undertakes, were utterly insufficient to
perform what was required of them; on which Supposition all the Truth of the
Scripture does depend. It is one of the very first notions of Christian
Religion, that the Lord Christ was given to us, born to us, that he came as a
Mediator, to do for us what we could not do for our selves, and not merely to
suffer what we had deserved. And here instead of our own Righteousness, we have
the Righteousness of God; instead of being righteous in our selves before God,
he is the Lord our Righteousness. And nothing but a Righteousness of another
kind and nature, unto Justification before God could constitute another
Covenant. Wherefore the Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, or we are still under the Law, under
the Covenant of Works.

It will be said that our Personal obedience is by none asserted to be the
Righteousness wherewith we are justified before God, in the same manner as it
was under the Covenant of Works. But the Argument speaks not as unto the manner
or way whereby it is so; but to the thing it self. If it be so in any way or
manner under what qualifications soever, we are under that Covenant still. If
it be of Works any way, it is not of Grace at all. But it is added, that the
differences are such as are sufficient to constitute Covenants effectually
distinct. As (1.) The perfect sinless obedience was required in the first
Covenant; but in the new, that which is imperfect and accompanied with many
sins and failings, is accepted. Answ. This is gratis dictum, and begs the
Question. No Righteousness unto Justification before God, is or can be
accepted, but what is perfect. (2.) Grace is the original fountain and cause of
all our acceptance before God in the new Covenant. Answ. It was so also in the
old. The Creation of Man in Original Righteousness was an effect of Divine
Grace, Benignity, and Goodness. And the reward of Eternal Life in the enjoyment
of God, was of mere Sovereign Grace: Yet what was then of Works, was not of
Grace, no more is it at present. (3.) There would then have been Merit of
Works, which is now excluded. Answ. Such a Merit as arises from an equality
and proportion between Works and Reward, by the rule of commutative Justice,
would not have been in the Works of the first Covenant; and in no other sense
is it now rejected by them that oppose the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ. (4.) All is now resolved into the Merit of Christ, upon the account
whereof alone, our own Personal Righteousness is accepted before God unto our
Justification. Answ. The Question is not on what account, nor for what reason
it is so accepted, but whether it be or no; seeing its so being is effectually
constitutive of a Covenant of Works.

CHAP. XIV. The Exclusion of all sorts of Works from an interest in
Justification. What intended by the Law, and the Works of it, in the Epistles
of Paul.
WE shall take our Fourth Argument from the express Exclusion of all Works of
what sort soever from our Justification before God. For this alone is that
which we plead; namely, that no Acts or Works of our own, are the Causes or
Conditions of our Justification; but that the whole of it is resolved into the
Free Grace of God, through Jesus Christ, as the Mediator and Surety of the
Covenant. To this purpose the Scripture speaks expressly. Romans 3.28. Therefore
we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Works of the Law.
Romans 4.5. But unto him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. Romans 11.6. If it be of
Grace, then is it not of Works. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a Man is not justified
by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ,
and not by the Works of the Law, for by the Works of the Law, shall no flesh be
justified. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, not of Works,
lest any Man should boast. Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we
have done, but according unto his Mercy he has saved us.

These and the like Testimonies are express, and in positive Terms assert all
that we contend for. And I am persuaded, that no unprejudiced person, whose
mind is not prepossessed with notions and distinctions whereof not the least
Title is offered unto them from the Texts mentioned nor elsewhere, can but judge
that the Law in every sense of it, and all sorts of Works whatever, that at any
time, or by any means Sinners or Believers, do or can perform, are not in this
or that sense; but every way and in all senses, excluded from our Justification
before God. And if it be so, it is the Righteousness of Christ alone that we
must betake our selves unto, or this matter must cease for ever. And this
Inference the Apostle himself makes from one of the Testimonies
beforementioned, namely that of Gal. 2.16. for he adds upon it; I through the
Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified with Christ;
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I
now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and
gave himself for me. I do not frustrate the Grace of God; for if Righteousness
come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain.

Our Adversaries are extremely divided amongst themselves, and can come unto no
consistency, as to the sense and meaning of the Apostle in these Assertions;
for what is proper and obvious unto the understanding of all Men, especially
from the opposition that is made between the Law and Works on the one hand, and
Faith, Grace, and Christ on the other, (which are opposed as inconsistent in
this matter of our Justification) they will not allow, nor can do so without
the ruin of the opinions they plead for. Wherefore their various conjectures
shall be examined, as well to show their inconsistency among themselves, by
whom the Truth is opposed, as to confirm our present Argument.

1. Some say it is the Ceremonial Law alone, and the Works of it that are
intended; or the Law as given unto Moses on Mount Sinai, containing that entire
Covenant that was afterward to be abolished. This was of old the common
opinion of the Schoolmen, though it be now generally exploded. And the opinion
lately contended for, that the Apostle Paul excludes Justification from the
Works of the Law, not because no Man can yield that perfect obedience which the
Law requires, or excludes Works absolutely perfect, and sinless obedience; but
because the Law it self, which he intends, could not justify any by the
observation of it, is nothing but the renovation of this obsolete notion, that
it is the Ceremonial Law only, or which upon the matter is all one, the Law
given on Mount Sinai, abstracted from the Grace of the Promise, which could not
justify any, in the observation of its Rites and Commands. But of all other
conjectures, this is the most impertinent and contradictory unto the design of
the Apostle, and is therefore rejected by Bellarmine himself. For the Apostle
treats of that Law whose doers shall be justified. Chap: 2.13. And the Authors
of this opinion would have it to be a Law that can justify none of them that
do it. That Law he intends whereby is the knowledge of sin; for he gives this
reason, why we cannot be justified by the Works of it, namely, Because by it,
is the knowledge of sin, Chap. 3.20. And by what Law is the knowledge of sin,
he expressly declares, where he affirms, That he had not known Lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not covet, Chap. 7.7. which is the Moral Law alone.
That Law he designs, which stops the mouth of all sinners, and makes all the
World obnoxious unto the judgment of God. Chap. 3.19. Which none can do but the
Law written in the heart of men at their Creation, Chap. 2.14, 15. That Law
which if a man do the works of it, he shall live in them; Gal. 3.12. Romans 10.5.
and which brings all men under the Curse for sin, Gal. 3.10. The Law that is
established by Faith and not made void; Romans 3.31; which the Ceremonial Law is
not, nor the Covenant of Sinai. The Law whose Righteousness is to be fulfilled
in us; Romans 8.4. And the instance which the Apostle gives of Justification
without the Works of that Law which he intends, namely that of Abraham, was
some hundreds of years before the giving of the Ceremonial Law. Neither yet do
I say that the Ceremonial Law and the Works of it are excluded from the
Intention of the Apostle; For when that Law was given, the Observation of it
was an especial Instance of that Obedience we owed unto the first Table of the
Decalogue; and the exclusion of the Works thereof from our Justification; in as
much as the performance of them was part of that Moral Obedience which we owed
unto God, is exclusive of all other works also. But that it is alone here
intended, or that Law which could never justify any by its observation,
although it was observed in due manner, is a fond Imagination, and
contradictory to the express Assertion of the Apostle. And whatever is
pretended to the contrary, this opinion is expressly rejected by Augustine; lib.
de Spirit. and liter. cap. 8. Ne quisquam putaret hic Apostolum dixisse ea lege
neminem justificari, quae in Sacramentis veteribus multa continet figurata
praecepta, unde etiam est ista circumcisio carnis, continuo subjungit, quam
dixerit legem and addit; per legem Cognitio peccati. And to the same purpose he
speaks again, Epist. 200. Non solum illa opera legis quae sunt in veteribus
Sacramentis, and nunc revelato Testamento novo non observantur a Christianis,
sicut est Circumcisio praeputii, and Sabbati carnalis vacatio; and a quibusdam
escis abstinentia, and pecorum in Sacrificiis immolatio, and neomenia and
azymum, and caetera hujusmodi, verum etiam illud quod in lege dictum est, non
concupisces, quod ubique and Christianus nullus ambigit esse dicendum, non
justificat hominem, nisi per fidem Jesu Christi, and gratiam Dei per Jesum
Christum dominum nostrum.

2. Some say the Apostle only excludes the perfect Works required by the Law of
Innocence, which is a sense diametrically opposite unto that foregoing. But
this best pleases the Socinians. Paulus agit de Operibus and perfectis in hoc
dicto ideo enim adjecit, sine operibus legis ut indicaretur loqui eum de
operibus a lege requisitis, and sic de perpetua and perfectissima divinorum
praeceptorum obedientia sicut lex requirit. Cum autem talem obedientiam qualem
lex requirit nemo praestare possit, ideo subjecit Apostolus nos justificari
fide, id est, fiducia and obedientia ea quantum quisque praestare potest, and
quotidie quam maximum praestare studet, and connititur. Sine operibus legis, id
est, etsi interim perfect totam legem sicut debebat complere nequit; says
Socinus himself. But (1.) We have herein the whole granted of what we plead
for; namely, that it is the moral indispensible Law of God that is intended by
the Apostle; and that by the works of it no man can be justified, yea, that all
the works of it are excluded from our Justification; for it is, says the
Apostle, without Works. The works of this Law being performed according unto
it, will justify them that perform them, as he affirms, Chap. 2.13. and the
Scripture elsewhere witnesses, that he that does them, shall live in them. But
because this can never be done by any Sinner, therefore all consideration of
them is excluded from our Justification. (2.) It is a wild Imagination that the
dispute of the Apostle is to this purpose; that the perfect works of the Law
will not justify us, but imperfect works, which answer not the Law, will do
so. (3.) Granting the Law intended to be the Moral Law of God, the Law of our
Creation, there is no such distinction intimated in the least by the Apostle,
that we are not justified by the perfect Works of it which we cannot perform,
but by some imperfect Works that we can perform, and labor so to do. Nothing
is more foreign unto the design and express words of his whole discourse. (4.)
The Evasion which they betake themselves unto, that the Apostle opposes
Justification by faith unto that of works which he excludes, is altogether vain
in this sense. For they would have this faith to be our Obedience unto the
Divine Commands in that imperfect manner which we can attain unto. For when the
Apostle has excluded all such Justification by the Law and the works thereof,
he does not advance in opposition unto them and in their room, our own Faith
and Obedience; but adds, being justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood.

3. Some of late among our selves, and they want not them who have gone before
them, affirm that the Works which the Apostle excludes from Justification, are
only the Outward Works of the Law, performed without an inward Principle of
Faith, fear or the Love of God. Servile Works attended unto from a respect unto
the Threatening of the Law, are those which will not justify us. But this
Opinion is not only false but impious. For (1.) The Apostle excludes the Works
of Abraham which were not such outward servile Works as are imagined. (2.) The
Works excluded are those which the Law requires; and the Law is holy, just and
good. But a Law that requires only outward Works without internal Love to God,
is neither holy, just nor Good. (3.) The Law Condemns all such Works as are
separated from the internal Principle of Faith, Fear and Love, for it requires
that in all our Obedience we should love the Lord our God with all our hearts.
And the Apostle says, that we are not justified by the Works which the Law
condemns, but not by them which the Law commands. (4.) It is highly reflexive
on the honor of God, that he unto whose Divine Prerogative it belongs to know
the Hearts of men alone, and therefore regards them alone in all the duties of
their Obedience, should give a Law requiring outward servile Works only; for if
the Law intended require more, then are not those the only Works excluded.

4. Some say in general it is the Jewish Law that is intended, and think
thereby to cast off the whole Difficulty. But if by the Jewish Law they intend
only the Ceremonial Law, or the Law absolutely as given by Moses, we have
already showed the Vanity of that pretense. But if they mean thereby the whole
Law or Rule of Obedience given unto the Church of Israel under the Old
Testament, they express much of the Truth, it may be more than they designed.

5. Some say that it is Works with a Conceit of Merit, that makes the Reward to
be of Debt, and not of Grace, that are excluded by the Apostle. But no such
distinction appears in the Text or Context. For, (1.) The Apostle excludes
all Works of the Law, that is, that the Law requires of us in a way of
Obedience, be they of what sort they will. (2.) The Law requires no Works with
a Conceit of Merit. (3.) Works of the Law Originally, included no Merit, as
that which arises from the Proportion of one thing unto another in the
Balance of Justice, and in that sense only is it rejected by those who plead
for an Interest of Works in Justification. (4.) The Merit which the Apostle
excludes, is that which is inseparable from Works, so that it cannot be
excluded, unless the Works themselves be so. And unto their Merit two things
concur: (1.) A Comparative boasting, that is, not absolutely in the sight of
God, which follows the Meritum ex condigno, which some poor sinful Mortals have
fancied in their Works; but that which gives one man a preference above another
in the obtaining of Justification, which Grace will not allow. Chap. 4.2. (2.)
That the Reward be not absolutely of Grace, but that respect be had therein
unto Works, which makes it so far to be of debt; not out of an internal
Condignity which would not have been under the Law of Creation, but out of some
Congruity with respect unto the promise of God, v. 4. In these two regards
Merit is inseparable from Works; and the Holy Ghost utterly to exclude it,
excludes all Works from which it is inseparable, as it is from all. Wherefore
(5.) The Apostle speaks not one word about the exclusion of the Merit of Works
only; but he excludes all Works whatever, and that by this Argument, that the
Admission of them, would necessarily introduce merit in the sense described,
which is inconsistent with Grace. And although some think that they are
injuriously dealt withal, when they are charged with maintaining of merit in
their asserting the Influence of our Works into our Justification; yet those of
them who best understand themselves, and the Controversy it self, are not so
averse from some kind of merit, as knowing that it is inseparable from Works.

6. Some contend that the Apostle excludes only Works wrought before believing,
in the strength of our own Wills and Natural Abilities, without the aid of
Grace. Works they suppose required by the Law are such as we perform by the
Direction and Command of the Law, alone. But the Law of Faith requires Works
in the strength of the supplies of Grace, which are not excluded. This is that
which the most learned and judicious of the Church of Rome do now generally
betake themselves unto. Those who amongst us plead for Works in our
Justification, as they use many distinctions to explain their Minds, and free
their Opinion from a co-incidence with that of the Papists; so as yet, they
deny the name of Merit, and the thing it self in the sense of the Church of
Rome, as it is renounced likewise by all the Socinians. Wherefore they make use
of the preceding Evasion, that Merit is excluded by the Apostle, and Works only
as they are meritorious, although the Apostles plain Argument be that they are
excluded because such a Merit as is inconsistent with Grace, is inseparable
from their Admission.

But the Roman Church cannot so part with Merit. Wherefore they are to find out
a sort of Works to be excluded only, which they are content to part withal as
not meritorious. Such are those before described, wrought as they say before
believing, and without the aids of Grace; and such they say, are all the Works
of the Law. And this they do with some more Modesty and Sobriety, than those
amongst us, who would have only external Works and Observances to be intended.
For they grant that sundry internal Works, as those of Attrition, sorrow for
Sin, and the like, are of this Nature. But the Works of the Law it is they say
that are excluded. But this whole Plea, and all the Sophisms wherewith it is
countenanced, has been so discussed and defeated by Protestant Writers of all
sorts against Bellarmine and others, as that it is needless to repeat the same
things, or to add any thing unto them. And it will be sufficiently evinced of
falsehood, in what we shall immediately prove concerning the Law and Works
intended by the Apostle. However the Heads of the Demonstration of the Truth to
the contrary may be touched on. And (1.) The Apostle excludes all Works
without distinction or exception. And we are not to distinguish where the Law
does not distinguish before us. (2.) All the Works of the Law are excluded,
therefore all Works wrought after believing by the aids of Grace, are excluded.
For they are all required by the Law. See Psalm. 119.35. Romans 7.22. Works not
required by the Law, are no less an Abomination to God, than Sins against the
Law. (3.) The Works of Believers after Conversion, performed by the Aids of
Grace, are expressly excluded by the Apostle. So are those of Abraham after he
had been a Believer many years, and abounded in them unto the Praise of God. So
he excludes his own Works after his Conversion, Gal. 2.16. 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil.
3.9. And so he excludes the Works of all other Believers; Ephesians. 2.9, 10. (4.)
All Works are excluded that might give countenance unto boasting, Romans 4.2.
Chap. 3.17. Ephesians. 2.9. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. But this is done more by the Good
Works of regenerate Persons, than by any Works of Unbelievers. (5.) The Law
required Faith and Love in all our Works, and therefore if all the Works of the
Law be excluded, the best works of Believers are so. (6.) All Works are
excluded which are opposed unto Grace working freely in our Justification. But
this all Works whatever are, Romans 11.6. (7.) In the Epistle unto the Galatians
the Apostle does exclude from our Justification all those Works which the false
Teachers pressed as necessary thereunto. But they urged the necessity of the
Works of Believers, and those which were by Grace already converted unto God.
For those upon whom they pressed them unto this End were already actually so.
(8.) They are Good Works that the Apostle excludes from our Justification. For
there can be no Pretense of Justification by those Works that are not Good, or
which have not all things essentially requisite to make them so. But such are
all the Works of Unbelievers, performed without the Aids of Grace; they are not
Good, nor as such accepted with God; but want what is essentially requisite
unto the Constitution of Good Works. And it is ridiculous to think that the
Apostle Disputes about the exclusion of such Works from our Justification, as
no man in his Wits would think to have any place therein. (9) The Reason why no
no man can be justified by the Law, is because no man can yield perfect
Obedience thereunto. For by perfect Obedience the Law will justify, Romans 2.13.
Chap. 10.5. Wherefore all Works are excluded that are not absolutely perfect.
But this the best Works of Believers are not; as we have proved before. (10.)
If there be a Reserve for the Works of Believers performed by the Aid of Grace
in our Justification, it is, that either they may be concauses thereof, or be
indispensibly subservient unto those things that are so. That they are
concauses of our Justification, is not absolutely affirmed; Neither can it be
said that they are necessarily subservient unto them that are so. They are not
so unto the efficient Cause thereof, which is the Grace and favor of God
alone, Romans 3.24, 25. Chap. 4.16. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Rev. 1.6. Nor are they so unto
the Meritorious Cause of it, which is Christ alone, Acts 13*38. Chap. 26.18. 1
Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. Nor unto the Material Cause of it; which is
the Righteousness of Christ alone; Romans 10.3, 4. Nor are they so unto Faith in
what place soever it be stated. For not only is Faith only mentioned,, wherever
we are taught the way how the Righteousness of Christ is derived and
communicated unto us; without any intimation of the conjunction of Works with
it; but also, as unto our Justification they are placed in Opposition and
Contradiction one to the other, Romans 3.28. And sundry other things are
pleadable unto the same purpose.

7. Some affirm that the Apostle excludes all Works from our first
Justification, but not from the second, or as some speak, the continuation of
our Justification. But we have before examined these Distinctions, and found
them groundless.

Evident it is therefore, that men put themselves into an uncertain, slippery
station, where they know not what to fix upon, nor wherein to find any such
appearance of Truth as to give them Countenance in denying the plain and
frequently repeated Assertion of the Apostle.

Wherefore in the Confirmation of the present Argument, I shall more
particularly enquire into what it is, that the Apostle intends by the Law and
Works whereof he treats. For as unto our Justification whatever they are, they
are absolutely and universally opposed unto Grace, Faith, the Righteousness of
God, and the Blood of Christ, as those which are altogether inconsistent with
them. Neither can this be denied or questioned by any, seeing it is the plain
design of the Apostle to evince that inconsistency.

1. Wherefore in general, it is evident that the Apostle by the Law and the
Works thereof intended, what the Jews with whom he had to do, did understand by
the Law and their own whole Obedience thereunto. I suppose this cannot be
denied. For without a Concession of it, there is nothing proved against them,
nor are they in any thing instructed by him. Suppose those Terms aequivocal and
to be taken in one sense by him, and by them in another, and nothing can be
rightly concluded from what is spoken of them. Wherefore the meaning of these
Terms the Law and Works, the Apostle takes for granted as very well known, and
agreed on between himself and those with whom he had to do.

2. The Jews by the Law intended what the Scriptures of the Old Testament meant
by that Expression. For they are no where blamed for any false Notion
concerning the Law, or that they esteemed any thing to be so, but what was so
indeed, and what was so called in the Scripture. Their present Oral Law was not
yet hatched, though the Pharisees were brooding of it.

3. The Law under the Old Testament, does immediately refer unto the Law given
at Mount Sinai, nor is there any distinct mention of it before. This is
commonly called the Law absolutely; but most frequently the Law of God, the Law
of the Lord; and sometimes the Law of Moses, because of his especial Ministry
in the giving of it. Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded
unto him, Mal. 4.4. And this the Jews intended by the Law.

4. Of the Law so given at Horeb, there was a Distribution into three Parts.
(1.) There was (...) Deuteronomy. 4.13. The ten Words; So also Chap. 10.4. that is the
ten Commandments written in two Tables of Stone. This Part of the Law was first
given; was the Foundation of the whole; and contained that perfect Obedience
which was required of Mankind by the Law of Creation, and was now received into
the Church, with the highest Attestations of its indispensible Obligation unto
Obedience or Punishment. (2.) (...) which the LXX render by (...), that is
jura; Rites or Statutes; but the Latin from thence Justificationes,
Justifications, which has given great Occasion of Mistake in many both Ancient
and Modern Divines. We call it the Ceremonial Law. The Apostle terms this Part
of the Law distinctly (...) Ephesians. 2.15. The Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances; that is consisting in a Multitude of Arbitrary Commands. (3.) (...)
which we commonly call the Judicial Law. This Distribution of the Law shuts up
the Old Testament, as it is used in places innumerable before, only the (...)
the Ten Words, is expressed by the general Word (...) the Law, Mal. 4.4.

5. These being the Parts of the Law given unto the Church in Sinai, the the
whole of it is constantly called (...) the Law, that is, the Instruction (as
the Word signifies) that God gave unto the Church, in the Rule of Obedience
which he prescribed unto it. This is the Constant signification of that Word in
Scripture, where it is taken absolutely; and thereon does not signify
precisely the Law as given at Horeb, but comprehends with it all the
Revelations that God made under the Old Testament, in the Explanation and
Confirmation of that Law, in Rules, Motives, Directions and Enforcements of
Obedience.

6. Wherefore (...) the Law is the whole Rule of Obedience which God gave to
the Church under the Old Testament, with all the Efficacy wherewith it was
accompanied by the Ordinances of God, including in it all the Promises and
Threatenings, that might be Motives unto the Obedience that God did require.
This is that which God and the Church called the Law under the Old Testament,
and which the Jews so called with whom our Apostle had to do. That which we
call the Moral Law was the Foundation of the whole; and those Parts of it which
we call the Judicial and Ceremonial Law, were peculiar Instances of the
Obedience which the Church under the Old Testament was obliged unto, in the
especial Polity and divine Worship, which at that season were necessary unto
it. And two things does the Scripture testify unto concerning this Law.

1. That it was a perfect complete Rule of all that internal, spiritual and
moral Obedience which God required of the Church. The Law of the Lord is
perfect converting the Soul, the Testimony of the Lord is sure making Wise the
Simple. Psalm. 19.7. And it was so of all the external Duties of Obedience, for
matter and manner, time and season; that in both, the Church might walk
acceptably before God, Isa. 8.20. And although the Original Duties of the Moral
Part of the Law are often preferred before the particular Instances of
Obedience in Duties of outward Worship; yet the whole Law was always the whole
Rule of all the Obedience internal and external that God required of the
Church, and which he accepted in them that did believe.

2. That this Law, this Rule of Obedience as it was ordained of God to be the
Instrument of his Rule of the Church, and by Virtue of the Covenant made with
Abraham, unto whose Administration it was Adapted, and which its Introduction
on Sinai did not disanul, was accompanied with a Power and Efficacy enabling
unto Obedience. The Law it self as merely preceptive and commanding,
administered no Power or Ability unto those that were under its Authority to
yield Obedience unto it; no more do the mere Commands of the Gospel. Moreover
under the Old Testament it enforced Obedience on the Minds and Consciences of
men, by the manner of its first delivery, and the severity of its Sanction, so
as to fill them with fear and bondage; and was besides accompanied with such
burthensom Rules of outward Worship, as made it an heavy yoke unto the people.
But as it was Gods Doctrine, Teaching, Instruction in all acceptable Obedience
unto himself, and was adapted unto the Covenant of Abraham, it was accompanied
with an Administration of effectual Grace, procuring and promoting Obedience in
the Church. And the Law is not to be looked on as separated from those Aids
unto Obedience, which God administered under the Old Testament, whose effects
are therefore ascribed unto the Law it self. See Psalm. 1. Psalm. 19. Psalm. 119.

2. This being the Law in the sense of the Apostle, and those with whom he had
to do, our next enquiry is what was their sense of Works, or Works of the Law?
And I say it is plain that they intended hereby, the universal Sincere
Obedience of the Church unto God, according unto this Law. And other Works, the
Law of God acknowledges not; yea, it expressly condemns all Works that have any
such defect in them, as to render them unacceptable unto God. Hence
notwithstanding all the Commands that God had positively given for the strict
Observance of Sacrifices, Offerings, and the like, yet when the people
performed them without Faith and Love, he expressly affirms that he Commanded
them not, that is, to be observed in such a manner. In these Works therefore
consisted their personal Righteousness, as they walked in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the Law blameless, Luke 1.6. wherein they did instantly serve
God day and night, Acts 26.7. And this they esteemed to be their own
Righteousness, their Righteousness according unto the Law, as really it was,
Phil. 3.6, 9. For although the Pharisees had greatly corrupted the Doctrine of
the Law, and put false glosses on sundry Precepts of it; yet that the Church in
those days did by the Works of the Law, understand either Ceremonial Duties
only, or external Works, or Works with a conceit of merit, or Works wrought
without an internal Principle of Faith, and Love to God, or any thing but their
own personal sincere Obedience unto the whole Doctrine and Rule of the Law,
there is nothing that should give the least color of Imagination. For,

1. All this is perfectly stated in the Suffrage which the Scribe gave unto the
Declaration of the sense and design of the Law, with the Nature of the
Obed^ence which it does require, that was made at his request by our blessed
Savior, Mark 12.28* 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. And one of the Scribes came and having
heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well,
asked him, which is the first Commandment of all; or as it is, Matthew. 22.36,
Which is the great Commandment in the Law? And Jesus answered him, the first of
all the Commandments is, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is One Lord; and thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength; this is the first Commandment: and the
second is like, namely this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And the
Scribe said unto him, Well Master, thou have said the Truth, for there is one
God, and there is none but he. And to love him with all the Heart* and with all
the Understanding, and with all the Soul, and with all the Strength, and to
love his Neighbor as himself, is more then all whole burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices. And this so expressly given by Moses as the Sum of the Law, namely
Faith and Love, as the Principle of all our Obedience, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5. that it is
mavelous what should induce any learned sober Person to fix upon any other
sense of it; as that it respected ceremonial or external Works only, or such as
may be wrought without Faith or Love. This is the Law concerning which the
Apostle disputes, and this the Obedience wherein the Works of it do consist.
And more then this, in the way of Obedience God never did nor will require of
any in this World. Wherefore the Law and the Works thereof, which the Apostle
excludes from Justification, is that whereby we are obliged to believe in God
as One God, the only God, and love him with all our Hearts and Souls, and our
Neighbors as our selves. And what Works there are, or can be in any Persons
regenerate or not regenerate, to be performed in the strength of Grace, or
without it, that are acceptable unto God, that may not be reduced unto these
Heads, I know not.

2. The Apostle himself declares, that it is the Law and the Works of it in
the sense we have expressed, that he excludes from our Justification.

For the Law he speaks of, is the Law of Righteousness, Rom 9.31. The Law whose
Righteousness is to be fulfilled in us, that we may be accepted with God, and
freed from Condemnation, Chap. 8.3. That in Obedience whereunto, our own
personal Righteousness does consist, whether what we judge so, before
Conversion, Romans 10.3. or what is so after it, Phil. 3.9. The Law which if a
man observe, he shall live, and be justified before God, Romans 2.13. Gal. 3.12.
Romans 10.5. That Law which is Holy, Just and Good, which discovers and
condemns all sin whatever, Romans 7.7, 9.

From what has been discoursed, these two things are evident in the
Confirmation of our present Argument. (1.) That The Law intended by the
Apostle, when he denies that by the Works of the Law any can be justified, is
the entire Rule and Guide of our Obedience unto God, even as unto the whole
frame and spiritual Constitution of our Souls, with all the Acts of Obedience
or Duties that he requires of us. And (2.) That the Works of this Law which he
so frequently and plainly excludes from our Justification, and therein
opposes to the Grace of God, and the Blood of Christ, are all the Duties of
Obedience, Internal, Supernatural, External, Ritual, however we are or may be
enabled to perform them, that God requires of us. And these things excluded,
it is the Righteousness of Christ alone imputed unto us, on the account whereof
we are justified before God.

The Truth is, so far as I can discern, the real Difference that is at this Day
amongst us about the Doctrine of our Justification before God, is the same that
was between the Apostle and the Jews, and no other. But Controversies in
Religion make a great Appearance of being new, when they are only varied and
made different, by the new Terms and Expressions that are introduced into the
handling of them. So has it fallen out in the Controversy about Nature and
Grace; For as unto the true nature of it, it is the same in these days, as it
was between the Apostle Paul and the Pharisees, between Austin and Pelagius
afterward. But it has now passed through so many forms and dresses of Words,
as that it can scarce be known to be what it was. Many at this day will condemn
both Pelagius and the Doctrine that he taught, in the Words wherein he taught
it, and yet embrace and approve of the things themselves which he intended. The
Introduction of every Change in Philosophical Learning, gives an Appearance of
a Change in the Controversies which are managed thereby. But take off the
covering of Philosophical Expressions, Distinctions, Metaphysical Notions, and
futilous Terms of Art, which some of the Ancient Schoolmen and later Disputants
have cast upon it, and the Difference about Grace and Nature is amongst us all,
the same that it was of old, and as it is allowed by the Socinians.

Thus the Apostle treating of our Justification before God, does it in these
Terms which are both expressive of the thing it self, and were well understood
by them with whom he had to do; such as the Holy Spirit in their Revelation had
consecrated unto their proper use. Thus on the one hand he expressly excludes
the Law, our own Works, our own Righteousness from any interest therein; and in
opposition unto, and as inconsistent with them in the matter of Justification,
he ascribes it wholly unto the Righteousness of God, Righteousness imputed unto
us, the Obedience of Christ, Christ made Righteousness unto us, the blood of
Christ as a Propitiation, Faith, receiving Christ and the Atonement. There is
no avvakened Conscience guided by the least beam of spiritual Illumination, but
in it self, plainly understands these things, and what is intended in them. But
through the Admission of Exotic Learning, with Philosophical Terms and notions
into the way of teaching Spiritual things in Religion, a new face and
Appearance is put on the whole matter; and a Composition made between those
things which the Apostle directly opposes as contrary and inconsistent. Hence
are all our Discourses about Preparations, Dispositions, Conditions, Merits de
congruo and condigno, with such a train of Distinctions, as that if some bounds
be not fixed unto the inventing and coining of them, (which being a facile Work
grows on us every day) we shall not e're long be able to look through them, so
as to discover the things intended or rightly to understand one another. For as
one said of lies, so it may be said of arbitrary distinctions, they must be
continually new thatched over, or it will rain through. But the best way is to
cast of all these coverings, and we shall then quickly see, that the real
difference about the Justification of a Sinner before God is the same and no
other, as it was in the days of the Apostle Paul between him and the Jews. And
all those things which men are pleased now to plead for, with respect unto a
Causality in our Justification before God, under the Names of Preparations,
Conditions, Dispositions, Merit with respect unto a first or second
Justification, are as effectually excluded by the Apostle, as if he had
expressly named them every one. For in them all, there is a management according
unto our Conceptions, and the Terms of the Learning passant in the present Age,
of the Plea for our own personal Righteousness which the Jews maintained
against the Apostle. And the true Understanding of what he intends by the Law,
the Works and Righteousness thereof, would be sufficient to determine this
Controversy, but that men are grown very Skilful in the Art of endless
Wrangling.

CHAP. XV. Faith alone.
THe Truth which we plead has two Parts. (1.) That the Righteousness of God
imputed to us, unto the Justification of Life, is the Righteousness of Christ,
by whose Obedience we are made Righteous. (2.) That it is Faith alone, which on
our Part is required to interest us in that Righteousness, or whereby we comply
with Gods Grant and Communication of it, or receive it unto our Use and
Benefit. For although this Faith is in it self the radical Principle of all
Obedience, and whatever is not so, which cannot, which does not on all
occasions, evidence, prove, show or manifest it self by Works, is not of the
same kind with it, yet as we are justified by it, its act and Duty is such, or
of that nature, as that no other Grace, Duty or Work can be associated with it,
or be of any Consideration. And both these are evidently confirmed in that
Description which is given us in the Scripture of the Nature of Faith and
believing unto the Justification of life.

I know that many Expressions used in the Declaration of the Nature and Work of
Faith herein, are Metaphorical, at least are generally esteemed so to be. But
they are such as the Holy Ghost in his Infinite Wisdom thought meet to make use
of, for the Instruction and Edification of the Church. And I cannot but say,
that those who understand not how effectually the light of knowledge is
communicated unto the minds of them that believe by them, and a sense of the
things intended unto their Spiritual Experience, seem not to have taken a due
consideration of them. Neither whatever Skill we pretend unto, do we know
always what expressions of Spiritual things are Metaphorical. Those oftentimes
may seem so to be, which are most proper. However it is most safe for us to
adhere unto the Expressions of the Holy Spirit, and not to embrace such senses
of things as are inconsistent with them, and opposite unto them. Wherefore,

1. That Faith whereby we are justified, is most frequently in the New
Testament expressed by receiving. This notion of Faith has been before spoken
unto, in our general Enquiry into the use of it in our Justification. It shall
not therefore be here much again insisted on. Two things we may observe
concerning it. (1.) That it is so expressed with respect unto the whole Object
of Faith, or unto all that does any way concur unto our Justification. For (1.)
We are said to receive Christ himself. Unto as many as have received him, he
gave power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. As you have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6. In Opposition hereunto Unbelief is expressed by not
receiving of him, Joh. 11.1. Chap. 3.11. Chap. 12.48. Chap. 14.17. And it is a
receiving of Christ, as he is the Lord our Righteousness, as of God he is made
Righteousness unto us. And as no Grace, no Duty can have any cooperation with
Faith herein, this Reception of Christ not belonging unto their Nature, nor
comprised in their Exercise; so it excludes any other Righteousness from our
Justification but that of Christ alone. For we are justified by Faith; Faith
alone receives Christ, and what it receives is the Cause of our Justification,
whereon we become the Sons of God. So we receive the Atonement, made by the
blood of Christ, Romans 5.11. For God has set him forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his Blood. And this receiving of the Atonement, includes the
Souls Approbation of the way of Salvation by the blood of Christ, and and the
Appropriation of the Atonement made thereby unto our own Souls. For thereby
also we receive the forgiveness of Sins; That they may receive the forgiveness
of Sin, through the Faith that is in me, Acts 26.18. In receiving Christ we
receive the Atonement, and in the Atonement we receive the forgiveness of Sins.
But moreover, the Grace of God, and Righteousness it self, as the Efficient and
Material Cause of our Justification are received also; even the Abundance of
Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. So that Faith with the respect
unto all the Causes of Justification is expressed by receiving. For it also
receives the Promise, the Instrumental Cause on the Part of God thereof, Acts
2.41. Heb. 9.15. (2.) That the Nature of Faith and its acting with respect unto
all the Causes of Justification consisting in receiving, that which is the
Object of it must be offered, tendered, and given unto us, as that which is not
our own, but is made our own by that giving and receiving; This is evident in
the general Nature of receiving. And herein as was observed, as no other Grace
or Duty can concur with it, so the Righteousness whereby we are justified can
be none of our own, antecedent unto this Reception, nor at any time inherent in
us. Hence we argue, That if the Work of Faith in our Justification be receiving
of what is freely granted, given, communicated and imputed unto us, that is, of
Christ, of the Atonement, of the Gift of Righteousness, of the forgiveness of
Sins, than have our other Graces, our Obedience, Duties, Works, no influence
into our Justification, nor are any Causes or Conditions thereof. For they are
neither that which does receive, nor that which is received, which alone concur
thereunto.

2. Faith is expressed by looking. Look unto me and be saved, Isa. 45.22. A man
shall look to his Maker, and his Eyes shall have respect unto the Holy One of
Israel, Chap. 17.1. They shall look on me whom they have pierced, Zech. 12.10.
See Psalm. 123.2. The nature hereof is expressed, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. For
so was he to be lifted up on the Cross in his Death, Joh. 8.28. Chap. 12.32.
The Story is recorded Numb. 21.8, 9. I suppose none doubt but that the Stinging
of the people by fiery Serpents, and the Death that ensued thereon, were Types
of the guilt of Sin, and the Sentence of the fiery Law thereon. For these
things happened unto them in Types, 1 Cor. 10.11. When any was so stung or
bitten, if he betook himself unto any other Remedies, he dyed and perished.
Only they that looked unto the Brazen Serpent that was lifted up, were healed
and lived. For this was the Ordinance of God, this way of healing alone, had he
appointed. And their healing was a Type of the Pardon of Sin with everlasting
life. So by their looking, is the Nature of Faith expressed, as our Savior
plainly expounds it in this P]ace. So must the Son of man be lifted up, that he
that believes on him, that is as the Israelites looked unto the Serpent in the
Wilderness. And although this Expression of the great Mystery of the Gospel by
Christ himself, has been by some derided, or as they call it exposed, yet is
it really as instructive of the Nature of Faith, Justification and Salvation by
Christ, as any passage in the Scripture. Now if Faith whereby we are justified,
and in that exercise of it wherein we are so, be a looking unto Christ, under a
sense of the guilt of Sin and our lost Condition thereby, for all, for our only
Help and Relief, for Deliverance, Righteousness, and life, then is it therein
exclusive of all other Graces and Duties whatever; for by them we neither look,
nor are they the things which we look after. But so is the Nature and Exercise
of Faith expressed by the Holy Ghost. And they who do believe, understand his
mind. For whatever may be pretended of Metaphor in the Expression, Faith is
that Act of the Soul whereby they who are hopeless, helpless, and lost in
themselves, do in a way of expectancy and Trust seek for all help and relief in
Christ alone, or there is not Truth in it. And this also sufficiently evinceth
the Nature of our Justification by Christ.

3. It is in like manner frequently expressed by coming unto Christ. Come unto
me all ye that labor, Mat. 11.28. See Joh. 6.35.37, 45, 65. Chap. 7.37. To
come unto Christ for life and Salvation, is to believe on him unto the
Justification of life. But no other Grace or Duty is a coming unto Christ, and
therefore have they no place in Justification. He who has been convinced of
Sin, who has been wearied with the Burden of it, who has really designed to
fly from the Wrath to come, and has heard the Voice of Christ in the Gospel,
inviting him to come unto him for Help and Relief, will tell you that this
coming unto Christ consists in a man's going out of himself, in a complete
Renunciation of all his own Duties and Righteousness, and betaking himself with
all his Trust and Confidence unto Christ alone, and his Righteousness, for
pardon of Sin, acceptance with God, and a right unto the Heavenly Inheritance.
It may be some will say this is not believing, but canting; Be it so, we refer
the Judgment of it to the Church of God.

4. It is expressed by flying for Refuge, Heb. 6.18. Who have fled for Refuge,
to lay hold on the hope set before us, Prove. 18.10. Hence some have defined
Faith to be perfugium animae, the flight of the Soul unto Christ for
Deliverance from Sin and Misery. And much light is given unto the Understanding
of the thing intended thereby. For herein it is supposed, that he who believes
is antecedently thereunto convinced of his lost condition, and that if he abide
therein he must perish eternally; that he has nothing of himself whereby he
may be delivered from it; that he must betake himself unto somewhat else for
Relief; that unto this end he considers Christ as set before him and proposed
unto him in the Promise of the Gospel; that he judges this to be an holy, a
safe way for his Deliverance and Acceptance with God, as that which has the
Characters of all Divine Excellencies upon it; hereon he flies unto it for
Refuge, that is, with diligence and speed that he perish not in his present
Condition, he betakes himself unto it by placing his whole Trust and Affiance
thereon. And the whole Nature of our Justification by Christ is better declared
hereby unto the supernatural Sense and Experience of Believers, than by an
hundred Philosophical Disputations about it.

5. The Terms and Notions by which it is expressed under the Old Testament, are
leaning on God, Micah 3.11. or Christ, Cant. 8.5. rolling, or casting our
selves and our burden on the Lord, Psalm. 22.8. Psalm. 37.5. The Wisdom of the
Holy Ghost in which Expressions has by some been profanely derided. Resting
on God, or in him, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Psalm. 37.7. Cleaving unto the Lord, Deuteronomy.
4.4. Acts 11.15. as also by Trusting, Hoping, and Waiting in Places
innumerable. And it may be observed that those who acted Faith as it is thus
expressed, do every where declare themselves to be lost, hopeless, helpless,
desolate, poor, Orphans, whereon they place all their hope and expectation on
God alone.

All that I would infer from these things, is, that the Faith whereby we
believe unto the Justification of life, or which is required of us in a way of
Duty that we may be justified, is such an Act of the whole Soul whereby
convinced Sinners do wholly go out of themselves to rest upon God in Christ,
for Mercy, Pardon, Life, Righteousness and Salvation, with an acquiescency of
Heart therein, which is the whole of the Truth pleaded for.

CHAP. XVI. The Truth pleaded, farther confirmed by Testimonies of Scripture,
Jer. 23.6.
THat which we now proceed unto, is the consideration of those Express
Testimonies of Scripture which are given unto the Truth pleaded for, and
especially of those places where the Doctrine of the Justification of Sinners
is expressly and designedly handled. From them it is, that we must learn the
Truth, and into them must our Faith be resolved, unto whose Authority all the
arguings and Objections of men must give place. By them is more light conveyed
into the understandings of Believers, than by the most subtle Disputations. And
it is a thing not without scandal, to see among Protestants whole Books written
about Justification, wherein scarce one Testimony of Scripture is produced,
unless it be to find out Evasions from the force of them. And in particular,
whereas the Apostle Paul has most fully and expressly (as he had the greatest
occasion so to do) declared and vindicated the Doctrine of Evangelical
Justification, not a few in what they write about it, are so far from declaring
their Thoughts and Faith concerning it, out of his Writings, as that they begin
to reflect upon them as obscure, and such as give occasion unto dangerous
mistakes; and unless, as was said, to answer and except against them upon their
own corrupt Principles, seldom or never make mention of them. As though we were
grown wiser than he, or that Spirit whereby he was inspired, guided, acted in
all that he wrote; But there can be nothing more Alien from the genius of
Christian Religion, than for us not to endeavor humbly to learn the Mystery of
the Grace of God, herein, in the Declaration of it made by him. But the
foundation of God stands sure, what course soever men shall be pleased to
take into their Profession of Religion.

For the Testimonies which I shall produce and insist upon, I desire the Reader
to observe, (1.) That they are but some of the many that might be pleaded unto
the same purpose. (2.) That those which have been, or yet shall be alleged on
particular occasions, I shall wholly omit; and such are most of them that are
given unto this Truth in the Old Testament. (3.) That in the Exposition of
them, I shall with what diligence I can attend; (1.) Unto the Analogy of Faith,
that is the manifest scope and design of the Revelation of the Mind and will of
God in the Scripture. And that this is to exalt the Freedom and riches of his
own Grace, the Glory and Excellency of Christ, and his Mediation, to discover
the woeful, lost, forlorn condition of man by Sin, to debase and depress every
thing that is in and of our selves, as to the attaining Life, Righteousness and
Salvation, cannot be denied by any who have their senses exercised in the
Scriptures. (2.) Unto the Experience of them that do believe, with the
condition of them who seek after Justification by Jesus Christ. In other things
I hope the best helps and Rules of the interpretation of the Scripture shall
not be neglected.

There is weight in this case deservedly laid on the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, as promised and given unto us; namely, the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. As the name Jehovah, being given and ascribed unto
him, is a full indication of his Divine person; so the addition of his being
our Righteousness, sufficiently declares, that in, and by him alone, we have
Righteousness, or are made righteous. So was he typed by Melchisedec, as first,
the King of Righteousness, then the King of Peace, Heb. 7.2. For by his
Righteousness alone have we Peace with God. Some of the Socinians would evade
this Testimony, by observing, that Righteousness in the Old Testament is used
sometimes for Benignity, Kindness and Mercy, and so they suppose it may be
here. But the most of them, avoiding the palpable absurdity of this
imagination, refer it to the Righteousness of God in deliverance, and
vindication of his people. So Brennius briefly, Ita vocatur quia Dominus per
manum ejus judicium and justitiam faciet Israeli. But these are evasions of
bold men, who care not, so they may say somewhat, whether what they say, be
agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, or the plain words of the Scripture.
Bellarmine who was more wary to give some appearance of Truth unto his answers,
first, gives other reasons why he is called the Lord our Righteousness; and
then, whether unawares, or overpowered by the evidence of Truth, grants that
sense of the words which contains the whole of the cause we plead for. Christ,
he says, may be called the Lord our Righteousness, because he is the efficient
cause of our righteousness. As God is said to be our Strength and Salvation.
Again, Christ is said to be our righteousness; as he is our Wisdom, our
Redemption and our Peace; because he has redeemed us, and makes us wise and
righteous, and reconcileth us unto God: And other reasons of the same nature
are added by others. But not trusting to these Expositions of the words, he
adds, Deinde dicitur Christus justitia nostra, quoniam satisfecit patri pro
nobis, and eam satisfactionem ita nobis donat and communicate, cum nos
justificat, ut nostra satisfactio and justitia dici possit. And afterward, Hoc
modo non esset absurdum, si quis diceret nobis imputari Christi justitiam and
merita, cum nobis donantur and applicantur, ac si nos ipsi Deo satisfecissemus.
De justificat, lib. 2. cap. 10. Christ is said to be our Righteousness because
he has made Satisfaction for us to the Father; and does so give and
communicate that Satisfaction unto us, when he justifies us, that it may be
said to be our Satisfaction, and Righteousness. And in this sense it would not
be absurd if any one should say, that the righteousness of Christ and his
merits are imputed unto us, as if we our selves had satisfied God. In this
sense we say, that Christ is the Lord our Righteousness; nor is there any thing
of importance in the whole Doctrine of Justification that we own, which is not
here granted by the Cardinal; and that in terms which some among our selves
scruple and oppose. I shall therefore look a little further into this Testimony
which has wrested so eminent a confession of the Truth, from so great an
Adversary. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise up unto
David a righteous branch, and this is his name whereby he shall be called, the
Lord our Righteousness, ver. 5, 6. It is confessed among Christians that this
is an illustrious Renovation of the first promise, concerning the Incarnation
of the Son of God, and our Salvation by him. This promise was first given when
we had lost our Original Righteousness, and were considered only as those who
had sinned and come short of the Glory of God. In this estate a Righteousness
was absolutely necessary that we might be again accepted with God; for without
a Righteousness, yea, that which is perfect and complete, we never were so, nor
ever can be so. In this estate it is promised that he shall be our
Righteousness, or, as the Apostle expresses it, the end of the Law for
righteousness to them that do believe. That he is so, there can be no question,
the whole enquiry is, how he is so? This, say the most Sober and Modest of our
Adversaries, because he is the efficient cause of our Righteousness, that is,
of our personal inherent Righteousness. But this Righteousness may be
considered either in it self, as it is an effect of Gods Grace, and so it is
good and holy, although it be not perfect and complete; or it may be considered
as it is ours, inherent in us, accompanied with the remaining defilements of
our Nature; In that respect, as this Righteousness is ours, the Prophet
affirms, that (in the sight of God) we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. (...) comprizeth our whole
personal, inherent righteousness. And the Lord Christ cannot from hence be
denominated (...); The Lord our righteousness, seeing it is all as filthy rags.
It must therefore be a Righteousness of another sort whence this denomination
is taken, and on the account whereof this name is given him. Wherefore he is
our Righteousness, as all our righteousnesses are in him. So the Church which
confesses all her own Righteousnesses to be filthy rags, says, in the Lord
have I righteousness, Isa. 45.24. which is expounded of Christ by the Apostle,
Romans 14.11. (...) only in the Lord are my righteousnesses; which two places the
Apostle expresses, Phil. 3.9. That I may win Christ and be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness which is of the Law (in this case as filthy rags)
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by Faith. Hence it is added, in the Lord shall the seed of Israel be
justified, ver. 25. namely, because he is, in what he is, in what he was, and
did, as given unto and for us, our righteousness, and our Righteousness is all
in him; which totally excludes our own personal inherent righteousness from any
interest in our justification, and ascribes it wholly unto the Righteousness of
Christ. And thus is that Emphatical Expression of the Psalmist, I will go in
the strength of the Lord God; (for as unto holiness and obedience, all our
spiritual strength is from him alone) and I will make mention (...) Psalm.
71.16. Of thy righteousness, of thine only; The redoubling of the affix
excludes all confidence and trusting in any thing but the righteousness of God
alone. For this the Apostle affirms to be the design of God, in making Christ
to be righteousness unto us, namely that no flesh should glory in his presence,
but that he that glories, should glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. For
it is by Faith alone making mention, as unto our Justification, of the
Righteousness of God, of his righteousness only, that excludes all boasting,
Romans 3.27. And, besides what shall be further pleaded from particular
Testimonies, the Scripture does eminently declare how he is the Lord our
righteousness, namely, in that he makes an end of sin and reconciliation for
iniquity, and brings in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. For by these
things is our Justification completed; namely in Satisfaction made for Sin,
the Pardon of it in our Reconciliation unto God, and the providing for us an
everlasting righteousness. Therefore is he the Lord our Righteousness, and so
rightly called. Wherefore seeing we had lost Original righteousness, and had
none of our own remaining, and stood in need of a perfect, complete
righteousness to procure our acceptance with God, and such a one as might
exclude all occasion of boasting of any thing in our selves, the Lord Christ
being given and made unto us, the Lord our righteousness, in whom we have all
our righteousness, our own, as it is ours, being as filthy rags in the sight of
God, and this by making an end of sin, and reconciliation for iniquity, and
bringing in everlasting righteousness. It is by his Righteousness, by his only,
that we are justified in the sight of God, and do glory. This is the substance
of what, in this case, we plead for; and thus it is delivered in the Scripture,
in a way bringing more Light and Spiritual Sense into the Minds of Believers,
than those Philosophical expressions, and distinctions, which vaunt themselves
with a pretense of propriety, and accuracy.

CHAP. XVII. Testimonies out of the Evangelists, considered.
THe Reasons why the Doctrine of Justification, by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, is more fully and clearly delivered in the following
Writings of the New Testament, than it is in those of the Evangelists who wrote
the History of the Life and Death of Christ, have been before declared. But yet
in them also it is sufficiently attested, as unto the state of the Church
before the Death and Resurrection of Christ, which is represented in them. Some
few of the many Testimonies which may be pleaded out of their Writings unto
that purpose, I shall consider.

1. The principal design of our Blessed Saviors Sermon, especially that part
of it which is Recorded Matthew. 5. is to declare the true nature of
Righteousness before God. The Scribes and Pharisees, from a Bondage unto whose
Doctrines he designed to vindicate the Consciences of those that heard him,
placed all our Righteousness before God in the Works of the Law, or Men's own
obedience thereunto. This they taught the People, and hereon they justified
themselves, as he charge them. Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your
selves before men; but God knows your hearts, for that which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God: As in this Sermon he
makes it evident. And all those who were under their conduct, did seek to
establish their own Righteousness, as it were by the works of the Law, Romans
9.33. Chap. 10.3. But yet were they convinced in their own Consciences, that
they could not attain unto the Law of Righteousness; or unto that perfection of
obedience which the Law did require. Yet would they not forego their proud,
fond imagination of Justification by their own Righteousness, but, as the
manner of all Men is in the same case, sought out other inventions to relieve
them against their convictions. For unto this end, they corrupted the whole Law
by their false glosses and interpretations to bring down, and debase the sense
of it, unto what they boasted in themselves to perform. So does he in whom our
Savior gives an instance of the principle and practice of the whole Society,
by way of a Parable. Luke 18.10, 11, 12. And so the young Man affirmed, That he
had kept the whole Law from his youth, namely in their sense. Matthew. 19.20.

To root out this pernicious Error out of the Church, our Lord Jesus Christ in
many instances, gives the true, spiritual Sense and intention of the Law,
manifesting what the Righteousness is, which the Law requires, and on what
terms a Man may be justified thereby. And among sundry others to the same
purpose, two things he evidently declares. (1.) That the Law in its Precepts
and Prohibitions had regard unto the regulation of the heart, with all its
first motions and actings. For he asserts, that the inmost thoughts of the
heart, and the first motions of concupiscence therein, though not consented
unto, much less actually accomplished in the outward deeds of sin, and all the
occasions leading unto them, are directly forbidden in the Law. This he does in
his holy Exposition of the Seventh Commandment, Ver. 27, 28, 29, 30. (2.) He
declares the penalty of the Law, on the least sin, to be Hell fire, in his
Assertion of causless anger to be forbidden in the Sixth Commandment. If Men
would but try themselves by these Rules and others, there given by our Savior,
it would, it may be, take them off from boasting in their own Righteousness and
Justification thereby. But as it was then, so is it now also; the most of them
who would maintain a Justification by Works, do attempt to corrupt the sense of
the Law, and accommodate it unto their own practice. The Reader may see an
eminent demonstration hereof, in a late excellent Treatise, whose title is, The
Practical Divinity of the Papists discovered to be destructive of Christianity
and Men's souls. The Spirituality of the Law, with the severity of its Sanction,
extending it self unto the least, and most imperceptible motions of sin in the
heart, are not believed, or not aright considered by them who plead for
Justification by Works in any sense. Wherefore the principal design of the
Sermon of our Savior is, as to declare what is the nature of that obedience
which God requires by the Law, so to prepare the minds of his Disciples to
seek after another Righteousness, which in the cause and means of it, was not
yet plainly to be declared, although many of them being prepared by the
Ministry of John, did hunger and thirst after it.

But he sufficiently intimates wherein it did consist, in that he affirms of
himself, That he came to fulfill the Law, Ver. 17. What he came for, that he was
sent for; for as he was sent, and not for himself, He was born to us, given
unto us. This was to fulfill the Law, that so the Righteousness of it might he
fulfilled in us. And if we our selves cannot fulfill the Law in the proper sense
of its commands, which yet is not to be abolished but established, as our
Savior declares; if we cannot avoid the Curse and Penalty of it upon its
transgression: And if he came to fulfill it for us, all which are declared by
himself, then is his Righteousness, even which he wrought for us in fulfilling
the Law, the Righteousness wherewith we are justified before God. And whereas
here is a twofold Righteousness proposed unto us, one in the fulfilling of the
Law by Christ; the other in our own perfect obedience unto the Law, as the
sense of it is by him declared, and other middle Righteousness between them
there is none; it is left unto the Consciences of convinced, sinners, whether
of these they will adhere and trust unto. And their direction herein, is the
principal design we ought to have in the declaration of this Doctrine.

I shall pass by all those places wherein the foundations of this Doctrine are
surely laid, because it is not expressly mentioned in them. But such they are as
in their proper Interpretation do necessarily infer it. Of this kind are they
all, wherein the Lord Christ is said to die for us, or in our stead, to lay
down his life a ransom for us, or in our stead, and the like; but I shall pass
them by, because I will not digress at all from the present Argument.

But the Representation made by our Savior himself, of the way and means
whereon and whereby Men come to be justified before God, in the Parable of the
Pharisee and the Publican, is a guide unto all Men who have the same design
with them. Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And he spoke this parable unto
certain which trusted in themselves, that they were righteous and despised
others: Two Men went up unto the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the
other a Publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself; God I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even
as this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I
possess. And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful unto me a
sinner. I tell you, that this Man went down unto his house justified, rather
then the other: For every one that exalts himself, shall be abased; and every
one that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

That the design of our Savior herein, was to represent the way of our
Justification before God, is evident. (1.) From the description given of the
persons whom he reflected on. V. 9. They were such as trusted in themselves,
that they were righteous; or, That they had a Personal Righteousness of their
own before God. (2.) From the general rule wherewith he confirms the judgment
he had given concerning the persons described, Every one that exalts himself
shall be abased. Ver. 14. And he that abaseth himself, shall be exalted. As
this is applied unto the Pharisee, and the Prayer that is ascribed unto him, it
declares plainly, That every plea of our own works, as unto our Justification
before God, under any consideration, is a self exaltation which God despises;
and as applied unto the Publican, that a sense of sin is the only preparation
on our part for acceptance with him on believing.

Wherefore both the persons are represented, As seeking to be justified, for so
our Savior expresses the issue of their address unto God for that purpose;
the one was justified, the other was not.

The Plea of the Pharisee unto this end consists of two parts. (1.) That he had
fulfilled the condition whereon he might be justified. He makes no mention of
any merit, either of congruity, or condignity. Only whereas there were two
parts of Gods Covenant then with the Church, the one with respect unto the
Moral, the other with respect unto the Ceremonial Law, he pleads the
observation of the condition of it in both parts, which he shows in instances
of both kinds, only he adds, the way that he took to further him in this
obedience, somewhat beyond what was enjoined, namely, That he fasted twice in
the week. For when Men begin to seek for Righteousness, and Justification by
Works, they quickly think their best reserve lies in doing something
extraordinary more then other Men, and more indeed then is required of them.
This brought forth all the Pharisaical Austerities in the Papacy. Nor can it be
said, That all this signified nothing, because he was an Hypocrite and a
Boaster; for it will be replied, That it should seem all are so who seek for
Justification by Works: For our Savior only represents one that does so;
neither are these things laid in Bar against his Justification, but only that
he exalted himself in trusting unto his own Righteousness. (2.) In an
ascription of all that he did unto God. God, I thank thee: Although he did all
this, yet he owned the aid and assistance of God by his Grace in it all. He
esteemed himself much to differ from other Men, but ascribed it not unto
himself, that so he did. All the Righteousness and Holiness which he laid claim
unto, he ascribed unto the benignity and goodness of God. Wherefore he neither
pleaded any merit in his Works, nor any Works performed in his own strength,
without the aid of Grace. All that he pretends is, That by the Grace of God he
had fulfilled the Condition of the Covenant, and thereon expected to be
justified. And what ever words Men shall be pleased to make use of in their
Vocal Prayers, God interprets their minds, according to what they trust in, as
unto their Justication before him. And if some Men will be true unto their own
Principles, this is the Prayer which, Mutatis mutandis, they ought to make.

If it be said, that it is charged on this Pharisee, that he trusted in
himself, and despised others, for which he was rejected. I answer, (1.) This
charge respects not the mind of the person, but the genius and tendency of the
opinion. The Persuasion of Justification by Works, includes in it a contempt of
other means. For if Abraham had been justified by Works, he should have had
whereof to glory. (2.) Those whom he despised, were such as placed their whole
trust in Grace and Mercy; as this Publican. It were to be wished, that all
others of the same mind did not so also.

The issue is with this person, That he was not justified; neither shall any
one ever be so on the account of his own Personal Righteousness. For our
Savior has told us, That when we have done all, that is, when we have the
testimony of our Consciences unto the integrity of our obedience, instead of
pleading it unto our Justification, we should say, that is, really judge and
profess, that we are (...), unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. As the Apostle
speaks, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4.
And he that is (...), and has nothing to trust unto but his service, will be
cast out of the presence of God, Matthew. 25.30. Wherefore on the best of our
obedience to confess our selves (...), is to confess, that after all in our
selves, we deserve to be cast out of the presence of God.

In opposition hereunto, the state and prayer of the Publican, under the same
design of seeking Justification before God, are expressed. And the outward acts
of his Person are mentioned, as representing, and expressive of the inward
frame of his mind. He stood afar off; he did not so much as lift up his eyes;
he smote upon his breast. All of them represent a person desponding, yea,
despairing in himself. This is the nature, this is the effect of that
conviction of sin, which we before asserted to be antecedently necessary unto
Justification. Displicency, sorrow, sense of danger, fear of wrath, all are
present with him. In brief he declares himself guilty before God, and his mouth
stopped, as unto any apology or excuse. And his prayer is a sincere application
of his Soul, unto sovereign Grace and Mercy, for a deliverance out of the
condition, wherein he was by reason of the guilt of sin. And in the use of the
word (...), there is respect had unto a propitiation. In the whole of his
address there is contained. (1.) Self-condemnation and abhorrency. (2.)
Displicency and sorrow for sin. (3.) An universal Renuntiation of all Works of
his own, as any conditions of his Justification. (4.) An acknowledgment of his
sin, guilt, and misery. And this is all that on our part is required unto
Justification before God, excepting that Faith whereby we apply our selves unto
him for deliverance.

Some make a weak attempt from hence, to prove that Justification consists
wholly in the remission of sin, because on the prayer of the Publican, for
Mercy and Pardon, he is said to be justified; but there is no force in this
Argument. For (1.) The whole nature of Justification is not here declared, but
only what is required on our part thereunto. The respect of it unto the
Mediation of Christ, was not yet expressly to be brought to light, as was showed
before. (2.) Although the Publican makes his address unto God, under a deep
sense of the guilt of sin, yet he prays not for the bare pardon of sin, but for
all that sovereign Mercy or Grace, God provided for sinners. (3.) The term of
Justification must have the same sense, when applied unto the Pharisee, as when
applied unto the Publican: And if the meaning of it, with respect unto the
Publican, be, That he was pardoned, then has it the same sense, with respect
unto the Pharisee, he was not pardoned; but he came on no such errand: He came
to be justified, not pardoned; nor does he make the least mention of his sin,
or any sense of it. Wherefore although the pardon of sin be included in
Justification, yet to justify, in this place has respect unto a
Righteousness, whereon a Man is declared just and righteous, wrapped up on the
part of the Publican in the sovereign producing cause, The Mercy of God.

Some few Testimonies may be added out of the other Evangelists, in whom they
abound. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name, Joh. 1.12. Faith is expressed by
the receiving of Christ. For to receive him, and to believe on his name, are
the same. It receives him as set forth of God to be a propitiation for sin, as
the great Ordinance of God, for the Recovery and Salvation of lost sinners.
Wherefore this notion of Faith includes in it, (1.) A supposition of the
proposal and tender of Christ unto us, for some end and purpose. (2.) That this
proposal is made unto us in the promise of the Gospel. Hence as we are said to
receive Christ, we are said to receive the promise also. (3.) The end for which
the Lord Christ is so proposed unto us, in the promise of the Gospel; and this
is the same with that for which he was so proposed in the first promise,
namely, The recovery and salvation of lost sinners. (4*) That in the tender of
his person, there is a tender made of all the Fruits of his Mediation, as
containing the way and means of our deliverance from sin, and acceptance with
God. (5.) There is nothing required on our part unto an interest in the end
proposed, but receiving of him, or believing on his name. (6.) Hereby are we
entitled unto the Heavenly inheritance, we have power to become the Sons of
God, wherein our Adoption is asserted, and Justification included. What this
receiving of Christ is, and wherein it does consist, has been declared before,
in the consideration of that Faith whereby we are justified. That which hence
we argue is, That there is no more required unto the obtaining of a right and
title unto the Heavenly Inheritance, but Faith alone in the name of Christ, the
receiving of Christ as the Ordinance of God, for Justification and Salvation.
This gives us, I say, our original right thereunto, and therein our acceptance
with God, which is our Justification, though more be required unto the actual
acquisition and possession of it. It is said indeed, that other Graces and
Works are not excluded, though Faith alone be expressed. But every thing which
is not a receiving of Christ, is excluded. It is, I say, virtually excluded,
because it is not of the nature of that which is required. When we speak of
that whereby we see, we exclude no other member from being a part of the body;
but we exclude all but the eye from the act of seeing. And if Faith be
required, as it is a receiving of Christ, every Grace and Duty which is not so,
is excluded as unto the end of Justification.

Chap. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And as Moses lifted up the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believes
on him, should not perish, but have eternal life. For God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World, but that the World, through him, might be saved. He that
believes on him, is not condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God.

I shall observe only a few things from these words, which in themselves convey
a better light of understanding in this Mystery unto the minds of Believers,
then many long discourses of some Learned Men. (1.) It is of the justification
of Men, and their right to eternal Life thereon, that our Savior discourses.
This is plain in Ver. 18. He that believes is not condemned, but he that
believes not, is condemned already. (2.) The means of attaining this condition
or state on our part, is believing only, as it is three times positively
asserted, without any addition. (3.) The nature of this Faith is declared, (1)
By its object, that is, Christ himself the Son of God; whosoever believes on
him, which is frequently repeated. (2) The especial consideration, wherein he
is the object of Faith unto the Justification of life; and that is as he is the
Ordinance of God, given, sent, and proposed from the Love and Grace of the
Father. God so loved the World, that he gave; God sent his Son. (3) The
especial act yet included in the type, whereby the design of God, in him, is
illustrated. For this was the looking unto the Brazen Serpent lifted up in the
Wilderness, by them who were stung with Fiery Serpents. Hereunto our Faith in
Christ unto Justification, does answer, and includes a trust in him alone for
deliverance and relief. This is the way, these are the only causes and means of
the Justification of condemned sinners, and are the Substance of all that we
plead for.

It will be said that all this proves not the Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ unto us, which is the thing principally inquired after: But if
nothing be required on our part unto Justification, but Faith acted on Christ,
as the Ordinance of God for our recovery, and salvation, it is the whole of
what we plead for. A Justification by the remission of sins alone without a
Righteousness giving acceptance with God, and a right unto the Heavenly
Inheritance, is alien unto the Scripture, and the common notion of
Justification amongst Men. And what this Righteousness must be, upon a
supposition, that Faith only, on our part, is required unto a participation of
it, is sufficiently declared in the words wherein Christ himself is so often
asserted, as the object of our Faith unto that purpose.

Not to add more particular Testimonies, which are multiplied unto the same
purpose, in this Evangelist, the sum of the Doctrine declared by him, is, That
the Lord Jesus Christ was the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
World, that is, by the sacrifice of himself, wherein he answered and fulfilled
all the typical sacrifices of the Law: That unto this end he sanctified
himself, that those, who believe, might be sanctified, or perfected for ever by
his own offering of himself: That in the Gospel he is proposed, as lifted up
and crucified for us* is bearing all our sins on his Body on the Tree: That by
Faith (...) him, we have adoption, justification, freedom from judgment and
condemnation, with a right and title unto Eternal Life: That those who believe
not, are condemned already, because they believe not on the Son of God; and as
he elsewhere expresses it, make God a lier, in that they believe not his
Testimony, namely, That he has given unto us Eternal Life; and that this life
is in his Son. Nor does he any where make mention of any other means, cause, or
condition of Justification on our part, but Faith only, though he abounds in
Precepts unto Believers for Love, and keeping the commands of Christ. And this
Faith is the receiving of Christ, in the sense newly declared. And this is the
substance of the Christian Faith in this matter; which oft-times we rather
obscure then illustrate, by debating the consideration of any thing in our
Justification, but the Grace and Love of God, the Person and Mediation of
Christ, with Faith in them.

CHAP. XVIII. The nature of Justification as declared in the Epistles of S.
Paul, in that unto the Romans especially. Chap. 3.
THat the way and manner of our Justification before God, with all the Causes
and Means of it are designedly declared by the Apostle in the Epistle unto the
Romans, Chap. 3.4, 5. as also vindicated from Objections, so as to render his
discourse thereon the proper Seat of this Doctrine, and whence it is
principally to be learned, cannot modestly be denied. The late exceptions of
some, That this Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without Works, is found
only in the Writings of S. Paul, and that his Writings are obscure and
intricate, are both false and scandalous to Christian Religion, so as that in
this place we shall not afford them the least consideration. He wrote (...), as
he was moved by the Holy Ghost. And as all the matter delivered by him was
sacred Truth, which immediately requires our Faith and Obedience, so the way
and manner wherein he declared it, was such as the Holy Ghost judged most
expedient for the edification of the Church. And as he said himself with
confidence, That if the Gospel which he Preached, and as it was Preached by
him, though accounted by them foolishness, was hid, so as that they could not
understand, nor comprehend the Mystery of it, it was hid unto them that are
lost; so we may say, That if what he delivers in particular concerning our
Justification before God, seems obscure, difficult, or perplexed unto us, it is
from our prejudices, corrupt affections, or weakness of understanding at best,
not able to comprehend the glory of this Mystery of the Grace of God in Christ,
and not from any defect in his way, and manner of the Revelation of it.
Rejecting therefore all such perverse insinuations, in a due sense of our own
weakness, and acknowledgment that at best we know but in part, we shall humbly
inquire into the Blessed Revelation of this great Mystery of the Justification
of a sinner before God, as by him declared in those Chapters of his glorious
Epistle to the Romans; and I shall do it with all briefness possible, so as not
on this occasion to repeat what has been already spoken, or to anticipate what
may be spoken in place more convenient.

The first thing he does, is to prove all men to be under sin, and to be guilty
before God. This he gives as the conclusion of his preceding discourse from
Chap. 1.18. or what he had evidently evinced thereby, Chap. 3. ver. 19, 23.
Hereon an inquiry does arise, how any of them come to be justified before God.
And whereas Justification is a sentence upon the consideration of a
Righteousness, his grand inquiry is what that Righteousness is, on the
consideration whereof a Man may be so justified. And concerning this, he
affirms expressly that it is not the Righteousness of the Law, nor of the Works
of it; whereby what he does intend, has been in part before declared, and will
be further manifested in the proofs of our discourse. Wherefore in general he
declares, that the Righteousness whereby we are justified, is the Righteousness
of God, in opposition unto any Righteousness of our own, Chap. 1.17, Chap.
3.21, 22. And he describes this Righteousness of God by three properties, (1.)
That it is (...), without the Law, Ver. 21. separated in all its concerns from
the Law; not attainable by it, nor any works of it; which they have no
influence into. It is neither our obedience unto the Law, nor attainable
thereby. Nor can any expression more separate and exclude the Works of
Obedience unto the Law, from any concernment in it, then this does: Wherefore,
what ever is, or can be performed by our selves in obedience unto the Law, is
rejected from any interest in this Righteousness of God, or the procurement of
it to be made ours. (2.) That yet it is witnessed unto by the Law. Ver. 21. The
Law and the Prophets.

The Apostle by this distinction of the Books of the Old Testament, into the
Law and the Prophets, manifests that by the Law he understands the Books of
Moses; and in them, Testimony is given unto this Righteousness of God, four
ways.

(1.) By a declaration of the causes of the necessity of it unto our
Justification. This is done in the account given of our Apostasy from God, of
the loss of his Image, and the state of sin that insued thereon. For hereby an
end was put unto all possibility and hope of acceptance with God, by our own
Personal Righteousness. By the entrance of sin, our own Righteousness went out
of the World; so that there must be another Righteousness prepared and approved
of God, and called The Righteousness of God, in opposition unto our own, or all
Relation of Love and Favor between God and Man, must cease for ever.

(2.) In the way of recovery from this state, generally declared in the first
Promise of the Blessed Seed, by whom this Righteousness of God was to be
wrought and introduced; for he alone was to make an end of sin, and to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness, (...) Dan. 9.24. That Righteousness of God, that
should be the means of the Justification of the Church in all ages, and under
all dispensations.

(3.) By stopping up the way unto any other Righteousness through the
Threatenings of the Law, and that Curse which every transgression of it, was
attended withal. Hereby it was plainly and fully declared, that there must be
such a Righteousness provided for our Justification before Men, as would answer
and remove that curse.

(4.) In the Prefiguration and Representation of that only way and means,
whereby this Righteousness of God was to be wrought. This it did in all its
Sacrifices, especially in the great Anniversary Sacrifice on the Day of
Expiation, wherein all the sins of the Church, were laid on the Head of the
Sacrifice, and so carried away. (3.) He describes it by the only way of our
participation of it, the only means on our part of the communication of it unto
us. And this is by Faith alone. The Righteousness of God* which is by the Faith
of Christ Jesus, unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no
difference. Ver. 22. Faith in Christ Jesus is so the only way and means,
whereby this Righteousness of God comes upon us, or is communicated unto us,
that it is so unto all that have this Faith, and only unto them, and that
without difference on the consideration of any thing else besides. And although
Faith taken absolutely, may be used in various senses, yet as thus specified
and limited, the Faith of Christ Jesus, or as he calls it, the Faith that is in
me. Acts 26.18. It can intend nothing but the reception of him, and trust in
him, as the Ordinance of God for Righteousness and Salvation.

This description of The Righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel, which the
Apostle asserts as the only means and cause of our Justification before God,
with the only way of its participation and communication unto us by the Faith
of Christ Jesus, fully confirms the truth we plead for. For if the
Righteousness wherewith we must be justified before God be not our own, but the
Righteousness of God, as these things are directly opposed, Phil. 3.9. And the
only way whereby it comes upon us, or we are made partakers of it, is by the
Faith of Jesus Christ, then our own personal inherent Righteousness or
Obedience, has no interest in our Justification before God; which Argument is
insoluble, nor is the force of it to be waved by any distinctions whatever, if
we keep our hearts unto a due reverence of the Authority of God in his Word.

Having fully proved, That no Men living have any Righteousness of their own,
whereby they may be justified, but are all shut up under the guilt of sin; and
having declared, That there is a Righteousness of God now fully revealed in the
Gospel, whereby alone we may be so; leaving all Men in themselves unto their
own lot, In as much as all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, he
proceeds to declare the nature of our Justification before God in all the
causes of it. Ver. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of sins, that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I
say, at this time, his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Justifier
of them that believe in Jesus.

Here it is, that we may, and ought if any where, to expect the interest of our
personal obedience under some qualification or other, in our Justification to
be declared. For if it should be supposed (which yet it cannot with any
pretense of Reason) that in the foregoing discourse, the Apostle had excluded
only the Works of the Law, as absolutely perfect, or as wrought in our own
strength without the aid of Grace, or as meritorious; yet having generally
excluded all Works from our Justification, Ver. 20. Without distinction or
limitation, it might well be expected, and ought to have been so; that upon the
full Declaration which he gives us of the nature and way of our Justification
in all the causes of it, he should have assigned the place, and consideration
which our own personal Righteousness had in our Justification before God; the
first or second, or continuation of it, somewhat or other, or at least, made
some mention of it, under the qualification of gracious, sincere, or
Evangelical, that it might not seem to be absolutely excluded. It is plain the
Apostle thought of no such thing, nor was at all solicitous about any
reflection that might be made on his Doctrine, as though it overthrew the
necessity of our own obedience. Take in the consideration of the Apostles
design, with the circumstances of the context, and the Argument from his utter
silence, about our own personal Righteousness in our Justification before God,
is unanswerable. But this is not all; we shall find in our progress, that it is
expressly and directly excluded by him.

All unprejudiced persons must needs think that no words could be used, more
express and emphatical, to secure the whole of our Justification unto the
Freegrace of God, through the Blood, or Mediation of Christ, wherein it is
Faith alone that gives us an interest, than these used here by the Apostle. And
for my part, I shall only say, that I know not how to express my self in this
matter, in words and terms more express or significant of the conception of my
mind. And if we could all but subscribe the answer here given by the Apostle;
how, by what means, on what grounds, or by what causes, are we justified before
God; namely, that we are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, etc. There might be an end of this Controversy.

But the principal passages of this Testimony must be distinctly considered,
(1.) The principal efficient cause is first expressed with a peculiar emphasis;
or the causa (...), being justified freely by his Grace. God is the principal
efficient cause of our Justification, and his Grace is the only moving cause
thereof. I shall not stay upon the exception of those of the Roman Church,
namely, that by (...) which their Translation renders per gratiam Dei, the
internal inherent Grace of God, which they make the formal cause of
Justification, is intended. For they have nothing to prove it, but that which
overthrows it; namely, that it is added unto (...) freely, which were needless,
if it signify the Free Grace or Favor of God. For both these expressions
gratis per gratiam, freely by Grace, are put together to give the greater
emphasis unto this assertion, wherein the whole of our Justification is
vendicated unto the Free Grace of God. So far as they are distinguishable, the
one denotes the principle from whence our Justification proceeds, namely Grace;
and the other, the manner of its operation, it works freely. Besides, the Grace
of God in this subject, does every where constantly signify his goodness,
love, and favor, as has been undeniably proved by many. See Romans 5.15. Ephesians.
2.4, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 3.4, 5.

Being justified (...), so the LXX. render the Hebrew particle (...); without
price, without merit, without cause; and sometimes it is used for without end,
that is, what is done in vain; as (...) is used by the Apostle, Gal. 2.21.
without price or reward, Genesis 29.15. Exodus 21.22. 2 Kings 24.25. without cause
or merit or any means of procurement, 1 Samuel 19.5. 2 Samuel 24.24. Psalm. 69.4.
Psalm. 102. In this sense it is rendered by (...), Joh. 15.25. The design of the
word is to exclude all consideration of any thing in us that should be the
cause or condition of our justification. (...); favor, absolutely considered
may have respect unto somewhat in him toward whom it is showed; so it is said
that Joseph found grace or favor (...) in the eyes of Potiphar, Genesis 29.4. but
he found it not (...), without any consideration or cause; for he saw that the
Lord was with him and made all that he did to prosper in his hand, v. 3. But no
words can be found out to free our justification before God from all respect
unto any thing in our selves, but only what is added expressly as the means of
its participation on our part, through faith in his blood, more emphatical than
these here used by the Apostle; (...); freely by his grace. And with whom this
is not admitted as exclusive of all Works or Obedience of our own, of all
conditions, preparations and merit, I shall despair of ever expressing my
conceptions about it intelligibly unto them.

Having asserted this Righteousness of God as the cause and means of our
justification before him, in opposition unto all Righteousness of our own; and
declared the cause of the communication of it unto us on the part of God, to be
mere free Sovereign grace, the means on our part, whereby according unto the
ordination of God, we do receive, or are really made partakers of that
Righteousness of God whereon we are justified, is by faith; (...); that is by
faith alone. Nothing else is proposed, nothing else required unto this end. It
is replied, that there is no intimation that is by faith alone, or that Faith
is asserted to be the means of our Justification exclusively unto other Graces
or Works. But there is such an exclusion directly included in the description
given of that faith whereby we are justified with respect unto its especial
object by faith in his blood. For Faith respecting the blood of Christ, as that
whereby propitiation was made for Sin, in which respect alone, the Apostle
affirms that we are justified through faith, admits of no association with any
other Graces or Duties. Neither is it any part of their nature to fix on the
blood of Christ, for Justification before God: wherefore they are all here
directly excluded. And those who think otherwise, may try how they can
introduce them into this context without an evident corrupting of it, and
perverting of its sense. Neither will the other evasion yield our Adversaries
the least relief: namely, that by faith not the single grace of Faith is
intended, but the whole obedience required in the new Covenant, Faith and Works
together. For as all works whatever, as our works, are excluded in the
declaration of the causes of our Justification on the part of God (...) freely
by his grace, by virtue of that great Rule, Romans 11.6. If it be of grace, then
no more of works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; so the determination of the
object of faith in its act or duty whereon we are justified, namely the blood
of Christ is absolutely exclusive of all Works from an interest in that duty.
For whatever looks unto the blood of Christ, for Justification, is faith and
nothing else. And as for the calling of it a single act or duty, I refer the
Reader unto our preceding discourse about the nature of justifying Faith.

Three things the Apostle infers from the declaration he had made of the
Nature and Causes of our Justification before God, all of them further
illustrating the meaning and sense of his words.

1. That Boasting is excluded; (...), ver. 27. Apparent it is from hence, and
from what he affirms concerning Abraham, Chap. 4. v. 2. that a great part, at
least, of the controversy he had about Justification, was whether it did admit
of any (...) or (...) in those that were justified. And it is known that the
Jews placed all their Hopes in those things whereof they thought they could
boast, namely their Privileges and their Righteousness. But from the
declaration made of the Nature and Causes of Justification, the Apostle infers
that all Boasting whatever is utterly shut out of doors; (...). Boasting, in
our language is the name of a vice; and is never used in a good sense. But
(...) and (...), the words used by the Apostle, are (...) of an indifferent
signification, and as they are applied may denote a Virtue as well as a Vice.
So they do, Heb. 3.6.

But always, and in all places, they respect something that is peculiar in or
unto them, unto whom they are ascribed. Wherever any thing is ascribed unto one
and not unto another, with respect unto any good end, there is fundamentum
(...), a foundation for boasting. All this says the Apostle in the matter of
our Justification is utterly excluded. But wherever respect is had unto any
condition or qualification in one more than another, especially if it be of
works, it gives a ground of boasting, as he affirms, Chap. 4.2. And it appears
from comparing that verse with this, that wherever there is any influence of
our own works into our Justification, there is a ground of boasting; but in
Evangelical Justification, no such boasting in any kind can be admitted:
Wherefore there is no place for Works in our Justification before God; for if
there were, it is impossible but that a (...) in one kind or other before God,
or man must be admitted.

2. He infers a general conclusion, that a man is justified by Faith without
the Works of the Law, v. 28. What is meant by the Law, and what by the Works of
the Law in this discourse of the Apostle about our Justification, has been
before declared. And if we are justified freely through Faith in the Blood of
Christ, that Faith, which has the Propitiation of Christ for its especial
Object, or as it has so, can take no other Grace nor Duty into Partnership
with it self therein: and being so justified as that all such boasting is
excluded as necessarily exults from any differencing Graces or Works in our
selves, wherein all the Works of the Law are excluded, it is certain that it is
by Faith alone in Christ that we are justified. All Works are not only
excluded, but the way unto their return is so shut up by the Method of the
Apostles Discourse, that all the reinforcements which the wit of man can give
unto them, will never introduce them into our Justification before God.

3. He asserts from hence, that we do not make void the Law through grace, but
establish it, v. 31. which how it is done, and how alone it can be done, has
been before declared.

This is the Substance of the Resolution the Apostle gives unto that great
Enquiry, how a guilty convinced Sinner may come to be justified in the sight of
God. The sovereign Grace of God, the Mediation of Christ, and Faith in the
Blood of Christ, are all that he requires thereunto. And whatever notions men
may have about Justification in other respects, it will not be safe to venture
on any other Resolution of this case and enquiry; nor are we wiser than the
Holy Ghost.

Romans Chap. 4.
In the beginning of the fourth Chapter he confirms what he had before
doctrinally declared, by a signal instance; and this was of the Justification
of Abraham, who being the Father of the Faithful, his Justification is proposed
as the pattern of ours, as he expressly declares verse. 22, 23, 24. And some few
things I shall observe on this instance in our passage unto the fifth Verse;
where I shall fix our Discourse.

1. He denies that Abraham was justified by Works, verse. 2. And (1.) These
Works were not those of the Jewish Law, which alone some pretend to be excluded
from our Justification in this place. For they were the Works he performed some
hundreds of years before the giving of the Law at Sinai: wherefore they are the
Works of his Moral Obedience unto God that are intended. (2.) Those Works must
be understood which Abraham had then, when he is said to be justified in the
Testimony produced unto that purpose; But the Works that Abraham then had, were
Works of Righteousness, performed in Faith and Love to God, Works of New
Obedience under the Conduct and aids of the Spirit of God; Works required in
the Covenant of Grace. These are the Works excluded from the Justification of
Abraham. And these things are plain, express and evident, not to be eluded by
any Distinctions or Evasions. All Abraham's Evangelical Works are expressly
excluded from his Justification before God.

2. He proves by the Testimony of Scripture, declaring the Nature and Grounds
of the Justification of Abraham, that he was justified no other way, but that
which he had before declared, namely by Grace through Faith in Christ Jesus,
verse. 3. Abraham believed God (in the Promise of Christ and his Mediation) and
it was counted unto him for righteousness, verse. 3. He was justified by Faith
in the way before described (for other Justification by Faith there is none) in
opposition unto all his own Works, and Personal Righteousness thereby.

3. From the same Testimony he declares how he came to be Partaker of that
Righteousness whereon he was justified before God, which was by imputation; it
was counted or imputed unto him for Righteousness. The Nature of Imputation
has been before declared.

4. The especial Nature of this Imputation, namely that it is of Grace without
respect unto Works, he asserts and proves, verse. 4. from what is ^^ntrary
thereunto, Now to him that works is the reward ^ot reckoned of Grace, but of
Debt. Where Works are of any consideration, there is no room for that kind of
Imputation whereby Abraham was justified, for it was a gracious Imputation, and
that is not of what is our own antecedently thereunto, but what is made our own
by that Imputation. For what is our own cannot be imputed unto us in a way of
Grace, but only reckoned ours in a way of Debt. That which is our own with all
the effects of it, is due unto us. And therefore they who plead that Faith it
self is imputed unto us, to give some countenance unto an Imputation of Grace,
do say it is imputed not for what it is, for then it would be reckoned of Debt,
but for what it is not. So Socinus, Cum fides imputatur nobis pro justitia,
ideo imputatur quia nec ipsa fides justitia est, nec vere in se eam continet,
De Servat. Part. 4. cap. 2. which kind of Imputation being indeed only a false
Imagination, we have before disproved. But all works are inconsistent with that
Imputation whereby Abraham was justified. It is otherwise with him that
works, so as thereon to be justified, then it was with him. Yea, say some,
all Works that are meritorious, that are performed with an opinion of Merit,
that make the Reward to be of debt, are excluded, but other Works are not. This
distinction is not learned from the Apostle. For according unto him, if this be
merit and meritorious, that the Reward be reckoned of Debt, then all Works in
Justification are so. For without distinction or limitation he affirms, that
unto him that works, the reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. He
does not exclude some sort of Works, or Works in some sense, because they would
make the reward of Debt, but affirms that all would do so unto the exclusion of
gracious Imputation. For if the foundation of Imputation be in our selves,
Imputation by Grace is excluded. In the fifth Verse the Sum of the Apostles
Doctrine, which he had contended for, and what he had proved, is expressed. But
to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. It is granted on all hands, that the close
of the Verse his Faith is counted for Righteousness, does express the
Justification of the person intended. He is justified, and the way of it is,
his Faith is counted or imputed. Wherefore the foregoing words declare the
Subject of Justification, and its qualification, or the description of the
Person to be justified with all that is required on his part thereunto.

And first, it is said of him, that he is, (...); who works not. It is not
required unto his Justification that he should not work, that he should not
perform any Duties of Obedience unto God in any kind, which is working. For
every person in the world is always obliged unto all Duties of Obedience,
according to the light and knowledge of the Will of God, the means whereof is
afforded unto him. But the expression is to be limited by the Subject matter
treated of. He who works not, with respect unto Justification; though not the
design of the Person, but the Nature of the thing is intended. To say, he who
works not is justified through believing, is to say that his Works whatever
they be, have no influence into his Justification, nor has God in justifying
of him any respect unto them. Wherefore he alone who works not, is the
subject of Justification, the person to be justified; that is, God considers
no man's Works, no man's Duties of Obedience in his Justification; seeing we are
justified (...), freely by his Grace. And when God affirms expressly, that he
justifies him who works not, and that freely by his Grace, I cannot
understand what place our Works or Duties of Obedience, can have in our
Justification. For why should we trouble our selves to invent of what
consideration they may be in our Justification before God, when he himself
affirms, that they are of none at all. Neither are the words capable of any
evading interpretation. He that works not, is he that works not, let men
say what they please, and distinguish as long as they will. And it is a
boldness not to be justified, for any to rise up in opposition unto such
express Divine Testimonies, however they may be harnessed with Philosophical
Notions and arguings, which are but as Thorns and Briars, which the Word of God
will pass through and consume.

But the Apostle further adds in the description of the Subject of
Justification that God justifies the ungodly. This is that expression which
has stirred up so much wrath amongst many, and on the account whereof, some
seem to be much displeased with the Apostle himself. If any other person dare
but say that God justifies the ungodly, he is presently reflected on, as one
that by his Doctrine would overthrow the necessity of Godliness, Holiness,
Obedience, or Good Works. For what need can there be of any of them, if God
justifies the ungodly? Howbeit this is a Periphrasis of God that he is (...)
he that justifies the ungodly; this is his Prerogative and Property, as such
will he be believed in and worshipped, which adds weight and Emphasis unto the
Expression. And we must not foregoe this Testimony of the Holy Ghost, let men
be as angry as they please.

But the difference is about the meaning of the words. If so, it may be allowed
without mutual offense, though we should mistake their proper sense. Only it
must be granted, that God justifies the ungodly. That is, say some, those who
formerly were ungodly, not those who continue ungodly when they are justified.
And this is most true. All that are justified were before ungodly; and all that
are justified are at the same instant made Godly. But the question is, whether
they are Godly or Ungodly antecedently in any moment of time unto their
Justification; if they are considered as Godly, and are so indeed, then the
Apostles words are not true, that God justifies the ungodly; for the
contradictory Proposition is true, God justifies none but the Godly. For these
Propositions, God justifies the ungodly, and God justifies none but the
Godly, are contradictory. For here are expressly (...) and (...), which is (...).

Wherefore, although in and with the Justification of a Sinner, he is made
Godly, for he is endowed with that Faith which purifieth the heart, and is a
vital Principle of all Obedience, and the Conscience is purged from Dead Works
by the Blood of Christ; yet antecedently unto his Justification he is ungodly
and considered as ungodly, as one that works not, as one whose Duties and
Obedience contribute nothing unto his Justification. As he works not, all
works are excluded from being the causa per quam; and as he is ungodly, from
being the causa sine qua non of his Justification.

The Qualification of the Subject, or the means on the part of the person to be
justified, and whereby he becomes actually so to be, is Faith or believing. But
believes on him who justifies the ungodly. That is, it is Faith alone. For it
is the Faith of him who works not; and not only so, but its especial object,
God as justifying the ungodly, is exclusive of the concomitancy of any works
whatever.

This is Faith alone, or it is impossible to express Faith alone, without the
literal use of that word alone. But Faith being asserted, in opposition unto
all works of ours, unto him that works not, and its especial nature declared
in its especial object, God as justifying the ungodly, that is, freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, no place is left for any
Works to make the least approach toward our Justification before God, under
the covert of any distinction whatever. And the nature of Justifying Faith is
here also determined. It is not a mere assent unto Divine Revelations; it is
not such a firm assent unto them, as should cause us to yield Obedience unto
all the Precepts of the Scripture, though these things are included in it; but
it is a believing on, and trusting unto him that justifies the ungodly,
through the Mediation of Christ.

Concerning this Person, the Apostle affirms that his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. That is, he is justified in the way and manner before declared.
But there is a difference about the Sense of these words. Some say, the meaning
of them is, that Faith as an Act, a Grace, a Duty or Work of ours, is so
imputed. Others say, that it is Faith as it apprehends Christ and his
Righteousness, which is properly imputed unto us, that is intended. So Faith
they say justifies, or is counted for Righteousness relatively, not properly,
with respect unto its object; and so acknowledge a Trope in the words. And this
is fiercely opposed, as though they denied the express words of the Scripture,
when yet they do but interpret this expression once only used, by many others,
wherein the same thing is declared. But those who are for the first sense, do
all affirm that Faith here is to be taken as including Obedience or Works,
either as the form and essence of it, or as such necessary concomitants as have
the same influence with it into our Justification, or are in the same manner
the condition of it. But as herein they admit also of a Trope in the words
which they so fiercely blame in others, so they give this sense of the whole,
unto him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his Faith and Works are counted to him for Righteousness; which is not only to
deny what the Apostle affirms, but to assign unto him a plain contradiction.

And, I do a little marvel that any unprejudiced person, should expound this
Solitary Expression in such a sense, as is contradictory unto the design of the
Apostle, the words of the same Period, and the whole ensuing Context. For that
which the Apostle proposes unto confirmation, which contains his whole design,
is, that we are justified by the Righteousness which is of God by Faith in the
blood of Christ. That this cannot be Faith it self, shall immediately be made
evident; And in the words of the Text, all Works are excluded, if any words be
sufficient to exclude them. But Faith absolutely as a single Grace, Act and
Duty of ours, much more as it includes Obedience in it, is a Work, and in the
later sense it is all Works. And in the ensuing Context, he proves that Abraham
was not justified by Works. But not to be justified by Works, and to be
justified by some Works, as Faith it self is a Work; and if as such it be
imputed unto us for Righteousness, we are justified by it as such; are
contradictory. Wherefore I shall oppose some few Arguments unto this feigned
sense of the Apostles words.

1. To believe absolutely, as Faith is an Act and Duty of of ours, and Works,
are not opposed; for Faith is a Work an especial kind of Working. But Faith as
we are justified by it, and Works, or to Work, are opposed. To him that works
not, but believes. So Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.8.

2. It is the Righteousness of God that is imputed unto us. For we are made the
Righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Righteousness of God upon them
that believe, Romans 3.21, 22. But Faith absolutely considered, is not the
Righteousness of God, God imputes unto us Righteousness without Works, Romans
4.16. But there is no intimation of a double Imputation of two sorts of
Righteousnesses, of the Righteousness of God, and that which is not so. Now
Faith absolutely considered, is not The Righteousness of God. For,

1. That whereunto the Righteousness of God is revealed, whereby we believe and
receive it, is not its self the Righteousness of God. For nothing can be the
cause or means of of it self: But the Righteousness of God is revealed unto
Faith, Romans 1.16. And by it is it received, Romans 3.22. Chap. 5.11.

2. Faith is not the Righteousness of God which is by Faith: But the
Righteousness of God which is imputed unto us is, the Righteousness of God
which is by Faith, Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9.

3. That whereby the Righteousness of God is to be sought, obtained, and
submitted unto, is not that Righteousness it self. But such is Faith, Romans
9.30, 31. Chap. 10.30.

4. The Righteousness which is imputed unto us, is not our own antecedently
unto that Imputation. That I may be found in him, not having my own
Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. But Faith is a man's own. Show me thy Faith, I will
show thee my Faith, Jam. 2.18.

5. God imputes Righteousness unto us, Romans 4.6. And that Righteousness which
God imputes unto us, is the Righteousness whereby we are justified, for it is
imputed unto us that we may be justified. But we are justified by the Obedience
and Blood of Christ. By the Obedience of one we are made Righteous, Romans 5.19.
Much more now being justified by his Blood, v. 9. He has put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. Isai. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear their Iniquities. But Faith
is neither the Obedience, nor the Blood of Christ.

6. Faith, as we said before, is our own. And that which is our own may be
imputed unto us. But the discourse of the Apostle is about that which is not
our own antecedently unto Imputation, but is made ours thereby, as we have
proved; for it is of Grace. And the Imputation of what is really our own unto
us antecedently unto that Imputation, is not of Grace in the sense of the
Apostle. For what is so imputed, is imputed for what it is, and nothing else.
For that Imputation is but the Judgment of God concerning the thing imputed,
with respect unto them whose it is. So the Fact of Phineas was imputed unto him
for Righteousness. God judged it, and declared it to be a Righteous rewardable
act. Wherefore if our Faith and Obedience be imputed unto us, that Imputation
is only the Judgment of God that we are Believers and Obedient. The
Righteousness of the Righteous, says the Prophet, shall be upon him and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.20. As the wickedness of
the wicked is upon him, or is imputed unto him, so the Righteousness of the
Righteous is upon him, or is imputed unto him. And the wickedness of the wicked
is on him, when God judges him wicked as his Works are. So is the
Righteousness of a man upon him, or imputed unto him, when God judges of his
Righteousness as it is. Wherefore if Faith absolutely considered, be imputed
unto us as it contains in it self, or as it is accompanied with Works of
Obedience: then it is imputed unto us, either for a perfect Righteousness which
it is not, or for an imperfect Righteousness which it is; or the Imputation of
it, is the accounting of that to be a perfect Righteousness, which is but
imperfect; but none of these can be affirmed.

1. It is not imputed unto us for a perfect Righteousness, the Righteousness
required by the Law, for so it is not. Episcopius confesses in his
disputation, Disput. 43.. 7, 8. that the Righteousness which is imputed unto us
must be absolutissima and perfectissima, most absolute and most perfect. And
thence he thus defines the Imputation of Righteousness unto us, name]y that it
is, gratiosa Divinae mentis aestimatio, qua credentem in filium suum, eo loco
reputat ac si perfect justus esset ac legi and voluntati ejus per omnia semper
paruisset. And no man will pretend, that Faith is such a most absolute and most
perfect righteousness, as that by it the Righteousness of the Law should be
fulfilled in us, as it is by that Righteousness which is imputed unto us.

2. It is not imputed unto us for what it is, an imperfect Righteousness. For,
(1.) This would be of no advantage unto us. For we cannot be justified before
God by an imperfect Righteousness, as is evident in the Prayer of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no man
living, (no Servant of thine who has the most perfect, or highest measure of
imperfect Righteousness) shall be justified. (2.) The Imputation of any thing
unto us, that was ours antecedently unto that Imputation, for what it is, and
no more, is contrary unto the Imputation described by the Apostle, as has been
proved.

3. This Imputation pleaded for, cannot be a judging of that to be a perfect
Righteousness which is imperfect. For the Judgment of God is according to
Truth. But without judging it to be such, it cannot be accepted as such. To
accept of any thing, but only for what we judge it to be, is to be deceived.

Lastly, if Faith, as a Work be imputed unto us, then it must be as a Work
wrought in Faith. For no other Work is accepted with God. Then must that Faith
also wherein it is wrought be imputed unto us; for that also is Faith and a
good Work. That therefore must have another Faith from whence it must proceed.
And so in infinitum.

Many other things there are in the ensuing Explication of the Justification of
Abraham, the nature of his Faith and his Righteousness before God, with the
application of them unto all that do believe, which may be justly pleaded unto
the same purpose with those passages of the Context which we have insisted on.
But if every Testimony should be pleaded which the Holy Ghost has given unto
this Truth, there would be no end of writing. One thing more I shall observe
and put an end unto our discourse on this Chapter.

Verse. 6, 7, 8. The Apostle pursues his Argument to prove the freedom of our
Justification by Faith, without respect unto Works, through the Imputation of
Righteousness in the instance of pardon of Sin, which essentially belongs
thereunto. And this he does by the Testimony of the Psalmist, who places the
blessedness of a man in the Remission of Sins. His design is not thereby to
declare the full nature of Justification, which he had done before, but only to
prove the freedom of it from any respect unto Works in the instance of that
essential part of it. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man
unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works (which was the only thing he
designed to prove by this Testimony) saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities
are forgiven. He describes their blessedness by it, not that their whole
blessedness does consist therein; but this concurs unto it wherein no respect
can possibly be had unto any Works whatever. And he may justly from hence
describe the blessedness of a man, in that the Imputation of Righteousness, and
the Non-Tmputation of Sin (both which the Apostle mentions distinctly)
wherein his whole blessedness as unto justification does consist, are
inseparable. And because Remission of Sin is the first part of Justification,
and the principal part of it, and has the Imputation of Righteousness always
accompanying it, the blessedness of a man may be well described thereby. Yea,
whereas all Spiritual Blessings go together in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. A man's
blessedness may be described by any of them. But yet the Imputation of
Righteousness, and the Remission of Sin are not the same, no more than
Righteousness imputed, and Sin remitted are the same. Nor does the Apostle
propose them as the same, but mentions them distinctly, both being equally
necessary unto our complete Justification, as has been proved.

Chap. 5. Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the world and death by Sin; and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. For until the Law Sin was
in the world: But Sin is not imputed when there is no Law. Nevertheless death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come:
But not as the offense, so also is the free gift. For if through the offense of
one, many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is
by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And not as it was by one
that sinned, so is the gift: For the Judgment was by one to condemnation; but
the free gift is of many offenses unto Justification. For if by one man's
offense death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of Grace,
and of the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.
Therefore as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation:
Even so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
Justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners:
So by the obedience of one, shall many be made Righteous. Moreover the Law
entered that the offense might abound: But where Sin abounded, Grace did much
more abound: That as Sin has reigned unto death, even so might Grace reign
through Righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.
The Apostle Chap. 3.27. affirms, That in this matter of Justification, all
(...) or boasting, is excluded. But here in the Verse foregoing, he grants a
boasting or a (...) (...). And not only so, but we also glory in God; he
excludes boasting in our selves, because there is nothing in us to procure or
promote our own Justification. He allows it us, in God, because of the eminency
and excellency of the way and means of our Justification, which in his Grace he
has provided. And the (...) or boasting in God here allowed us, has a
peculiar respect unto what the Apostle had in prospect further to discourse of.
(...), and not only so, includes what he had principally treated of before,
concerning our Justification so far, as it consists in the pardon of sin. For
although he does suppose, yea, and mention the imputation of Righteousness also
unto us; yet principally he declares our Justification by the pardon of sin,
and our freedom from condemnation, whereby all boasting in our selves, is
excluded. But here he designs a further progress, as unto that whereon our
glorying in God, on a right and title freely given us unto eternal life, does
depend. And this is the Imputation of the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ
unto the Justification of life, or the reign of Grace, through Righteousness,
unto eternal Life.

Great complaints have been made by some concerning the obscurity of the
discourse of the Apostle in this place, by reason of sundry Ellipses,
Antapodota, Hyperbata, and other Figures of Speech, which either are, or are
feigned to be therein. Howbeit I cannot but think, that if Men acquainted with
the common principles of Christian Religion, and sensible in themselves of the
nature and guilt of our original apostasy from God, would without prejudice
read (...), this place of the Scripture, they will grant that the design of the
Apostle is to prove; that as the sin of Adam was imputed unto all Men unto
condemnation, so the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ is imputed unto all
that believe unto the Justification of life. The sum of it is given by
Theodoret, Dial. 3. Vide, quomodo quae Christi sunt cum iis quae sunt Adami
conferantur, cum morbo medicina, cum vulnere emplastrum, cum Peccato justitia,
cum execratione benedictio, cum condemnatione remissio, cum transgressione
obedientia, cum morte vita, cum inferis regnum, Christus cum Adam, homo cum
homine.

The differences that are among Interpreters about the Exposition of these
words, relate unto the use of some Particles, Prepositions, and the dependence
of one passage upon another; on none of which the confirmation of the truth
pleaded for does depend. But the plain design of the Apostle, and his express
Propositions are such, as if Men could but acquiesce in them, might put an end
unto this controversy.

Socinus acknowledges that this place of Scripture does give, as he speaks the
greatest occasion unto our opinion in this matter: For he cannot deny, but, at
least, a great appearance of what we believe, is represented in the words of
the Apostle. He does therefore use his utmost endeavor to wrest and deprave
them: And yet, although most of his Artifices are since traduced into the
Annotations of others upon the place, he himself produces nothing material,
but what is taken out of Origin, and the Comment of Pelagius on this Epistle,
which is extant in the Works of Jerome, and was urged before him by Erasmus.
The substance of what he pleads for is, That the actual transgression of Adam
is not imputed unto his posterity, nor a depraved nature from thence
communicated unto them. Only whereas he had incurred the penalty of death, all
that derive their nature from him in that condition, are rendered subject unto
death also. And as for that corruption of nature which is in us, or a proneness
unto sin, it is not derived from Adam, but is an habit contracted by many
continued acts of our own. So also on the other hand, that the Obedience or
Righteousness of Christ, is not imputed unto us. Only when we make our selves
to become his Children by our obedience unto him; he having obtained eternal
life for himself by his obedience unto God, we are made partakers of the
benefits thereof. This is the substance of his long Disputation on this
subject, De Servator. lib. 4. cap. 6. But this is not to expound the words of
the Apostle, but expressly to contradict them, as we shall see in the ensuing
consideration of them.

I intend not an Exposition of the whole discourse of the Apostle, but only of
those passages in it, which evidently declare the way and manner of our
Justification before God.

A comparison is here proposed and pursued between the First Adam, by whom sin
was brought into the World; and the Second Adam, by whom it is taken away. And
a comparison it is (...), of things contrary, wherein there is a similitude in
some things, and a dissimilitude in others, both sorts illustrating the truth
declared in it. The general Proposition of it is contained in Ver. 12. As by
one Man sin entered into the World, and death by sin; and so death passed on all
Men, for that all have sinned. The entrance of sin and punishment into the
World, was by one Man; and that by one sin as he afterward declares. Yet were
they not confined unto the person of that one Man, but belonged equally unto
all. This the Apostle expresses inverting the order of the Effect and Cause.
In the entrance of it, he first mentions the cause or sin, and then the effect
or punishment, By one Man sin entered into the World, and Death by sin: But in
the Application of it unto all Men, he expresses first the effect, and then
the cause; Death passed on all Men, for that all had sinned. Death on the first
entrance of sin, passed on all; that is, all Men became liable and obnoxious
unto it, as the punishment due to sin. All Men that ever were, are, or shall
be, were not then existent in their own persons. But yet were they all of them,
then, upon the first entrance of sin, made subject to death, or liable unto
punishment. They were so by virtue of Divine Constitution upon their foederal
existence in the one Man that sinned. And actually they became obnoxious in
their own persons unto the sentence of it, upon their first natural existence
being born children of wrath.

It is hence manifest what sin it is that the Apostle intends, namely, The
actual sin of Adam; the one sin of that one common person whilst he was so.
For although the corruption and depravation of our nature, does necessarily
ensue thereon, in every one that is brought forth actually in the World by
Natural Generation; yet is it the guilt of Adams actual sin alone, that rendered
them all obnoxious unto death upon the First entrance of sin into the World. So
death entered by sin, the guilt of it, obnoxiousness unto it, and that with
respect unto all Men universally.

Death here compriseth the whole punishment due unto sin, be it what it will,
concerning which we need not here to dispute. The wages of sin is death, Romans
6.23. and nothing else. Whatever sin deserves in the Justice of God. whatever
punishment God at any time appointed or threatened unto it, it is comprised in
death: In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. This therefore
the Apostle lays down as the foundation of his discourse, and of the comparison
which he intends; namely, that in and by the actual sin of Adam, all Men are
made liable unto death, or unto the whole punishment due unto sin. That is, the
guilt of that sin is imputed unto them. For nothing is intended by the
imputation of sin unto any, but the rendering them justly obnoxious unto the
punishment due unto that sin. As the not imputing of sin, is the freeing of Men
from being subject or liable unto punishment. And this sufficiently evidenceth
the vanity of the Pelagian Gloss that Death passed upon all, merely by virtue
of natural propagation from him who had deserved it, without any imputation of
the guilt of sin unto them; which is a contradiction unto the plain words of
the Apostle. For it is the guilt of sin, and not natural propagation that he
affirms to be the cause of Death.

Having mentioned sin and death, the one as the only cause of the other, the
guilt of sin of the punishment of death, sin deserving nothing but death, and
death being due unto nothing but sin, he declares how all Men universally
became liable unto this punishment, or guilty of death. (...), in quo omnes
peccaverunt; in whom all have sinned. For it relates unto the one Man that
sinned, in whom all sinned; which is evident from the effect thereof, in as
much as in him all died, 1 Cor. 15.22. Or as it is here, on his sin Death
passed on all Men. And this is the evident sense of the words, (...) being put
for (...), which is not unusual in the Scripture. See Matthew. 15.5. Romans 4.18.
Chap. 5.2. Phil. 1.3. Heb. 9.17. And it is so often used by the best Writers in
the Greek Tongue: So Hesiod (...), modus in omnibus rebus optimus. So (...), in
vobis situm est. (...), hoc in me situm est. And this reading of the words is
contended for by Austine against the Pelagians rejecting their eo quod or
propterea. But I shall not contend about the reading of the words. It is the
artifice of our adversaries to persuade Men, that the force of our Argument to
prove from hence the imputation of the sin of Adam unto his posterity, does
depend solely upon this interpretation of these words, (...), by, in whom. We
shall therefore grant them their desire, that they are better rendered by eo
quod, propterea, or quatenus; in as much, because. Only we must say, that here
is a reason given, Why Death passed on all Men, in as much as all have sinned,
that is, in that sin whereby death entered into the World.

It is true! Death by virtue of the original constitution of the Law, is due
unto every sin, when ever it is committed. But the present inquiry is, how
Death passed at once on all Men, how they came liable and obnoxious unto it
upon its first entrance by the actual sin of Adam; which cannot be by their own
actual sin. Yea the Apostle in the next Verses affirms, That death passed on
them also, who never sinned actually, or as Adam did, whose sin was actual. And
if the actual sins of Men in imitation of Adams sin were intended, then should
Men be made liable to Death, before they had sinned. For Death upon its first
entrance into the World, passed on all Men, before any one Man had actually
sinned, but Adam only. But that Men should be liable unto Death, which is
nothing but the punishment of sin, when they have not sinned, is an open
contradiction. For although God by his sovereign Power might inflict Death on
an innocent Creature, yet that an innocent Creature should be guilty of death
is impossible. For to be guilty of death, is to have sinned. Wherefore this
expression, In as much as all have sinned, expressing the desert and guilt of
death, then when sin and death first entered into the World, no sin can be
intended in it, but the sin of Adam, and our interest therein; Eramus enim
omnes ille unus homo. And this can be no otherwise, but by the imputation of
the guilt of that sin unto us. For the act of Adam not being ours inherently
and subjectively, we cannot be concerned in its Effect, but by the imputation
of its guilt. For the communication of that unto us which is not inherent in
us, is, that which we intend by imputation.

This is the (...) of the intended collation, which I have insisted the longer
on, because the Apostle lays in it the foundation of all that he afterward
infers, and asserts in in the whole comparison. And here some say there is an
(...) in his discourse, that is, he lays down the Proposition on the part of
Adam, but does not show what answers to it on the contrary in Christ. And
Origin gives the reason of the silence of the Apostle herein, namely, Lest what
is to be said therein, should be abused by any unto sloth and negligence. For
whereas he says (...), (as, which is a note of similitude) By one Man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin; so the (...) or reddition should be,
So by one, Righteousness entered into the World, and Life by Righteousness.

This he acknowledges to be the genuine filling up of the comparison, but was
not expressed by the Apostle, Lest Men should abuse it unto negligence or
security, supposing that to be done already, which should be done afterward.
But as this plainly contradicts and everts most of what he further asserts in
the Exposition of the place; so the Apostle concealed not any Truth upon such
considerations. And as he plainly expresses that which is here intimated, Ver.
19. So he shows how foolish and wicked any such imaginations are, as suppose
that any countenance is given hereby unto any, to indulge themselves in their
sins.

Some grant, therefore, that the Apostle does conceal the Expression of what is
ascribed unto Christ, in opposition unto what he had affirmed of Adam and his
sin, unto Ver. 19. But the truth is, it is sufficiently included in the close
of Ver. 14. where he affirms of Adam, that in those things whereof he treats,
He was the Figure of him that was to come. For the way and manner whereby he
introduced Righteousness and Life, and communicated them unto Men, answered the
way and manner whereby Adam introduced sin and death which passed on all the
World. Adam being the Figure of Christ, look how it was with him, with respect
unto his Natural Posterity as unto sin and death; so it is with the Lord
Christ, the Second Adam, and his Spiritual Posterity, with respect unto
Righteousness and Life. Hence we argue,

If the actual sin of Adam was so imputed unto all his posterity, as to be
accounted their own sin unto condemnation, then is the actual obedience of
Christ, the Second Adam imputed unto all his Spiritual Seed, that is, unto all
Believers unto Justification. I shall not here further press this Argument,
because the ground of it will occur unto us afterward.

The two next Verses containing an Objection and an Answer returned unto them,
wherein we have no immediate concernment, I shall pass by.

Verse. 15, 16. The Apostle proceeds to explain his Comparison in those things,
wherein there is a dissimilitude between the comparates.

But not as the offense, so is the free gift; for if through the offense of one
many be dead, much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, by one Man
Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. The opposition is between (...) on the
one hand, and (...) on the other; between which, a dissimilitude is asserted,
not as unto their opposite effects of Death and Life, but only as unto the
degrees of their efficacy, with respect unto those effects, (...), the offense,
the fall, the sin, the transgression; that is, (...), the disobedience of one,
Ver. 19. Hence the first sin of Adam, is generally called the fall, (...). That
which is opposed hereunto, is (...); Donum, Donum gratuitum; Beneficium, id
quod Deus gratificatur; that is, (...), as it is immediately explained. The
grace of God, and the free gift by grace, through Jesus Christ. Wherefore,
although this word, in the next verse, does precisely signify the
Righteousness of Christ, yet here it comprehends all the causes of our
Justification, in opposition unto the fall of Adam, and the entrance of sin
thereby.

The consequent and effect (...) of the offense, the fall, is, that many be
dead. No more is here intended by many, but only that the effects of that one
offense were not confined unto one: And if we inquire who, or how many those
many are, the Apostle tells us, that they are all Men universally, that is, all
the posterity of Adam. By this one offense, because they all sinned, therein
they are all dead; that is, rendered obnoxious and liable unto death, as the
punishment due unto that one offense. And hence also it appears, how vain it is
to wrest those words of Ver. 12. In as much as all have sinned, unto any other
sin, but the first sin in Adam; seeing it is given as the reason why death
passed on them, it being here plainly affirmed, That they are dead, or that
death passed on them by that one offense.

The efficacy (...) of the free gift opposed hereunto, is expressed, as that
which abounded much more. Besides the thing it self asserted, which is plain
and evident, the Apostle seems to me to argue the equity of our Justification
by Grace, through the obedience of Christ, by comparing it with the
condemnation that befell us by the sin and disobedience of Adam. For if it were
just, meet, and equal that all Men should be made subject unto condemnation for
the sin of Adam; it is much more so, that those who believe, should be
justified by the obedience of Christ, through the grace and free donation of
God. But wherein, in particular the gift by Grace, abounded unto many, above
the efficacy of the fall to condemn, he declares afterward. And, that whereby
we are freed from condemnation, more eminently then we are made obnoxious unto
it by the fall and sin of Adam, by that alone we are justified before God. But
this is by the grace of God, and the gift by Grace, through Jesus Christ alone;
which we plead for Ver. 16. Another difference between the comparates is
expressed, or rather the instance is given in particular of the dissimilitude
asserted in general before.

And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by
one to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto Justification.

(...), By one that sinned, is the same with (...), by one sin, one offense,
the one sin of that one Man. (...), we render judgment. Most Interpreters do it
by reatus, guilt, or crimen, which is derived from it. So (...) Judicium, is
used in the Hebrew for guilt, (...) Jere. 26.11. The judgment of death is to
this Man, this Man is guilty of death, has deserved to die. First therefore
there was (...) the sin, the fall (...) of one Man that sinned; it was his
actual sin alone. Thence followed (...), reatus, guilt; this was common unto
all. In and by that one sin, guilt came upon all. And the end hereof, that
which it rendered Men obnoxious unto, is (...), condemnation; guilt unto
condemnation; and this guilt unto condemnation which came upon all, was (...)
of one person, or sin. This is the order of things on the part of Adam, (1.)
(...) the one sin. (2.) (...) the guilt that thereon insued unto all. (3.)
(...) the condemnation which that guilt deserved. And their Antitheta or
Opposites in the Second Adam, are (1.) (...) the free donation of God. (2.)
(...) the gift of Grace it self, or the Righteousness of Christ. (3.) (...) or
(...), Justification of Life. But yet though the Apostle does thus distinguish
these things to illustrate his comparison and opposition, yet that which he
intends by them all, is the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ, as he
declares Ver. 18, 19. This in the matter of our Justification, he (1.) calls
(...) with respect unto the free gratuitous grant of it by Grace of God, (...);
and (2.) (...) with respect unto us who receive it. A free gift it is unto us;
and (3.) (...), with respect unto its effect of making us righteous.

Whereas therefore, by the sin of Adam imputed unto them, guilt came on all men
unto condemnation, we must inquire wherein the free gift was otherwise. Not as
by one that sinned, so was the gift. And it was so in two things: For (1.)
Condemnation came upon all by one offense. But being under the guilt of that
one offense, we contract the guilt of many more innumerable. Wherefore if the
free gift had respect only unto that one offense, and intended it self no
further, we could not be delivered; wherefore it is said to be of many
offenses, that is, of all our sins and trespasses whatever. (2.) Adam and all
his posterity in him, were in a state of acceptance with God, and placed in a
way of obtaining eternal life and blessedness, wherein God himself would have
been their reward. In this estate by the entrance of sin, they lost the favor
of God, and incurred the guilt of death or condemnation, for they are the same.
But they lost not an immediate right and title unto life and blessedness. For
this they had not, nor could have before the course of obedience prescribed
unto them was accomplished. That therefore, which came upon all by the one
offense, was the loss of Gods favor in the approbation of their present state,
and the judgment or guilt of death and condemnation. But an immediate right
unto eternal life, by that one sin was not lost. The free gift is not so: For
as by it we are freed, not only from one sin, but from all our sins, so also by
it we have a right and title unto eternal life. For therein Grace reigns
through Righteousness unto eternal life, Ver. 22.

The same truth is further explained and confirmed, Ver. 17. For if by one Man's
offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of Grace,
and of the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. The
design of the Apostle having been sufficiently manifested in our observations
on the former Verses, I shall from this only observe those things which more
immediately concern our present subject. And (1.) it is worth observation, with
what variety of expressions the Apostle sets forth the Grace of God in the
Justification of Believers. (...). Nothing is omitted that may any way express
the freedom, sufficiency, and efficacy of Grace unto that end. And although
these terms seem some of them to be coincident in their signification, and to
be used by him promiscuously, yet do they every one include something that is
peculiar, and all of them set forth the whole work of Grace. (...) seems to me,
to be used in this Argument for (...), which is the foundation of a cause in
trial, the matter pleaded, whereon the person tried is to be acquitted and
justified. And this is the Righteousness of Christ; of one, (...), or a free
donation is exclusive of all desert and conditions on our part, who do receive
it. And it is that whereby we are freed from condemnation, and have a right
unto the Justification of life. (...) is the free grace and favor of God, which
is the original or efficient cause of our Justification, as was declared Chap.
3.24. (...) has been explained before. (...), the abundance of grace, is added
to secure Believers of the certainty of the effect. It is that whereunto
nothing is wanting unto our Justification. (...) expresses the free grant of
that Righteousness which is imputed unto us unto the Justification of life,
afterward called the obedience of Christ. Be Men as wise and learned as they
please, it becomes us all to learn to think, and speak of those Divine
Mysteries from this Blessed Apostle, who knew them better then we all, and
besides, wrote by divine inspiration.

And it is mavelous unto me, how Men can break through the fence that he has
made about the grace of God, and obedience of Christ in the work of our
Justification before God, to introduce their our own Works of Obedience, and to
find a place for them therein. But the design of Paul and some Men in declaring
this point of our Justification before God, seems to be very opposite and
contrary. His whole discourse is concerning the Grace of God, the Death, Blood,
and Obedience of Christ, as if he could never sufficiently satisfy himself in
the setting out, and declaration of them, without the least mention of any
works or duties of our own, or the least intimation of any use that they are of
herein. But all their pleas are for their own works and duties; and they have
invented as many terms to set them out by, as, the Holy Ghost has used for the
expression and declaration of the Grace of God. Instead of the words of Wisdom
before mentioned, which the Holy Ghost has taught, wherewith he fills up his
discourse, theirs are filled with conditions, preparatory dispositions, merits,
causes, and I know not what trappings for our own works. For my part I shall
choose rather to learn of him, and accommodate my conceptions and expressions of
Gospel Mysteries, and of this, in especial, concerning our Justification, unto
his who cannot deceive me; than trust to any other conduct, how specious soever
its pretenses may be.

2. It is plain in this Verse, that no more is required of any one unto
Justification, but that he receive the abundance of Grace, and the gift of
Righteousness. For this is the description that the Apostle gives of those that
are justified, as unto any thing that on their part is required. And as this
excludes all Works of Righteousness which we do; for by none of them do we
receive the abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness; so it does also
the imputation of Faith it self unto our Justification, as it is an act and
duty of our own: For Faith is that whereby we receive the gift of
Righteousness, by which we are justified. For it will not be denied, but that
we are justified by the gift of Righteousness, or the Righteousness which is
given unto us; for by it have we right and title unto life. But our Faith is
not this gift, for that which receives, and that which is received, are not
the same.

3. Where there is (...), and (...), abounding grace, superabounding grace,
exerted in our Justification, no more is required thereunto. For how can it be
said to abound, yea, to superabound, not only to the freeing of us from
condemnation; but the giving of us a title unto life, if in any thing it is to
be supplied, and eeked out by works and duties of our own. The things intended
do fill up these expressions, although to some they are but an empty noise.

4. There is a gift of Righteousness required unto our Justification, which all
must receive, who are to be justified. And all are justified who do receive it;
for they that receive it shall reign in life by Jesus Christ. And hence it
follows, (1.) That the Righteousness whereby we are justified before God, can
be nothing of our own, nothing inherent in us, nothing performed by us. For it
is that which is freely given us, and this donation is by imputation: Blessed
is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes Righteousness, Chap. 4.6. And by Faith
we receive what is so given and imputed, and otherwise we contribute nothing
unto our participation of it. This it is to be justified in the sense of the
Apostle, (2.) It is such a Righteousness as gives right and title unto eternal
life. For they that receive it, shall reign in life. Wherefore it cannot
consist in the pardon of sin alone. For (1.) the pardon of sin can in no
tolerable sense be called the gift of Righteousness. Pardon of sin is one
thing, and Righteousness another. (2.) Pardon of sin does not give right and
title unto eternal life. It is true, he whose sins are pardoned shall inherit
eternal life; but not merely by virtue of that pardon, but through the
imputation of Righteousness which does inseparably accompany it, and is the
ground of it.

The description which is here given of our Justification by Grace, in
opposition unto the condemnation, that we were made liable unto by the sin of
Adam, and in exaltation above it, as to the efficacy of Grace above that of the
first sin, in that thereby not one but all sins are forgiven, and not only so,
but a right unto life eternal is communicated unto us, is this, That we receive
the Grace of God, and the gift of Righteousness, which gives us a right unto
life by Jesus Christ. But this is to be justified by the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ received by Faith alone.

The conclusion of what has been evinced in the management of the comparison
insisted on is fully expressed and further confirmed Ver. 18, 19.

Ver. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all Men unto
condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
Men unto the Justification of life. So we read the words. By the offense of
one; the Greek Copies vary here. Some read (...), whom Beza follows, and our
Translation in the Margin; by one offense; most by (...), by the offense of
one; and so afterward as unto Righteousness; but both are unto the same
purpose. For the one offense intended, is the offense of one, that is, of Adam:
And the one Righteousness is the Righteousness of one, Jesus Christ.

The Introduction of this Assertion by (...), the note of a Syllogistical
inference, declares what is here asserted to be the substance of the truth
pleaded for. And the comparison is continued, (...), these things have
themselves after the same manner.

That which is affirmed on the one side, is, (...); by the sin or fall of one,
on all Men unto condemnation, that is, Judgment, say we, repeating (...) from
the foregoing Verse. But (...) is guilt, and that only. By the sin of one, all
Men became guilty, and were made obnoxious unto condemnation. The guilt of it
is imputed unto all Men. For no otherwise can it come upon them unto
condemnation, no otherwise can they be rendered obnoxious unto death and
judgment on the account thereof. For we have evinced that by death and
condemnation in this disputation of the Apostle, the whole punishment due unto
sin, is intended. This therefore is plain and evident on that hand.

In answer hereunto, the (...) of one as to the causality of Justification, is
opposed unto the (...) of the other, as unto its causality unto, or of
condemnation. (...), By the Righteousness of one. That is, the Righteousness
that is pleadable (...) unto Justification. For that is (...) a Righteousness
pleaded for Justification. By this, say our Translators, the free gift came
upon all; repeating (...) from the foregoing Verse, as they had done (...)
before on the other hand. The Syriack Translation renders the words without the
aid of any supplement: Therefore as by the sin of one, condemnation was unto
all men, so by the Righteousness of one, Justification unto life shall be unto
all Men. And the sense of the words is so made plain without the supply of any
other word into the Text. But whereas in the original the words are not (...),
but (...), and so in the later clause, somewhat from his own foregoing words,
is to be supplied to answer the intention of the Apostle. And this is (...)
gratiosa donatio, the free grant of Righteousness; or (...) the free gift of
Righteousness unto Justification. The Righteousness of one Christ Jesus, is
freely granted unto all Believers, to the Justification of life. For the all
Men here mentioned are described by, and limited unto them that receive the
abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness by Christ, Ver. 17.

Some vainly pretend from hence a general grant of righteousness and life unto
all men, whereof the greatest part are never made partakers; then which nothing
can be more opposite nor contradictory unto the Apostles design. Men are not
made guilty of condemnation from the Sin of Adam, by such a Divine
constitution, as that they may, or on some conditions may not be obnoxious
thereunto, Every one so soon as he actually exists, and by virtue thereof is a
descendant from the first Adam, is actually in his own person liable thereunto,
and the wrath of God abides on him. And no more are intended on the other
side, but those only who by their relation through Faith unto the Lord Christ
the second Adam, are actually interessed in the Justification of life. Neither
is the controversy about the universality of Redemption by the Death of Christ
herein concerned. For those by whom it is asserted, do not affirm that it is
thence necessary that the free gift unto the Justification of life, should come
on all, for that they know it does not do. And of a provision of Righteousness
and life for men in case they do believe, although it be true, yet nothing is
spoken in this place. Only the certain Justificatin of them that believe, and
the way of it is declared. Nor will the Analogy of the Comparison here insisted
on, admit of any such interpretation. For the all on the one hand, are all and
only those who derive their being from Adam by natural propagation. If any man
might be supposed not to do so, he would not be concerned in his Sin or Fall.
And so really it was with the man Christ Jesus. And those on the other hand,
are only those who derive a spiritual life from Christ. Suppose a man not to do
so, and he is no way interessed in the Righteousness of the one unto the
Justification of life. Our Argument from the words is this; As the Sin of one
that came on all unto condemnation, was the Sin of the first Adam imputed unto
them, so the Righteousness of the one unto the Justification of life that comes
on all Believers, is the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto them. And what
can be more clearly affirmed or more evidently confirmed than this is by the
Apostle, I know not. Yet is it more plainly expressed, v. 19.

For as by one man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of
one shall many be made Righteous. This is well explained by Cyrillus
Alexandrinus in Joan. Lib. 11. Cap. 25. Quemadmodum praevaricatione primi
hominis ut in primitiis generis nostri, morti addicti fuimus; eodem modo per
obedientiam and justitiam Christi, in quantum seipsum legi subjecit, quamvis
legis author esset, benedictio and vivificatio quae per spiritum est, ad totam
nostram penetravit naturam. And by Leo. Epist. 12. ad Juvenalem. Vt autem
reparet omnium vitam, recepit omnium causam; ut sicut per unius reatum omnes
facti fuerunt peccatores, ita per unius innocentiam omnes fierent innocents;
inde in homines manaret justitia, ubi est humana suscepta natura.

That which he before called (...) and (...) he now expresses by (...) and
(...), Disobedience and Obedience. The (...) of Adam or his Disobedience was
his actual transgression of the Law of God. Hereby, says the Apostle, many
were made Sinners. Sinners in such a sense as to be obnoxious unto Death and
Condemnation. For liable unto Death they could not be made, unless they were
first made Sinners or guilty. And this they could not be, but that they are
esteemed to have sinned in him, whereon the guilt of his Sin was imputed unto
them. This therefore he affirms, namely that the actual sin of Adam was so the
sin of all men, as that they were made sinners thereby, obnoxious unto Death
and Condemnation.

That which he opposes hereunto, is (...) the Obedience of one, that is, of
Jesus Christ. And this was the Actual Obedience that he yielded unto the whole
Law of God. For as the Disobedience of Adam was his actual Transgression of the
whole Law; so the Obedience of Christ was his actual accomplishment or
fulfilling of the whole Law. This the Antithesis does require.

Hereby many are made Righteous. How? By the Imputation of that Obedience unto
them. For so and no otherwise, are men made Sinners by the Imputation of the
Disobedience of Adam. And this is that which gives us a right and title unto
eternal life; as the Apostle declares, verse. 21. That as Sin reigned unto
death; so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto eternal life. This
Righteousness is no other but the Obedience of one, that is, of Christ, as it
is called, verse. 18. And it is said to come upon us, that is, to be imputed
unto us; For blessed is the man unto whom God imputes Righteousness. And
hereby we have not only deliverance from that Death and Condemnation whereunto
we were liable by the Sin of Adam, but the Pardon of many Offenses, that is, of
all our Personal Sins, and a right unto life eternal through the Grace of God;
for we are justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus.

And these things are thus plainly and fully delivered by the Apostle, unto
whose sense and expressions also (so far as may be) it is our Duty to
accommodate ours. What is offered in opposition hereunto, is so made up of
Exceptions and Evasions, perplexed Disputes, and leads us so far off from the
plain words of the Scripture, that the Conscience of a convinced Sinner knows
not what to fix upon to give it rest and saisfaction, nor what it is that is to
be believed unto Justification.

Piscator in his Scholia on this Chapter and elsewhere, insisteth much on a
specious Argument against the Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto our
Justification. But it proceeds evidently on an open mistake and false
supposition, as well as it is contradictory unto the plain words of the Text.
It is true which he observes and proves, that our Redemption, Reconciliation,
Pardon of Sin, and Justifiation are often ascribed unto the Death and Blood of
Christ in a signal manner. The reasons of it have partly been intimated before,
and a further account of them, shall be given immediately. But it does not
thence follow, that the Obedience of his life wherein he fulfilled the whole
Law, being made under it for us, is excluded from any causality therein, or is
not imputed unto us. But in opposition thereunto he thus argues.

Si obedientia vitae Christi nobis ad justitiam imputaretur, non fuit opus
Christum pro nobis mori; mori enim necesse fuit pro nobis injustis, 1 Pet.
3.18. Quod si ergo justi effecti sumus per vitam illius, causa nulla relicta
fuit cur pro nobis moreretur; quia justitia Dei non patitur ut puniat justos.
At punivit nos in Christo, seu quod idem valet punivit Christum pro nobis, and
loco nostri, posteaquam ille sancte vixisset, ut certum est e Scriptura. Ergo
non sumus justi effecti per sanctam vitam Christi. Item, Christus mortuus est
ut justitiam illam Dei nobis acquireret. 2 Cor. 5.21. Non igitur illam
acquisiverat ante mortem.

But this whole Argument, I say, proceeds upon an evident mistake. For it
supposes such an order of things, as that the Obedience of Christ or his
Righteousness in fulfilling the Law, is first imputed unto us, and then the
Righteousness of his death is afterward to take place, or to be imputed unto
us, which on that supposition he says would be of no use. But no such order or
Divine constitution is pleaded or pretended in our Justification. It is true,
the life of Christ, and his Obedience unto the Law did precede his Sufferings,
and undergoing the curse thereof; neither could it otherwise be. For this order
of these things between themselves was made necessary from the Law of Nature;
But it does not thence follow that it must be observed in the Imputation or
Application of them unto us. For this is an effect of Sovereign Wisdom and
Grace, not respecting the natural order of Christ's Obedience and Suffering, but
the moral order of the things whereunto they are appointed. And although we
need not assert, nor do I so do, different acts of the Imputation of the
Obedience of Christ unto the Justification of life, or a right and title unto
life eternal, and of the suffering of Christ unto the pardon of our Sins and
freedom from condemnation; but by both we have both according unto the
Ordinance of God, that Christ may be all in all; Yet as unto the effects
themselves, in the Method of Gods bringing Sinners unto the Justification of
life, the application of the Death of Christ unto them unto the pardon of Sin
and freedom from Condemnation, is in order of Nature, and in the exercise of
Faith, antecedent unto the application of his Obedience unto us, for a right
and title unto life eternal.

The state of the person to be justified, is a state of Sin and wrath, wherein
he is liable unto Death and Condemnation. This is that which a convinced Sinner
is sensible of, and which alone in the first place he seeks for deliverance
from. What shall we do to be saved? This in the first place is presented unto
him in the Doctrine and Promise of the Gospel, which is the Rule and Instrument
of its application. And this is the death of Christ. Without this no actual
Righteousness imputed unto him, not the Obedience of Christ himself, will give
him relief. For he is sensible that he has sinned, and thereby come short of
the glory of God, and under the Sentence condemnatory of the Law. Until he
receives a deliverance from hence, it to no purpose to propose that unto him
which should give him right unto life eternal. But upon a supposition hereof,
he is no less concerned in what shall yet further give him title thereunto,
that he may reign in life through Righteousness. Herein I say in its order,
Conscience is no less concerned than in deliverance from Condemnation. And this
order is expressed in the declaration of the Fruit and Effects of the Mediation
of Christ. Dan. 9.24. To make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness. Neither is there any force in the Objection against
it, that actually the Obedience of Christ did precede his Suffering. For the
Method of their application is not prescribed thereby; And the state of Sinners
to be justified, with the nature of their Justification requires it should be
otherwise, as God also has ordained. But because the Obedience and Sufferings
of Christ, were concomitant from first to last, both equally belonging unto his
state of Exinanition, and cannot in any act or instance be separated, but only
in notion or imagination, seeing he suffered in all his Obedience, and obeyed
in all his Suffering, Heb. 5.8. And neither part of our Justification, in
freedom from Condemnation, and right unto life eternal, can be supposed to be
or exist without the other according unto the Ordinance and constitution of
God, the whole effect is jointly to be ascribed unto the whole Mediation of
Christ, so far as he acted toward God in our behalf, wherein he fulfilled the
whole Law both as to the penalty exacted of Sinners, and the Righteousness it
requires unto life as an eternl reward. And there are many reasons why our
Justification is in the Scripture by the way of Eminency ascribed unto the
death and bloodshedding of Christ.

For, (1.) The Grace and Love of God, the principal efficient cause of our
Justification, are therein made most eminent and conspicuous. For this is most
frequently in the Scripture proposed unto us as the highest instance, and
undeniable demonstration of Divine Love and Grace. And this is that which
principally we are to consider in our Justification, the glory of them being
the end of God therein. He made us accepted in the Beloved to the praise of the
glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.6. Wherefore this being the fountain, spring and
sole cause, both of the Obedience of Christ, and of the Imputation thereof unto
us, with the pardon of Sin and Righteousness thereby, it is every where in the
Scripture proposed as the prime object of our Faith in our Justification, and
opposed directly unto all our own Works whatever. The whole of Gods design
herein, is, that Grace may reign through Righteousness unto eternal life.
Whereas therefore this is made most evident and conspicuous in the Death of
Christ, our Justification is in a peculiar manner assigned thereunto.

2. The love of Christ himself and his Grace are peculiarly exalted in our
Justification; that all men may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father.
Frequently are they expressed unto this purpose, 2 Cor. 8.9. Gal. 2.20. Phil.
3.6, 7. Rev. 1.5, 6. And those also are most eminently exalted in his death, so
as that all the effects and fruits of them are ascribed thereunto in a peculiar
manner. As nothing is more ordinary than, among many things that concur to the
same effect, to ascribe it unto that which is most eminent among them,
especially if it cannot be conceived as separated from the rest.

3. This is the clearest Testimony, that what the Lord Christ did and suffered
was for us, and not for himself. For without the consideration hereof, all the
Obedience which he yielded unto the Law, might be looked on as due only on his
own account, and himself to have been such a Savior as the Socinians imagine,
who should do all with us from God, and nothing with God for us. But the
suffering of the curse of the Law by him who was not only an innocent man, but
also the Son of God, openly testifies that what he did and suffered was for us,
and not for himself. It is no wonder therefore if our Faith as unto
Justification be in the first place, and principally directed unto his Death
and Bloodshedding.

4. All the Obedience of Christ had still respect unto the Sacrifice of
himself, which was to ensue, wherein it received its accomplishment, and
whereon its efficacy unto our Justification did depend. For as no Imputation of
actual Obedience would justify Sinners from the condemnation that was passed
on them for the Sin of Adam; so although the Obedience of Christ was not a mere
preparation or qualification of his person for his Suffering; yet its efficacy
unto our Justification did depend on his Suffering that was to ensue, when his
Soul was made an offering for Sin.

5. As was before observed, Reconciliation and the Pardon of Sin through the
Blood of Christ, do directly in the first place respect our relief from the
state and condition whereinto we were cast by the Sin of Adam, in the loss of
the favor of God, and liableness unto Death; this therefore is that which
principally and in the first place a lost convinced Sinner, such as Christ
calls unto himself, does look after. And therefore Justification is eminently
and frequently proposed as the effect of the Bloodshedding and Death of Christ,
which are the direct cause of our Reconciliation and Pardon of Sin. But yet
from none of these considerations, does it follow that the Obedience of the one
man Christ Jesus is not imputed unto us, whereby Grace might reign through
Righteousness unto eternal life.

The same Truth is fully asserted and confirmed Chap. 8. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. But
this place has been of late so explained and so vindicated by another in his
learned and Judicious Exposition of it, (namely Dr. Jacombe) as that nothing
remains of weight to be added unto what has been pleaded and argued by him,
Part. 1. verse. 4. page 587. and onwards. And indeed the answers which he
subjoyns (to the Arguments whereby he confirms the Truth) to the most usual and
important objections against the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, are
sufficient to give just Satisfaction unto the minds of unprejudiced, unengaged
persons. I shall therefore pass over this Testimony, as that which has been so
lately pleaded and vindicated; and not press the same things, it may be (as is
not unusual) unto their disadvantage.

Chap. 10. Verse. 3, 4.
For they (the Jews who had a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge)
being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God. For
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness unto every one that believes.
What is here determined, the Apostle enters upon the Proposition and
declaration of, Chap. 9. verse. 30. And because what he had to propose was
somewhat strange, and unsuited unto the common apprehensions of men, he
introduces it with that prefatory Interrogation, (...); which he uses on the
like occasions, Chap. 3.5. Chap. 6.1. Chap. 7.7. Chap. 9.14. What shall we then
say? that is, is there in this matter unrighteousness with God? as verse. 14. or
what shall we say unto these things, or this is that which is to be said
herein? That which hereon he asserts is, that the Gentiles which followed not
after Righteousness have attained unto Righteousness, even the Righteousness
which is of Faith; But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness
has not attained unto the Law of Righteousness, that is, unto Righteousness it
self before God.

Nothing seems to be more contrary unto reason, than what is here made manifest
by the event. The Gentiles who lived in Sin and Pleasures, not once
endeavoring to attain unto any Righteousness before God, yet attained unto it
upon the Preaching of the Gospel. Israel on the other hand, which followed
after Righteousness, diligently in all the Works of the Law and Duties of
Obedience unto God thereby, came short of it, attained not unto it. All
Preparations, all Dispositions, all merit as unto Righteousness and
Justification are excluded from the Gentiles. For in all of them there is more
or less a following after Righteousness which is denied of them all. Only by
Faith in him who justifies the ungodly, they attain Righteousness, or they
attained the Righteousness of Faith. For to attain Righteousness by Faith, and
to attain the Righteousness which is of Faith, are the same. Wherefore all
things that are comprised any way in following after Righteousness, such as are
all our Duties and Works, are excluded from any influence into our
Justification. And this is expressed to declare the Sovereignty and freedom of
the Grace of God herein; Namely that we are justified freely by his Grace, and
that on our part all boasting is excluded. Let men pretend what they will, and
dispute what they please, those who attain unto Righteousness and Justification
before God, when they follow not after Righteousness, they do it by the
gratuitous Imputation of the Righteousness of another unto them.

It may be it will be said; it is true in the time of their Heathenism they did
not at all follow after Righteousness, but when the Truth of the Gospel was
revealed unto them, then they followed after Righteousness and did attain it.
But (1.) This is directly to contradict the Apostle in that it says, that they
attained not Righteousness, but only as they followed after Righteousness,
whereas he affirms the direct contrary. (2.) It takes away the distinction
which he puts between them and Israel; namely, that the one followed after
Righteousness, and the other did not. (3.) To follow after Righteousness in
this place, is to follow after a Righteousness of our own; To establish their
own Righteousness, Chap. 10.3. But this is so far from being a means of
attaining Righteousness, as that it is the most effectual obstruction thereof.

If therefore those who have no Righteousness of their own, who are so far from
it, that they never endeavored to attain it, do yet by Faith receive that
Righteousness wherewith they justified before God, they do so by the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ unto them, or let some other way be assigned.

In the other side of the instance concerning Israel some must hear whether
they will or not, that wherewith they are not pleased.

Three things are expressed of them; 1. Their Attempt. 2. Their Success. 3. The
Reason of it.

Their Attempt or Endeavor was in this, that they followed after the Law of
Righteousness. (...), the word whereby their endeavor is expressed, signifies
that which is earnest, diligent and sincere. By it does the Apostle declare
what his was, and what ours ought to be in the Duties and Exercise of Gospel
Obedience, Phil. 3.12. They were not indiligent in this matter, but instantly
served God day and night. Nor were they Hypocritical; for the Apostle bears
them record in this matter, that they had a zeal of God, Chap. 10.2. And that
which they thus endeavored after was (...) the Law of Righteousness. That Law
which prescribed a perfect personal Righteousness before God; the things which
if a man do them, he shall live in them, Chap. 10.5. Wherefore the Apostle has
no other respect unto the Ceremonial Law in this place, but only as it was
branched out from the Moral Law by the Will of God, and as the Obedience unto
it belonged thereunto. When he speaks of it separately he calls it the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances, but it is no where called the Law of
Righteousness, the Law whose Righteousness is fulfilled in us, Chap. 8.4.
wherefore their following after this Law of Righteousness, was their diligence
in the performance of all Duties of Obedience, according unto the Directions
and Precepts of the Moral Law.

2. The issue of this attempt is, that they attained not unto the Law of
Righteousness; (...) that is, they attained not unto a Righteousness before God
hereby. Though this was the end of the Law namely a Righteousness before God,
wherein a man might live, yet could they never attain it.

3. An account is given of the Reason of their failing, in attaining that which
they so earnestly endeavored after. And this was in a double mistake that they
were under; first, in the means of attaining it; secondly, in the righteousness
it self, that was to be sought after. The first is declared Ver. 32. Because
not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. Faith and Works are the
two only ways whereby Righteousness may be attained, and they are opposite and
inconsistent; so that none does or can seek after Righteousness by them both.
They will not be mixed and made one entire means of attaining Righteousness.
They are opposed as Grace and Works; what is of the one, is not of the other,
Romans 11.6. Every composition of them in this matter, is, Male sartae gratia*
nequicquam coit and rescinditur. And the reason is, because the Righteousness
which Faith seeks after, or which is attainable by Faith, is that which is
given to us, imputed unto us, which Faith does only receive. It receives the
abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness. But that which is attainable
by Works, is our own, inherent in us, wrought out by us, and not imputed unto
us: For it is nothing but those works themselves, with respect unto the Law of
God.

And if Righteousness before God, be to be obtained alone by Faith, and that in
contradistinction unto all Works, which if a Man do them according unto the
Law, he shall even live in them, then is it by Faith alone that we are
justified before God, or nothing else, on our part, is required thereunto. And
of what nature this Righteousness must be, is evident.

Again, if Faith and Works are opposed as contrary and inconsistent, when
considered as the means of attaining Righteousness or Justification before God,
as plainly they are, then is it impossible we should be justified before God by
them in the same sense way and manner. Wherefore when the Apostle James
affirms, That a Man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only, he cannot
intend our Justification before God, where it is impossible they should both
concur. For not only are they declared inconsistent by the Apostle in this
place, but it would introduce several sorts of Righteousness unto
Justification, that are inconsistent and destructive of each other. This was
the first mistake of the Jews, whence this miscarriage insued; they sought not
after Righteousness by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law.

Their second mistake was as unto the Righteousness it self, whereon a Man
might be justified before God. For this they judged was to be their own
Righteousness. Chap. 10.3. Their own Personal Righteousness consisting in their
own Duties of Obedience, they looked on as the only Righteousness, whereon they
might be justified before God. This therefore they went about to establish as
the Pharisees did. Luke 18.11, 12. And this mistake, with their design thereon,
to establish their own Righteousness, was the principal cause that made them
reject the Righteousness of God, as it is with many at this day.

What ever is done in us, or performed by us, as obedience unto God, is our own
Righteousness. Though it be done in Faith, and by the aids of Gods Grace; yet
is it subjectively ours, and so far as it is a Righteousness, it is our own.
But all Righteousness which is our own whatever, is so far diverse from the
Righteousness, by which we are to be justified before God, as that the most
earnest endeavor to establish it, that is, to render it such, as by which we
may be justified, is an effectual means to cause us to refuse a submission
unto, and an acceptance of that, whereby alone we may be so.

This ruined the Jews, and will be the ruin of all that shall follow their
example in seeking after Justification; yet is it not easy for Men to take any
other way, or to be taken off from this. So the Apostle intimates in that
expression, They submitted not themselves unto the Righteousness of God. This
Righteousness of God is of that nature, that the proud mind of Man is
altogether unwilling to bow and submit it self unto; yet can it no otherwise be
attained, but by such a submission or subjection of mind, as contains in it a
total Renuntiation of any Righteousness of our Men. And those who reproach
others for affirming, That Men indeavoring after Morality or Moral
Righteousness, and resting therein, are in no good way for the participation of
the Grace of God by Jesus Christ, do expressly deride the Doctrine of the
Apostle, that is, of the Holy Ghost himself.

Wherefore, the plain design of the Apostle is to declare, that not only Faith,
and the Righteousness of it, and a Righteousness of our own by Works are
inconsistent, that is, as unto our Justification before God; but also that the
intermixture of our own Works, in seeking after Righteousness, as the means
thereof does wholly divert us from the acceptance of, or submission unto the
Righteousness of God. For the Righteousness which is of Faith, is not our own,
it is the Righteousness of God, that which he imputes unto us. But the
Righteousness of Works is our own, that which is wrought in us, and by us. And
as Works have no aptitude nor meetness in themselves to attain or receive a
Righteousness, which because it is not our own is imputed unto us, but are
repugnant unto it, as that which will cast them down from their legal dignity
of being our Righteousness: So Faith has no aptitude nor meetness in it self,
to be an Inherent Righteousness, or so to be esteemed, or as such to be imputed
unto us, seeing its principal faculty and efficacy consists in fixing all the
trust, confidence, and expectation of the Soul, for Righteousness and
acceptance with God, upon another.

Here was the ruin of those Jews; they judged it a better, a more probable,
yea, a more righteous and holy way for them, constantly to endeavor after a
Righteousness of their own by duties of obedience unto the Law of God, then to
imagine that they could come to acceptance with God by Faith in another. For
tell them, and such as they, what you please, if they have not a Righteousness
of their own, that they can set upon its legs, and make to stand before God,
the Law will not have its accomplishment, and so will condemn them.

To demolish this last fort of unbelief, the Apostle grants that the Law must
have its end, and be completely fulfilled, or there is no appearing for us as
righteous before God; and withal shows them how this is done, and where alone
it is to be sought after. For Christ (says he) is the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes, Ver. 4. We need not trouble our
selves to inquire in what various sense Christ may be said to be (...), the
end, the complement, the perfection of the Law. The Apostle sufficiently
determines his intention, in affirming not absolutely that he is the end of
the Law, but he is so (...) for Righteousness unto every one that believes.
The matter in question, Is a Righteousness unto Justification before God. And
this is acknowledged to be the Righteousness which the Law requires. God looks
for no Righteousness from us, but what is prescribed in the Law. The Law is
nothing but the Rule of Righteousness; Gods prescription of a Righteousness,
and all the Duties of it unto us. That we should be righteous herewith before
God, was the first original end of the Law. Its other ends at present of the
conviction of sin, and judging or condemning for it, were accidental unto its
primitive constitution. This Righteousness, which the Law requires, which is
all and only that Righteousness which God requires of us, the accomplishment of
this end of the Law, the Jews sought after by their own personal performance of
the Works and Duties of it. But hereby in the utmost of their endeavors they
could never fulfill this Righteousness, nor attain this end of the Law, which
yet if Men do not, they must perish for ever.

Wherefore the Apostle declares, That all this is done another way; that the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled, and its end, as unto a Righteousness
before God, attained, and that is in and by Christ. For what the Law required,
that he accomplished which is accounted unto every one that believes.

Herein the Apostle issues the whole disquisition about a Righteousness
wherewith we may be justified before God, and in particular, how satisfaction
is given unto the demands of the Law. That which we could not do, that which
the Law could not effect in us, in that it was weak through the flesh, that
which we could not attain by the Works and Duties of it, that Christ has done
for us, and so is the end of the Law, for Righteousness unto every one that
believes.

The Law demands a Righteousness of us; the accomplishment of this
Righteousness is the end which it aims at, and which is necessary unto our
Justification before God. This is not to be attained by any works of our own,
by any Righteousness of our own. But the Lord Christ is this for us, and unto
us; which, how he is or can be but by the Imputation of his Obedience and
Righteousness in the accomplishment of the Law, I cannot understand; I am sure
the Apostle does not declare.

The Way whereby we attain unto this End of the Law, which we cannot do by our
utmost endeavors to establish our own Righteousness, is by Faith alone, for
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness unto every one that believes.
To mix any thing with Faith herein, as it is repugnant unto the nature of Faith
and Works, with respect unto their aptitude and meetness, for the attaining of
a Righteousness, so it is as directly contradictory unto the express design and
words of the Apostle, as any thing that can be invented.

Let Men please themselves with their distinctions which I understand not (and
yet perhaps should be ashamed to say so, but that I am persuaded they
understand them not themselves, by whom they are used) or with cavils,
objections, feigned consequences, which I value not: Here I shall for ever
desire to fix my Soul, and herein to acquiesce; namely, That Christ is the end
of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that does believe. And I do suppose,
that all they who understand aright what it is that the Law of God does require
of them, how needful it is that it be complied withal, and that the end of it
be accomplished, with the utter insufficiency of their own endeavors unto those
ends, will, at least, when the time of disputing is over, betake themselves
unto the same refuge and rest.

The next place I shall consider in the Epistle of this Apostle is 1 Cor. 1.30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

The design of the Apostle in these words is to manifest, that whatever is
wanting unto us on any account that we may please God, live unto him, and come
to the enjoyment of him, that we have in and by Jesus Christ: And this on the
part of God from mere, free, and sovereign Grace, as Ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. do
declare. And we have all these things by virtue of our insition or implantation
in him; (...), from of, or by him. He by his Grace is the principal efficient
cause hereof. And the effect is, that we in Christ Jesus; that is ingrafted in
him, or united unto him, as Members of his Mystical Body, which is the constant
sense of that expression in the Scripture. And the benefits which we receive
hereby are enumerated in the following words. But first the way whereby we are
made partakers of them, or they are communicated unto us, is declared; who of
God is made unto us. It is so ordained of God, that he himself shall be made or
become all this unto us. (...), where (...), denotes the efficient cause, as
(...) did before. But how is Christ thus made unto us of God, or what act of
God is it that is intended thereby. Socinus says it is a General act of the
providence of God, whence it is come to pass, or is so fallen out, that one way
or other the Lord Christ should be said to be all this unto us. But it is an
especial Ordinance and Institution of Gods sovereign Grace and Wisdom,
designing Christ to be all this unto us, and for us, with actual Imputation
thereon, and nothing else, that is intended. Whatever interest therefore we
have in Christ, and what ever benefit we have by him, it all depends on the
sovereign Grace and constitution of God, and not on any thing in our selves.
Whereas then we have no Righteousness of our own, he is appointed of God to be
our Righteousness, and is made so unto us; which can be no otherwise, but that
his Righteousness is made ours. For he is made it unto us (as he is likewise
the other things mentioned) so as that all boasting, that is in our selves,
should be utterly excluded, and that he that glories, should glory in the
Lord, Ver. 29, 31. Now there is such a Righteousness, or such a way of being
righteous whereon we may have somewhat to Glory, Rom* 4.2. And which does not
exclude boasting, Chap. 3.27. And this cannot possibly be but when our
Righteousness is inherent in us. For that however it may be procured, or
purchased, or wrought in us, is yet our own, so far as any thing can be our
own, whilst we are Creatures. This kind of Righteousness therefore is here
excluded. And the Lord Christ being so made Righteousness unto us of God, as
that all boasting and glorying on our part, or in our selves, may be excluded,
yea, being made so, for this very end, that so it should be, it can be no
otherwise, but by the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us. For thereby is
the Grace of God, the honor of his Person and Mediation exalted, and all
occasion of glorying in our selves utterly prescinded. We desire no more from
this testimony, but that whereas we are in our selves destitute of all
Righteousness in the sight of God, Christ is by a gracious act of Divine
Imputation made of God Righteousness unto us, in such a way, as that all our
glorying ought to be in the Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ
himself. Bellarmine attempts three Answers unto this Testimony, the two first
whereof are coincident; and in the third, being on the rack of Light and Truth,
he confesses and grants all that we plead for. (1.) He says, That Christ is
said to be our Righteousness, because he is the efficient cause of it, as God
is said to be our strength; and so there is in the words a Metonymy of the
effect for the cause. And I say it is true, That the Lord Christ, by his
Spirit, is the efficient cause of our Personal, Inherent Righteousness. By his
Grace it is effected and wrought in us; he renews our natures into the Image of
God, and without him we can do nothing: So that our habitual and actual
Rightousness is from him. But this Personal Righteousness is our Sanctification
and nothing else. And although the same internal habit of Inherent Grace, with
operations suitable thereunto, be sometimes called our Sanctification, and
sometimes our Righteousness, with respect unto those operations; yet is it
never distinguished into our Sanctification, and our Righteousness. But his
being made Righteousness unto us in this place, is absolutely distinct from his
being made Sanctification unto us, which is that Inherent Righteousness which
is wrought in us by the Spirit and Grace of Christ. And his working Personal
Righteousness in us, which is our Sanctification, and the Imputation of his
Righteousness unto us, whereby we are made righteous before God, are not only
consistent, but the one of them cannot be without the other.

2. He pleads, That Christ is said to be made Righteousness unto us, as he is
made Redemption. Now he is our Redemption, because he has redeemed us. So is
he said to be made Righteousness unto us, because by him we become righteous;
or as another speaks, Because by him alone we are justified. This is the same
plea with the former, namely, that there is a metonymy of the effect for the
cause in all these expressions; yet what cause they intend it to be, who
expound the words By him alone we are justified, I do not understand. But
Bellarmine is approaching yet nearer the Truth, for as Christ is said to be
made of God, Redemption unto us, because by his Blood we are redeemed, or freed
from Sin, Death, and Hell, by the ransom he paid for us, or have redemption
through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins: So he is said to be made
Righteousness unto us, because through his Righteousness granted unto us of God
(as Gods making him to be Righteousness unto us, and our becoming the
Righteousness of God in him; and the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us,
that we may be righteous before God, are the same) we are justified.

His third answer, as was before observed, grants the whole of what we plead.
For it is the same which he gives unto Jere. 23.6. which place he conjoyns with
this, as of the same sense and importance, giving up his whole cause in
satisfaction unto them, in the words before transcribed. Lib. 2. cap. 10.

Socinus Prefaceth his Answer unto this Testimony with an Admiration, That any
should make use of it, or plead it in this cause, it is so impertinent unto the
purpose. And indeed, a pretended contempt of the Arguments of his Adversaries
is, the Principle Artifice he makes use of in all his Replies and Evasions;
wherein I am sorry to see that he is followed by most of them, who together
with him, do oppose the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. And so of
late the use of this Testimony which reduced Bellarmine to so great a strait,
is admired at, on the only ground and reason wherewith it is opposed by
Socinus. Yet are his exceptions unto it such, as that I cannot also but a
little on the other hand wonder, that any learned Man should be troubled with
them, or seduced by them. For he only pleads, That if Christ be said to be made
Righteousness unto us, because his Righteousness is imputed unto us; then is he
said to be made Wisdom unto us, because his Wisdom is so imputed, and so of his
Sanctification which none will allow; yea, he must be redeemed for us, and his
Redemption be imputed unto us. But there is nothing of force, nor truth in this
pretense. For it is built only on this Supposition, That Christ must be made
unto us of God, all these things, in the same way and manner; whereas they are
of such different natures, that it is utterly impossible he should so be. For
instance, he is made Sanctification unto us, in that by his Spirit and Grace we
are freely sanctified. But he cannot be said to be made Redemption unto us, in
that by his Spirit and Grace we are freely redeemed. And, if he is said to be
made Righteousness unto us, because by his Spirit and Grace he works inherent
Righteousness in us, then is it plainly the same with his being made
Sanctification unto us. Neither does he himself believe that Christ is made all
these things unto us in the same way and manner. And therefore does he not
assign any special way whereby he is so made them all; but clouds it in an
ambiguous expression, that he becomes all these things unto us in the
Providence of God. But ask him in particular, how Christ is made Sanctification
unto us, and he will tell you that it was by his Doctrine and Example alone,
with some such general assistance of the Spirit of God as he will allow. But
now, this is no way at all whereby Christ was made Redemption unto us; which
being a thing external, and not wrought in us, Christ can be no otherwise made
Redemption unto us, then by the Imputation unto us of what he did, that we
might be redeemed, or reckoning it on our account. Not that he was redeemed for
us, as he childishly cavils, but that he did that whereby we are redeemed.
Wherefore Christ is made of God Righteousness unto us in such a way and manner,
as the nature of the thing does require. Say some, it is because by him we are
justified. Howbeit the Text says not, That by him we are justified, but he is
of God made Righteousness unto us, which is not our Justification, but the
ground cause and reason whereon we are justified. Righteousness is one thing,
and Justification is another. Wherefore we must inquire how we come to have
that Righteousness whereby we are justified. And this the same Apostle tells us
plainly is by Imputation. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes
Righteousness, Romans 4.6. It follows then, that Christ being made unto us of God
Righteousness, can have no other sense, but that his Righteousness is imputed
unto us, which is what this Text does undeniably confirm.

2 Cor. 5.21.
The Truth pleaded for, is yet more emphatically expressed. For he has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. The Paraphrase of Austine on these words gives the sense of
them. Ipse peccatum ut nos justitia, non nostra sed Dei, non in nobis sed in
ipso; sicut ipse peccatum non suum sed nostrum, non in se, sed in nobis
constitutum. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 4. And the words of Chrysostom upon
this place, unto the same purpose, have been cited before at large.

To set out the greatness of the Grace of God in our Reconciliation by Christ,
he describes him by that Paraphrasis (...), who knew no sin, or who knew not
sin. He knew sin in the notion or understanding of its nature; and he knew it
experimentally in the effects which he underwent and suffered; but he knew it
not, that is, was most remote from it, as to its commission or guilt. So that
he knew no sin, is absolutely no more; but he did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, as it is expressed 1 Pet. 2.22. Or, that he was holy
harmless undefiled separate from sinners. Heb. 7.26. Howbeit, there is an
Emphasis in the expression which is not to be neglected. For as it is observed
by Chrysostom, as containing an auxesis ((...),) and by sundry learned persons
after him. So those who desire to learn the excellency of the Grace of God
herein, will have an impression of a sense of it on their minds, from this
emphatical expression, which the Holy Ghost chose to make use of unto that end,
and the observation of it is not to be despised.

He has made him to be sin; that is, say many Expositors, A Sacrifice for sin.
Quemadmodum oblatus est pro peccatis, non immerito peccatum factus dicitur,
quia and bestia in lege quae pro peccatis offerebatur, peccatum nuncupatur.
Ambros. in locum. So the Sin and Trespass offering are often expressed by (...)
and (...), the sin and trespass or guilt. And I shall not contend about this
Exposition, because that signified in it, is according unto the truth. But
there is another more proper signification of the word; (...) being put for
(...), sin for a sinner; that is, Passively not Actively, not by Inhesion but
Imputation. For this this the phrase of speech, and force of the Antithesis
seem to require. Speaking of another sense, Estius himself on the place adds,
as that which he approves. Hic intellectus explicandus est per Commentarium
Graecorum Chrysostomi and caeterorum; quia peccatum emphatics interpretantur
magnum peccatorem; ac si dicat Apostolus, nostri causa tractavit eum tanquam
ipsum peccatum, ipsum scelus, id est, tanquam hominem insigniter sceleratum, ut
in quo posuerit iniquitates omnium nostrum. And if this be the interpretation
of the Greek Scholiasts, as indeed it is, Luther was not the first, who
affirmed, That Christ was made the greatest sinner, namely, by Imputation. But
we shall allow the former Exposition, provided, that the true notion of a sin
offering, or expiatory sacrifice be admitted. For although this neither was,
nor could consist in the transfusion of the inherent sin of the person unto the
Sacrifice; yet did it so in the translation of the guilt of the sinner unto it,
as is fully declared Levit. 16.20, 21. Only I must say, that I grant this
signification of the word to avoid contention. For whereas some say, that (...)
signifies sin, and a sacrifice for sin, it cannot be allowed, (...) in Kal,
signifies to err, to sin, to transgress the Law of God: In Piel it has a
contrary signification, namely, to cleanse from sin, or to make expiation of
sin. Hence (...) is most frequently used with respect unto its derivation from
the first conjugation, and signifies sin, transgression, and guilt. But
sometimes with respect unto the second, and then it signifies a sacrifice for
sin, to make expiation of it. And so it is rendered by the LXX, sometimes by
(...), Ezekiel. 44.27. sometimes (...), Exodus 30.10. Ezekiel. 43.23. A Propitiation,
a Propitiatory Sacrifice. Sometimes by (...), Number. 19.19. and (...),
Purification or Cleasing. But (...) absolutely does no where in any good
Author, nor in the Scripture signify a Sacrifice for sin* unless it may be
allowed to do so in this one place alone. For whereas the LXX do render (...)
constantly by (...) where it signifies sin; where it denotes an Offering for
sin, and they retain that word, they do it by (...), an Elliptical expression
which they invented for that which they knew (...) of its self neither did, nor
could signify, Lev. 4.3, 14, 32, 35. Chap. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 6.30.
Chap. 8.2. And they never omit the preposition, unless they name the Sacrifice,
as (...). This is observed also by the Apostle the new Testament. For twice
expressing the Sin-offering by this word, he uses that phrase (...) Romans 8.3.
Heb. 10.6. But no where uses (...) to that purpose. If it be therefore of that
signification in this place, it is so here alone. And whereas some think, that
it answers Piaculum in the Latin, it is also a mistake, for the first
signification of (...) is confessed to be sin, and they would have it supposed
that thence it is abused to signify a Sacrifice for sin. But Piaculum is
properly a Sacrifice, or any thing whereby sin is expiated or satisfaction is
made for it. And very rarely it is abused to denote such a sin or crime as
deserves public expiation, and is not otherwise to be pardoned, so Virgil
Distulit in seram commissa Piacula mortem. But we shall not contend about
words, whilst we can agree about what is intended.

The only enquiry is, how God did make him to be sin. He has made him to be
sin; so that an act of God is intended. And this is elsewhere expressed, by his
laying all our Iniquities upon him, or causing them to meet on him, Isa. 53.6.
And this was by the Imputation of our sins unto him, as the sins of the people
were put on the Head of the Goat that they should be no more theirs but his, so
as that he was to carry them away from them. Take sin in either sense before
mentioned, either of a Sacrifice for sin, or a Sinner, and the Imputation of
the guilt of sin, antecedently unto the punishment of it, and in order
thereunto, must be understood. For in every Sacrifice for sin there was an
imposition of sin on the Beast to be offered antecedent unto the Sacrificing of
it, and therein its suffering by death. Therefore in every offering for sin, he
that brought it was to put his hand on the head of it, Lev. 1.4. And that the
transferring of the guilt of sin unto the offering, was thereby signified, is
expressly declared, Lev. 16.21. Wherefore if God made the Lord Christ a Sin
Offering for us, it was by the Imputation of the guilt of sin unto him
antecedently unto his suffering. Nor could any Offering be made for sin,
without a Typical translation of the guilt of sin unto it. And therefore when
an Offering was made for the expiation of the guilt of an uncertain Murder,
those who were to make it by the Law, namely, the Elders of the City that were
next unto the place where the man was slain, were not to offer a Sacrifice,
because there was none to confess guilt over it, or to lay guilt upon it; But
whereas the neck of an Heifer was to be stricken off, to declare the punishment
due unto Blood, they were to wash their hands over it to testify their own
Innocence, Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But a Sacrifice for sin without the
Imputation of guilt there could not be. And if the word be taken in the second
sense, namely, for a sinner, that is, by imputation, and in Gods esteem, it
must be by the imputation of guilt. For none can in any sense be denominated a
sinner from mere suffering. None indeed do say, that Christ was made sin, by
the imputation of punishment unto him, which has no proper sense; But they
say, sin was imputed unto him as unto punishment, which is indeed to say, that
the guilt of sin was imputed unto him. For the guilt of sin, is its respect
unto punishment, or the obligation unto punishment which attends it. And that
any one should be punished for sin without the imputation of the guilt of it
unto him, is impossible; and were it possible would be unjust. For it is not
possible that any one should be punished for sin properly, and yet that sin be
none of his. And if it be not his by inhaesion, it can be his no other way but
by imputation. One may suffer on the occasion of the sin of another, that is no
way made his, but he cannot be punished for it; for punishment is the
recompense of sin on the account of its guilt. And were it possible, where is
the Righteousness of punishing any one for that which no way belongs unto him?
Besides, imputation of sin and punishing are distinct acts, the one preceding
the other, and therefore the former is only of the guilt of sin; Wherefore the
Lord Christ was made sin for us by the imputation of the guilt of our sins unto
him.

But it is said, that if the guilt of sin were imputed unto Christ, he is
excluded from all possibility of merit, for he suffered but what was his due;
And so the whole work of Christ's satisfaction is subverted. This must be so, if
God in judgment did reckon him guilty and a sinner. But there is an ambiguity
in these expressions. If it be meant that God in judgment did reckon him guilty
and a sinner inherently in his own person, no such thing is intended. But God
laid all our sins on him, and in judgment spared him not, as unto what was due
unto them. And so he suffered not what was his due upon his own account, but
what was due unto our sin, which is impiety to deny; For if it were not so, he
dyed in vain, and we are still in our sins. And as his satisfaction consists
herein, nor could be without it, so does it not in the least derogate from his
merit. For supposing the infinite dignity of his person, and his voluntary
susception of our sin to answer for it, which altered not his state and
condition, his Obedience therein was highly meritorious.

In answer hereunto, and by virtue hereof, we are made the Righteousness of God
in him. This was the end of his being made sin for us. And by whom are we so
made: It is by God himself, for it is God that justifies, Romans 8.33. It is God
who imputes Righteousness; Chap. 4.6. Wherefore it is the Act of God in our
Justification that is intended. And to be made the Righteousness of God, is to
be made Righteous before God, though emphatically expressed by the abstract for
the concrete, to answer what was said before of Christ being made sin for us.
To be made the Righteousness of God, is to be justified; and to be made it so
in him, as he was made sin for us, is to be justified by the imputation of his
Righteousness unto us, as our sin was imputed unto him.

No man can assign any other way whereby he was made sin, especially his being
made so by God, but by Gods laying all our Iniquities upon him, that is,
imputing our sin unto him. How then are we made the Righteousness of God in
him? By the infusion of an habit of Grace say the Papists generally; Then by
the Rule of the Antithesis, he must be made sin for us, by the infusion of an
habit of sin, which would be a blasphemous imagination. By his meriting,
procuring, and purchasing Righteousness for us say others: so possibly we might
be made Righteous by him; but so we cannot be made Righteous in him. This can
only be by his Righteousness, as we are in him, or united unto him. To be
Righteous in him is to be Righteous with his Righteousness, as we are one
mystical person with him. Wherefore

To be made the Righteousness of God in Christ as he was made sin for us, and
because he was so, can be no other but to be made Righteous by the imputation
of his Righteousness unto us, as we are in him or united unto him. All other
expositions of these words are both jejune and forced, leading the mind from
the first, plain, obvious sense of them.

Bellarmine excepts unto this interpretation, and it is his first argument
against the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. lib. 2. cap. 7. de
justificatione. Quinto refellitur, quoniam si vere nobis imputetur justitia
Christi ut per eam justi habeamur ac censeremur, ac si proprie nostra esset
intrinseca formalisque justitia, profecto non minus justi haberi and censeri
deberemus quam ipse Christus: proinde deberemus dici atque haberi Redemptores,
and salvatores mundi quod est absurdissimum. So full an answer has been
returned hereunto, and that so frequently, by Protestant Divines, as that I
would not have mentioned it, but that diverse among our selves are pleased to
borrow it from him, and make use of it. For, say they, if the Righteousness of
Christ be imputed unto us so as thereby to be made ours, then are we as
Righteous as Christ himself, because we are Righteous with his Righteousness.
Answ. 1. These things are plainly affirmed in the Scripture, that as unto our
selves, and in our selves, we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousness is as filthy Rags, Isa. 64.6. on the one hand; And that in the
Lord we have Righteousness and strength, in the Lord we are justified and do
glory, Isa. 45.24, 25. on the other: That if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves; and yet that we are the Righteousness of God in Christ. Wherefore
these things are consistent what ever cavils the wit of men can raise against
them; And so they must be esteemed, unless we will comply with Socinus his rule
of interpretation; namely, that where any thing seems repugnant unto our
Reason, though it be never so expressly affirmed in the Scripture, we are not to
admit of it, but find out some interpretation though never so forced, to bring
the sense of the words unto our Reason. Wherefore (2) notwithstanding the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, and our being made Righteous
therewith, we are sinners in our selves, (the Lord knows greatly so, the best
of us) and so cannot be said to be as Righteous as Christ, but only to be made
Righteous in him who are sinners in our selves. (3) To say, that we are as
Righteous as Christ, is to make a comparison between the personal Righteousness
of Christ, and our personal Righteousness, if the comparison be of things of
the same kind. But this is foolish and impious; For notwithstanding all our
personal Righteousness, we are sinful, he knew no sin. And if the comparison be
between Christ's personal inherent Righteousness, and Righteousness imputed unto
us, inhaesion and imputation being things of diverse kinds, it is fond and of
no consequence. Christ was actively Righteous, we are passively so. When our
sin was imputed unto him, he did not thereby become a sinner as we are,
actively and inherently a sinner, but passively only, and in Gods estimation.
As he was made sin, yet knew no sin, so we are made Righteous, yet are sinful
in our selves. (4) The Righteousness of Christ as it was his personally was the
Righteousness of the Son of God; in which respect it had in itself an infinite
perfection and value; But it is imputed unto us only with respect unto our
personal want, not as it was satisfactory for all; but as our Souls stand in
need of it, and are made partakers of it. There is therefore no ground for any
such comparison. (5) As unto what is added by Bellarmine that we may hereon be
said to be Redeemers and Saviors of the World, the absurdity of the assertion
falls upon himself, we are not concerned in it. For he affirms directly, lib.
1. de purgator. cap. 14. That a man may be rightly called his own Redeemer and
Savior, which he endeavors to prove from Dan. 4. And some of his Church
affirms that the Saints may be called the Redeemers of others, though
improperly. But we are not concerned in these things; seeing from the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, it follows only that those unto whom
it is imputed are Redeemed and Saved, not at all that they are Redeemers and
Saviors. It belongs also unto the vindication of this Testimony to show the
vanity of his Seventh Argument in the same case, because that also is made use
of by some among our selves, and it is this. If by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, we may be truly said to be Righteous and the Sons of God, then
may Christ by the imputation of our unrighteousness be said to be a sinner and
a child of the Devil. Ans. (1) That which the Scripture affirms concerning the
imputation of our sins unto Christ is, that he was made sin for us. This the
Greek Expositors, Chrysostom, Theophylact and Oecumenius with many others take
for a sinner. But all affirm, that denomination to be taken from imputation
only; he had sin imputed unto him, and underwent the punishment due unto it, as
we have Righteousness imputed unto us, and enjoy the benefit of it. (2) The
imputation of sin unto Christ, did not carry along with it any thing of the
pollution or filth of sin to be communicated unto him by transfusion, a thing
impossible; so that no denomination can thence arise which should include in
it, any respect unto them; A thought hereof is impious and dishonorable unto
the Son of God. But his being made sin through the imputation of the guilt of
sin, is his honor and glory. (3) The imputation of the sin of Fornicators,
Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. such as the Corinthians were before their
Conversion unto Christ, does not on any ground bring him under a denomination
from those sins. For they were so in themselves actively, inherently.
subjectively, and thence were so called. But that he who knew no sin,
voluntarily taking on him to answer for the guilt of those sins, which in him
was an act of Righteousness and the highest Obedience unto God, should be said
to be an Idolater, etc. is a fond imagination. The denomination of a sinner
from sin inherent, actually committed, defiling the Soul, is a reproach, and
significative of the utmost unworthiness; But even the denomination of a
sinner, by the imputation of sin, without the least personal guilt or
defilement, being undergone by him unto whom it is imputed, in an act of the
highest Obedience, and tending unto the greatest glory of God, is highly
honorable and glorious. But (4) The imputation of sin unto Christ, was
antecedent unto any real union between him and sinners, whereon he took their
sin on him, as he would, and for what ends he would. But the imputation of his
Righteousness unto Believers, is consequential in order of nature unto their
union with him, whereby it becomes theirs in a peculiar manner; so as that
there is not a parity of reason that he should be esteemed a sinner, as that
they should be accounted Righteous. And (5) we acquiesce in this, that on the
imputation of sin unto Christ, it is said that God made him to be sin for us,
which he could not be, but thereby; and he was so by an act transient in its
effects for a time only, that time wherein he underwent the punishment due unto
it. But on the imputation of his Righteousness unto us, we are made the
Righteousness of God with an everlasting Righteousness that abides ours always.
(6) To be a child of the Devil by sin, is to do the works of the Devil, Joh.
8.44. But the Lord Christ in taking our sins upon him, when imputed unto him,
did the work of God in the highest act of holy Obedience, evidencing himself to
be the Son of God thereby, and destroying the work of the Devil. So foolish and
impious is it, to conceive that any absolute change of state or relation in him
did ensue thereon.

That by the Righteousness of God in this place, our own Faith and Obedience
according to the Gospel, as some would have it, are intended, is so alien from
the scope of the place, and sense of the words, as that I shall not
particularly examine it. The Righteousness of God is revealed to Faith, and
received by Faith, and is not therefore Faith it self. And the force of the
Antithesis is quite perverted by this conceit. For where is it in this, that he
was made sin by the imputation of our sin unto him, and we are made
Righteousness, by the imputation of our own Faith and Obedience unto our
selves. But as Christ had no concern in sin, but as God made him sin, it was
never in him inherently; so have we no interest in this Righteousness, it is
not in us inherently, but only is imputed unto us. Besides the act of God, in
making us righteous, is his justifying of us. But this is not by the infusion
of the habit of Faith and Obedience, as we have proved. And what act of God is
intended by them, who affirm, That the Righteousness of God which we are made,
is our own Righteousness, I know not. The constitution of the Gospel Law it
cannot be; for that makes no Man righteous. And the Persons of Believers are
the object of this act of God, and that as they are considered in Christ.

Gal. 2.16.
The Epistle of the same Apostle unto the Galatians, is wholly designed unto
the vindication of the Doctrine of Justification by Christ, without the Works
of the Law, with the use and means of its improvement. The sum of his whole
design is laid down in the repetition of his words unto the Apostle Peter, on
the occasion of his failure, there related Chap. 2.86. Knowing that a Man is
not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law; for by the Works of the Law, shall no
flesh be justified.

That which he does here assert, was such a known, such a fundamental principle
of Truth among all Believers, that their conviction and knowledge of it, was
the ground and occasion of their transition, and passing over from Judaism unto
the Gospel and Faith in Jesus Christ thereby.

And in the words the Apostle determines that great inquiry, how, or by what
means a Man is, or may be justified before God. The subject spoken of is
expressed indefinitely; A Man, that is, any Man, a Jew, or a Gentile, a
Believer, or an Unbeliever. The Apostle that spoke, and they to whom he spoke;
the Galatians to whom he wrote, who also for some time had believed and made
Profession of the Gospel.

The answer given unto the question, is both Negative and Positive, both
asserted with the highest assurance, and as the common faith of all Christians,
but only those who had been carried aside from it by Seducers. He asserts, that
this is not, this cannot be by the Works of the Law. What is intended by the
Law in these disputations of the Apostle, has been before declared and
evinced. The Law of Moses is sometimes signally intended; not absolutely, but
as it was the present instance of Men's cleaving unto the Law of Righteousness,
and not submitting themselves thereon unto the Righteousness of God. But that
the consideration of the Moral Law, and the duties of it, is in this Argument
any where excepted by him, is a weak imagination; yea, it would except the
Ceremonial Law it self; for the observation of it, whilst it was in force, was
a duty of the Moral Law.

And the Works of the Law, are the Works and Duties of Obedience which this Law
of God requires, performed in the manner that it prescribes, namely, in Faith,
and out of love unto God above all, as has been proved. To say, that the
Apostle excludes only Works absolutely perfect, which none ever did, or could
perform since the entrance of sin, is to suppose him to dispute with great
earnestness, and many Arguments against that which no Man asserted, and which
he does not once mention in all his discourse. Nor can he be said to exclude
only Works that are looked on as meritorious, seeing he excludes all Works
that there may be no place for merit in our Justification, as has also been
proved. Nor did these Galatians, whom he writes unto, and convinces them of
their error, look for Justification from any Works, but such as they performed
then, when they were Believers. So that all sorts of Works are excluded from
any interest in our Justification. And so much weight does the Apostle lay on
this exclusion of Works from our Justification, as that he affirms, That the
admittance of it overthrows the whole Gospel, Ver. 21. For, says he, if
Righteousness be by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain; and it is dangerous
venturing on so sharp a fence.

Not this, or that sort of Works; not this, or that manner of the performance
of them; not this, or that kind of interest in our Justification, but all Works
of what sort soever, and however performed, are excluded from any kind of
consideration in our Justification, as our Works or Duties of Obedience. For
these Galatians whom the Apostle reproves, desired no more, but that in the
Justification of a Believer, Works of the Law, or Duties of Obedience, might be
admitted into a conjunction or copartnership witn Faith in Christ Jesus. For
that they would exclude Faith in him, and assign Justification unto Works
without it, nothing is intimated, and it is a foolish imagination. In
opposition hereunto he positively ascribes our Justification unto Faith in
Christ alone: Not by Works but by Faith, is by Faith alone. That the Particles
(...) are not exceptive, but adversative, has not only been undeniably proved
by Protestant Divines, but is acknowledged by those of the Roman Church, who
pretend unto any modesty in this Controversy. The words of Estius on this
place deserve to be transcribed, Nisi per fidem Jesu Christi sententiam reddit
obscuram particula Nisi (so the vulgar Latin renders (...), instead of sed or
sed tantum) quae si proprie ut Latinis auribus sonat accipiatur, exceptionem
facit ab eo quod praecedit, ut sensus sit hominem non justificari ex operibus
Legis, nisi fides in Chrislum ad ea opera accedat, quae si accesserit
justificari eum per legis opera. Sed cum hic sensus Justificationem dividat,
partim eam tribuens operibus legis, partim fidei Christi, quod est contra
definitam and absolutam Apostoli sententiam, manifestum est, interpretationem
illam tanquam Apostolico sensui and scopo contrariam omnino repudiandam esse.
Verum constat voculam (nisi) frequenter in Scripturis adversative sumi, ut idem
valeat quod Sed tantum. So he according to his usual candor and ingenuity.

It is not probable that we shall have an end of contending in this World, when
Men will not acquiesce in such plain Determinations of Controversies given by
the Holy Ghost himself.

The Interpretation of this place given, as the meaning of the Apostle, That
Men cannot be justified by those Works which they cannot perform, that is,
Works absolutely perfect; but may be so, and are so, by those which they can,
and do perform, if not in their own strength, yet by the aid of Grace: And that
Faith in Christ Jesus which the Apostle opposes absolutely unto all Works
whatever, does include in it all those Works which he excludes, and that with
respect unto that end or effect with respect whereunto they are excluded,
cannot well be supposed to be suitable unto the mind of the Holy Ghost.

Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10.
For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God; not of Works, lest any Man should boast. For we are his
Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has
foreordained that we should walk in them.
Unless it had seemed good unto the Holy Ghost to have expressed before hand
all the evasions and subterfuges, which the wit of Man in after ages could
invent, to pervert the Doctrine of our Justification before God, and to have
rejected them, it is impossible they could have been more plainly prevented
then they are in this context. If we may take a little unprejudiced
consideration of it, I suppose what is affirmed will be evident.

It cannot be denied, but that the design of the Apostle from the beginning of
this Chapter, unto the end of Ver. 11. is to declare the way whereby lost and
condemned sinners come to be delivered, and translated out of that condition
into an estate of acceptance with God, and eternal Salvation thereon. And
therefore in the first place, he fully describes their natural state, with
their being obnoxious unto the wrath of God thereby. For such was the method of
this Apostle, unto the Declaration of the Grace of God in any kind, he did
usually, yea, constantly premise the consideration of our sin, misery, and
ruin. Others now like not this method so well. Howbeit this hinders not, but
that it was his. Unto this purpose he declares unto the Ephesians, That they
were dead in trespasses and sins, expressing the power that sin had on their
Souls, as unto Spiritual life, and all the actions of it; but withal that they
lived and walked in sin, and on all accounts were the children of wrath, or
subject and liable unto eternal condemnation, Ver. 1, 2, 3. What such persons
can do toward their own deliverance, there are many terms found out to
express, all passing my understanding, seeing the entire design of the Apostle
is to prove, that they can do nothing at all. But another cause, or other
causes of it, he finds out, and that in direct express opposition unto any
thing that may be done by our selves unto that end. (...), Ver. 4. It is not a
work for us to undertake; it is not what we can contribute any thing unto: But
God, who is rich in mercy. The adversative includes an opposition, unto every
thing on our part, and incloseth the whole work to God. Would Men have rested
on this Divine Revelation, the Church of God had been free from many of those
perverse opinions and wrangling disputes, which it has been pestered withal.
But they will not so easily part with thoughts of some kind of interest in
being the Authors of their own happiness. Wherefore two things we may observe
in the Apostles assignation of the causes of our deliverance from a state of
sin, and acceptance with God.

1. That he assigns the whole of this work absolutely unto Grace, Love, and
Mercy, and that with an exclusion of the consideration of any thing on our
part, as we shall see immediately, Ver. 5, 8.

2. He magnifies this Grace in a mavelous manner. For (1.) He expresses it
by all names and titles whereby it is signified as (...), Mercy, Love, Grace,
and Kindness. For he would have us to look only unto Grace herein. (2.) He
ascribes such Adjuncts, and gives such Epithets, unto that Divine Mercy and
Grace which is the sole cause of our deliverance in and by Jesus Christ, as
render it singular, and herein solely to be adored, (...). Rich in Mercy. Great
Love wherewith he loved us. The exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness,
Ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. It cannot reasonably be denied, but that the Apostle does
design deeply to affect the Mind and Heart of Believers with a sense of the
Grace and Love of God in Christ, as the only cause of their Justification
before God. I think no words can express those conceptions of the Mind, which
this Representation of Grace does suggest. Whether they think it any part of
their duty to be like minded, and comply with the Apostle in this design, who
scarce ever mention the Grace of God, unless it be in a way of diminution from
its efficacy, and unto whom such Ascriptions unto it as are here made by him,
are a matter of contempt, is not hard to judge.

But it will be said these are good words indeed, but they are only general;
there is nothing of Argument in all this adoring of the Grace of God in the
work of our Salvation. It may be so it seems to many. But yet to speak plainly,
there is to me more Argument in this one consideration, namely, of the
Ascription made in this cause unto the Grace of God in this place, then in an
hundred Sophisms, suited neither unto the expressions of the Scripture, nor the
experience of them that do believe. He that is possessed with a due
apprehension of the Grace of God, as here represented, and under a sense that
it was therein, the design of the Holy Ghost, to render it glorious, and alone
to be trusted unto, will not easily be induced to concern himself in those
additional supplies unto it from our own works and obedience, which some would
suggest unto him. But we may yet look further into the words.

The case which the Apostle states, the inquiry which he has in hand, whereon
he determines as to the Truth, wherein he instructs the Ephesians, and in them
the whole Church of God, is, How a lost condemned sinner may come to be
accepted with God, and thereon saved. And this is the sole inquiry wherein we
are, or intend in this controversy to be concerned. Further we will not
proceed, either upon the invitation or provocation of any. Concerning this, his
position and determination is, That we are saved by Grace.

This first he occasionally interposeth in his enumeration of the benefits we
receive by Christ, Ver. 5. But not content therewith, he again directly asserts
it, Ver. 8. in the same words; for he seems to have considered how slow Men
would be in the admittance of this Truth, which at once deprives them of all
boastings in themselves.

What it is that he intends by our being saved, must be inquired into. It would
not be prejudicial unto, but rather advance the truth we plead for, if by our
being saved, eternal Salvation were intended. But that cannot be the sense of
it in this place, otherwise than as that Salvation is included in the causes of
it, which are effectual in this life. Nor do I think that in that expression,
By Grace ye are saved, our Justification only is intended, although it be so
principally. Conversion unto God and Sanctification, are also included therein,
as is evident from Ver. 5, 6. And they are no less of sovereign Grace, than is
our Justification it self. But the Apostle speaks of what the Ephesians being
now Believers, and by virtue of their being so, were made partakers of in this
life. This is manifest in the whole context. For having in the beginning of the
Chapter described their condition, what it was in common with all the Posterity
of Adam by nature, Ver. 1, 2, 3. He moreover declares their condition in
particular, in opposition to that of the Jews, as they were Gentiles,
Idolaters, Atheists, Ver. 11, 12. Their present delivery by Jesus Christ from
this whole miserable state and condition, that which they were under in common
with all mankind, and that which was a peculiar aggravation of its misery in
themselves, is that which he intends by their being saved. That which was
principally designed in the description of this state is, That therein and
thereby they were liable unto the wrath of God, guilty before him, and
obnoxious unto his judgment. This he expresses in the declaration of it. Ver.
3. Answerable unto that method, and those grounds, he every where proceeds on
in declaring the Doctrine of Justification.

Romans 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. From this state they had
deliverance by Faith in Christ Jesus. For unto as many as received him, power
is given to be the sons of God. Joh. 1.12. He that believes on him, is not
condemned, that is, he is saved, in the sense of the Apostle in this place.
Joh. 3.15. He that believes on the Son of God has everlasting life, (is
saved) but he that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. Ver. 36. And
in this sense, saved, and Salvation, are frequently used in the Scripture.
Besides he gives us so full a description of the Salvation, which he intends
from Ver. 13. unto the end of the Chapter, that there can be no doubt of it. It
is our being made nigh by the Blood of Christ, Ver. 13. Our Peace with God by
his death, Ver. 14, 15. Our Reconciliation by the Blood of the Cross, Ver. 16.
Our access unto God, and all Spiritual privileges thereon depending, Ver. 18,
19, 20, etc.

Wherefore the inquiry of the Apostle and his determination thereon, is
concerning the causes of our Justification before God. This he declares and
fixes both Positively and Negatively. Positively (1.) In the supreme moving
Cause on the part of God. This is that free sovereign Grace and Love of his,
which he illustrates by its adjuncts and properties before mentioned. (2.) In
the meritorious procuring cause of it, which is Jesus Christ in the Work of his
Mediation, as the Ordinance of God for the rendering this Grace effectual unto
his Glory, Ver. 7, 13, 16. (3.) In the only means or instrumental cause on our
part, which is Faith. By Grace are ye saved through Faith, Ver. 8. And lest he
should seem to derogate any thing from the Grace of God, in asserting the
necessity and use of Faith, he adds, That Epanorthosis, and that not of our
selves, it is the gift of God. The communication of this Faith unto us is no
less of Grace then is the Justification which we obtain thereby. So has he
secured the whole Work unto the Grace of God through Christ, wherein we are
interested by Faith alone.

But not content herewith, he describes this work Negatively, or adds an
exclusion of what might be pretended to have a concernment therein. And therein
three things are stated distinctly. (1.) What it is he so excludes. (2.) The
Reason whereon he does so. (3.) The confirmation of that Reason, wherein he
obviates an objection that might arise thereon.

1. That which he excludes is Works, not of Works, Ver. 9. And what works he
intends at least principally, himself declares. Works, say some, of the Law,
the Law of Moses. But what concernment had these Ephesians therein, that the
Apostle should inform them, that they were not justified by those works. They
were never under that Law, never sought for Righteousness by it, nor had any
respect unto it, but only, that they were delivered from it. But it may be he
intends only Works wrought in the strength of our own natural abilities,
without the aids of Grace, and before believing. But what were the Works of
these Ephesians antecedent unto believing, he before and afterward declares.
For being dead in trespasses and sins, they walked according to the course of
this World in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, Ver. 1, 2, 3. It is certain enough that these works have no
influence into our Justification; and no less certain, that the Apostle had no
reason to exclude them from it, as though any could pretend to be advantaged by
them, in that which consists in a deliverance from them. Wherefore the Works
here excluded by the Apostle, are those works which the Ephesians now
performed, when the were Believers, quickened with Christ; even the Works which
God has foreordained, that we should walk in them, as he expressly declared,
Ver. 10. And these Works he excludes not only in opposition unto Grace, but in
opposition unto Faith also. Through Faith not of Works. Wherefore he does not
only reject their merit, as inconsistent with Grace, but their cointerest on
our part with, or subsequent interest unto Faith, in the Work of Justification
before God.

If we are saved by Grace through Faith in Christ exclusively unto all works of
Obedience whatever, then cannot such works be the whole or any part of our
Righteousness unto the Justification of life. Wherefore another Righteousness
we must have or perish for ever. Many things I know are here offered, and many
distinctions coined to retain some interest of Works in our Justification
before God; But whether it be the safest way to trust unto them, or unto this
plain, express, Divine Testimony, will not be hard for any to determine when
they make the case their own.

2. The Apostle adds a Reason of this exclusion of Works, not of Works left any
one should boast. God has ordained the order and method of our Justification
by Christ in the way expressed, that no man might have ground, reason, or
occasion to glory or boast in or of himself. So it is expressed, 1 Cor. 1.21,
30, 31. Romans 3.32. To exclude all glorying or boasting on our part, is the
design of God. And this consists in an ascription of something unto our selves,
that is not in others, in order unto Justification. And it is Works alone that
can administer any occasion of this boasting; For if Abraham were justified by
Works, he had whereof to glory, Romans 4.2. And it is excluded alone by the Law
of Faith, Romans 3.27. For the nature and use of Faith, is to find Righteousness
in another. And this boasting, all Works are apt to beget in the minds of men,
if applied unto Justification. And where there is any boasting of this nature,
the design of God toward us in this Work of his Grace, is frustrated what
lies in us.

That which I principally insist on from hence, is, that there are no
boundaries fixed in Scripture unto the interest of Works in Justification, so
as no boasting should be included in them. The Papists make them meritorious of
it, at least of our second Justification as they call it. This, say some, ought
not to be admitted; for it includes boasting, Merit and boasting are
inseparable. Wherefore say others, they are only causa sine qua non, they are
the condition of it; or they are our Evangelical Righteousness before God
whereon we are Evangelically justified, or they are a subordinate
Righteousness, whereon we obtain an interest in the Righteousness of Christ; or
are comprised in the condition of the new Covenant whereby we are justified, or
are included in Faith, being the form of it, or of the essence of it, one way
or other: For herein men express themselves in great variety. But so long as
our Works are hereby asserted in order unto our Justification, how shall a man
be certain that they do not include boasting; or, that they do express the true
sense of these words, not of works lest any man should boast. There is some
kind of Ascription unto our selves in this matter, which is boasting. If any
shall say, that they know well enough what they do, and know that they do not
boast in what they ascribe unto Works, I must say that in general I cannot
admit it. For the Papists affirm of themselves, that they are most remote from
boasting; yet I am very well satisfied that boasting and merit are inseparable.
The question is not what men think they do, but what Judgment the Scripture
passes on what they do. And if it be said, that what is in us, is also of the
Grace and Gift of God, and is so acknowledged, which excludes all boasting in
our selves, I say it was so by the Pharisee, and yet was he an horrible
boaster. Let them therefore be supposed to be wrought in us in what way men
please, if they be also wrought by us, and so be the Works of Righteousness,
which we have done, I fear their Introduction into our Justification, does
include boasting in it, because of this assertion of the Apostle, not of Works
lest any man should boast. Wherefore because this is a dangerous point, unless
men can give us the direct, plain indisputable bounds of the Introduction of
our Works into our Justification, which cannot include boasting in it, it is
the safest course utterly to exclude them, wherein I see no danger of any
mistake in these words of the Holy Ghost, not of Works lest any man should
boast. For if we should be unadvisedly seduced into this boasting, we should
lose all the benefit which we might otherwise expect by the Grace of God.

3. The Apostle gives another reason why it cannot be of Works, and withal
obviates an Objection, which might arise from what he had declared, v. 10. For
we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has
before ordained, that we should walk in them. And the force of his Reason,
which the causal Conjunction intimates the Introduction of, consists in this:
That all good Works, those concerning which he treats, Evangelical Works, are
the Effects of the Grace of God in them that are in Christ Jesus, and so are
truly justified antecedently in order of nature unto them. But that which he
principally designed in these words, was that which he is still mindful of,
wherever he treats of this Doctrine, namely to obviate an Objection that he
foresaw some would make against it, and that is this; If good Works be thus
excluded from our Justification before God, then of what use are they? we may
live as we list, utterly neglect them, and yet be justified. And this very
Objection do some men continue to manage, with great vehemence against the same
Doctrine. We meet with nothing in this cause more frequently than that if our
Justification before God be not of Works some way or other, if they be not
antecedaneously required thereunto, if they are not a previous condition of it,
then there is no need of them: Men may safely live in an utter neglect of all
Obedience unto God. And on this Theme men are very apt to enlarge themselves,
who otherwise give no great evidences of their own Evangelical Obedience. To me
it is mavelous, that they heed not unto what party they make an Accession in
the management of this Objection; namely unto that of them, who were the
Adversaries of the Doctrine of Grace taught by the Apostle. It must be
elsewhere considered. For the present I shall say no more, but that if the
answer here given by the Apostle be not satisfactory unto them, if the Grounds
and Reasons of the necessity and use of good Works here declared, be not judged
by them sufficient to establish them in their proper place and order, I shall
not esteem my self obliged to attempt their further satisfaction.

Phil. 3.8, 9.
Yea doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him
not having mine own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.
This is the last Testimony which I shall insist upon, and although it be of
great importance, I shall be the more brief in the consideration of it, because
it has been lately pleaded and vindicated by another, whereunto I do not
expect any tolerable reply. For what has since been attempted by one, it is of
no weight. He is in this matter (...). And the things that I would observe from
and concerning this Testimony, may be reduced into the ensuing heads.

1. That which the Apostle designs from the beginning of this Chapter, and in
these Verses, in an especial manner to declare what it is on the account
whereof we are accepted with God, and have thereon cause to rejoice. This he
fixes in general in an interest in and participation of Christ by Faith in
opposition unto all Legal Privileges and advantages, wherein the Jews whom he
reflected upon did boast and rejoice, Rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh, Verse. 3.

2. He supposes that unto that Acceptance before God wherein we are to
Rejoice, there is a Righteousness necessary; And to whatever it be is the sole
ground of that acceptance. And to give evidence hereunto,

3. He declares that there is a twofold Righteousness that may be pleaded and
trusted unto to this purpose. (1.) Our own Righteousness which is of the Law.
(2.) That which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith. These he asserts to be opposite and inconsistent as unto the end
of our Justification and acceptance with God; Not having mine own
Righteousness, but that which is, etc. And an intermediate Righteousness
between these he acknowledges not.

4. Placing the instance in himself, he declares emphatically (so as there is
scarce a greater (...), or vehemence of Speech, in all his Writings,) which of
those it was that he adhered unto, and placed his confidence in. And in the
handling of this Subject, there were some things which engaged his holy mind
into an earnestness of expression in the exaltation of one of these, namely of
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, and the depression of the other, or
his own Righteousness. As,

1. This was the turning point, whereon he and others had forsaken their
Judaism and betaken themselves unto the Gospel. This therefore was to be
secured as the main instance, wherein the greatest controversy that ever was
in the world was debated. So he expresses it, Gal. 2.15.16. We who are Jews by
nature and not Sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by
the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by
the Works of the Law. (2.) Hereon there was great opposition made unto this
Doctrine by the Jews in all places and in many of them the minds of multitudes
were turned off from the Truth (which the most are generally prone unto in this
case) and perverted from the simplicity of the Gospel. This greatly affected
his holy Soul, and he takes notice of it in most of his Epistles. (3.) The
weight of the Doctrine it self, with that unwillingness which is in the minds
of men by nature to embrace it, as that which lays the axe to the root of all
Spiritual Pride, elation of Mind, and Self-pleasing whatever, whence
innumerable Subterfuges have been, and are sought out to avoid the efficacy of
it, and to keep the Souls of men from that universal resignation of themselves
unto sovereign Grace in Christ, which they have naturally such an aversation
unto, did also affect him. (4.) He had himself been a great Sinner in the days
of his ignorance by a peculiar opposition unto Christ and the Gospel; This he
was deeply sensible of; and therewithal of the excellency of the Grace of God
and the Righteousness of Christ, whereby he was delivered. And men must have
some experience of what he felt in himself as unto Sin and Grace, before they
can well understand his expressions about them.

5. Hence it was, that in many other places of his Writings, but in this
especially, he treats of these things with a greater earnestness and vehemence
of Spirit than ordinary. Thus (1.) On the part of Christ whom he would exalt he
mentions not only the knowledge of him, but (...), The excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, with an Emphasis in every word; And those
other redoubled expressions, all loss for him, that I may win him, that I may
be found in him, that I may know him, all argue the working of his affections
under the Conduct of Faith and Truth unto an acquiescency in Christ alone, as
all and in all. Somewhat of this frame of mind is necessary unto them that
would believe his Doctrine. Those who are utter strangers unto the one, will
never receive the other. (2.) In his expression of all other other things that
are our own, that are not Christ, whether Privileges or Duties, however good,
useful, excellent, they may be in themselves, yet in Comparison of Christ and
his Righteousness, and with respect unto the end of our standing before God,
and acceptance with him, with the same vehemence of Spirit he casts contempt
upon, calling them (...), Dogs meat to be left for them whom he calls Dogs,
that is, evil Workers, of the Concision; or the wicked Jews who adhered
pertinaciously unto the Righteousness of the Law, v. 2. This account of the
earnestness of the Apostle in this Argument, and the warmth of his Expressions,
I thought meet to give as that which gives light into the whole of his design.

6. The question being thus stated, the enquiry is what any person who desires
acceptance with God, or a Righteousness whereon he may be justified before him,
ought to betake himself unto. One of the ways proposed he must close with all.
Either he must comply with the Apostle in his Resolution to reject all his own
Righteousness, and to betake himself unto the Righteousness of God, which is by
Faith in Christ Jesus alone, or find out for himself, or get some to find out
for him, some exceptions unto the Apostles conclusion, or some distinctions
that may prepare a reserve for his own works, one way or other in his
justification before God. Here every one must choose for himself. In the mean
time, we thus argue. If our own Righteousness, and the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith; or that which is through the Faith of Christ Jesus (namely,
the Righteousness which God imputes unto us, Romans 4.6. Or the abundance of
Grace and the gift of Righteousness thereby, which we receive, Romans 5.17.) are
opposite, and inconsistent in the Work of Justification before God, then are we
justified by Faith alone through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ
unto us. The consequence is plain from the removal of all other ways, causes,
means, and conditions of it, as inconsistent with it. But the antecedent is
expressly the Apostles; Not my own, but that of God. Again,

That whereby, and wherewith we are found in Christ, is that whereby alone we
are justified before God; for to be found in Christ, expresses the state of
the person that is to be justified before God: Whereunto is opposed to be found
in our selves. And according unto these different states does the judgment of
God pass concerning us. And as for those who are found in themselves, we know
what will be their portion. But in Christ we are found by Faith alone.

All manner of evasions are made use of by some, to escape the force of this
Testimony. It is said in general, That no sober minded Man can imagine the
Apostle did not desire to be found in Gospel Righteousness, or, That by his own
Righteousness he meant that. For it is that alone can entitle us unto the
Benefits of Christ's Righteousness. Nollem Dictum. (1.) The censure is too
severe to be cast on all Protestant Writers without exception, who have
expounded this place of the Apostle; and all others, except some few of late,
influenced by the heat of the Controversy wherein they are engaged. (2.) If
the Gospel Righteousness intended be his own Personal Righteousness and
Obedience, there is some want of consideration in affirming, That he did not
desire to be found in it. That wherein we are found, thereon are we to be
judged; to be found in our own Evangelical Righteousness before God, is to
enter into judgment with God thereon, which those who understand any thing
aright of God and themselves, will not be free unto. And to make this to be the
meaning of his words, I desire not to be found in my own Righteousness which is
after the Law, but I desire to be found in mine own Righteousness which is
according to the Gospel; whereas, as they are his own inherent Righteousness,
they are both the same, does not seem a proper interpretation of his words, and
it shall be immediately disproved. (3.) That our Personal Gospel Righteousness,
does entitle us unto the Benefits of Christ's Righteousness, that is, as unto
our Justification before God, is gratis dictum, not one Testimony of Scripture
can be produced that gives the least countenance unto such an assertion. That
it is contrary unto many express Testimonies, and inconsistent with the freedom
of the Grace of God in our Justification, as proposed in the Scripture, has
been proved before. Nor do any of the places which assert the necessity of
obedience and good Works in Believers, that is, Justified Persons unto
Salvation, any way belong unto the Proof of this Assertion; or, in the least
express, or intimate any such thing. And in particular, the Assertion of it is
expressly contradictory unto that of the Apostle, Tit. 3.4, 5. But I forbear,
and proceed to the consideration of the special answers, that are given unto
this testimony, especially those of Bellarmine, whereunto I have as yet, seen
nothing added with any pretense of Reason in it.

1. Some say, that by his own Righteousness which the Apostle rejects, he
intends only his Righteousness (...), or by the Works of the Law. But this was
only an outward external Righteousness, consisting in the observation of Rites
and Ceremonies, without respect unto the inward frame or obedience of the
heart. But this is an impious imagination. The Righteousness which is by the
Law, is the Righteousness which the Law requires, and those works of it, which
if a Man do, he shall live in them; for the doers of the Law shall be
justified, Romans 2.16. Neither did God ever give any Law of Obedience unto Man,
but what obliged him to love the Lord his God with all his heart, and all his
soul. And it is so far from being true, That God by the Law required an
external Righteousness only, that he frequently condemns it as an abomination
to him, where it is alone.

2. Others say, that it is the Righteousness whatever it be, which he had
during his Pharisaism. And although he should be allowed in that state, to have
lived in all good Conscience, instantly to have served God day and night, and
to have had respect as well unto the internal, as the external Works of the
Law; yet all these Works being before Faith, before Conversion to God, may be,
and are to be rejected as unto any concurrence unto our Justification. But
Works wrought in Faith, by the aid of Grace, Evangelical Works are of another
consideration, and together with Faith, are the condition of Justification.

Answ. 1. That in the matter of our Justification the Apostle opposes
Evangelical Works, not only unto the Grace of God, but also unto the Faith of
Believers, was proved in the consideration of the foregoing Testimony.

2. He makes no such distinction, as that pretended, namely, That Works are of
two sorts; whereof one is to be excluded from any interest in our
Justification, but not the other; neither does he any where else, treating of
the same subject, intimate any such distinction; but on the contrary, declares
that use of all Works of Obedience in them that believe, which is exclusive of
the supposition of any such distinction* but he directly expresses, in this
rejection, his own Righteousness, that is, his Personal Inherent Righteousness
whatever it be, and however it be wrought.

3. He makes a plain distinction of his own twofold estate, namely, that of his
Judaism which he was in before his Conversion, and that which he had by Faith
in Christ Jesus. In the first state, he considers the privileges of it, and
declares what judgment he made concerning them upon the Revelation of Jesus
Christ unto him, (...), says he, referring unto the time past, namely, at his
first conversion. I considered them with all the advantages, gain, and
reputation, which I had by them, but rejected them all for Christ, because the
esteem of them and continuance in them as privileges, was inconsistent with
Faith in Christ Jesus. Secondly, he proceeds to give an account of himself and
his thoughts, as unto his present condition. For it might be supposed, that
although he had parted with all his legal privileges for Christ; yet now being
united unto him by Faith, he had something of his own, wherein he might
rejoice, and on the account whereof he might be accepted with God (the thing
inquired after) or else he had parted with all for nothing. Wherefore he who
had no design to make any reserves of what he might glory in, plainly declares
what his judgment is concerning all his present Righteousness, and the ways of
obedience which he was now engaged in, with respect unto the ends inquired
after, Ver. 8. (...). The bringing over of what was affirmed before concerning
his Judaical privileges into this Verse, is an effect of a very superficiary
consideration of the context. For (1.) there is a plain (...) in these words
(...). He could not more plainly express the heightning of what he had affirmed
by a Proceed unto other things, or the consideration of himself in another
state. But moreover, beyond what I have already asserted. (2.) The change of
the time expressed by (...) respects what was past, into (...) wherein he has
respect only unto what was present, not what he had before rejected and
forsaken, makes evident his progress unto the consideration of things of
another nature. Wherefore unto the rejection of all his former Judaical
privileges, he adds his judgment concerning his own present Personal
Righteousness. But whereas it might be objected, That rejecting all both before
and after conversion, he had nothing left to rejoice in, to glory in, to give
him acceptance with God; he assures us of the contrary, namely, that he found
all these things in Christ, and the Righteousness of God which is by Faith. He
is therefore in these words, Not having mine own Righteousness, which is by the
Law; so far from intending only the Righteousness which he had before his
Conversion, as that he intends it not at all.

The words of Davenant on this passage of the Apostle, being in my judgment not
only sober, but weighty also, I shall transcribe them. Hic docet Apostolus
quaenam illa justitia sit qua nitendum coram Deo, nimirum quae per fidem
apprehenditur, at haec imputata est: Causam etiam ostendit cur jure nostra
fiat, nimirum quia nos Christi sumus and in Christo comperimur; quia igitur
insiti sumus in corpus ejus and coalescimus cum illo in unam personam, ideo
ejus justitia nostra reputatur. De Justif. Habit. cap. 38. For whereas some
begin to interpret our being in Christ, and being found in him, so as to intend
no more but our profession of the Faith of the Gospel, The Faith of the
Catholic Church in all ages concerning the Mystical Union of Christ and
Believers, is not to be blown away with a few empty words and unproved
Assertions.

The Answer therefore is full and clear unto the general Exception, namely,
that the Apostle rejects our Legal, but not our Evangelical Righteousness. For
(1.) the Apostle rejects, disclaims, disowns nothing at all, not the one, nor
the other absolutely, but in comparison of Christ, and with respect unto the
especial end of Justification before God, or a Righteousness in his sight* (2.)
In that sense he rejects all our own Righteousness, but our Evangelical
Righteousness, in the sense pleaded for, is our own, inherent in us, performed
by us. (3.) Our Legal Righteousness, and our Evangelical, so far as an Inherent
Righteousness is intended, are the same, and the different ends and use of the
same Righteousness, is alone intended in that distinction, so far as it has
sense in it. That which in respect of Motives unto it, the ends of it, with the
especial causes of its acceptance with God. is Evangelical, in respect of its
original Prescription, Rule, and Measure, is Legal. When any can instance in
any Act or Duty, in any habit or effect of it, which are not required by that
Law which injoyns us to love the Lord our God, with all our heart, soul, and
mind, and our neighbor as our selves; they shall be attended unto. (4.) The
Apostle in this case rejects all the Works of Righteousness which we have done,
Tit. 3.5. But our Evangelical Righteousness consists in the Works of
Righteousness which we do. (5.) He disclaims all that is our own. And if the
Evangelical Righteousness intended be our own, he sets up another in opposition
unto it; and which therefore is not our own, but as it is imputed unto us. And
I shall yet add some other reasons which render this pretense useless, or show
the falsness of it.

1. Where the Apostle does not distinguish or limit what he speaks of, what
ground have we to distinguish or limit his Assertions. Not by Works, says he,
sometimes absolutely, sometimes the Works of Righteousness which we have done;
that is, not by some sort of Works say those who plead the contrary: But by
what warrant? (2.) The Works which they pretend to be excluded, as wherein our
own Righteousness that is rejected does consist, are Works wrought without
Faith, without the aid of Grace: But these are not good Works, nor can any be
denominated righteous from them, nor is it any Righteousness that consists in
them alone. For without Faith it is impossible to please God: And to what
purpose should the Apostle exclude evil works and hypocritical, from our
Justification? Who ever imagined, that any could be justified with respect unto
them. There might have been some pretense for this gloss, had the Apostle said
his own Works; but whereas he rejects his own Righteousness, to restrain it
unto such Works as are not righteous, as will denominate none righteous, as are
no Righteousness at all, is most absurd. (3.) Works wrought in Faith, if
applied unto our Justification, do give occasion unto, or include boasting,
more then any others, as being better and more praise worthy then they. (4.)
The Apostle elsewhere excludes from Justification the Works that Abraham had
done when he had been a Believer many years; and the Works of David when he
described the Blessedness of a Man by the forgiveness of sins. (5.) The state
of the Question which he handles in his Epistle unto the Galatians, was
expressly about the Works of them that did believe. For he does not disspute
against the Jews, who would not be pressed in the least with his Arguments,
namely, that if the inheritance were by the Law, then the promise was of none
effect; and if Righteousness were by the Law, then did Christ die in vain: For
these things they would readily grant. But he speaks unto them that were
Believers, with respect unto those Works which they would have joined with
Christ and the Gospel, in order unto Justification. (6.) If this were the mind
of the Apostle, that he would exclude one sort of Works, and assert the
necessity of another unto the same end, why did he not once say so, especially
considering how necessary it was that so he should do, to answer those
objections against his doctrine which he himself takes notice of, and returns
answer unto on other grounds, without the least intimation of any such
distinction.

Bellarmine considers this Testimony in three places, Lib. 1. cap. 18. Lib.
1. cap. 19. Lib. 5. cap. 5. De Justificat. And he returns three answers unto
it, which contain the substance of all that is pleaded by others unto the same
purpose. 1. He says, That the Righteousness which is by the Law, and which is
opposed unto the Righteousness which is by Faith, is not the Righteousness
written in the Law, or which the Law requires, but a Righteousness wrought
without the aid of Grace, by the knowledge of the Law alone. 2. That the
Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ, are opera nostra justa facta ex
fide, our own righteous Works wrought in Faith, which others call our
Evangelical Works. (3.) That it is blasphemous to call the Duties of Inherent
Righteousness (...) loss and dung. But he labors in the fire with all his
sophistry. For as to the first, (1.) That by the Righteousness which is by the
Law, the Righteousness which the Law requires, is not intended, is a bold
assertion, and expressly contradictory unto the Apostle, Romans 9.31. Chap. 10.5.
In both places he declares the Righteousness of the Law to be the Righteousness
that the Law requires. (2.) The Works which he excludes, he calls the Works of
Righteousness that we have done, Tit. 3.5. which are the Works that the Law
requires. Unto the second, I say (1.) That the substance of it, is, That the
Apostle should profess that I desire to be found in Christ, not having my own
Righteousness, but having my own Righteousness; for Evangelical Inherent
Righteousness was properly his own. And I am sorry that some should apprehend
that the Apostle in these words did desire to be found in his own Righteousness
in the presence of God, in order unto his Justification. For nothing can be
more contrary, not only unto the perpetual tenor and design of all his
discourses, on this subject, but also unto the Testimony of all other holy Men
in the Scripture, to the same purpose, as we have proved before. And I suppose
there are very few true Believers at present, whom they will find to comply and
join with, them in this desire of being found in their own Personal Evangelical
Righteousness, or the Works of Righteousness which they have done, in their
trial before God, as unto their Justification. We should do well to read our
own hearts, as well as the Books of others in this matter. (2.) The
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, is not our own Obedience or
Righteousness, but that which is opposed unto it: That which God imputes unto
us, Romans 4.6. That which we receive by way of gift, Romans 5.17. (3.) That by the
Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ Jesus our own Inherent
Righteousness is not intended, is evident from hence, That the Apostle excludes
all his own Righteousness, as, and when he was found in Christ, that is, what
ever he had done as a Believer. And if there be not an opposition in these
words, between a Righteousness that is our own, and that which is not our own,
I know not in what words it can be expressed. Unto the third I say, (1.) The
Apostle does not, nor do we say, that he does, call our Inherent Righteousness
dung, but only that he accounts it so. (2.) He does not account it so
absolutely, which he is most remote from, but only in comparison with Christ.
(3.) He does not esteem it so in it self, but only as unto his trust in it,
with respect unto one especial end, namely, our Justification before God. (4.)
The Prophet Isaiah in the same respect, terms all our Righteousness filthy
rags, Chap. 64.6. And (...) is an expression of as much contempt, as (...).

5. Some say all Works are excluded as meritorious of Grace, Life, and
Salvation, but not as the condition of our Justification before God. But (1.)
what ever the Apostle excludes, he does it absolutely, and with all respects,
because he sets up something else in opposition unto it. (2.) There is no
ground left for any such distinction in this place: For all that the Apostle
requires unto our Justification is, (1.) That we be found in Christ, not in our
selves. (2.) That we have the Righteousness of God, not our own. (3.) That we
be made partakers of this Righteousness by Faith, which is the substance of
what we plead for.

CHAP. XIX. Objections against the Doctrine of Justification, by the imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ. Personal Holiness and Obedience not obstructed,
but furthered by it.
THat which remains to put an issue to this Discourse, is the consideration
of some things, that in general are laid in objection against the truth pleaded
for. Many things of that nature we have occasionally met withal, and already
removed. Yea, the principal of those which at present are most insisted on. The
Testimonies of Scripture urged by those of the Roman Church for Justification
by works, have all of them so fully and frequently been answered by Protestant
Divines, that it is altogether needless to insist again upon them, unless they
had received some new inforcement, which of late they have not done. That which
for the most part we have now to do withal, are rather Sophistiacal cavils from
supposed absurd consequences, then real Theological arguments. And some of
those who would walk with most wariness between the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ and Justification by our own works, either are in such
a slippery place, that they seem sometimes to be on the one side, sometimes on
the other, or else to express themselves with so much caution as it is very
difficult to apprehend their minds. I shall not therefore for the future dare
to say, that this or that is any man's opinion, though it appear unto me so to
be as clear and evident as words can express it, but that this or that opinion,
let it be maintained by whom it will, I approve or disapprove, this I shall
dare to say. And I will say also, that the declination that has been from the
common Doctrine of Justification before God, on the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, does daily proceed toward a direct assertion of
justification by works. Nor indeed has it where to rest, until it comes unto
that bottom. And this is more clearly seen in the objections which they make
against the truth, then in what they plead in defense of their own opinions.
For herein they speak as yet warily, and with a pretense of accuracy in
avoiding extremes: But in the other, or their objections they make use of none
but what are easily resolved into a supposition of Justification by Works in
the grossest sense of it. To insist on all particulars were endless, and as was
said, most of those of any importance have already occasionally been spoken
unto. There are therefore only two things which are generally pleaded by all
sorts of persons, Papists, Socinians, and others, with whom here we have to do,
that I shall take notice of. The first and fountain of all other is, that the
Doctrine of Justification by the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ does
render our personal Righteousness needless, and overthrows all necessity of an
Holy life. The other is, that the Apostle James in his Epistle, does plainly
ascribe our Justification unto Works, and what he affirms there, is
inconsistent with that sense of those many other Testimonies of Scripture which
we plead for.

For the first of these, although those who oppose the truth we contend for, do
proceed on various different and contradictory principles among themselves as
to what they exalt in opposition unto it, yet do they all agree in a vehement
urging of it. For those of the Church of Rome who renewed this charge, invented
of old by others, it must be acknowledged by all sober men, that as managed by
them, it is an open calumny. For the wisest of them and those of whom it is
hard to conceive, but that they knew the contrary, as Bellarmine, Vasquez,
Suarez, do openly aver that Protestant Writers deny all inherent Righteousness;
( Bellarmine excepts Bucer and Chemnitius) that they maintain that men may be
saved, although they live in all manner of sin, that there is no more required
of them, but that they believe that their sins are forgiven, and that whilst
they do so, although they give themselves up unto the most sensual Vices and
Abominations, they may be assured of their Salvation.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum. So will men out of a perverse zeal to
promote their own interest in the Religion they profess, wilfully give up
themselves unto the worst of evils, such as false accusation and open calumny,
and of no other nature are these assertions, which none of the Writings or
Preachings of those who are so charged, did ever give the least countenance
unto. Whether the forging and promulgation of such impudent falsehoods, be an
expedient to obtain Justification by Works in the sight of God, they who
continue in them had best to consider. For my part I say again, as I suppose I
have said already, that it is all one to me what Religion men are of, who can
justify themselves in such courses and proceedings. And for those among our
selves who are pleased to make use of this Objection, they either know what the
Doctrine is which they would oppose, or they do not. If they do not, the wise
man tells them, that he who answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly
and shame unto him. If they do understand it, it is evident that they use not
sincerity, but artifices, and false pretenses for advantage, in their handling
of Sacred things, which is scandalous to Religion. Socinus fiercely manageth
this charge against the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches; De servat. par. 4.
cap. 1. And he made it the foundation whereon, and the reason why he opposes
the Doctrine of the imputation of the satisfaction of Christ, if any such
satisfaction should be allowed, which yet he peremptorily denies. And he has
written a Treatise unto the same purpose defended by Schlictingius against
Meisnerus. And he takes the same honest course herein, that others did before
him. For he charge it on the Divines of the Protestant Churches, that they
taught that God justifies the ungodly, not only those that are so, and whilst
they are so, but although they continue so; that they required no inherent
Righteousness or Holiness in any, nor could do so on their principles, seeing
the imputed Righteousness of Christ is sufficient for them, although they live
in sin, are not washed nor cleansed, nor do give up themselves unto the ways
of Duty and Obedience unto God whereby he may be pleased, and so bring in
Libertinisme and Antinomianisme into the Church. And he thinks it a sufficient
confutation of this Doctrine to allege against it that neither Fornicators,
nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And these
are some of those ways which have rendered the management of controversies in
Religion scandalous and abominable, such as no wise or good man will meddle
withal, unless compelled for the necessary service of the Church. For these
things are openly false, and made use of with a shameful dishonesty to promote
a corrupt design and end. When I find men at this kind of work I have very
little concernment in what they say afterward, be it true or false. Their rule
and measure is what serves their own end, or what may promote the design and
interest wherein they are engaged, be it right or wrong. And as for this man
there is not any Article in Religion (the principal whereof are rejected by
him) on whose account he does with more confidence adjudge us unto eternal
ruin, than he does on this of the satisfaction of Christ and the imputation of
it unto them that do believe. So much darkness is their remaining on the minds
of the most of men: so many inveterate prejudices on various occasions are they
pestered withal, especially if not under the conduct of the same inlightning
spirit, that some will confidently condemn others unto eternal flames, for
those things whereon they place on infallible grounds, their hopes of eternal
blessedness, and know that they love God and live unto him on their account.
But this wretched advantage of condemning all them of Hell who dissent from
them, is greedily laid hold of by all sorts of persons. For they thereby
secretly secure their own whole party in persuasion of eternal Salvation be
they otherwise what they will. For if the want of that Faith which they
profess, will certainly damn men whatever else they be, and how good soever
their lives be, many will easily suffer themselves to be deceived with a
foolish Sophisme, that then that Faith which they profess will assuredly save
them, be their lives what they please, considering how it falls in with their
inclinations. And hereby they may happen also to frighten poor simple people
into a compliance with them, whilst they peremptorily denounce Damnation
against them unless they do so. And none for the most part are more fierce in
the denunciation of the condemnatory sentence against others for not believing
as they do, then those who so live as that if there be any truth in the
Scripture, it is not possible they should be saved themselves. For my part I
believe that as to Christians in outward profession, all unregenerate
unbelievers, who obey not the Gospel shall be damned, be they of what Religion
they will, and none else; for all that are born again, do truly believe and
obey the Gospel, shall be saved, be they of what Religion they will, as unto
the differences that are at this day among Christians. That way wherein these
things are most effectually promoted, is in the first place to be embraced by
every one that takes care of his own Salvation. If they are in any way or
Church obstructed, that Church or way is so far as it does obstruct them to be
forsaken. And if there be any way of profession or any visible Church state
wherein any thing or things absolutely destructive of or inconsistent with
these things are made necessary unto the professors of it, in that way, and by
virtue of it, no Salvation is to be obtained. In other things every man is to
walk according unto the light of his own mind, for whatever is not of Faith is
sin. But I return from this digression occasioned by the fierceness of him with
whom we have to do.

For the Objection it self, that has fallen under so perverse a management, so
far as it has any pretense of sobriety in it is this and no other. If God
justify the ungodly merely by his Grace through Faith in Christ Jesus, so as
that works of Obedience are not antecedently necessary unto Justification
before God, nor are any part of that Righteousness whereon any are so
justified, then are they no way necessary, but men may be justified and saved
without them. For it is said that there is no connection between Faith unto
Justification as by us asserted, and the necessity of Holiness, Righteousness
or Obedience, but that we are by Grace set at liberty to live as we list, yea
in all manner of sin, and yet be secured of Salvation. For if we are made
Righteous with the Righteousness of another, we have no need of any
Righteousness of our own. And it were well it many of those who make use of
this Plea, would endeavor by some other way also to evidence their esteem of
these things; for to dispute for the necessity of Holiness, and live in the
neglect of it, is uncomely.

I shall be brief in the answer that here shall be returned unto this
Objection, for indeed it is sufficiently answered or obviated in what has been
before discoursed concerning the nature of that Faith whereby we are justified,
and the continuation of the moral Law in its force, as a rule of Obedience unto
all believers. An unprejudiced consideration of what has been proposed on
these heads will evidently manifest the Iniquity of this charge, and how not
the least countenance is given unto it by the Doctrine pleaded for. Besides, I
must acquaint the Reader that some while since I have published an entire
Discourse concerning the nature and necessity of Gospel Holiness, with the
Grounds and Reasons thereof in compliance with the Doctrine of Justification
that has now been declared. Nor do I see it necessary to add any thing
thereunto, nor do I doubt, but that the perusal of it will abundantly detect
the vanity of this charge ( Dispensat. of the Holy Spirit, Book 5.) Some few
things may be spoken on the present occasion.

1. It is not pleaded that all who do profess or have in former ages professed
this Doctrine, have exemplified it in an holy and fruitful conversation. Many
it is to be feared have been found amongst them who have lived and dyed in sin.
Neither do I know but that some have abused this Doctrine to countenance
themselves in their sins, and neglect of duty. The best of holy things or
truths cannot be secured from abuse, so long as the Sophistry of the old
Serpent has an influence on the lusts and depraved minds of men. So was it
with them of old who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness; or from the
Doctrine of it countenanced themselves in their ungodly deeds. Even from the
beginning the whole Doctrine of the Gospel with the grace of God declared
therein, was so abused. Neither were all that made profession of it,
immediately rendered Holy and Righteous thereby. Many from the first, so walked
as to make it evident that their Belly was their God, and their end
destruction. It is one thing to have only the conviction of truth in our minds,
another to have the power of it in our hearts. The former will produce an
outward profession, the later only effect an inward Renovation of our Souls.
However I must add three things unto this concession.

1. I am not satisfied that any of those who at present oppose this Doctrine,
do in Holiness or Righteousness, in the exercise of Faith, Love, Zeal,
Self-denial, and all other Christian Graces, surpass those who in the last
ages, both in this and other Nations firmly adhered unto it, and who constantly
testified unto that effectual influence which it had into their walking before
God: Nor do I know that any can be named amongst us in the former ages, who
were eminent in Holiness, and many such there were, who did not cordially
assent unto that imputation of the Righteousness of Christ which we plead for.
I doubt not in the least, but that many who greatly differ from others in the
explication of this Doctrine may be and are eminently holy, at least sincerely
so, which is as much as the best can pretend unto. But it is not comely to find
some others who give very little evidence of their diligent following after
that Holiness, without which no man shall see God, vehemently declaming against
that Doctrine as destructive of Holiness, which was so fruitful in it in former
days.

2. It does not appear as yet in general, that an attempt to introduce a
Doctrine contrary unto it has had any great success in the Reformation of the
lives of men. Nor has personal Righteousness or Holiness as yet much thrived
under the conduct of it, as to what may be observed. It will be time enough to
seek countenance unto it by declaming against that which has formerly had
better effects, when it has a little more commended it self by its fruits.

3. It were not amiss, if this part of the controversy might amongst us all,
be issued in the advice of the Apostle James Chap. 2.18. Show me thy Faith by
thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works. Let us all labor that
fruits may thus far determine of Doctrines, as unto their use, unto the
interest of Righteousness and Holiness. For that Faith which does not evidence
it self by works, that has not this (...) this Index which James calls for,
whereby it may be found out and examined, is of no use nor consideration
herein. Secondly, The same Objection was from the beginning laid against the
Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, the same charge was managed against it, which
sufficiently argues, that it is the same Doctrine which is now assaulted with
it. This himself more than once takes notice of, Romans 3.31. Do we make void the
Law through Faith? It is an objection that he anticipates against his Doctrine
of the free Justification of sinners, through Faith in the blood of Christ. And
the substance of the charge included in these words is, that he destroyed the
Law, took off all Obligation unto Obedience, and brought in Antinomianism. So
again, Chap. 6.1. What shall we say then, shall we continue in sin, that grace
may abound? Some thought this the natural and genuine consequence of what he
had largely discoursed concerning Justification which he had now fully closed,
and some think so still. If what he taught concerning the grace of God in our
Justification be true, it will not only follow, that there will be no need of
any relinquishment of sin on our part, but also a continuance in it must needs
tend unto the exaltation of that grace, which he had so extolled. The same
objection he repeats again, v. 15. What then, shall we sin because we are not
under the Law but under Grace. And in sundry other places does he obviate the
same objection, where he does not absolutely suppose it, especially, Ephesians.
2.9, 10. we have therefore no Reason to be surprised with, nor much to be moved
at this objection and charge, for it is no other but what was insinuated or
managed against the Doctrine of the Apostle himself, whatever inforcements are
now given it by subtilty of arguing or Rhetorical exaggerations. However,
evident it is, that there are naturally in the minds of men efficacious
prejudices against this part of the Mystery of the Gospel which began betimes
to manifest themselves, and ceased not until they had corrupted the whole
Doctrine of the Church herein. And it were no hard matter to discover the
principal of them, were that our present business; However it has in part been
done before.

3. It is granted that this Doctrine both singly by it self, or in conjunction
with whatever else concerns the grace of God by Christ Jesus, is liable unto
abuse by them in whom darkness and the love of sin is predominant. For hence
from the very beginning of our Religion, some fancied unto themselves that a
bare assent unto the Gospel, was that Faith whereby they should be saved, and
that they might be so, however they continued to live in sin, and a neglect of
all Duties of Obedience. This is evident from the Epistles of John, James and
Jude, in an especial manner. Against this pernicious evil we can give no
relief, whilst men will love darkness more than light, because their deeds are
evil, And it would be a fond imagination in any to think, that their modellings
of this Doctrine after this manner, will prevent future abuse. If they will, it
is by rendering it no part of the Gospel: for that which is so was ever liable
to be abused by such persons as we speak of.

These general observations being premised which are sufficient of themselves,
to discard this Objection from any place in the minds of sober men, I shall
only add the consideration of what answers the Apostle Paul returns unto it,
with a brief application of them unto our purpose.

The objection made unto the Apostle was, that he made void the Law, that he
rendered good works needless, and that on the supposition of his Doctrine, men
might live in sin, unto the advancement of Grace. And as unto his sense hereof,
we may observe,

1. That he never returns that answer unto it, no not once, which some think is
the only answer, whereby it may be satisfied and removed: namely, the necessity
of our own personal Righteousness and Obedience or Works in order unto our
Justification before God. For that by Faith without Works, he understands
Faith and Works, is an unreasonable supposition. If any do yet pretend, that he
has given any such answer, let them produce it; as yet it has not been made
to appear. And is it not strange that if this indeed were his Doctrine, and the
contrary a mistake of it, namely, that our personal Righteousness, Holiness,
and Works had an influence into our justification, and were in any sort our
Righteousness before God therein, that he who in an eminent manner every where
presses the necessity of them, shows their true nature and use, both in
general and in particular Duties of all sorts, above any of the Writers of the
new Testament, should not make use of this truth in answer unto an objection
wherein he was charged to render them all needless and useless? His Doctrine
was urged with this objection as himself acknowledged, and on the account of it
rejected by many, Romans 10.3, 4. Gal. 2.3. He did see and know that the corrupt
lusts and depraved affections of the minds of many would supply them with
subtle arguings against it. Yea he did foresee by the Holy Spirit, as
appears in many places of his Writings, that it would be perverted and
abused. And surely it was highly incumbent on him to obviate what in him lay,
these evils, and so state his Doctrine upon this objection, that no countenance
might ever be given unto it. And is it not strange that he should not on this
occasion, once at least, somewhere or other, give an intimation, that although
he rejected the works of the Law, yet he maintained the necessity of
Evangelical Works, in order unto our Justification before God as the condition
of it, or that whereby we are justified according unto the Gospel. If this were
indeed his Doctrine, and that which would so easily solve this difficulty, and
answer this objection, as both of them are by some pretended, certainly neither
his wisdom nor his care of the Church under the conduct of the infallible
Spirit would have suffered him to omit this reply, were it consistent with the
truth which he had delivered. But he is so far from any such Plea, that when
the most unavoidable occasion was administered unto it, he not only waves any
mention of it, but in its stead affirms that which plainly evidenceth that he
allowed not of it. See Ephesians. 2.9, 10. Having positively excluded Works from our
Justification, not of Works least any man should boast, it being natural
thereon to enquire, to what end do Works serve, or is there any necessity of
them? instead of a distinction of Works legal and Evangelical in order unto our
Justification, he asserts the necessity of the later on other Grounds, Reasons
and Motives, manifesting that they were those in particular which he excluded,
as we have seen in the consideration of the place; Wherefore that we may not
forsake his pattern and example in the same cause, seeing he was Wiser and
Holier, knew more of the mind of God, and had more zeal for personal
Righteousness and Holiness in the Church than we all, if we are pressed a
Thousand times with this objection we shall never seek to deliver our selves
from it, by answering that we allow these things to be the condition, or causes
of our Justification, or the matter of our Righteousness before God, seeing he
would not so do.

Secondly, we may observe, that in his answer unto this objection, whether
expressly mentioned or tacitly obviated, he insisteth not any where upon the
common principle of moral Duties, but on those motives and reasons of Holiness,
Obedience, good works alone, which are peculiar unto Believers. For the
question was not, whether all mankind were obliged unto Obedience unto God and
the Duties thereof of by the moral Law. But whether there were an Obligation
from the Gospel upon Believers unto Righteousness, Holiness and good Works,
such as was suited to affect and constrain their minds unto them. Nor will we
admit of any other state of the question but this only; whether upon the
supposition of our gratuitous justification through the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, there are in the Gospel grounds, reasons and motives
making necessary, and efficaciously influencing the minds of Believers unto
Obedience and good Works; for those who are not Believers, we have nothing to
do with them in this matter, nor do plead that Evangelical grounds and motives
are suited or effectual to work them unto Obedience; yea we know the contrary,
and that they are apt both to despise them and abuse them. See I Cor. 1.23, 24.
2 Cor. 4.4. such persons are under the Law, and there we leave them unto the
Authority of God in the moral Law. But that the Apostle does confine his
enquiry unto Believers, is evident in every place wherein he makes mention of
it, Romans 6.2, 3. How shall we that are dead unto sin, live any longer therein?
Know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, etc. Ephesians.
2.10. For we are the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works. Wherefore we shall not at all contend what cogency unto duties of
Holiness, there is in Gospel motives and reasons unto the minds of Unbelievers,
whatever may be the truth in that case; But what is their power force and
efficacy toward them that truly believe.

Thirdly, The answers which the Apostle returns positively unto this objection
wherein he declares the necessity, nature, ends and use of Evangelical
Righteousness, and good Works, are large, and many comprehensive of a great
part of the Doctrine of the Gospel. I shall only mention the heads of some of
them which are the same that we plead in the vindication of the same truth.

1. He pleads the Ordination of God; God has before ordained that we should
walk in them; Ephesians. 2.10. God has designed, in the disposal of the order of the
causes of Salvation, that those who believe in Christ should live in, walk in,
abound in, good Works and all Duties of Obedience unto God. To this end are
Precepts, Directions, Motives and Encouragements every where multiplied in the
Scripture. Wherefore we say that good Works, and that as they include the
gradual progressive Renovation of our natures, our growth and increase in
grace, with fruitfulness in our lives, are necessary from the Ordination of
God, from his will and command. And what need there any further dispute about
the necessity of good Works among them that know what it is to believe, or what
respect there is in the Souls and Consciences of Believers unto the commands of
God?

But what force, say some, is in this Command or Ordination of God, when
notwithstanding it, and if we do not apply our selves unto Obedience, we shall
be justified by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and so may be
saved without them. I say (1) As was before observed, that it is Believers
alone concerning whom this enquiry is made, and there is none of them but will
judge this a most unreasonable and senseless objection, as that which arises
from an utter ignorance of their state and relation unto God. To suppose that
the minds of Believers are not as much and as effectually influenced with the
Authority and Commands of God unto Duty and Obedience, as if they were all
given in order unto their Justification, is to consider neither what Faith is,
nor what it is to be a Believer, nor what is the Relation that we stand in unto
God by Faith in Christ Jesus, nor what are the Arguments or motives wherewith
the minds of such persons are principally affected and constrained. This is the
Answer which the Apostle gives at large unto this Exception, Romans 6.2, 3. (2)
The whole fallacy of this Exception is (1) In separating the things that God
has made inseparable, These are our Justification and our Sanctification. To
suppose that the one of these may be without the other, is to overthrow the
whole Gospel, (2) In compounding those things that are distinct, namely,
Justification and eternal actual Salvation; the respect of Works and Obedience
being not the same unto them both, as has been declared. Wherefore this
Imagination that the commands of God unto Duty; However given, and unto what
ends soever, are not equally obligatory unto the Consciences of Believers, as
if they were all given in order unto their Justification before God, is an
absurd figment, and which all of them who are truly so, defy. Yea they have a
greater power upon them, than they could have, if the Duties required in them
were in order unto their Justification, and so were antecedent thereunto. For
thereby they must be supposed to have their efficacy upon them before they
truly believe. For to say, that a man may be a true Believer, or truly believe,
in answer unto the commands of the Gospel, and not to be thereon, in the same
instant of time absolutely justified, is not to dispute about any point of
Religion, but plainly to deny the whole truth of the Gospel. But it is Faith
alone that gives power and efficacy unto Gospel Commands, effectually to
influence the Soul unto Obedience. Wherefore this Obligation is more powerfully
constraining, as they are given unto those that are justified, then if they
were given them in order unto their Justification.

Secondly, The Apostle answers, as we do also, Do we then make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid; yea we establish the Law. For although the Law is
principally established in and by the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, Romans
8.3, 4. Chap. 10.3, 4. Yet is it not, by the Doctrine of Faith and the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto the Justification of life, made
void as unto Believers. Neither of these do exempt them from that Obligation
unto universal Obedience, which is prescribed in the Law. They are still
obliged by virtue thereof to love the Lord their God with all their Hearts, and
their Neighbors as themselves. They are indeed freed from the Law, and all its
commands unto Duty as it abides in its first consideration, Do this and live,
the opposite whereunto, is Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things written in the Law to do them. For he that is under the Obligation of
the Law in order unto Justification and Life, falls inevitably under the Curse
of it, upon the supposition of any one Transgression. But we are made free to
give Obedience unto it, on Gospel motives, and for Gospel ends, as the Apostle
declares at large, Romans 6. And the Obligation of it is such unto all Believers,
as that the least Transgression of it has the nature of sin. But are they
hereon bound over by the Law unto everlasting punishment, or, as some phrase
it, will God damn them that Transgress the Law, without which all this is
nothing? I ask again what they think hereof; And upon a supposition that he
will do so, what they further think will become of themselves? For my part I
say no; even as the Apostle says, There is no condemnation unto them that are
in Christ Jesus. Where then, they will say, is the necessity of Obedience from
the Obligation of the Law, if God will not damn them that Transgress it? And I
say, it were well if some men did understand what they say in these things, or
would learn, for a while at least, to hold their peace. The Law equally
requires Obedience in all instances of Duty, if it require any at all. As unto
its Obligatory power, it is capable neither of Dispensation nor Relaxation, so
long as the essential differences of good and evil do remain. If then none can
be obliged unto Duty by virtue of its commands, but that they must on every
Transgression fall under its curse, either it obliges no one at all, or no one
can be saved. But although we are freed from the Curse and condemning power of
the Law by him who has made an end of sin and brought in everlasting
Righteousness, yet whilst we are viatores in order unto the accomplishment of
Gods design for the Restoration of his Image in us, we are obliged to
endeavor after all that Holiness and Righteousness which the Law requires of
us.

Thirdly, The Apostle answers this Objection, by discovering the necessary
Relation that Faith has, unto the Death of Christ, the grace of God, with the
nature of Sanctification, excellency, use, and advantage of Gospel Holiness,
and the end of it in Gods appointment. This he does at large in the whole Sixth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and that with this immediate design, to
show the consistency of Justification by Faith alone, with the necessity of
personal Righteousness and Holiness. The due pleading of these things would
require a just and full Exposition of that Chapter wherein the Apostle has
comprised the chief springs and reasons of Evangelical Obedience. I shall only
say, that those unto whom the reasons of it and motives unto it, therein
expressed, which are all of them compliant with the Doctrine of Justification
by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ are not effectual unto their
own personal Obedience, and do not demonstrate an indispensible necessity of
it, are so unacquainted with the Gospel, the nature of Faith, the genius and
inclination of the new Creature (for, let men scoff on whilst they please, he
that is in Christ Jesus is a new Creature) the constraining efficacy of the
grace of God, and love of Christ, of the Economy of God in the disposition of
the causes and means of our Salvation, as I shall never trouble my self to
contend with them about these things.

Sundry other considerations I thought to have added unto the same purpose; And
to have showed (1) That to prove the necessity of inherent Righteousness and
Holiness, we make use of the Arguments which are suggested unto us in the
Scripture. (2) That we make use of all of them in the sense wherein and unto
the ends for which they are urged therein, in perfect compliance with what we
teach concerning Justification. (3) That all the pretended Arguments or motives
for and unto Evangelical Holiness which are inconsistent with the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, do indeed obstruct it and evert it. (4) That the
Holiness which we make necessary unto the Salvation of them that believe is of
a more excellent sublime and Heavenly nature in its causes, essence,
operations, and effects, than what is allowed or believed by the most of those
by whom the Doctrine of Justification is opposed. (5) That the Holiness and
Righteousness which is pleaded for by the Socinians and those that follow them,
does in nothing exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, nor upon
their principles can any man go beyond them. But whereas this Discourse has
already much exceeded my first intention, and that as I said before, I have
already at large treated on the Doctrine of the nature and necessity of
Evangelical Holiness, I shall at present omit the further handling of these
things and acquiesce in the answers given by the Apostle unto this Objection.

CHAP. XX. The Doctrine of the Apostle James, concerning Faith and Works. Its
agreement with that of St. Paul.
THe seeming difference that is between the Apostle Paul and James in what they
teach concerning Faith, Works, and Justification, requires our consideration of
it. For many do take advantage from some words and expressions used by the
later, directly to oppose the Doctrine fully and plainly declared by the
former. But whatever is of that nature pretended has been so satisfactorily
already answered and removed by others, as that there is no great need to treat
of it again. And although I suppose that there will not be an end of contending
and writing in these causes, whilst we know but in part and Prophecy but in
part, yet I must say, that in my Judgment the usual solution of this appearing
difficulty securing the Doctrine of Justification by Faith through the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ from any concernment or contradiction
in the Discourse of St. James, Chap. 2. v. 14. to the end, has not been in the
least impeached, not has had any new difficulty put upon it in some late
Discourses to that purpose. I should therefore utterly forbear to speak any
thing hereof, but that I suppose it will be expected in a Discourse of this
nature, and do hope that I also may contribute some light unto the clearing and
vindication of the Truth. To this purpose it may be observed, That 1. It is
taken for granted on all hands, that there is no real repugnancy or
contradiction between what is delivered by these two Apostles. For if that were
so, the writings of one of them must be Pseudepigrapha, or falsely ascribed unto
them whose names they bear, and uncanonical, as the Authority of the Epistle of
James has been by some both of old and of late highly, but rashly questioned.
Wherefore their words are certainly capable of a just Reconciliation. That we
cannot any of us attain thereunto, or that we do not agree therein is from the
darkness of our own minds, the weakness of our understandings, and with too
many, from the power of prejudices.

2. It is taken also for granted on all other occasions, that when there is an
appearance of Repugnancy or contradiction in any places of Scripture, if some,
or any of them, do treat directly, designedly, and largely about the matter
concerning which there is a seeming repugnancy or contradiction, and others, or
any other speak of the same things only Obiter occasionally, transiently, in
order unto other ends, the truth is to be learned, stated and fixed from the
former places. Or the interpretation of those places where any truth is
mentioned only occasionally with reference unto other things or ends, is, as
unto that truth, to be taken from and accommodated unto those other places
wherein it is the design and purpose of the Holy Penman to declare it for its
own sake, and to guide the Faith of the Church therein. And there is not a more
rational and natural Rule of the interpretation of Scripture among all them
which are by common consent agreed upon.

3. According unto this Rule, it is unquestionable that the Doctrine of
Justification before God is to be learned from the writings of the Apostle
Paul, and from them is light to be taken into all other places of Scripture
where it is occasionally mentioned. Especially it is so, considering how
exactly this Doctrine represents the whole Scope of the Scripture, and is
witnessed unto by particular Testimonies occasionally given unto the same
truth, without number. For it must be acknowledged that he wrote of this
subject of our Justification before God, on purpose to declare it for its own
sake, and its use in the Church, and that he does it fully, largely, and
frequently in a constant Harmony of expressions. And he owns those Reasons that
pressed him unto fullness, and accuracy herein. (1) The importance of the
Doctrine it self. This he declares to be such, as that thereon our Salvation
does immediately depend; and that it was the hinge whereon the whole Doctrine
of the Gospel did turn, Articulus stantis aut cadentis-Ecelesiae, Gal. 2.16,
21. Chap. 5.4, 5. (2) The plausible and dangerous opposition, that was then
made unto it. This was so managed, and that with such specious pretenses as
that very many were prevailed on, and turned from the truth by it, as it was
with the Galatians, and many detained from the Faith of the Gospel out of a
dislike unto it, Romans 10.3, 4. What care and diligence this requires in the
Declaration of any truth is sufficiently known unto them, who are acquainted
with these things, What zeal, care and circumspection it stirred up the Apostle
unto, is manifest in all his writings. (3) The Abuse which the corrupt nature
of man is apt to put upon this Doctrine of Grace, and which some did actually
pervert it unto. This also himself takes notice of, and througly vindicates it
from giving the least countenance unto such wrestings and impositions.
Certainly, never was there a greater necessity incumbent on any person fully
and plainly to teach and declare a Doctrine of truth, than was on him at that
time in his circumstances, considering the place and duty that he was called
unto. And no reason can be imagined why we should not principally and in the
first place learn the truth herein from his declaration and vindication of it,
if withal* we do indeed believe that he was* Divinely inspired, and Divinely
guided to reveal the truth for the information of the Church.

As unto what is delivered by the Apostle James, so far as our Justification is
included therein, things are quite otherwise. He does not undertake to declare
the Doctrine of our Justification before God, but having another design in hand
as we shall see immediately, he vindicates it from the abuse that some in those
days had put it unto, as other Doctrines of the Grace of God which they turned
into licentiousness. Wherefore it is from the writings of the Apostle Paul,
that we are principally to learn the truth in this matter, and unto what is by
him plainly declared is the interpretation of other places to be accommodated.

4. Some of late are not of this mind: They contend earnestly that Paul is to
be interpreted by James, and not on the contrary. And unto this end they tell
us that the Writings of Paul are obscure, that sundry of the ancients take
notice thereof, that many take occasion of errors from them, with sundry things
of an alike nature, indeed scandalous to Christian Religion. And that James
writing after him, is presumed to give an interpretation unto his sayings,
which are therefore to be expounded and understood according unto that
interpretation. Ans. (1) As to the vindication of the Writings of St. Paul,
which begin now to be frequently reflected on with much severity (which is one
effect of the secret prevalency of the Atheism of these days) as there is no
need of it, so it is designed for a more proper place. Only I know not how any
person that can pretend the least acquaintance with Antiquity can plead a
passage out of Irenaeus wherein he was evidently himself mistaken, or a rash
word of Origin, or the like in derogation from the perspicuity of the Writings
of this Apostle, when they cannot but know how easy it were to overwhelm them
with Testimonies unto the contrary from all the famous Writers of the Church in
several ages. And (as for instance in one) Chrysostom in forty places gives an
account why some men understood not his Writings which in themselves were so
gloriously evident and perspicuous; so for their satisfaction I shall refer
them only unto the Preface unto his Exposition of his Epistles, of which kind
they will be directed unto more in due season. But he needs not the Testimony
of men, nor of the whole Church together, whose safety and security it is to be
built on that Doctrine which he taught. In the mean time it would not be
unpleasant to consider (but that the perverseness of the minds of men is rather
a real occasion of sorrow) how those who have the same design do agree in their
conceptions about his Writings, for some will have it, that if not all, yet the
most of his Epistles were Written against the Gnostics and in the confutation
of their error; others, that the Gnostics took the occasion of their errors
from his Writings. So bold will men make with things Divine to satisfy a
present interest.

Secondly, This was not the judgment of the ancient Church for three or four
hundred years. For whereas the Epistles of Paul were always esteemed the
principal treasure of the Church, the great guide and rule of the Christian
Faith, this of James was scarce received as Canonical by many, and doubted of
by the most, as both Eusebius and Hierome do testify.

Thirdly, The design of the Apostle James is not at all to explain the meaning
of Paul in his Epistles as is pretended, but only to vindicate the Doctrine of
the Gospel from the abuse of such as used their liberty for a cloak of
Maliciousness, and turning the Grace of God into lasciviousness, continued in
sin under a pretense that Grace had abounded unto that end.

Fourthly, The Apostle Paul does himself as we have declared, vindicate his own
Doctrine from such exceptions and abuses as men either made at it, or turned it
unto. Nor have we any other Doctrine in his Epistles than what he Preached all
the World over, and whereby he laid the foundation of Christian Religion
especially among the Gentiles.

These things being premised, I shall briefly evidence that there is not the
least Repugnancy or contradiction between what is declared by these two
Apostles, as unto our Justification with the causes of it. And this I shall do,
1. By some general considerations of the nature and tendency of both their
discourses. (2) By a particular explication of the context in that of St.
James. And under the first head I shall manifest. (1) That they have not the
same scope, design or end in their discourses; That they do not consider the
same question, nor state the same case, nor determine on the same enquiry, and
therefore not speaking ad idem unto the same thing do not contradict one
another. (2) That as Faith is a word of various signification in the Scripture,
and does as we have proved before, denote that which is of diverse kinds, they
speak not of the same Faith, or Faith of the same kind, and therefore there can
be no contradiction in what the one ascribes unto it, and the other derogates
from it, seeing they speak not of the same Faith. (3) That they do not speak of
Justification in the same sense, nor with respect unto the same ends. (4) That
as unto Works they both intend the same, namely, the Works of Obedience unto
the moral Law.

As to the scope and design of the Apostle Paul, the question which he
answers, the case which he proposes and determines upon, are manifest in all
his Writings, especially his Epistles unto the Romans and Galatians. The whole
of his purpose is to declare, how a guilty convinced sinner comes through Faith
in the blood of Christ to have all his sins pardoned, to be accepted with God,
and obtain a right unto the Heavenly inheritance, that is, be acquitted and
justified in the sight of God. And as the Doctrine hereof belonged eminently
unto the Gospel, whose Revelation and Declaration unto the Gentiles was in a
peculiar manner committed unto him, so as we have newly observed, he had an
especial reason to insist much upon it from the opposition that was made unto
it by the Jews and Judaizing Christians, who ascribed this privilege unto the
Law, and our own Works of Obedience in compliance therewithal. This is the case
he states, this the question he determines in all his Discourses about
Justification; and in the explication thereof declares the nature and causes of
it, as also vindicates it from all exceptions. For whereas men of corrupt minds
and willing to indulge unto their lusts (as all men naturally desire nothing
but what God has made eternally inconsistent, namely, that they may live in
sin here, and come to blessedness hereafter) might conclude that if it were so
as he declared, that we are justified freely through the Grace of God by the
Imputation of a Righteousness that Originally and inherently is not our own,
then was there no more required of us, no relinquishment of sin, no attendance
unto the duties of Righteousness and Holiness, he obviates such impious
suggestions, and shows the inconsequence of them on the Doctrine that he
taught. But this he does not do in any place by intimating or granting that our
own Works of Obedience or Righteousness are necessary unto, or have any causal
influence into our Justification before God. Had there been a Truth herein,
were not a supposition thereof really inconsistent with the whole of his
Doctrine and destructive of it, he would not have omitted the Plea of it, nor
ought so to have done, as we have showed. And to suppose that there was need
that any other should explain and vindicate his Doctrine from the same
exceptions which he takes notice of by such a Plea, as he himself would not
make use of but rejects, is foolish and impious.

The Apostle James on the other hand had no such scope or design, or any such
occasion for what he wrote in this matter. He does not enquire, or give
intimation of any such enquiry, he does not state the Case how a guilty
convinced Sinner whose mouth is stopped as unto any plea or excuse for himself,
may come to be justified in the sight of God, that is, receive the Pardon of
sins, and the gift of Righteousness unto life. To resolve this question into
our own Works, is to overthrow the whole Gospel. But he had in hand a business
quite of another nature. For as we have said, there were many in those days who
professed the Christian Religion or Faith in the Gospel, whereon they presumed
that as they were already justified, so that there was nothing more needful
unto them that they might be saved. A desirable estate they thought they had
attained, suited unto all the interest of the Flesh, whereby they might live in
Sin, and neglect of all Duty of Obedience, and yet be eternally saved. Some
suppose that this pernicious conceit was imbibed by them from the poisonous
Opinions that some had then divulged, according as the Apostle Paul foretold
that it would come to pass, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. For it is generally conceived
that Simon Magus and his followers had by this time infected the minds of many
with their abominations, and amongst them this was one, and not the least
pernicious, that by Faith was intended a liberty from the Law, and unto Sin, or
unto them that had it, the taking away of all difference between good and evil,
which was afterward improved by Basilides Valentinus, and the rest of the
Gnostics. Or it may be it was only the corruption of men's hearts and lives,
that prompted them to seek after such a countenance unto Sin. And this latter I
judge it was. There were then among professed Christians, such as the world now
swarms withal, who suppose that their Faith, or the Religion which they
profess, be it what it will, shall save them, although they live in flagitious
wickedness, and are utterly barren as unto any good Works or Duties of
Obedience. Nor is there any other occasion of what he writes intimated in the
Epistle; For he makes no mention of Seducers, as John does expressly and
frequently, some while after. Against this sort of persons, or for their
conviction he designs two things. (1.) In general to prove the necessity of
Works unto all that profess the Gospel or Faith in Christ thereby. (2.) To
evidence the vanity and folly of their pretense unto Justification, or that
they were justified and should be saved, by that Faith that was indeed so far
from being fruitful in good Works, as that it was pretended by them only to
countenance themselves in Sin. Unto these ends are all his arguings designed
and no other. He proves effectually that the Faith which is wholly barren and
fruitless as unto Obedience, and which men pretended to countenance themselves
in their sins, is not that Faith whereby we are justified, and whereby we may
be saved, but a dead carcass, of no use nor benefit, as he declares by the
Conclusion of his whole Dispute, in the last Verse of the Chapter. He does not
direct any how they may be justified before God, but convinces some that they
are not justified by trusting unto such a dead Faith, and declares the only way
whereby any man may really evidence and manifest that he is so justified
indeed. This design of his is so plain, as nothing can be more evident, and
they miss the whole scope of the Apostle, who observe it not in their
Expositions of the Context. Wherefore the principal design of the Apostles
being so distant, there is no repugnancy in their Assertions, though their
words make an appearance thereof. For they do not speak ad idem, nor of things
eodem respectu. James does not once enquire how a guilty convinced Sinner, cast
and condemned by the Law, may come to be justified before God; and Paul speaks
to nothing else. Wherefore apply the Expressions of each of them unto their
proper design and scope, as we must do, or we depart from all sober Rules of
Interpretation, and render it impossible to understand either of them aright,
and there is no disagreement or appearance of it between them.

Secondly, they speak not of the same Faith. Wherefore there can be no
discrepancy in what one ascribes unto Faith, and the other denies concerning
it, seeing they understand not the same thing thereby, for they speak not of
the same Faith. As if one affirms that fire will burn, and another denies it,
there is no contradiction between them, whilst one intends real fire, and the
other only that which is painted, and both declare themselves accordingly. For
we have proved before that there are two sorts of Faith wherewith men are said
to believe the Gospel, and make profession thereof, as also that which belongs
unto the one, does not belong unto the other; None I suppose will deny but that
by Faith in the matter of our Justification, St. Paul intends that which is
(...) or properly so called. The Faith of Gods Elect, precious Faith, more
precious then Gold, the Faith that purifieth the heart, and works by love, the
Faith whereby Christ dwells in us, and we abide in him, whereby we live to
God, a living Faith, is that alone which he intends. For all these things,
and other Spiritual effects without number does he ascribe unto that Faith
which he insisteth on, to be on our part the only means of our Justification
before God. But as unto the Faith intended by the Apostle James, he assigns
nothing of all this unto it; yea, the only Argument whereby he proves that men
cannot be saved by that Faith which he treats of, is that nothing of all this
is found in it. That which he intends is, what he calls it, a dead Faith, a
Carcass without breath, the Faith of Devils, a wordy Faith, that is no more
truly what it is called, than it is true Charity to send away naked and hungry
persons without relief, but no without derision. Well may he deny Justification
in any sense unto to this Faith however boasted of, when yet it may be justly
ascribed unto that Faith which Paul speaks of.

Bellarmine uses several Arguments to prove that the Faith here intended by
James, is justifying Faith considered in its self; but they are all weak to
contempt, as being built on this supposition, that true justifying Faith is
nothing but a real assent unto the Catholic Doctrine or Divine Revelation. De
Justificat. lib. 1. cap. 15. His first is, that James calls it Faith
absolutely, whereby always in the Scripture true Faith is intended. Ans. 1.
James calls it a Dead Faith, the Faith of Devils, and casts all manner of
reproach upon it, which he would not have done on any Duty or Grace truly
Evangelical. (2.) Every Faith that is true as unto the reality of assent which
is given by it unto the Truth, is neither living, justifying, nor saving, as
has been proved. (3.) They are said to have Faith absolutely or absolutely to
believe, who never had that Faith which is true and saving, Joh. 2.23. Act.
8.13. He urges that in the same place and Chapter he treats of the Faith of
Abraham, and affirms that it wrought with his works, Verse. 22, 23. But this a
vain shadow of Faith does not do; It was therefore true Faith, and that which
is most properly called so, that the Apostle intends. Ans. This pretense is
indeed ridiculous: For the Apostle does not give the Faith of Abraham as an
instance of that Faith which he had treated with so much severity, but of that
which is directly contrary unto it, and whereby he designed to prove that the
other Faith which he had reflected on, was of no use nor advantage unto them
that had it. For this Faith of Abraham produced good Works, which the other was
wholly without. Thirdly, He urges, v. 24 You see then how that by Works a man
is justified, and not by Faith only: For the Faith that James speaks of
justifies with works, but a false Faith, the shadow of a Faith does not so; it
is therefore true saving Faith, whereof the Apostle speaks. Ans. He is utterly
mistaken; for the Apostle does not ascribe Justification partly to Works, and
partly to Faith; but he ascribes Justification in the sense by him intended,
wholly to Works in opposition to that Faith concerning which he treats. For
there is a plain Antithesis in the Words between Works and Faith as unto
Justification in the sense by him intended. A dead Faith, a Faith without
Works, the Faith of Devils is excluded from having any influence into
Justification, Fourthly, He adds that the Apostle compares this Faith without
Works unto a rich man that gives nothing unto the poor, ver. 16. and a Body
without a Spirit, ver. 26. wherefore, as that knowledge whereby a rich man knows
the wants of the poor is true and real, and a dead body is a body; so is Faith
without Works true Faith also, and as such is considered by Saint James. Ans.
These things do evidently destroy what they are produced in the confirmation
of, only the Cardinal helps them out with a little Sophistry. For whereas the
Apostle compares this Faith unto the charity of a man that gives nothing to the
poor, he suggests in the room thereof his knowledge of their poverty. And his
knowledge may be true, and the more true and certain it is, the more false and
feigned is the charity which he pretends in these words, Go and be fed or
clothed. Such is the Faith the Apostle speaks of. And although a dead body is
a true body, that is, as unto the matter or substance of it, a Carcass; yet is
it not an essential part of a living man. A Carcass is not of the same nature
or kind as is the body of a living man. And we assert no other difference
between the Faith spoken of by the Apostle, and that which is justifying, than
what is between a dead breathless Carcass and a living animated body, prepared
and fitted for all vital acts. Wherefore it is evident beyond all
contradiction, if we have not a mind to be contentious, that what the Apostle
James here derogates from Faith as unto our Justification it respects only a
dead barren lifeless Faith, such as is usually pretended by ungodly godly men
to countenance themselves in their sins. And herein the Faith asserted by Paul
has no concern. The consideration of the present condition of the profession
of Faith in the World, will direct us unto the best exposition of this place.

Thirdly, They speak not of Justification in the same sense nor unto the same
end. It is of our absolute Justification before God, the Justification of our
persons, our acceptance with him and the grant of a right unto the Heavenly
inheritance, that the Apostle Paul does treat and thereof alone. This he
declares in all the causes of it, all that on the part of God, or on our part
concurreth thereunto. The evidence, the knowledge, the sense, the fruit, the
manifestation of it in our own Consciences, in the Church, unto others that
profess the Faith, he treats not of, but speaks of them separately as they
occur on other occasions. The Justification he treats of, is but one and at
once accomplished before God, changing the relative state of the person
justified, and is capable of being evidenced various ways unto the glory of God
and the consolation of them that truly believe. Hereof the Apostle James does
not treat at all; for his whole enquiry is after the nature of that Faith
whereby we are justified, and the only way whereby it may be evidenced to be of
the right kind, such as a man may safely trust unto. Wherefore he treats of
Justification only as to the evidence and manifestation of it, nor had he any
occasion to do otherwise. And this is apparent from both the instances, whereby
he confirms his purpose. The first, is that of Abraham, ver. 21.22, 23. For he
says, that by Abraham's being justified by Works in the way and manner wherein
he asserts him so to have been, the Scripture was fulfilled, which says that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness. And if his
intention were to prove that we are justified before God by Works and not by
Faith, because Abraham was so, the Testimony produced is contrary, yea directly
contradictory unto what should be proved by it, and accordingly is alleged by
Paul to prove that Abraham was justified by Faith without Works, as the words
do plainly import. Nor can any man declare, how the Truth of this proposition,
Abraham was justified by Works, intending absolute Justification before God,
was that wherein that Scripture was fulfilled; Abraham believed God and it was
imputed unto him for Righteousness; especially, considering the opposition that
is made both here and elsewhere between Faith and Works in this matter.
Besides, he asserts that Abraham was justified by Works then when he had
offered his Son on the Altar; the same we believe also, but only enquire in
what sense he was so justified. For it was Thirty years or thereabout after it
was testified concerning him, that he believed God and it was imputed unto him
for Righteousness; and when Righteousness was imputed unto him he was
justified. And twice justified in the same sense, in the same way, with the
same kind of Justification he was not. How then was he Justified by Works when
he offered his Son on the Altar? He that can conceive it to be any otherwise,
but that he was by his Work in the offering of his Son evidenced and declared
in the sight of God and man to be justified, apprehends what I cannot attain
unto, seeing that he was really justified long before, as is unquestionable and
confessed by all. He was I say then justified in the sight of God, in the way
declared, Genesis 22.12. And gave a signal Testimony unto the sincerity of his
Faith and trust in God, manifesting the truth of that Scripture, he believed
God and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness. And in the quotation of this
Testimony the Apostle openly acknowledges that he was really accounted
Righteous, had Righteousness imputed unto him and was justified before God (the
reasons and causes whereof, he therefore considers not) long before that
Justification which he ascribes unto his Works, which therefore can be nothing
but the evidencing proving and manifestation of it: whence also it appears of
what nature that Faith is whereby we are justified, the Declaration whereof is
the principal design of the Apostle. In brief the Scripture alleged that
Abraham believed and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness, was fulfilled
when he was justified by Works on the offering of his Son on the Altar, either
by the Imputation of Righteousness unto him, or by a real efficiency or working
Righteousness in him, or by the manifestation and evidence of his former
Justification, or some other way must be found out. (1) That it was not by
Imputation, or that Righteousness unto the Justification of life, was not then
first imputed unto him is plain in the Text, for it was so imputed unto him
long before, and that in such a way as the Apostle proves thereby, that
Righteousness is imputed without Works. (2) That he was not justified by a real
efficiency of an habit of Righteousness in him, or by any way of making him
inherently Righteous, who was before unrighteous is plain also, because he was
Righteous in that sense long before, and had abounded in the Works of
Righteousness unto the praise of God. It remains therefore that then, and by
the Work mentioned, he was justified as unto the evidencing and manifestation
of his Faith and Justification thereon. His other instance is of Rahab
concerning whom he asserts that she was justified by Works when she had
received the Messengers and sent them away. But she received the Spies by
Faith, as the Holy Ghost witnesses, Heb. 11.31. And therefore had true Faith
before their coming; and if so, was really justified. For that any one should
be a true believer, and yet not be justified is destructive unto the foundation
of the Gospel. In this condition she received the Messengers, and made unto
them a full Declaration of her Faith, Josh. 2.10, 11. After her believing and
Justification thereon, and after the confession she had made of her Faith, she
exposed her life by concealing and sending of them away. Hereby did she
justify the sincerity of her Faith and Confession, and in that sense alone is
said to be justified by Works: And in no other sense does the Apostle James in
this place make mention of Justification, which he does also only occasionally.

Fourthly, As unto Works mentioned by both Apostles, the same Works are
intended, and there is no disagreement in the least about them. For as the
Apostle James intends by Works, Duties of Obedience unto God according to the
Law, as is evident from the whole first part of the Chapter, which gives
occasion unto the Discourse of Faith and Works; So the same are intended by the
Apostle Paul also, as we have proved before. And as unto the necessity of them
in all believers, as unto other ends, so as evidences of their Faith and
Justification, it is no less pressed by the one than the other as has been
declared.

These things being in general premised, we may observe some things in
particular from the Discourse of the Apostle James, sufficiently evidencing
that there is no contradiction therein, unto what is delivered by the Apostle
Paul concerning our Justification by Faith and the Imputation of Righteousness
without Works, nor to the Doctrine which from him we have learned and declared;
as (1) He makes no composition or conjunction between Faith and Works in our
Justification, but opposes them the one to the other, asserting the one and
rejecting the other in order unto our Justification. (2) He makes no
distinction of a first and second Justification, of the beginning and
continuation of Justification, but speaks of one Justification only which is
our first personal Justification before God. Neither are we concerned in any
other Justification in this cause whatever. (3) That he ascribes this
Justification wholly unto Works in contradistinction unto Faith, as unto that
sense of Justification which he intended, and the Faith whereof he treated
Wherefore (4) He does not at all enquire or determine how a sinner is justified
before God, but how Professors of the Gospel can prove or demonstrate that they
are so, and that they do not deceive themselves by trusting unto a lifeless and
barren Faith. All these things will be further evidenced in a brief
consideration of the context it self, wherewith I shall close this Discourse.

In the beginning of the Chapter unto v. 14. He reproves those unto whom he
wrote for many sins committed against the Law the rule of their sins and
Obedience; or at least warns them of them; and having showed the danger they
were in hereby, he discovers the Root and principal occasion of it, v. 14.
which was no other but a vain surmise and deceiving presumption that the Faith
required in the Gospel was nothing but a bare assent unto the Doctrine of it,
whereon they were delivered from all obligation unto moral Obedience or good
Works, and might without any danger unto their eternal state live in whatever
sins their lusts inclined them unto, Chap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 5. v. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. The state of such persons which contains the whole cause which he
speaks unto, and which gives rule and measure unto the interpretation of all
his future arguings is laid down, v. 14. What does it profit my Brethren though
a man say he has Faith and have not Works, can Faith save him? suppose a man,
any one of those who are guilty of the sins charged on them in the foregoing
verses, do yet say, or boast of himself, that he has Faith, that he makes
profession of the Gospel, that he has left either Judaism or Paganism, and
betaken himself to the Faith of the Gospel, and therefore although he be
destitute of good Works, and live in sin, he is accepted with God and shall be
saved? will indeed this Faith save him? this therefore is the question
proposed: whereas the Gospel says plainly, that he who believes shall be
saved; whether that Faith which may and does consist with an indulgence unto
sin, and a neglect of Duties of Obedience, is that Faith whereunto the promise
of life and Salvation is annexed? And thereon, the enquiry proceeds, how any
man, in particular he who says he has Faith, may prove and evidence himself to
have that Faith which will secure his Salvation. And the Apostle denies that
this is such a Faith as can consist without Works, or that any man can evidence
himself to have true Faith any otherwise but by Works of Obedience only. And in
the proof hereof does his whole ensuing Discourse consist. Not once does he
propose unto consideration the means and causes of the Justification of a
convinced sinner before God, nor had he any occasion so to do. So that his
words are openly wrested when they are applied unto any such intention.

That the Faith which he intends and describes, is altogether useless unto the
end pretended to be attainable by it; namely, Salvation, he proves in an
instance of, and by comparing it with the love or charity of an alike nature,
v. 15.16. If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one
of you say unto him, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding
ye give them not those things which are needful to the body, what does it
profit? This love or charity is not that Gospel Grace which is required of us
under that name; For he who behaveth himself thus toward the poor, the love of
God dwells not in him, 1 John 3.17. whatever name it may have, whatever it
may pretend unto, whatever it may be professed or accepted for, love it is not,
nor has any of the effects of love; is neither useful nor profitable. Hence
the Apostle infers, v. 17. Even so Faith, if it has not Works, is dead being
alone. For this was that which he undertook to prove, not that we are not
justified by Faith alone without Works before God, but that the Faith which is
alone without Works, is dead useless and unprofitable.

Having given this first evidence unto the conclusion which in Thesi he
designed to prove, he reassumes the question and states it in Hypothesi, so as
to give it a more full demonstration, v. 15. Yea a man may say thou have Faith,
and I have Works, show me thy Faith without thy Works, (that is, which is
without Works, or by thy Works) and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. It
is plain beyond denial, that the Apostle does here again propose his main
question only on a supposition that there is a dead useless Faith which he had
proved before. For now all the enquiry remaining is how true Faith, or that
which is of the right Gospel kind, may be showed, evidenced or demonstrated,
so, as that their folly may appear, who trust unto any other Faith whatever
(...), Evidence or demonstate thy Faith to be true by the only means thereof,
which is works. And therefore although he say, thou have Faith, that is, thou
professest and boastest that thou have that Faith whereby thou may be saved,
and I have Works, he does not say, show me thy Faith by thy Works, and I will
show thee my Works by my Faith, which the Antithesis would require, but I will
show thee my Faith by my Works, because the whole question was concerning the
evidencing of Faith and not of Works.

That this Faith which cannot be evidenced by Works, which is not fruitful in
them, but consists only in a bare assent unto the Truth of Divine Revelation,
is not the Faith that does justify or will save us, he further proves in that
it is no other but what the Devils themselves have, and no man can think or
hope to be saved by that which is common unto them with Devils, and wherein
they do much exceed them, v. 11. Thou beliivest there is one God, thou do
well, the Devils also believe and tremble. The belief of one God is not the
whole of what the Devils believe, but is singled out as the principal
fundamental Truth, and on the concession whereof an assent unto all Divine
Revelation does necessarily ensue. And this is the second Argument, whereby he
proves an empty barren Faith to be dead and useless.

The second Confirmation being given unto his principal assertion, He restates
it in that way, and under those terms wherein he designed it unto its last
Confirmation. But will thou know O vain man that Faith without Works is dead?
ver. 20. And we may consider in the words. (1) The person with whom he deals
whose conviction he endeavored him, he calls a vain man, not in general, as
every man living is altogether vanity, but as one who in an especial manner is
vainly puffed up in his own fleshly mind, one that has entertained vain
Imaginations of being saved by an empty profession of the Gospel, without any
fruit of Obedience. (2) That which he designs with respect unto this vain man
is his conviction, a conviction of that foolish and pernicious error that he
had imbibed; will thou know O vain man. (3) That which alone he designed to
convince him of is, that Faith without Works is dead; that is, the Faith which
is without Works, which is barren and unfruitful, is dead and useless. This is
that alone, and this is all that he undertakes to prove by his following
Instances and Arguings, neither do they prove any more. To wrest his words to
any other purpose when they are all proper and suited unto what he expresses
as his only design, is to offer violence unto them.

This therefore he proves by the consideration of the Faith of Abraham. ver.
21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had offered Isaac
his Son upon the Altar? Some things must be observed to clear the mind of the
Apostle herein: As (1) It is certain that Abraham was justified many years
before the Work instanced in was performed: For long before was that Testimony
given concerning him, he believed in the Lord, and he counted it unto him for
Righteousness, and the imputation of Righteousness upon believing is all the
Justification we enquire after or will contend about. (2) It is certain that in
the Relation of the Story here repeated by the Apostle, there is not any one
word spoken of Abraham's being then justified before God, by that or any other
Work whatever. But (3) It is plain and evident that in the place related unto,
Abraham was declared to be justified by an open attestation unto his Faith and
fear of God as sincere, and that they had evidenced themselves so to be, in the
sight of God himself, which God condescends to express by an assumption of
humane affections, Genesis 22.12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou
have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. That this is the
Justification which the Apostle intends cannot be denied, but out of love to
strife. And this was the manifestation and declaration of the Truth and
Sincerity of his Faith whereby he was justified before God. And hereby the
Apostle directly and undeniably proves what he produces this instance for;
namely, that Faith without Works is dead. (4) It is no less evident that the
Apostle had not spoken any thing before, as unto our Justification before God,
and the means thereof. And is therefore absurdly imagined here to introduce it
in the proof of what he had before asserted, which it does not prove at all.
(5) The only safe rule of interpreting the meaning of the Apostle next unto the
scope and design of his present Discourse, which he makes manifest in the
reiterated proposition of it, and the scope of the places, matter of fact, with
its circumstances which he refers unto, and takes his proof from, and they were
plainly these and no other. Abraham had been long a justified believer, for
there were Thirty years or thereabout, between the Testimony given thereunto,
Genesis 15. and the story of Sacrificing his Son related, Genesis 22. All this while
he walked with God, and was upright in a course of holy fruitful Obedience. Yet
it pleased God to put his Faith after many others, unto a new, his greatest,
his last Trial. And it is the way of God in the Covenant of Grace, to try the
Faith of them that believe by such ways as seem meet unto him. Hereby he
manifests how precious it is (the trial of Faith making it appear to be more
precious than Gold, 1 Pet. 1.7.) and raises up Glory unto himself, which is in
the nature of Faith to give unto him, Romans 4.20. And this is the state of the
case as proposed by the Apostle; namely* how it may be tried whether the Faith
which men profess be genuine precious, more precious than Gold, of the right
nature with that whereunto the Gospel promise of Salvation is annexed. 2. This
trial was made by Works or by one signal Duty of Obedience prescribed unto him
for that very end and purpose. For Abraham was to be proposed as a Pattern unto
all that should afterward believe. And God provided a signal way for the trial
of his Faith; namely, by an act of Obedience, which was so far from being
enjoined by the moral Law that it seemed contrary unto it. And if he be
proposed unto us as a Pattern of Justification by Works in the sight of God, it
must be by such Works as God has not required in the moral Law, but such as
seem to be contrary thereunto. Nor can any man receive any encouragement to
expect Justification by Works, by telling him that Abraham was justified by
Works, when he offered up his only Son to God, for it will be easy for him to
say, that as no such Work was ever performed by him, so none such was ever
required of him. But (3) upon Abraham's compliance with the command of God given
him in the way of Trial, God himself (...) declares the sincerity of his Faith
and his Justification thereon, or his gracious acceptance of him. This is the
whole design of the place which the Apostle traduceth unto his purpose; And it
contains the whole of what he was to prove and no more. Plainly it is granted
in it that we are not justified by our Works before God, seeing he instances
only in a Work performed by a justified believer many years after he was
absolutely justified before God. But this is evidently proved hereby; namely,
that Faith without Works is dead; seeing justifying Faith as is evident in the
case of Abraham is that, and that alone which brings forth Works of Obedience;
For on such a Faith alone, is a man evidenced declared and pronounced to be
justified or accepted with God. Abraham was not then first justified; He was
not then said to be justified, he was declared to be justified, and that by and
upon his Works, which contains the whole of what the Apostle intends to prove.

There is therefore no appearance of the least contradiction between this
Apostle and Paul who professedly asserts, that Abraham was not justified before
God by Works. For James only declares that by the Works which he performed
after he was justified, he was manifested and declared so to be. And that this
was the whole of his design, he manifests in the next verses, where he declares
what he had proved by this instance, ver. 22. See thou how Faith wrought with
his Works, and by Works was Faith made perfect. Two things he inforceth as
proved unto the conviction of him, with whom he had to do. (1) That true Faith
will operate by Works, so did Abraham's, it was effective in Obedience. (2) That
it was made perfect by Works, that is evidenced so to be. For (...) does no
where in the Scripture signify the internal, formal perfecting of any thing,
but only the external complement or perfection of it, or the manifestation of
it. It was complete as unto its proper effect, when he was first justified; and
it was now manifested so to be. See Mat. 5.48. Col. 4.12. 2 Cor. 12.9. This
says the Apostle, I have proved in the instance of Abraham; namely, that it is
Works of Obedience alone that can evince a man to be justified, or to have that
Faith whereby he may be so. (3) He adds in the confirmation of what he had
affirmed, ver. 23. And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness, and he was called
the friend of God.

Two things the Apostle affirms here^^ (1) That the Scripture mentioned was
fulfilled. It was so in that Justification by Works which he ascribes unto
Abraham. But how this Scripture was herein fulfilled, either as unto the time
wherein it was spoken, or as unto the thing it self, any otherwise but as that,
which is therein asserted, was evidenced and declared, no man can explain, what
the Scripture affirmed so long before of Abraham was then evidenced to be most
true, by the Works which his Faith produced, and so that Scripture was
accomplished. For otherwise supposing the distinctions made between Faith and
Works by himself, and the opposition that he puts between them, adding
thereunto the sense given of this place by the Apostle Paul, with the direct
importance of the words, and nothing can be more contradictory unto his design;
(namely, if he intended to prove our Justification before God by Works) than
the quotation of this Testimony. Wherefore this Scripture neither was nor can
be otherwise fulfilled by Abraham's Justification by Works, but only that by and
upon them he was manifested so to be. (2) He adds that hereon he was called the
friend of God. So he is, Isa. 41.8. as also 2 Chronicles. 20.7. This is of the same
importance with his being justified by Works: For he was not thus called merely
as a justified person, but as one who had received singular privileges from
God, and answered them by an holy walking before him. Wherefore his being
called the friend of God was Gods approbation of his Faith and Obedience, which
is the Justification by Works that the Apostle asserts.

Hereon he makes a double conclusion (for the instance of Rahab being of the
same nature and spoken unto before, I shall not insist again upon it) (1) As
unto his present argument, ver. 24. (2) As unto the whole of his design, v. 26.
The first is, that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only; Ye see
then; you whom I design to convince of the vanity of that imagination, that you
are justified by a dead Faith, a breathless Carcass of Faith, a mere assent
unto the Truth of the Gospel and profession of it, consistent with all manner
of impiety, and wholly destitute of good fruits, you may see what Faith it is
that is required unto Justification and Salvation. For Abraham was declared to
be Righteous, to be justified on that Faith which wrought by Works, and not at
all by such a Faith as you pretend unto. A man is justified by Works as Abraham
was when he had offered up his Son to God. That is, what he really was by Faith
long before, as the Scripture testifies, was then and thereby evidenced and
declared. And therefore let no man suppose that by the Faith which they boasted
of, any one is or can be justified, seeing that whereon Abraham was declared to
be so, was that which evidenced it self by its fruits. (2) He lays down that
great conclusion which he had evinced by his whole Disputation, and which at
first he designed to confirm, v. 26. For as the body without the spirit is
dead, so Faith without Works is dead also. A breathless Carcass and an
unworking Faith are alike, as unto all the ends of natural or spiritual life.
This was that which the Apostle designed from the beginning to convince vain
and barren professors of, which accordingly he has given sufficient Reason and
Testimony for.

FINIS.

