ANIMADVERSIONS ON A TREATISE Entitled Fiat Lux: OR, A Guide in Differences of
Religion, between Papist and Protestant, Presbyterian and Independent.

By a Protestant.

LONDON; Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Cripps in Popes-head-alley, and George
West in Oxford, 1662.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe Treatise, entitled Fia^ Lux, which thou will find examined in the ensuing
Discourse, was lent unto me, not long since, by an Honorable Person, with a
request to return an Answer unto it. It had not been many hours in my hand,
before the same desire was seconded by others. Having made no engagement unto
the person of whom I received it, the Book, after some few days, was rem^nded;
yet, as it fell out, not before I had finished my Animadversions upon it. But
before I could send my papers to the Press, I heard of a second Edition of that
Treatise; which also occasionally coming to my hands, I perceived it had been
Printed some good while before I saw or heard of the first. Finding the bulk of
the Discourse increased, I thought it needful to go through it once more, to
see if any thing of moment were added to that Edition which I had considered,
or any alterations made by the Authors second thoughts. This somewhat
discouraged me, tha^, my first Book being gone, I could not compare the
Editions, but must trust to my memory, none of the best, as to what (...), or
was not, in that I had perused. But not designing any use in a mere comparing
of the Editions, but only to consider, whether in either of them any thing
material was remaining, either not heeded by me, in my hasty passage through
the first, or added in the second, undiscussed; I thought it of no great
concernment to enquire again after the first Book. What of that nature offered
its self unto me, I cast my thoughts upon, into the Margin of what was before
written, inserting it into the same continued Discourse. I therefore desire the
Reader, that he may not suspect himself deceived, to take notice* that whatever
quotations out of that Treatise he meets withal, the number of pages
throughout, answers the first Edition of it.

Of the Author of that Discourse, and his design therein, I have but little to
premise. He seems at first view to be a Napthali, an Hind let loose, and to
give goodly words. But though the voice we hear from him sometimes, be the
voice of Jacob; yet the hands that put forth themselves, in his progress, are
the hands of Esau. Moderation is pretended, but his counsels for peace, center
in an advice for the extermination of the Ishmael (as he esteems it) of
Protestancy. We know full well, that the words he begins to flourish withal,
are not Vox ultima Papae. A discovery of the inconsistency of his real and
pretended design, is one part of our business. Indeed, an attentive Reader,
cannot but quickly discern, that persuasions unto Moderation in different
professions of Christian Religion, with a relinguishment of all others to an
embracement of Popery, be they never so finely smoothed, must needs interfere.
But yet with words, at such real variance among themselves, does our Author
hope to impose his sentiments in Religion, on the minds of noble and ingenious
persons, not yet accustomed to those severer thoughts and studies, which are
needful to form an exact Judgment in things of this nature. That he should
upon any obtain both his ends, Moderation, and Popery, is impossible. No two
things are (...) inconsistent. Let him cease the pursuit of the latter, and we
will follow after the former with him, or without him. And if any man be so
unhappily simple, as to think to come to Moderation in Religion-fewds, by
turning Romanist, I shall leave him for his conviction to the mistress of such
wise men. My present business is, as I find, to separate between his pleas for
the Moderation pretended; and those for Popery really, aimed at. What force
there may be in his Reasons, for that which he would not have, I shall not
examine, but shall manifest that there is none, in them he uses for what he
would. And, Reader, if this hasty attempt for the prevention of the Application
of them find acceptance with thee, I shall, it may be, ere long, give thee a
full account of the new Ways and Principles, which our Author, and the men of
the same persuasion, have of late years resolved on, for the promotion of their
Cause and Interest.

Farewell.
PREFACE.
COnsidering the condition of Affairs in these Nations, in reference to the
late Miscarriages, and present Distempers of men about Religion; it was no hard
Conjecture, that some would improve the Advantage, seeming so fairly to present
it self unto them, unto ends of their own: Men of prudence, ability, and
leisure, engaged by all bonds imaginable in the persuit of any special
Interest, need little minding of the common ways of wisdom for its promotion.
They know, that he that would fashion Iron into the image and likeness which he
has fancied, must strike whilst it is hot; when the adventitious efficacy of
the fire it has admitted, makes it pliable to that whereunto in its own
nature, it is most opposite. Such seems to be, in these days, the temper of
men in Religion, from those flames wherewith some have been scorched, others
heated, all provoked, and made fit to receive new impressions, if wisely
hammered. Neither was it a difficult Prognostication for any one to fore-tel,
what Arguments and Mediums would be made use of, to animate and enliven the
persuasions of men, who had either right, or confidence enough, to plead or
pretend a Disinterest in our miscariages, for an embracement of their
profession. Commonly with men that indulge to passion and distempers, as the
most of men are apt to do, the last provocation blots out the remembrance of
preceding crimes no less heinous. And what ever to the contrary is pretended,
men usually have not that indignation against Principles which have produced
evils they have only heard or read of; that they have against Practices under
which they have personally suffered. Hence it might easily be exspected, that
the Romanists, supposing, at least by the help of those paroxysms they discern
amongst us, that the miscariages of some of their Adversaries would prove a
garment large enough to cover and hide their own, would, with much confidence,
improve them to their special advantage. Nor is it otherwise come to pass. This
persuasion and suitable practice thereon, runs through all the veins of the
Discourse, we have proposed to consideration; making that seem quick and
sprightly, which otherwise would have been but an heap, or a carcass.

That then this sort of men would not only be angling in the lesser brooks of
our troubled waters, endeavoring to enveigle wandering loose and discontented
individuals, which has been their constant employment; but also come with
their nets into our open streams; was the thoughts of all men, who count
themselves concerned to think of such things as these. There is scarce a
forward Emissary amongst them, who cries not in such a season; An ego
occasionem mihi ostentatam, tantam, tam bonam, tam optatam, tam insperatam,
amitterem? What baits and tacklings they would principally make use of, was
also foreknown. But the way and manner which they would fix on for the
mannagement of their Design, now displayed in this Discourse, lay not, I
confess, under an ordinary prospect. For, as to what course the wisdom of men
will steer them, in various alterations, (...), He is no mean Prophet that can
but indifferently guess. But yet there wanted not some beams of light to guide
men in the exercise of their Stocastick faculty, even as to this also. That
accommodation of Religion, and all its concernments unto the humors, fancies,
and conversations of men, wherewith some of late have pleased themselves, and
laid snares for the ruin of others, did shrewdly portend, what in this
attempt of the same party we were to expect. Of this Nature is that Poetical
strain of Devotion so much applauded and prevailing in our Neighbor-kingdom;
whereby men, ignorant of the heavenly power of the Gospel, not only to resist,
but to subdue the strongest lusts and most towering imaginations of the sons of
men, do labor in soft and delicate Rhymes, to attemperate Religion unto the
loose and aerie fancies of Persons wholly indulging their minds to vanity and
pleasure. A fond attempt of men not knowing how to manage the sublime,
spiritual, severe Truths of the Gospel, to the ingenerating of Faith and
Devotion in the souls of sinners; but yet that which they suppose is the only
way left them to prevent the keeping of Religion, and the most of the^ party at
a perpetual distance! So Mahomet saw it necessary to go to the Mountain, when
the Mountain for all his calling would not come to him. And of the same sort is
the greatest part of the Casuistical Divinity of the Jesuits. A mere
accommodation of the Principles of Religion to the filthy lusts and wicked
lives of men, who on no other terms would resign the conduct of their souls
unto them, seems to be their main design in it. On these effects of others, he
that would have pondered what a wise and observing person of the same Interest
with them, might apprehend of the present tempers, distempers, humors,
interests, provocations, fancies, lives of them, with whom he intends to deal,
could not have failed of some advantage in his conjectures at the way and
manner wherein he would proceed in treating of them, It is of the many, of whom
we speak; on whose countenances, and in whose lives he that runs may read
provocations from former miscarriages, supine negligence of spiritual and
eternal concernments, ignorance of things past beyond what they can remember in
their own days, sloth in the disquisition of the truth, willingness to be
accommodated with a Religion pretended secure and unconcerned in present
disputes, that may save them and their sins together without further trouble,
delight in queint language and Poetical strains of Eloquence, whereunto they
are accustomed at the Stage, with sundry other inward accout^ements of mind not
unlike to these. To this frame and temper of spirin, this composition of,
humors; it was not improbable, but that those who should first enter into the
Lists in this design, would accommodate their style and manner of procedure;
Nec spe^^ fefellis expectatio. The Treatise under consideration, has fully
answered what ever was of conjecture in this kind. Frequent repetitions of late
provocations, with the crimes of the provokers; confident and undue assertions
of things past in the days of old; large promises of security temporal and
eternal, to Nations and all Individuals in them; of facility in coming to
perfection in Religion without more pains of teaching, learning, or fear of
opposition; all interwoven with tart Sarcasms, pleasant diversions; pretty
Stories of himself and others, flourished over with a smooth and handsome strain
of Rhetoric, do apparently make up the bulk of our Author's discourse. Nor is
the Romance of his conversion, much influenced by the tinckling of Bells, and
sweeping of Churches, suited unto any other principles: A matter, I confess, so
much the more admirable, because, as I suppose it, in the way mentioned, to
have bin his singular lot and good hap; so it was utterly impossible, that for
five hundred, I may say a thousand years after Christ, any man should on these
motives be turned to any Religion, most of them being not in those days in
rerum natura. A way of handling Religion he has fixed on, which, as, I
suppose, he will himself acknowledge, that the first Planters of it were
ignorant of; so I will promise him, that if he can for a thousand years after
they began their work, instance in any one Book of an approved Catholic
Author, written with the same design that this is, he shall have one Proselyte
to his Profession; which is more, I suppose, then otherwise he will obtain by
his learned labor. That this is no other, but to persuade men, that they can
find no certainty or establishment for their Faith in Scripture, but must for
it devolve themselves solely on the Authority of the Pope, will afterward be
made to appear, nor will himself deny it. But it may be, it is unreasonable,
that when men are eagerly engaged in the persuit of their Interest, we should
think from former Presidents, or general Rules of Sobriety, with that reverence
which is due to the things of the great and holy God, to impose upon them the
way and manner of their progress. The event and end aimed at, is that which we
are to respect; the management of their business in reference to this world and
that which is to come, is their own concernment. No man, I suppose, who has
any acquaintance with the things he treats about, can abstain from smiling, to
observe how dexterously he turns and winds himself in his Cloak, (which is not
every ones work to dance in) how he gilds over the more comely parts of his
Amasia, with brave suppositions, presumptions, and stories of things past and
present, where he has been in his days; covering her deformities with a
perpetual silence; ever and anon bespattering the first Reformation and
Reformers in his passage. Yea, their contentment must needs proceed to an high
degree of complacence, in whom compassion for the woeful state of them whom so
able a man judges like to be enveigled by such flourishes and pretenses, does
not excite to other affections. The truth is, if ever there blew a wind of
Doctrine on unwary souls (...), we have an instance of it in this Discourse.
Such a disposposition of cogging slights, various drafts in entising words, is
rarely met with. Many, I think, are not able to take this course in handling
the Sacred things of God, and Eternal concernments of Men; and more, I hope,
dare not. But our Author is another man's Servant; I shall not judge him, he
stands or falls to his own Master. That which the importunity of some Noble
Friends has compelled me unto is, to offer somewhat to the judgment of
impartial men, that may serve to unmask him of his gilded pretenses, and to lay
open the emptiness of those prejudices and presumptions wherewith he makes such
a tinckling noise in the ears of unlearned and unstable persons. Occasion of
serious debate is very little administered by him; that which is the task
assigned me, I shall as fully discharge, as the few hours allotted to its
performance will allow.

In my dealing with him, I shall not make it my business to defend the several
Parties, whereinto the men of his contest are distributed by our Author as
such; not all, not any of them. It is the common Protestant Cause which, in and
by all of them, he seeks to oppose so far as they are interested and concerned
therein; they fall all of them within the bounds of our present Defensative.
Wherein they differ one from another, or any, or all of them do, or may, swerve
from the common Principles of the Protestant Religion; I have nothing to do
with them in this business: And if any be so far addicted to their Parties,
wherein, it may be, they are in the wrong, as to choose rather not to be
vindicated and pleaded for, in that wherein with others I know they are in the
right, than to be joined in the same plea with them from whom in part they
differ, I cannot help it. I pretend not their Commission for what I do; and
they may, when they please, disclaim my appearance for them. I suppose, by this
course, I shall please very few, and, I am sure, I shall displease some, if not
many: I aim at neither, but to profit all. I have sundry reasons for not owning
or avowing particularly any Party in this Discourse, so as to judge the rest,
wherewith I am not bound to acquaint the World. One of them I shall, and, I
hope, it is such an one, as may suffice ingenious and impartial men, and
thereunto some others may be added. The Gentleman whose Discourse I have
undertaken the consideration of, was pleased to front and close it, with a part
of a Speech of my Lord Chancellor's; and his placing of it manifests how he
uses it. He salutes it in his Entrance, and takes his leave also of it, never
regarding its intendment, until coming to the close of his Treatise, to his
Salve in the beginning, he adds an aeternum Vale. That the mention of such an
excellent Discourse, the best part in both our Books, might not be lost, I have
suited my Plea and Desensative of Protestantism, to the spirit and principles
and excellent ratiocinations of it; behind that Shield I lay the manner of my
Proceeding, where, if it be not safe, I care not what becomes of it. Besides,
it is not for what the men of his Title Page are differenced amongst
themselves, that our Author blames them, but for what he thinks they agree in
too well, in reference to the Church of Rome; nor does be insist on the evils
of their Contests to persuade them to Peace amongst themselves, or to prevail
over them to center in any one Persuasion about which they contend, but to lead
them all, over to the Pope. And if any of them with whom our Author deals and
sports himself in his Treatise, are fallen off from the Fundamental
denominating Principles of Protestant Religion, as some of them seem to be,
they come not within the compass of our plea, seeing, as such, they are not
dealt with by our Author. It is the Protestant Religion in general, which he
charges with all the irregularities, uncertainties, and evils, that he
exspatiates about; and from the Principles of it, does he endeavor to withdraw
us. As to the case then under debate with him, it is enough, if we manifest
that that Profession of Religion is not liable or obnoxious to any of the
crimes or inconveniences by him objected unto it; and, that the Remedy of our
Evils, whether real or imaginary, which he would impose upon us, is so far from
being specifical toward their Cure, that it is indeed far worse then the
Disease pretended: to the full as undesirable as the cutting of the throat, for
the cure of a forefinger. There is no reason therefore in this business,
wherefore I should avow any one Persuasion about which Protestants that consent
in general in the same Confession of Faith, may have or actually have
difference amongst themselves; especially, if I do also evince, there is no
cogency in them, to cause any of them to renounce the Truth wherein they all
agree.

Much less shall I undertake to plead for, excuse, or palliate the miscarriages
of any Part or Parties of men during our late unhappy Troubles: Nor shall I
make much use of what offers it self in a way of Recrimination. Certain it is,
that as to this Gentleman's pretensions, sundry things might be insisted on,
that would serve to allay the fierceness of his spirit, in his management of
other men's crimes to his own ends and purposes. The sound of our late Evils, as
it is known to all the World, began in Ireland, amongst his good
Roman Catholics, who were blessed from Rome into Rebellion and Murder,
somewhat before any drop of blood was shed in England, or Scotland, -- Oculis
male lippus inunctis
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum
Quam aut Aquila aut Serpens Epidaurius?
Let them that are innocent throw stones at others; Roman Catholics are unfit
to be employed in that work. But it was never judged either a safe or honest
way, to judge of any Religion by the practices of some that have professed it.
Men by Doctrines and Principles, nor Doctrines by Men; was the trial of old.
And if this be a rule to guide our thoughts in reference to any Religion,
namely, the Principles which it avows and asserts, I know none that can vye
with the Romanists, in laying foundations of, and making provision for, the
disturbance of the Civil Peace of Kingdoms and Nations. For the present, unto
the advantage taken by our Author from our late unnatural Wars and Tumults to
reflect on Protestancy, I shall only say, That, if all the Religion of Sinners
be to be quitted and forsaken, I doubt, that professed by the Pope must be
cashiered for company.

Least of all, shall I oppose my self to that moderation in the persuit of our
Religious Interests, which he pretends to plead for. He that will plead against
mutual forbearance in Religion, can be no Christian, at least no good one. Much
less shall I impeach what he declaims against, that abominable Principle of
disturbing the Peace of Kingdoms and Nations, under a pretense of defending,
reforming or propagating of our Faith and Opinions. But I know, that neither
the commendation of the former, nor the decrying of the latter, is the proper
work of our Author; for, as the present Principles and past Practices of the
men of that Church and Religion which he defends, will not allow him to
entertain such hard thoughts of the latter, as he pretends unto; so as to the
former, where he has made some progress in his work, and either warmed his zeal
beyond his first intendment for its discovery, or has gotten some confidence,
that he has obtained a better acceptance with his Reader, then at the entrance
of his Discourse he could lay claim unto, laying aside those counsels of
moderation and forbearance which he had gilded over, he plainly declares, that
the only way of procuring Peace amongst us, is by the extermination of
Protestancy. For having compared the Roman Catholic to Isaac, the proper Heir
of the House, and Protestants to Ishmael vexing him in his own Inheritance, the
only way to obtain Peace, he tells us, is, Projiee ancillam cum filio suo; Cast
out the handmaid with her son, that is, in the gloss of their former practices,
either burn them at home, or send them to starve abroad. There is not the least
reason then, why I should trouble my self with his flourishes and stories, his
Characters of us and our neighbour-Nations, in reference unto moderation and
forbearance in Religion; that is not the thing by him intended; but is only
used to give a false Alarm to his unwary Readers, whilst he marches away with
a Rhetorical Persuasive unto Popery. In this it is wherein alone I shall attend
his motions; and, if in our passage through his other Discourses, we meet with
any thing lying, in a direct tendency unto his main end, though pretended to be
used to another purpose, it shall not pass without some Animadversion.

Also, I shall be far from contending with our Author in those things wherein
his Discourse excels, and, that upon the two general reasons, of Will and
Ability. Neither could I compare with him in them if I would, nor would if I
could. His quaint Rhetoric, biting Sarcasms, fine Stories, smooth Expressions
of his high contempt of them with whom he has to do; with many things of that
sort, the repetition of whose Names has got the reputation of incivility, are
things wherein as I cannot keep pace with him, (for Illud possumus quod jure
possumus); so I have no mind to follow him.

CHAP. I.
Our Author's Preface. And his Method.

IT is not any Disputation, or Rational debate about Differences in Religion
that our Author intends; nor, until toward the close of his Treatise, does he
at all fix directly on any thing in Controversy between Romanists and
Protestants. In the former parts of his Discourse, his Design is sometimes
covered, always carried on in the way of a Rhetorical Declamation; so, that it
is not possible, and is altogether needless to trace all the particular
passages and expressions as they lie scattered up and down in his Discourse,
which he judges of advantage unto him in the mannagement of the work he has
undertaken. Some Suppositions there are which lie at the bottom of his whole
Superstructure, quickening the Oratory and Rhetorical, part of it, (undoubtedly
it is best,) which he chose rather to take for granted, then to take upon
himself the trouble to prove. These being drawn forth and removed, what ever he
has built upon them, with all that paint and flourish wherewith it is adorned,
will of it self fall to the ground. I shall then first briefly discuss what he
offers as to the method of his procedure, and then take this for my own;
Namely, I shall draw out and examine the Fundamental Principles of his Oration,
upon whose trial the whole must stand or fall, and then pass through the
severals of the whole Treatise, with such Animadversions, as what remains of
it, may seem to require.

His method he speaks unto, page 13. My method, says he, I do purposely
conceal, to keep therein a more handsome decorum: for he that goes about to part
a fighting fray, cannot observe a method, (...) must turn himself this way and
that as occasion offers; be it a corporal or mental Duel. So did good Sc. Paul
in his Epistle to the Romans, which of all his other Epistles as it has most
of solidity, so it has least of method in the context; the reason is, etc.
These are handsome words, of a man that seems to have good thoughts of himself
and his skill, in parting frays. But yet I see not how they hang well together,
as to any congruity of their sense and meaning. Surely, he that uses no
method, nor can use any, cannot conceal his method; no, though he purpose so to
do. No man's purpose to hide, will enable him to hide that which is not. If he
has concealed his method, he has used one: if he has used none, he has not
concealed it: for, that which is wanting cannot be numbered. Nor has he by
this, or any other means, kept any handsome decorum: not having once spoken the
sense, or according to the Principles of him whom he undertakes to personate:
which is such an observance of a decorum as a man shall not lightly meet with.
Nor has he discovered any mind so to part a fray, as that the Contenders might
hereafter live quietly one by another; his business being avowedly to persuade
as many as he can to a conjunction in one Party, for the destruction of all the
rest. And what ever he says of not using a method, the method of his
Discourse, with the good words it is set off withal, is the whole of his
Interest in it: He pretends indeed, to pass through loca nullius an^^ Trita
solo; yet setting aside his mannagement of the Advantages given him by the late
miserable Tumults in these Nations; and the Provision he has made for the
Entertainment of his Reade^, are Worts boiled an hundred times over, as he
knows well enough. And, for the method which he would have us believe not to
be, and yet to be concealed, it is rather (...) then (...) rather a crafty
various distribution of entising words, and plausible pretenses to enveagle and
delude men unlearned and unstable, then any decent contexture of, or fair
progress in, a Rational Discourse, or Regular Disposition of nervous Topics,
to convince or persuade the minds of men, who have their eyes in their heads. I
shall therefore little trouble my self further about it, but only discover it
as occasion shall require; for, the Discovery of Sophistry is its proper
Confutation.

However the course he steers is the same that good St. Paul used in his
Epistle to the Romans, which has, as he tells us, most of solidity and least
of method of all his Epistles; I confess, I knew not before, that his Church
had determined which of St. Paul's Epistles had most of solidity, which least.
For I have such good thoughts of him, that, I suppose, he would not do it of
his own head: nor do I know, that he is appointed Umpire to determine upon the
Writings that came all of them by Inspiration from God, which is most solid.
This therefore must needs be the sense of his Church, which he may be
acquainted with, twenty ways that I know not of. And here his Protestant vizor
which by and by he will utterly cast off, fell off from him, I presume at
unawares. That he be no more so entrapped, I wish he would take notice against
the next time he has occasion to personate a Protestant; that although for
method purely adventitious and belonging to the external manner of writing,
Protestants may affirm, that one Epistle is more methodical then another,
according to those Rules of method, which our selves, or other Worms of the
Earth like to our selves, have invented; yet, for their solidity, which
concerns the Matter of them, and Efficacy, for Conviction, they affirm them all
equal. Nor is he more happy in what he intimates of the immethodicalness of
that Epistle to the Romans: For, as it is acknowledged by all good Expositors,
that the Apostle uses a most clear distinct and exact method in that Epistle,
whence most Theological Systems are composed by the Rule of it; so our Author
himself assigns such a design unto him, and the use of such ways and means
in the prosecution of it, as argues a diligent observation of a method. I
confess, he is deceived in the occasion and intention of the Epistle, by
following some few late Roman Expositors, neglecting the Analysis given of it
by the Ancients: but we may pass that by; because I find his aim in mentioning
a false scope and design, was not to acquaint us with his mistake, but to take
an advantage to fall upon our Ministers; and I think, a little too early, for
one so careful to keep an handsome decorum, for culling out of this Epistle
Texts against the Christian Doctrine of good Works done in Christ, by his
special Grace, out of obedience to his command, with a promise of everlasting
reward and intrinsic acceptability thence accrewing. Thus we see still
Incoeptis gravibus plerunque and magna professis
Purpureus late qui splendeat unus and alter
Assuitur pan^us; --
Sed nunc nonerat his locus.
Use of Disputing, has cast him at the very entrance of his Discourse, upon, as
he supposes, a particular Controversy between Protestants and
Roman Catholics, quite besides his design and purpose; But instead of
obtaining any advantage, by this transgression of his own Rule, he is fallen upon
a new misadventure; and, that so much the greater because it evidently
discovers somewhat in him besides mistake. I am sure, I have heard as many of
our Ministers Preach as he, and read as many of their Books as he, yet I can
testify, that I never heard or read them opposing the Christian doctrine of
good works. Often I have heard and found them pressing a universal Obedience to
the whole Law of God teaching men to abound in good works, pressing the
indispensable necessity of them from the commands of Law and Gospel,
encouraging men unto them by the blessed promises of Acceptance and Reward in
Christ, declaring them to be the way of men's coming to the Kingdom of Heaven;
affirming, that all that believe are created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
and for men to neglect, to despise them, is wilfully to neglect their own
Salvation: But, opposing the Christian Doctrine of Good Works; and that with
sayings ^ulled out of St. Paul 's Epistle to the Romans, I never heard, I never
read any Protestant Minister. There is but one expression in that Declaration
of the Doctrine of Good Works, which, he says, Protestants oppose used by
himself, that they do not own; and, that is their intrinsic acceptability:
which I fear he does not very well understand himself. If he mean by it, that
there is in good works an intrinsical worth and value, from their exact
answerableness to the Law, and proportion to the Reward, so as on rules of
Justice to deserve and merit it; he speaks daggers, and does not himself
believe what he says, it being contradictious; for he lays their acceptability
on the account of the promise. If he intend, that God having graciously
promised to accept and receive them in Christ, they become thereupon acceptable
and rewardable; this, Protestant Ministers teach daily. Against the former
Explication of their acceptability, in reference to the Justice of God, on
their own account, and the Justification of their persons that perform them,
for them; I have often heard them speaking, but never with any Authority, or
force of Argument, comparable to that used by St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, to the same purpose. But this tale of Protestants opposing the
Christian Doctrine of Good Works, has been so often told by the Romanists,
that I am persuaded, some of them begin to believe it; however it be not only
false, but from all circumstances, very incredible: and finding our Author
hugely addicted to approve any thing that passes for current in his Party, I
will not charge him with a studied fraud; in the finding it so advantageous to
his cause, he took hold of a very remote occasion to work an early prejudice in
the minds of his Readers, against them and their Doctrine whom he designeth to
oppose. When he writes next, I hope he will mind the account we have all to
make of what we do write, and say, and be better advised, than to give
countenance to such groundless Slanders.

CHAP. II.
Heathen Pleas. General Principles.

WE have done with his Method, or manner of proceeding; our next view shall be
of those general Principles, and Suppositions, which animate the paraenetical
part of his work, and whereon it is solely founded. And here I would entreat
him not to be offended, if in the entrance of this Discourse, I make bold to
mind him, that the most, if not all, of his Pleas, have been long since
insisted on by a very learned man, in a case not much unlike this which we have
in hand; and were also long since answered by one as learned as he, or as any
the world saw in the age wherein he lived, or it may be since, to this day,
though he died now 1400 years ago. The person I intend is Celsus the
Philosopher, who objected the very same things, upon the same general grounds,
and ordered his Objections in the same manner, against the Christians of old,
as our Author does against the Protestants: And the Answer of Origin to his
eight books, will save any man the labor of answering this one, who knows how
to make application of general Rules and Principles, unto particular Cases that
may be regulated by them. Does our Author lay the cause of all the Troubles,
Disorders, Tumults, Wars, wherewith the Nations of Europe, have been for some
season, and are still, in some places, infested, on the Protestants? So does
Celsus charge all the Evils, and Commotions, Plagues, and Famines, wherewith
mankind, in those days, was much wasted, upon the Christians. Does our Author
charge the Protestants, that by their breaking off from Rome, with Schisms and
Seditions they made way for others, on the same principles to break off
seditiously from themselves? So did Celsus charge the Jews and Christians;
telling the Jews, that by their Seditious departure from the common Worship and
Religion of the World, they made way for the Christians, a branch of
themselves, to (...) them and their worship in like manner, and to set up for
themselves: And following on his Objection he applies it to the Christians,
that they departing from the Jews, had broached Principles for others to
improve into a departure from them; which is the sum of most that is pleaded
with any fair pretense, by our Author, against Protestants. Does he insist upon
the Divisions of the Protestants, and to make it evident that he speaks
knowingly, boast, that he is acquainted with their persons, and has read the
books of all sorts amongst them? So does Celsus deal with the Christians,
reproaching them with their Divisions, Discords, mutual Animosities, Disputes,
about God, and his Worship; boasting, that he had debated the matter with them,
and read their Books of all sorts. Has he gathered a Rhapsody of insignificant
words, at least, as by him put together, out of the books of the Quakers, to
reproach Protestants with their Divisions? So did Celsus out of the books and
writings of the Gnostics, Elionites, and Valentinians. Does he bring in
Protestants pleading against the Sects that are fallen from them, and these
pleading against them, justifying the Protestants against them, but at length
equally rejecting them all? So dealt Celsus with the Jews, Christians, and
those that had fallen into singular Opinions of their own. Does he manage the
Arguments of the Jews against Christ, to intimate that we cannot well by
Scripture prove him to be so? The very same thing did Celsus, almost in the
very words here used. Does he declaim openly about the obscurity of Divine
things, the nature of God, the works of Creation, and Providence, that we are
not like to be delivered from it by books of Poems, Stories, plain Letters? So
does Celsus. Does he insist on the uncertainty of our knowing the Scripture to
be from God; the difficulty of understanding it; its insufficiency to end men's
Differences about Religion, and the worship of God? The same does Celsus at
large, pleading the cause of Paganism, against Christianity. Does our Author
plead, that where, and from whom men had their Religion of old, there and with
them they ought to abide, or to return unto them? The same does Celsus, and
that with pretenses far more specious then those of our Author: Does he plead
the quietness of all things in the World, the Peace, the Plenty, Love, Union,
that were in the days before Protestants began to trouble all, as he
supposes, about Religion? The same course steers Celsus, in his contending
against Christians in general. Is there intimated by our Author, a decay of
Devotion and Reverence to Religious things, Temples* etc? Celsus is large on
this particular; the relinquishment of Temples, discouragement of Priests in
their daily Sacrifices, and heavenly Contemplations, with other Votaries;
contempt of holy Altars, Images, and Statua's of Worthies deceased, all
Heaven-bred Ceremonies and comely Worship by the means of Christians, he
expatiates upon. Does he profess love and compassion to his Countrymen, to
draw them off from their folly, to have been the cause of his writing? So does
Celsus. Does he deride and scoff at the first Reformers, with no less witty and
biting Sarcasms than those wherewith Aristophanes jeered Socrates on the Stage?
Celsus deals no otherwise with the first Propagators of Christianity. Has he
taken pains to palliate and put new glosses and interpretations upon those
Opinions and Practices in his Religion, which seem most obnoxious to exception?
The same work did Celsus undertake, in reference to his Pagan Theology and
Worship. And in sundry other things may the parallel be traced; so, that I may
truly say, I cannot observe any thing of moment or importance of the nature of
a general Head or Principle in this whole Discourse made use of against
Protestants, but that the same was used, as by others of old, so in particular,
by Celsus, against the whole Profession of Christianity. I will not be so
injurious to our Author, as once to surmise, that he took either aim, or
assistance, in his work from so bitter a professed Enemy of Christ Jesus, and
the Religion by him revealed; yet he must give me leave to reckon this
coincidence of argumentation between them, amongst other instances that may be
given, where a similitude of Cause has produced a great likeness, if not
identity, in the reasonings of ingenious men. I could not satisfy my self
without remarking this parallel; and perhaps, much more needs not to be added,
to satisfy an unprejudiced Reader in, or to, our whole business: For, if he be
one that is unwilling to fore-go his Christianity, when he shall see, that the
Arguments that are used to draw him from his Protestancy, are the very same in
general, that wise men of old made use of to subvert that which he is resolved
to cleave unto; he needs not much deliberation with himself what to do, or say,
in this case, or be solicitous what he shall answer, when he is earnestly
entreated to suffer himself to be deceived.

Of the Pretences^ beforementioned, some with their genuine inferences, are
the main Principles of this whole Discourse. And seeing they bear the weight of
all the pleas, reasonings, and persuasions that are drawn from them, which can
have no further real strength and efficacy, then what is from them communicated
unto them, I shall present them in one view to the Reader, that he loose not
himself in the maze of words, wherewith our Author endeavors to lead him up
and down, still out of his way; and, that he may make a clear and distinct
judgment of what is tendered to prevail upon him to desert that Profession of
Religion wherein he is engaged. For, as I dare not attempt to deceive any man,
though in matters incomparably of less moment then that treated about; so, I
hope, no man can justly be offended, if in this, I warn him to take heed to
himself, that he be not deceived. And they are these that follow; I. That we in
these Nations first received the Christian Religion from Rome, by the Mission
and Authority of the Pope. II. That whence, and from whom, we first received
our Religion; there, and wi^h them, we ought to abide, to them we must repair
for guidance in all our concernments in it, and speedily return to their Rule
and Conduct, if we have departed from them. III. That the Roman Profession of
Religion and Practice in the Worship of God, is every way the same as it was
when we first received our Religion from thence; nor can ever otherwise be. IV.
That all things as to Religion were quiet and in peace, all men in union and at
agreement amongst themselves, in the Worship of God, according* to the mind of
Christ, before the Relinquishment of the Roman-See by our forefathers. V. That
the First Reformers were the most of them sorry contemptible persons, whose
Errors were propagated by indirect means, and entertained for sinister ends.
VI. That our departure from Rome has been the cause of all our evils, and
particularly, of all those Divisions which are at this day found amongst the
Protestants, and which have been ever since the Reformation. VII. That we have
no Remedy of our Evils, no means of ending our differences but by a return unto
the Rule of the Roman-See. VIII. The Scripture upon sundry accounts is
insufficient to settle us in the truth of Religion, or to bring us to an
agreement amongst our selves; seeing it is, 1. Not to be known to be the Word
of God, but by the Testimony of the Roman Church: 2. Cannot be well translated
into our vulgar Language: 3. Is in it self obscure: And, 4. We have none to
determine of the sense of it. IX. That the Pope is a good man, one that seeks
nothing but our good, that never did us harm, and has the care and inspection
of us committed unto him by Christ. X. That the Devotion of the Catholics, far
transcends that of Protestants, nor is their Doctrine or Worship liable to any
just exception*


I suppose, our Author will not deny these to be the Principal nerves and
sinews of his Oration; nor complain, I have done him the least injury in this
representation of them; or, that any thing of importance unto his advantage by
himself insisted on, is here omitted. He that runs and reads, if he observe any
thing that lies before him, besides handsome words, and ingenious diversions,
will consent, that here lies the substance of what is offered unto him. I shall
not need then to tire the Reader, and my self, with transcriptions of those
many words from the several parts of his Discourse, wherein these Principles
are laid down and insinuated, or gilded over, as things on all hands granted.
Besides, so far as they are interwoven with other reasonings, they will fall
again under our Consideration in the several places where they are used and
improved. If all these Principles upon examination be found good, true, firm,
and stable; it is most meet and reasonable that our Author should obtain his
desire: And if, on the other side, they shall appear, some of them false, some
impertinent, and the deductions from them Sophistical, some of them destructive
to Christian Religion in general; none of them singly, nor all of them together
able to bear the least part of that weight which is laid upon them, I suppose,
he cannot take it ill, if we resolve to be contented with our present
condition, until some better way of deliverance from it be proposed unto us;
which, to tell him the truth, for my part, I do not expect from his Church or
Party. Let us then consider these Principles apart, in the order wherein we
have laid them down, which was the best I could think on upon the sudden, for
the Advantage of him who makes use them.

The first is an hinge, upon which many of those which follow, do, in a a sort,
depend; yea, upon the matter, all of them. Our Primitive receiving Christian
Religion from Rome, is that which influences all persuasions for a return
thither. Now if this must be admitted to be true, that we in these Nations
first received the Christian Religion from Rome, by the Mission and Authority
of the Pope; it either must be so, because the Proposition carries its own
evidence in its very terms, or because our Author, and those consenting with
him, have had it by Revelation, or it has been testified to them by others,
who knew it so to be: That the first it does not, is most certain; for, it is
very possible, it might have been brought unto us from some other place, from
whence it came to Rome; for, as I take it, it had not there its beginning. Nor
do I suppose, they will plead special Revelation, made either to themselves, or
any others about this matter. I have read many of the Revelations that are said
to be made to sundry persons canonized by his Church for Saints; but never met
with any thing concerning the place from whence England first received the
Gospel. Nor have I yet heard Revelation pleaded to this purpose by any of his
Copartners in design. It remains then, that some body has told him so, or
informed him of it, either by writing, or by word of mouth: Usually, in such
cases, the first enquiry is, Whether they be credible Persons who have made the
report. Now the pretended Authors of this Story, may, I suppose, be justly
questioned, if on no other, yet on this account, that he who designs an
advantage by their Testimony, does not indeed himself believe what, they say.
For notwithstanding what he would fain have us believe of Christianity coming
into Britain from Rome, he knows well enough, and tells us elsewhere himself,
that it came directly by Sea from Palestina into France, and was thence brought
into England by Joseph of Ariniathea. And what was that Faith and Worship which
he brought along with him, we know full well; by that which was the Faith and
Worship of his Teachers, and Associates, in the work of propagating the Gospel
recorded in the Scripture. So that Christianity found a passage to Britain,
without so much as once visiting Rome by the way. Yea, but 150 years after,
Fugatius and Damianus came from Rome, and propagated the Gospel here; and, 400
years after them, Austin the Monk. Of these stories we shall speak particularly
afterward. But this quite spoils the whole market in hand; this is not a
FIRST receiving of the Gospel, but a second and third at the best; and if that
be considerable, then so ought the Proposition to be laid: These Nations a
second and third time, after the first from another place, received the Gospel
from Rome; but this will not discharge that bill of following Items, with is
laid upon it. What ever then there is considerable in the place or persons,
from whence, or whom, a Nation, or People, receive the Gospel, as far as it
concerns us, in these Kingdoms; it relates to Jerusalem and Jews, not Rome and
Italians. Indeed, it had been very possible, that Christian Religion might have
been propagated at first from Rome into Britany, considering, what, in these
days, was the condition of the one place, and the other; yet things were so
ordered, in the Providence of the Lord, that it fell out otherwise; and the
Gospel was preached here in England, probably, before ever St. Paul came to
Rome, or St. Peter either, if ever he came there. But yet, to prevent wrangling
about Austin and the Saxons, let us suppose that Christian Religion was first
planted in these Nations by Persons coming from Rome, if you will, men sent by
the Pope, before he was born, for that purpose: What then will follow? Was it
the Popes Religion they taught and preached? Did the Pope first find it out,
and declare it? Did they baptize men into the name of the Pope? or, Declare
that the Pope was crucified for them? You know whose arguings these are, to
prove men should not lay weight upon, or contend about, the first ministerial
Revealers of the Gospel; but rest all in Him who is the Author of it, Christ
Jesus. Did any come here and preach in the Popes name, declare a Religion of
his Revealing, or resting in him as the fountain and sourse of the whole
business they had to do? If you say so, you say something which is near to your
purpose, but certainly very wide from the Truth. But because it is most
certain, that God had not promised, originally, to send the rod of Christ's
strength out of Rome, I shall take leave to ask, Whence the Gospel came
thither? or, to use the words made use of once and again by our Author, Came
the Gospel from them, or came it to them only? I suppose they will not say so,
because they speak to men that have seen the Bible: If it came to them from
others, what Privilege had they at Rome, that they should not have the same
respect for them, from whom the Gospel came to them, as they claim from those
unto whom they plead, that it came from themselves? The case is clear; St.
Peter coming to Rome, brought his Chair along with him, after which time, that
was made the head, spring, and fountain of all Religion, and no such thing
could befall those places, where the Planters of the Gospel had no Chaires to
settle. I think I have read this Story in an hundred writers, but they were all
men of yesterday, in comparison; who, what ever they pretend, know no more of
this business, than my self. St. Peter speaks not one word of it, in his
writings; nor yet St. Luke; nor St. Paul, nor any one who by Divine
inspiration, committed any thing to remembrance of the state of the Church,
after the Resurrection of Christ. And not only are they utterly silent of this
matter; but so also are Clemens, and Ignatius, and Justin Martyr, and
Tertullian, with the rest of knowing men in those days. I confess, in
after-ages, when some began to think it meet, that the chiefest Apostle should
go to the then chiefest City in the world, diverse began to speak of his going
thither, and of his Martyrdom there, though they agree not in their Tales about
it. But be it so; as for my part, I will not contend in a matter so dark,
uncertain, of no moment in Religion; this I know, that being the Apostle of the
Circumcision, if he did go to Rome, it was to convert the Jews that were there,
and not to found that Gentile-Church, which in a short space got the start of
the other; But yet, neither do these Writers talk of bringing his Chair
thither; much less is there in them one dust of that rope of Sand, which men of
latter days have endeavored to twist with inconsistent consequences, and
groundless presumptions to draw out from thence the Popes Prerogative. The case
then is absolutely the same as to those in respect of the Romans, who received
the Gospel from them, or by their means; and of the Romans themselves, in
respect of those from whom they received it. If they would win worship to
themselves from others, by pretending that the Gospel came forth from them unto
them; let them teach them by the example of their devotion toward those from
whom they received it. I suppose, they will not plead, that they are not now in
rerum natura; knowing what will ensue to their disadvantage on that plea. For,
if that Church is utterly failed and gone from whence they first received the
Gospel, that which others received it from, may possibly be not in a much
better condition. But I find my self, before I was aware, fallen into the borders
of the second Principle, or Presumption mentioned. I shall therefore shut up my
consideration of this first Pretense, with this only; that neither is it true,
that these Nations first received Christianity from Rome, much less by any
mission of the Pope; nor, if they had done so, in the Exercise of a Ministerial
work and authority, would this make any thing to what is pretended from it; Nor
will it ever be of any use to the present Romanists, unless they can prove,
that the Pope was the first Author of Christian Religion, which, as yet, they
have not attempted to do, and thence it is evident, what is to be thought of
the second Principle beforementioned; Namely,

II. That whence, and from whom, we first receive our Religion, there, and with
them, we must abide therein, to them we must repair for Guidance, and return to
their Rule and Conduct, if we have departed from them.

I have showed already, that there is no privity of Interests between us and
the Romanists in this matter. But suppose, we had been originally instructed in
Christianity by men sent from Rome to that purpose, (for unless, we suppose
this, for the p^^sent, our talk is at an end) I see not, as yet, the verity of
this Proposition. With the Truth, (wherever it be, or with whomsoever) it is
most certainly our duty to abide. And if those, from whom we first received our
Christianity ministerially, abide in the Truth, we must abide with them; not
because they, or their Predecessors, were the Instruments of our Conversion;
but, because they abide in the Truth. Setting aside this Consideration of
Truth, which is the Bond of all Union, and that which fixes the Center, and
limits the bounds of it, one Peoples, or one Churches abiding with another in
any Profession of Religion, is a thing merely indifferent. When we have
received the Truth from any, the formal reason of our continuance with them in
that union, which our reception of the Truth from them gives unto us, is their
abiding in the Truth, and no other. Suppose some Persons, or some Church or
Churches, do propagate Christianity to another; and in progress of time,
themselves fall off from some of those Truths, which they, or their
Predecessors, had formerly delivered unto these instructed by them? If our
Author shall deny, that such a Supposition can well be made, because it never
did, nor can fall out, I shall remove his Exception, by scores of Instances out
of Antiquity, needless in so evident a matter to be here mentioned. What in
this case would be their duty who received the Gospel from them? Must they
abide with them, follow after them, and embrace the errors they are fallen
into, because they first received the Gospel from them? I trow not; It will be
found their duty to abide in the Truth, and not to pin their Faith upon the
sleeves of them, by whom ministerially it was at first communicated unto them.
But this case, you will say, concerns not the Roman-Church, and Protestants;
for, as these abide not in the Truth, so they never did, nor can, depart from
it. Well then! that we may not displease them at present, let us put the case
so, as I presume, they will own it. Suppose, Men, or a Church, entrusted by
Christ authoritatively to preach the Gospel, do propagate the Faith unto others
according to their duties; these, being converted by their means, do
afterward, through the craft and subtilty of seducers, fall in sundry things
from the Truths they were instructed in, and wherein their Instructers do
constantly abide; yea, say our Adversaries, this is the true case indeed; I ask
then, in this case, What is, and ought to be, the formal Motive to prevail with
these persons to return to their former condition from whence they were fallen?
Either this, that they are departed from the Truth, which they cannot do,
without peril to their souls, and whereunto, if they return not, they must
perish; or this, that it is their duty to return to them from whom they first
received the Doctrine of Christianity, because they so received it from them?
St. Paul, who surely, had as much authority in these matters, as either the
Pope, or Church of Rome, can with any modesty lay claim unto, had to deal with
very many in this case. Particularly, after he had preached the Gospel to the
Galatians, and converted them to the Faith of Christ, there came in some false
Teachers and Seducers amongst them, which drew them off from the Truth wherein
they had been instructed, in diverse important and some fundamental points of
it. What course does the Apostle proceed in, toward them? Does he plead with
them about their falling away from him that first converted them? or falling
away from the Truth whereunto they were converted? If any one will take the
pains to turn to any Chapter in that Epistle, he may be satisfied as to this
Enquiry; it is their falling away from the Gospel, from the Truth they had
received, from the Doctrine, in particular, of Faith and Justification by the
blood of Christ, that alone he blamed them for: yea, and makes Doctrines so
far the measure and rule of judging and censuring of Persons, whether they
preach the Word first or last, that he pronounces a redoubled Anathema,
against any creature in Heaven or Earth, upon a supposition of their teaching
any thing contrary unto it, chap. 1.8. He pleads not, we preached first unto
you, by us you were converted, and therefore with us you must abide, from whom
the Faith came forth unto you; but says, If we, or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. This was the way he chose to
insist on; and it may not be judged unreasonable, if we esteem it better then
that of theirs, who by false pretending to have been our old, would very fain
be our new Masters. But the mentioned Maxim lets us know, that the Persons, and
Churches, that have received the Faith from the Roman-Church, or by means
thereof, should abide under the rule and conduct of it, and, if departed from
it, return speedily to due obedience. I think, it will be easily granted, that,
if we ought to abide under its rule and conduct, whither ever it shall please
to guide us, we ought quickly to return to our duty and task, if we should make
any loapment from it. It is not meet, that those that are born Mules to
bondage, should ever alter their condition. Only we must profess, we know not
the Springs of that unhappy Fate, which should render us such Animals. Unto
what is here pretended, I only ask, Whether this right of Presidency and Rule
in the Roman-Church, over all persons and Churches pretended of old to be
converted by her means, do belong unto her by virtue of any general right that
those who convert others, should for ever have the conduct of those converted
by them, or by virtue of some special Privilege granted to the Church of Rome
above others? If the first, or general Title, be insisted on, it is most
certain, that a very small pittance of Jurisdiction, will be left unto the
Roman-See, in comparison of that vast Empire, which now it has, or lays
claim unto, knowing no bounds, but those of the Universal Nature of things here
below. For all men know, that the Gospel was preached in very many places of
the World, before its sound reached unto Rome, and in most parts of the
then-known World, before any such planting of a Church at Rome, as might be the
foundation of any Authoritative Mission of any from thence for the Conversion
of others; and, after that a Church was planted in that City, for any thing
that may be made to appear by Story, it was as to the first Edition of
Christianity in the Roman-Empire, as little serviceable in the Propagation of
the Gospel, as any other Church of name in the World; so that, if such
Principles should be pleaded, as of general equity, there could be nothing
fixed on more destructive to the Romanist's pretenses. If they have any special
Privilege to found this claim upon, they may do well to produce it. In the
Scripture, though there be of many Believers, yet there is no mention made, of
any Church at Rome, but only of that little Assembly that used to meet at
Aquila's house, Romans 16.5. Of any such Privilege annexed unto that meeting, we
find nothing; The first general Council, confirming Power and Rule over others
in some Churches, acknowledge, indeed, more to have been practiced in the
Roman-Church then I know how they could prove to be due unto it. But yet that
very unwarrantable Grant, is utterly destructive to the present claim and
condition of the Pope and Church of Rome. The wings, now pretended to be like
those of the Sun, extending themselves, at once, to the ends of the Earth, were
then accounted no longer, then to be able to cover the poor Believers in the
City and Suburbs of it, and some few adjacent Towns and Villages. It would be a
long Story, to tell the Progress of this claim in aftertimes; it is
sufficiently done in some of those Books, of which our Author says, there are
enough to fill the Tower of London; where, I presume, or into the fire, he
could be contented they should be for ever disposed of, and therefore we may
dismiss this Principle also.

III. That which is the main Pillar, bearing the weight of all this fine
Fabric, is the Principle we mentioned in the third place, viz. That the Roman
Profession of Religion, and Practice in the Worship of God, are every way the
same, as when we first received the Gospel from the Pope, nor can they ever
otherwise be.

This is taken for granted, by our Author, throughout his Discourse. And the
Truth is, that, if a man has a mind to suppose, and make use of things that
are in question between him and his Adversary, it were a folly not to presume
on so much as should assuredly serve his turn. To what purpose is it to mince
the matter, and give opportunity to new cavils, and exceptions, by
baby^me^^y-mouthed Petitions of some small things that there is a strife about,
when a man may as honestly, all (...) once, suppose the whole Truth of his
side, and proceed without fear of disturbance. And so wisely deals our Author
in this business. That which ought to have been his whole work, he takes for
granted, to be already done. If this be granted him, he is safe; deny it, and
all his fine Oration dwindles into a little sapless Sophistry. But he must get
the great number of Books that he seems to be troubled with, out of the World,
and the Scripture to boot, before he will persuade considerate and unprejudiced
men, that there is a word of Truth in this Supposition. That we in these
Nations received not the Gospel originally from the Pope, (which page 354. our
Author tells us is his, purely his, whereas we thought before, it had been
Christ's) has been declared, and shall, if need be, be further evinced. But
let us suppose once again, that we did so; yet we constantly deny the Church of
Rome, to be the same in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, that she was when it
is pretended, that by her means we were instituted in the knowledge of Truth.
Our Author knows full well, what a facile work I have now lying in view; what
an easy thing it were to go over most of the Opinions of the present Church of
Rome, and most, if not all their practices in Worship, and to manifest their
vast distance from the Doctrine, Practice, and Principles of that Church of
old. But, though this were really a more serious work, and more useful, and
much more accommodated to the nature of the whole difference between us, more
easy and pleasant to my self then the persuit of this odd rambling chase that
by following of him I am engaged in; yet, lest he should pretend, that this
would be a division into common places, such as he has purposely avoided, (and
that not unwisely, that he might ^^ve advantage all along to take for gra^^^d,
that which he knew to be principally in question between us) I shall dismiss
that business, and only attend unto that great proof of this Assertion, which
himself thought meet to shut up his Book withal, as that which was fit to pin
down the Basket, and to keep close and safe, all the long Bill'd Birds, that he
hoped to Limetwig by his preceding Rhetoric and Sophistry. It is in page 362,
363. Though I hope I am not contentious, nor have any other hatred against
Popery then what becomes an honest man to have against that which he is
persuaded to be so ill as Popery must needs be, if it be ill at all; yet upon
his request, I have seriously pondered his Queries (a captious way of
disputing), and falling now in my way, do return him this answer unto them.

1. The Supposition on which all his ensuing Queries are founded, must be
rightly stated, its terms freed from ambiguity, and the whole from
equivocation: which a word or two, unto, first, the Subject; and then,
secondly, the Predicate of the Proposition, or what is attributed unto the
Subject spoken of; and thirdly, the proof of the whole; will suffice to do. The
Thesis laid down is this, The Church of Rome, was once a most pure, excellent,
flourishing and mother Church: This, good St. Paul amply testifies in his
Epistle to them, and is acknowledged by Protestants. The Subject is the Church
of Rome. And this may be taken either for the Church that was founded in Rome,
in the Apostles days, consisting of Believers, with those that had their rule
and oversight in the Lord; or it may be taken for the Church of Rome, in the
sense of latter Ages, consisting of the Pope its Head, and Cardinals, principal
members, with all the Jurisdiction dependent on them, and way of Worship
established by them, and their Authority; or, that collection of men throughout
the world, that yield obedience to the Pope in their several places and
subordinations according to the Rules by him and his Authority given unto them.
That which is attributed to this Church, is, that it was once a most pure,
excellent, flourishing, and Mother Church; all, it seems, in the superlative
degree. I will not contend about the purity, excellency, or flourishing of that
Church; the boasting of the superlativeness of that purity and excellency,
seems to be borrowed from that of Revel. 3.15. But we shall not exagitate that,
in that Church, which it would never have affirmed of it self, because it is
fallen out to be the interest of some men in these latter days to talk at such
a rate, as primitive humility was an utter stranger unto. I somewhat guess at
what he means by a Mother Church; for, though the Scripture knows no such
thing, but only appropriates that Title to Jerusalem that was above, which is
said to be the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. which I suppose is not Rome, (and I
also think that no man can have two Mothers,) nor did purer Antiquity ever
dream of any such Mother, yet the vogue of latter days, has made this
expression not only passable in the world, but sacred and unquestionable; I
shall only say, that in the sense wherein it is by some understood, the old
Roman Church could lay no more claim unto it, then most other Churches in the
world, and not so good as some others could.

The proof of this Assertion, lies first on the Testimony of St. Paul, and then
on the acknowledgement of Protestants; First, Good St. Paul, he says, amply
testifies this in his Epistle to the Romans. This, what I pray? That the then
Roman Church was a Mother Church: not a word in all the Epistle of any such
matter. Nay, as I observed before, though he greatly commends the faith and
holiness of many Believers, Jews and Gentiles, that were at Rome; yet he makes
mention of no Church there, but only of a little Assembly that used to meet at
Aquila's house; nor does St. Paul give any Testimony at all to the Roman Church
in the latter sense of that expression. Is there any thing in his Epistle of
the Pope, Cardinals, Patriarchs, etc? any thing of their power, and rule over
other Churches, or Christians, not living at Rome? Is there any one word in
that Epistle about that which the Papists make the principal ingredient in
their definition of the Church, namely, subjection to the Pope? What then is
the This that good St. Paul so amply testifies unto, in his Epistle to the
Romans? Why this and this only; that, when he wrote this Epistle to Rome, there
were then living in that City, sundry good, and holy men, believing in Christ
Jesus, according to the Gospel, and making profession of the faith that is in
him; but, that these men should live there to the end of the world, he says
not, nor do we find that they do. The acknowledgement of Protestants, is next,
to as little purpose, insisted on. They acknowledge a pure and flourishing
Church to have been once at Rome, as they maintain there was at Jerusalem,
Antioch, Ephesus, Smyrna, Laodicea, Alexandria, Babylon, etc. that in all these
places, such Churches do still continue, they deny, and particularly at Rome.
For that Church which then was, they deny it to be the same that now is; at
least, any more then Argo was the same ship as when first built, after there
was not one plank or pin of its first structure remaining. That the Church of
Rome, in the latter sense, was ever a pure flourishing Church, never any
Protestant acknowledged; the most of them deny it ever to have been in that
sense, any Church at all; and those that grant it, to retain the Essential
constituting Principals of a Church; yet averr, that as it is, so it ever was,
since it had a being, very far from a pure and flourishing Church. For ought
then, that I can perceive, we are not at all concerned in the following
Queries; the Supposition they are all built upon, being partly sophistical, and
partly false. But yet, because he does so earnestly request us to ponder them,
we shall not give him cause to complain of us, in this particular at least, (as
he does in general of all Protestants) -- That we deal uncivilly; and therefore
shall pass through them; after which, if he pleases, he may deliver them to
his friend of whom they were borrowed.

1. Says he, This Church could not cease to be such, but she must fall either
by Apostasy, Heresy, or Schism: But who told him so? Might she not cease to be,
and so consequently to be such? Might not the persons of whom it consisted,
have been destroyed by an earthquake, as it happened to Laodicea? or by the
sword, as it befell the Church of the Jews, or twenty other ways? Besides,
might she not fall by Idolatry, or false Worship, or by Profaneness, or
Licentiouss of Conversation, contrary to the whole rule of Christ? That then he
may know what is to be removed by his Queries, if he should speak any thing to
the purpose, he may do well to take notice, that this is the dogme of
Protestants concerning the Church of Rome; that the Church planted there pure,
did by degrees in a long tract of time, fall by Apostasy, Idolatry, Heresy,
Schism, and Profaneness of life, into that condition wherein now it is. But,
says he,

1. Not by Apostasy; for that is not only a renouncing of the faith of Christ,
but the very name and title of Christianity; and no man will say that the
Church of Rome had ever such a Fall, or fell thus. I tell you truly, Sir, your
Church is very much beholding unto men, if they do not sometimes say very hard
things of her Fall. Had it been an ordinary slip, or so, it might have been
passed over; but this Falling into the mire, and wallowing in it for so many
Ages, as she has done, is in truth a very naughty business. For my part, I am
resolved, to deal as gently with her as possible; and therefore say, that there
is a total Apostasy from Christianity, which she fell not into, or by; and
there is a partial Apostasy in Christianity, from some of the Principles of
it, such as St. Paul charged on the Galatians; and the old Fathers on very many
that yet retained the name and title of Christians, and this, we say plainly,
that she fell by; she fell by Apostasy from many of the most material
Principles of the Gospel, both as to Faith, Life, and Worship. And there being
no Reply made upon this instan^e, were it not upon the account of pure
civility, we need not proceed any further with his Queries, the business of
them being come to an end.

But, upon his entreaty, we will follow him a little further: Supposing, that
he has dispatched the business of Apostasy, he comes to Heresy, and tells
us; That it is an adhesion to some private or singular Opinion, or Error, in
Faith; contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church; That which
ought to be subsumed, is, that the Church of Rome did never adhere to any
singular Opinion or Error in Faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine
of the Church; but our Author, to cover his business, changes the terms in his
proceeding, into the Christian World; to clear this to us a little, I desire to
know of him, What Church he means, when he speaks of the approved Doctrine of
the Church? I am sure, he will say, the Roman Catholic Church; and, if I ask
him, What age it is, of that Church which he intends, he will also say, That
Age which is present, when the Opinions mentioned, are asserted, contrary to
the approved Doctrine. We have then obtained his meaning, viz. The Roman-Church
did never at any time adhere to any Opinion, but what the Roman- Church at that
time adhered unto; or taught, or approved, no other Doctrine, but what it
taught and approved. Now, I verily believe this to be true, and he must be
somewhat besides uncivil, that shall deny it. But from hence to infer, That the
Roman-Church, never fell from her first purity by Heresy; that is a thing I
cannot yet discern, how it may be made good. This conclusion arises out of
that pitiful definition of Heresy he gives us, coined merely to serve the
Roman-Interest. The rule of judging Heresy is made the approved Doctrine of
the Church; I would know of what Church: of this or that particular Church, or
of the Catholic? Doubtless the Catholic must be pretended. I ask, Of this or
that Age, or of the first? Of the first certainly. I desire then to know, how
we may come to discern infallibly what was the approved Doctrine of the
Catholick-Church of Old, but only by the Scriptures; which we know it
unanimously embraced as given unto it by Christ, for its Rule of Faith and
Worship. If we should then grant, that the approved Doctrine of the Church,
were that which a departure from, as such, gives formality unto Heresy; yet
there is no way to know that Doctrine but by the Scripture. But yet neither can
or ought this to be granted. The formal reason of Heresy, in the usual
acceptance of the word, arises from its deviation from the Scripture as such,
which is the Rule of the Churches Doctrine, and of the Opinions that are
contrary unto it. Nor yet is every private or singular Opinion contrary to the
Scripture, or the Doctrine of the Church, presently an Heresy. That is not the
sense of the word, either in Scripture or Antiquity. So that the foundation of
the Queries about Heresy is not one jot better laid, then that was about
Apostasy, which went before. This is that which I have heard Protestants say;
namely, That the Church of Rome does adhere to very many Opinions and Errors in
Faith, contrary to the main Principles of Christian Religion delivered in the
Scripture, and so, consequently, the Doctrine approved by the Catholic Church;
and, if this be to fall by Heresy, I add, that she is thus fallen also from
what she was. But then he asks 1. By what general Council was she ever
condemned? 2. Which of the Fathers ever wrote against her? 3. By what Authority
was she otherwise reproved? But this is all one, as if a thief arraigned for
stealing before a Judge, and the goods that he had stolen found upon him, should
plead for himself and say; If ever I stole any thing, then by what lawful Judge
was I ever condemned? what Officer of the State did ever, formerly, apprehend
me? by what Authority were Writs issued out against me? Were it not easy for
the Judge to reply, and tell him; Friend, these Allegations may prove, that you
were never before condemned, but they prove not at all, that you never stole;
which is a matter of fact that you are now upon your trial for. No more will it
at all follow, that the Church of Rome did never offend, because she is not
condemned. These things may be necessary that she may be said to be legally
convicted, but not at all to prove, that she is really guilty. Besides, the
truth is, that many of her Doctrines and Practices are condemned by general
Councils, and most of them by the most learned Fathers, and all of them by the
Authority of the Scripture. And whilst her Doctrine and Worship is so
condemned, I see not well how she can escape; so that this second way also she
is fallen.

3. To Apostasy and Heresy she has also added the guilt of Schism in an high
degree. For, Schisms within her self, and her great Schism from all the
Christian world besides her self, are things well known to all that know her.
Her intestine Schisms were the shame of Christendom, her Schisms in respect of
others the ruin of it. And briefly, to answer the triple Query we are so
earnestly invited to the consideration of, I shall need to instance only in
that one particular of making, Subjection to the Pope in all things, the
Tessera and Rule of all Church Communion, whereby she has left the company of
all the Churches of Christ in the world besides her self, is gone forth and
departed from all Apostolical Churches; even that of Old Rome its self; and the
true Church, which she has forsaken, abides and is preserved in all the
Societies of Christians throughout the Earth, who attending to the Scripture
for their only Rule and Guide, do believe what is therein revealed, and worship
God accordingly. So that notwithstanding any thing here offered to the
contrary, it is very possible, that the present Church of Rome, may be fallen
from her Primitive Condition by Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism, which indeed
she is; and worst of all, by Idolatry, which our Author thought meet to pass
over in silence.

IV. It is frequently pleaded by our Author (nor is there any thing which he
more triumphs in) That all things as to Religion were quiet and in peace; all
men in union and agreement amongst themselves in the Worship of God, before the
departure made by our Forefathers from the Roman- See. No man that has once
cast an eye upon the Defensatives written by the Ancient Christians, but knows
how this very consideration was managed and improved against them by their
Pagan impugners. That Christians by their Introduction of a new way of
worshipping God, which their Forefathers knew not, had disturbed the Peace of
humane Society, divided the World into Seditious Factions, broken all the
ancient Bonds of Peace and Amity, dissolved the whole Harmony of Man-kinde's
Agreement amongst themselves, was the subject of the declamations of their
Adversaries. This complaint, their Books, their Schools, the Courts and
Judicatories were filled with; against all which clamors, and violences that
were stirred up against them by their means, those blessed souls armed
themselves with patience, and the testimony of their Consciences, that they
neither did, nor practiced any thing that in its own nature had a tendency to
the least of those evils, which they and their way of worshipping God, was
reproached with. As they had the opportunity indeed, they let their Adversaries
know, that that Peace and Union they boasted of, in their Religion, before the
entrance of Christianity, was but a Conspiracy against God, a consent in Error
and Falsehood, and brought upon the World by the craft of Satan, maintained
through the effectual influence of innumerable prejudices upon the innate
blindness and darkness of their hearts, That upon the appearance of light, and
publishing of the Truth, divisions, animosities, troubles, and distractions did
arise; they declared to have been no proper or necessary effect of the work,
but a consequent, occasional, and accidental, arising from the lusts of men,
who loved darkness more then light, because their works were evil, which that
it would ensue, their blessed Master had long before foretold them, and
forewarned them.

Though this be enough, yet it is not all, that may be replied unto this old
pretense, and plea, as managed to the purpose of our Adversaries. It is part
of the motive, which the great Historian makes Galgacus, the valiant Britain,
use to his Contrymen, to cast off the Roman-yoke; Solitudinem ubi fecerunt,
pacem vocant. It was their way, when they had by force and cruelty laid all
waste before them, to call the remaining solitude and desolation, by the goodly
name of Peace; neither considered they, whether the residue of men had either
satisfaction in their minds, or advantage by their Rule. Nor was the Peace of
the Roman-Church any other before the Reformation. What waste they had, by
Sword and Burnings, made in several parts of Europe, in almost all the chiefest
Nations of it, of mankind; what desolation they had brought by violence upon
those who opposed their rule, or questioned their Doctrine; the blood of
innumerable poor men, many of them learned, all pious and zealous, whom they
called Waldenses, Albigenses, Lollards, Wicklevites, Hussites, Caliptives,
Subutraguians, Picards, or what else they pleased, (being indeed the faithful
witnesses of the Lord Christ and his Truths) will at the last Day reveal.
Besides, the event declared, how remote the minds of millions* were from an
acquiescency in that Conspiracy in the Papal Sovereignty, which was grown to be
the Bond of Communion amongst those who called themselves the Church, or an
approbation of that Doctrine and Worship which they made profession of. For no
sooner was a door of Liberty and Light opened unto them, but whole Nations were
at strife who should first enter in at it; which undoubtedly, all the Nations
of Europe had long since done, had not the holy wise God in his good Providence
suffered in some of them a sword of power and violence to interpose it self
against their entrance. For, whatever may be pretended of Peace and Agreement
to this day, take away force and violence, Prisons and Fagots, and in one day,
the whole compages of that stupendous Fabric of the Papacy, will be
dissolved; and the life, which will be maintained in it, springing only from
secular advantages and inveterate prejudices, would together with them decay,
and disappear. Neither can any thing, but a confidence of the ignorance of men
in all things that are past, yea, in what was done almost by their own
Grandsyres, give countenance to a man in his own silent thoughts, for such
insinuations of quietness in the World before the Reformation. The Wars,
Seditions, Rebellions, and Tumults, (to omit private practices) that were
either raised, occasioned, and countenanced by the Pope's absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, Kings and States from their Oaths given mutually for the
securing of Peace between them, all in the pursuit of their own worldly
interests, do fill up a good part of the Stories of some ages before the
Reformation. What ever then is pretended, things were not so peaceable and
quiet in those days, as they are now represented to men that mind only things
that are present; nor was their Agreement their virtue, but their sin and
misery; being centred in blindness and ignorance, and cemented with blood.

V. That the first Reformers were most of them sorry contemptible Persons,
whose Errors were propagated by indirect means, and entertained for sinister
ends; is in several places of this Book alleged, and consequences pretended
thence to ensue, urged and improved. But the truth is, the more contemptible
the Persons were that begun the work, the greater glory and luster is reflected
on the work it self; which points out to an higher cause then any appeared
outwardly for the carrying of it on. It is no small part of the Gospels glory,
that being promulgated by persons whom the World looked on with the greatest
contempt and scorn imaginable, as men utterly destitute of whatever was by them
esteemed noble or honorable; it prevailed notwithstanding in the minds of men,
to eradicate the inveterate prejudices received by Tradition from their
Fathers; to overthrow the ancient and outward glorious Worship of the Nations;
and to bring them into subjection unto Christ. Neither can any thing be written
with more contempt and scorn, nor with greater under-valuation of the
abilities, or outward condition of the first Reformers, then was spoken and
written by the greatest and wisest and learned of men of old, concerning the
Preachers and Planters of Christianity. Should I but repeat the biting
Sarcasms, contemptuous reproaches and scorns wherewith, with plausible
pretenses, the Apostles and those that followed them in their work of preaching
the Gospel were entertained by Celsus, Lucian, Porphyry, Julian, Hierocles,
with many more, men learned and wise; I could easily manifest how short our new
Masters come of them in facetious wit, beguiling eloquence, and fair pretenses,
when they seek by stories, jestings, calumnies, and false reports, to expose
the first Reformers to the contempt and scorn of men, who know nothing of them
but their names, and those as covered with all the dirt they can possibly cast
upon them. But I intend not to tempt the Atheistical wits of any, to an
approbation of their sin, by that compliance which the vain fancies of such men
do usually afford them, in the contemplation of the wit and ingenuity, as they
esteem it, of plausible calumnies. The Scripture may be heard; that abundantly
testifies, that the Character given of the first Reformers as men, poor,
unlearned, seeking to advantage themselves by the troubling of others, better,
greater and wiser than they, in their Religion, was received of the Apostles,
Evangelists, and other Christians in the first budding of Christianity. But the
truth is, all these are but vain pretenses; those knew of old, and these do
now, that the Persons whom they vilify and scorn, were eminently fitted of God
for the work that they were called unto.

The receiving of their Opinions for sinisters end, reflects principally on
this Kingdom of England; and must do so, whilst the surmises of a few
interested Friars shall be believed by Englishmen, before the solemn
Protestation of so renowned a King, as he was, who first casheer'd the Popes
Authority in this Nation; For, what he being alive avowed on his Royal word,
and vowed as in the sight of the Almighty God, was an effect of Light and
Conscience in him, they will needs have to be a consequent of his lust and
levity. And what honor it is to the Royal Government of this Nation, to have
those who swayed the Scepter of it, but a few years ago, publicly traduced and
exposed to obloquy by the Libellous Pens of obscure and unknown persons, wise
men may be easily able to judge. This I am sure, there is little probability
that they should have any real regard or reverence for the present Rulers,
farther then they find, or hope that they shall have their countenance and
assistance for the furtherance of their private Interest, who so revile their
Predecessors, for acting contrary unto it; And this Loyalty the Kings Majesty
may secure himself of, from the most Seditious Fanatic in the Nation; so
highly is he beholding to these men, for their duty and obedience.

VI. That our departure from Rome has been the cause of all our Evils, and
particularly of all those Divisions, which are at this day found amongst
Protestants, and which have been since the Reformation, is a supposition, that
not only insinuates it self into the hidden Sophistry of our Authors Discourse,
but is also every where spread over the face of it; with as little truth, or
advantage to his purpose, as those that went before. So the Pagans judged the
Primitive Christians, so also did the Jews, and do to this day. Here is no new
task lies before us. The Answers given of old to them, and yet continued to be
given, will suffice to these men also. The truth is, our Divisions are not the
effect of our Leaving Rome; but of our being there. In the Apostasy of that
Church came upon men all that darkness, and all those prejudices, which cause
many needless Divisions amongst them. And is it any wonder, that men, partly
ledd, partly driven out of the right way, and turned a clean contrary course
for sundry Generations, should upon liberty obtained to return to their old
paths, somewhat vary in their choice of particular Tracts, though they all
agree to travail toward the same place, and in general, steer their course
accordingly. Besides, let men say what they please, the differences amongst the
Protestants that are purely religious, are no other but such as ever were, and,
take away external force, ever will be amongst the best of men, whilst they
know but in part; however they may not be managed with that prudence and
moderation, which it is our duty to use in and about them. Were not the
Consequences of our Differences, which arise merely from our solly and sin, of
more important consideration then our differences themselves, I should very
little value the one or the other; knowing that none of them in their own
nature are such, as to impeach either our present tranquillity, or future
happiness. So that, neither are the Divisions that are among Protestants in
themselves of any importance, nor were they occasioned by their departure from
Rome. That all men are not made perfectly wise, nor do know all things
perfectly, is partly a consequent of their condition in this World, partly, a
fruit of their own lusts, and corruptions; neither to be imputed to the
Religion which they profess, nor to the Rule that they pretend to follow. Had
all those who could not continue in the Profession of the Errors, and Practice
of the Worship of the Church of Rome, and were therefore driven out by violence
and blood from amongst them, been as happy in attending to the Rule that they
chose for their guidance and direction, as they were wise in choosing it; they
had had no other differences among them than what necessarily follow their
concreated different constitutions, complexions, and capacities. It is not the
work of Religion in this world wholly to dispel men's darkness; nor absolutely
to eradicate their distempers; somewhat must be left for Heaven: and that more
is than ought to be, is the fault of Men, and not of the Truth they profess.
That Religion which reveals a sufficient Rule to guide men into Peace, Union,
and all necessary Truth, is not to be blamed, if men in all things follow not
it is direction. Nor are the differences amongst the Protestants, greater than
those amongst the Members of the Roman-Church. The imputation of the Errors and
miscarriages of the Socinians and Quakers unto Protestancy, is of no other
nature then that of Pagans of old, charging the follies, and abominations of
the Gnostics and Valentinians on Christianity. For those that are truly called
Protestants, whose concurrence in the same Confession of Faith, as to all
material points, is sufficient to cast them under one denomination, What evils
I wonder are to be found amongst them as to Divisions, that are not conspicuous
to all in the Papacy? The Princes and Nations of their Profession are, or have
all been engaged in mortal fewds and wars one against another, all the World
over. Their Divines write, as stiffly one against another, as men can do:
mutual accusations of pernicious Doctrines and Practices abound amongst them. I
am not able to guess what place will hold the Books written about their
intestine differences, as our Author does concerning those that are written by
Protestants against the Papacy; but this I know, all public Libraries and
private Studies of learned men abound with them. Their Invectives, Apologies,
Accusations, Charges, underminings of one another, are part of the weekly news
of these days. Our Author knows well enough what I mean. Nor are these the
ways and practices of private men, but of whole Societies and Fraternities;
which, if they are in truth, such as they are by each other represented to be;
it would be the Interest of mankind, to seek the suppression and extermination
of some of them. I profess, I wonder, whilst their own house is so visibly on
fire, that they can find leisure to scold at others for not quenching theirs.
Nor is the remaining agreement that they boast of, one jot better, than either
their own dissentions, or ours. It is not union or agreement amongst men
absolutely, that is to be valued. Simeon and Levi never did worse, then when
they agreed best; and were Brethren in evil. The grounds and reasons of men's
agreement, with the nature of the things wherein they are agreed, are that
which make it either commendable or desirable. Should I lay forth what these
are in the Papacy, our Author I fear would count me unmannerly, and uncivil;
But yet because the matter does so require, I must needs tell him, that many
wise men do affirm, that Ignorance, inveterate prejudice, secular advantages,
and external force, are the chief constitutive Principles of that union and
agreement which remains amongst them. But whatever their evils be, it is
pretended, that they have a remedy at hand for them all: But,

VII. That we have no Remedy of our Evils, no means of ending our Differences,
but by a Returnal to the Roman See. Whether there be any way to end differences
among our selves, as far, and as soon, as there is any need they should be
ended, will be afterward enquired into. This I know, that a Returnal unto R^me
will not do it; unless when we come thither, we can learn to behave our selves
better, then those do, who are there already; and there is indeed no party of
men in the world, but can give us as good security of ending our differences as
the Romanists. If we would all turn Quakers, it would end our Disputes; and
that is all that is provided us, if we will turn Papists. This is the language
of every Party; and for my part I think they believe what they say; Come over
to us, and we shall all agree. Only the Romanists are likely to obtain least
credit as to this matter among wise men, because they cannot agree among
themselves; and are as unfit to umpire the differences of other men, as Philip
of Macedon was to quiet Greece, whilst he, his wife and children* were together
by the ears at home.

But why have not Protestants a remedy for their evils, a means of ending and
making up their differences? They have the Word that is left them for that
purpose, which the Apostles commended unto them, and which the Primitive Church
made use of, and no other. That this will not serve to prevent, or remove any
hurtful differences from amongst us, it is not its fault, but ours. And could
we prevail with Roman Catholics to blame and reprove us, and not to blame the
Religion we profess, we should count our selves beholding to them; and they
would have the less to answer for, another day. But as things are stated, it is
fallen out very unhappily for them; that finding they cannot hurt us, but that
their Weapons must pass through the Scriptures, That is it which they are
forced to direct their blows against. The Scripture is Dark, Obscure,
Insufficient, cannot be known to be the word of God, nor understood, is the
main of their Plea, when they intend to deal with Protestants. I am persuaded,
that they are troubled, when they are put upon this Work: It cannot be
acceptable to the minds of men to be engaged in such undervaluations of the
word of God. Sure, they can have no other mind in this Work, than a man would
have in pulling down hi^ House, to find out his Enemy. He that shall read what
the Scripture testifies of it self, that is, what God does of it; and what the
Ancients speak concerning it, and shall himself have any acquaintance with the
nature and excellency of it, must needs shrink extremely when he comes to see
the Romanists discourse about it; indeed, against it. For my part, I can truly
profess, That no one thing does so alienate my mind from the present Roman
Religion, as this treatment of the word of God. I cannot but think that a sad
profession of Religion, which enforces men to decry the use and excellency of
that, which (let them pretend what they please) is the only infallible
Revelation of all that Truth, by obedience whereunto, we become Christians. I
do heartily pity Learned and Ingenious men, when I see them enforced by a
private corrupt Interest, to engage in this woeful work of undervaluing the word
of God; and so much the more, as that I cannot but hope, that it is a very
ungrateful work to themselves: Did they delight in it, I should have other
thoughts of them; and conclude, that there are more Atheists in the World, than
those whom our Author informs us* to be lately turned so in England. This then
is the Remedy that Protestants have for their evils: This the means of making
up all their differences; which they might do every day, so far as in this
World it is possible that that work should be done amongst men, if it were not
their own fault: That they do not so, blame them still, blame them soundly, lay
on Reproofs till I cry, Hold: but let not, I pray, the word of God be blamed
any more. Methinks I could beg this of a Catholic, especially of my
Contrymen, That whatever they say to Protestants, or however they deal with
them, they would let the Scripture alone, and not decry its worth and
usefulness: It is not Protestants Book, it is Gods; who has only granted them
an use of it, in common with the rest of men: And what is spoken in
disparagement of it, does not reflect on them, but on him that made it, and
sent it to them. It is no Policy, I confess, to discover our secrets to our
Adversaries, whereby they may prevent their own disadvantages for the future:
But yet because I look not on the Romanists as absolute Enemies, I shall let
them know for once, that when Protestants come to that head of their Disputes
or Orations, wherein they contend that the Scripture is so, and so, obscure and
insufficient, they generally take great contentment, to find that their
Religion cannot be opposed, without casting down the word of God from its
excellency, and enthroning somewhat else in the room of it. Let them make what
use of this they please, I could not but tell it them for their good, and I
know it to be true. For the present it comes too late. For, another main
Principle of our Authors Discourse is,

VIII. That the Scripture on sundry accounts is insufficient to settle us in
the Truth of Religion, or to bring us to an agreement amongst our selves; and
that 1. Because it is not to be known to be the word of God, but by the
Testimony of the Roman Church. And then 2. Cannot be well Translated into any
vulgar Language. And is also 3. In its self obscure. And 4. We have no way to
determine of what is its proper sense. Atqui hic est nigrae sumus Caliginis,
haec est Aerugo mera. I suppose they will not tell a Pagan or a Mahumetan this
story: At least I heartily wish that men would not suffer themselves to be so
far transported by their private Interest, as to forget the general
concernments of Christianity. We cannot, say they, know the Scripture to be the
word of God, but by the Authority of the Church of Rome: And all men may easily
assure themselves, that no man had ever known there was such a thing as a
Church; much less that it had any Authority, but by the Scripture. And whither
this tends, is easy to guess. But it will not enter into my head, that we
cannot know or believe the Scripture to be the word of God, any otherwise than
on the Authority of the Church of Rome: The greatest part of it, was believed
to be so, before there was any Church at Rome at all; and all of it is so by
Millions in the World, who make no account of that Church at all. Now some say,
there is such a Church. I wish men would leave persuading us, that we do not
believe what we know we do believe; or that we cannot do that, which we know we
do, and see that millions besides our selves do so too. There are not many
Nations in Europe, wherein there are not Thousands who are ready to lay down
their lives to give testimony, that the Scripture is the word of God, that care
not a rush for the Authority of the present Church of Rome: And what further
evidence they can give that they believe so, I know not. And this they do, upon
that innate evidence, that the word of God has in it self, and gives to its
self, the testimony of Christ, and his Apostles, and the teaching of the Church
of God in all Ages. I must needs say, There is not any thing for which
Protestants are so much beholding to the Roman Catholics as this, That they
have with so much importunacy cast upon them the work of proving the Scripture
to be of Divine Original, or to have been given by inspiration from God. It is
as good a work, as a man can well be employed in: and there is not any thing I
should more gladly en professo engage in, if the nature of my present business
would bear such a Diversion. Our Author would quickly see what an easy Task it
were, to remove those his Reproaches of a private spirit, of an inward
testimony, of our own Reason; which himself knowing the advantage they afford
him amongst vulgar unstudied men, trisles withal. Both Romanists, and
Protestants, as far as I can learn, do acknowledge, That the Grace of the
Spirit, is necessary to enable a man to believe savingly, the Scripture to be
the Word of God, upon what Testimony or Authority soever that faith is founded,
or resolved into. Now this with Protestants is no private Whisper, no
Enthusiasm, no Reason of their own, no particular Testimony, but the most open,
noble, known that is, or can be in the World; even the voice of God himself,
speaking publicly to all, in and by the Scripture, evidencing it self by its
own Divine, innate light, and excellency, taught, confirmed, and testified
unto, by the Church in all Ages; especially the first, founded by Christ and
his Apostles. He that looks for better, or other Testimony, Witness, or
Foundation to build his faith upon, may search till Doomsday without success.
He that renounceth this, shakes the very root of Christianity, and opens a door
to Atheism and Paganism. This was the Anchor of Christians of old, from which
neither the Storms of Persecution could drive them, nor the subtilty of
Disputations entise them. For men to come now in the end of the World, and to
tell us, That we must rest in the Authority of the present Church of Rome, in
our receiving the Scripture to be the word of God; and then to tell us, That
that Church has all its Authority by, and from, the Scripture; and to know
well enough all the while, that no man can know there is any Church, or any
Church Authority, but by the Scripture, is to speak Daggers and Swords to us,
upon a confidence that we will suffer our selves to be befooled, that we may
have the after-pleasure of making others like our selves.

Of the Translation of the Scripture into vulgar Tongues, I shall expressly
treat afterward, and therefore here pass it over.

3. Its Obscurity is another thing insisted on, and highly exaggerated by our
Author. And this is another thing that I greatly wonder at: For as wise as
these Gentlemen would be thought to be, he that has but half an eye, may
discern, that they consider not with whom they have to do in this matter. The
Scripture I suppose, they will grant to be given by inspiration from God; if
they deny it, we are ready to prove it at any time. I suppose also that they
will grant, That the end why God gave it, was, that it might be a Revelation of
himself, so far as it was needful for us to know him, and his mind, and will,
so that we may serve him. If this were not the end for which God gave his Word
unto us, I wish they would acquaint us with some other. I think it was not,
that it might be put into a Cabinet, and locked up in a Chest: If this were the
end of it; then God intended in it, to make a Revelation of himself, so far as
it was necessary we should know of Him, and his Mind, and Will, that we might
serve him. For that which is any one end of any Thing, or Matter, That he
intends, which is the Author of it: Now if God intended to make such a
Revelation on of Himself, his Mind, and Will, in giving of the Scripture, as
was said; he has either done it plainly, that is, without any such Obscurity,
as should frustrate him of his end, or he has not; and that because either he
would not, or he could not: I wish I knew which of these it was, that the Roman
Catholics do fix upon; it would spare me the labor of speaking to the other:
But seeing I do not; that they may have no evasion, I will consider them both.
If they say, It was because he could not make any such plain Discovery and
Revelation of himself, then this is that they say: That God intending to reveal
Himself, his Mind, and Will, plainly in the Scripture to the sons of men, was
not able to do it, and therefore failed in his Design: This works but little to
the glory of his Omnipotency, and Omnisciency. But to let that pass, wherein
men (so they may compass their own ends) seem not to be much concerned: I
desire to know, Whether this plain sufficient Revelation of God, be made any
other way, or no? If no otherwise, then, as I confess we are all in the Dark;
so it is to no purpose to blame the Scripture of Obscurity, seeing it is as
lightsom as any thing else is, or can be. If this Revelation be made some other
way, it must be by God himself, or some body else: That any other should be
supposed in good earnest to do that which God cannot (though I know how some
Canonists have jested about the Pope) I think will not be pleaded: If God then
has done this another way, I desire to know the true reason why he could not
do it this way; namely, by the Scripture, and therefore desisted from his
purpose? But it may be thought God could make a Revelation of Himself, his
Mind, and Will, in and by the Scripture, yet he would not do it plainly, but
Obscurely: Let us then see what we mean by plainly in this business. We intend
not, that every Text in Scripture is easy to be understood; nor that all the
matter of it is easy to be apprehended: We know that there are things in it
hard to be understood, things to exercise the minds of the best, and wisest of
men unto Diligence, and when they have done their utmost, unto Reverence. But
this is that we mean by plainly; The whole Will and Mind of God, with whatever
is needful to be known of him, is revealed in the Scripture, without such
Ambiguity or Obscurity, as should hinder the Scripture from being a Revelation
of him, his Mind, and Will; to the end, that we may know him, and live unto
him. To say that God would not do this, would not make such a Revelation
(besides the reflection that it casts on his Goodness and Wisdom) is indeed to
say, that he would not do that, which we say he would do. The truth is, all the
Harangues we meet withal about the Obscurity of the Scripture, are direct
Arraignments of the Wisdom and Goodness of God. And if I were worthy to advise
my Roman-Catholick-Countreymen, I would persuade them to desist from this
Enterprise; if not in Piety, at least in Policy: For, I can assure them, as I
think I have done already, that all their endeavors for the extenuation of the
Worth, Excellency, Fullness, Sufficiency of the Scripture, do exceedingly
confirm Protestants in the truth of their present persuasion; which they see
cannot be touched, but by such horrible Applications as they detest.

4. But yet they say, Scripture is not so clear, but that it needs
interpretation; and Protestants have none to interpret it, so as to make it a
means of ending differences, I confess, the interpretation of Scripture is a
good and necessary work; and I know, that he who was dead, and is alive for
ever, continues to give gifts unto men, according to his Promise, to enable
them to interpret the Scripture, for the edification of his Body the Church. If
there were none of these Interpreters among the Protestants, I wonder whence it
is come to pass, that his Comments on, and interpretations of Scripture, who is
most hated by Romanists of all the Protestants that ever were in the World, are
so borrowed, and used (that I say not stolen) by so many of them: And that
indeed what is praiseworthy in any of their Church, in the way of Exposition
of Scripture, is either borrowed from Protestants, or done in imitation of
them. If I am called on for instances in this kind, I shall give them, I am
persuaded, to some men's amazement, who are less conversant in these things. But
we are besides the matter: It is of an infallible Interpreter, in whose
Expositions and Determinations of Scripture-sense, all Christians are obliged
to acquiesce, and such an one you have none. I confess we have not, if it be
such an one as you intend; whose Expositions and Interpretations we must
acquiesce in: not because they are true, but because they are his. We have
infallible Expositions of the Scripture in all necessary Truths, as we are
assured from the Scripture it self: But an infallible Expositor, into whose
Authority our faith should be resolved, besides the Scripture it self, we have
none: Nor do I think they have any at Rome, whatever they talk of to men that
were never there; nor (I suppose) do they believe it themselves: for indeed if
they do, I know not how they can be freed, from being thought to be strangely
distempered, if not stark mad: For not to talk of the Tower of London, this I
am sure of, That we have whole Cart loads of Comments and Expositions on the
Scripture, written by Members of the Church, men of all Orders and Degrees; and
he that has cast an eye upon them, knows, that a great part of their large
Volumes, are spent in confuting the Expositions of one another, and those that
went before them. Now wh^t a madness is this, or childishness, above that of
very Children, to lie swaggering and contending one with another, before all
the World, with fallible Mediums about the sense of Scripture, and giving
Expositions, which no man is bound to acquiesce in, any further than he sees
Reason; whilst all this while they have One amongst them, who can infallibly
interpret all; and that with such an Authority, as all men are bound to rest
in, and contend no further? And the further mischief of it is, That of all the
rest, This man is always silent, as to Exposition of Scripture, who alone is
able to part the fray. There be two things, which I think verily, if I were a
Papist, I should never like in the Pope; because methinks they argue a great
deal of want of good nature: The one is (that we treat about) That he can see
his Children so fiercely wrangle about the sense of Scripture, and yet will not
give out what is the infallible meaning of every place, at least that is
controverted, and so stint the strife amongst them, seeing it seems he can if
he would. And the other is, That he suffers so many souls to lie in Purgatory,
when he may let them forth if he please; and (that I know of) has received no
order to the contrary. But the truth is, That neither the Romanists, nor we,
have any infallible living Judge, in whose determination of the sense of
Scripture, all men should be bound to acqu^esce, upon the account of his
Authority: This is all the difference: We openly profess we have none such, and
betake us to that which we have, which is better for us; They pretending they
have, yet acting constantly as if they had not, and as indeed they have not;
maintain a perpetual inconsistency, and contradiction between their
Pretentions, and their Practice. The holy Ghost, speaking in and by the
Scripture, using the Ministry of men furnished by himself, with gifts and
abilities, and lawfully called to the Work* for the oral Declaration, or other
Expositions of his mind, is that which the Protestants cleave unto, for the
interpreting of the Scripture; which its self discovers, when infallible. And
if Papists can tell me of a better way, I will quickly embrace it. I suppose I
may, upon the considerations we have had of the reasons offered to prove the
insufficiency of Scripture, to settle us in the Truth, and to end our
differences, conclude their insufficiency to any such purpose. We know, the
Scripture was given us, to settle us in the Truth, and to end our differences;
we know, it is profitable to that end and purpose, and able to make us wise to
salvation. If we find not these effects wrought in our selves, it is our own
fault; and I desire that for hereafter, we may bear our own blame, without such
Reflections on the holy Word of the Infinitely Blessed God.

IX. We are come at length unto the Pope, of whom we are told, That He is a
good man, One that seeks nothing but our good, that never did us harm, but has
the care, and inspection of us committed unto him by Christ. For my part, I am
glad to hear such news of him, and should be more glad to find it to be true.
Our Forefathers and Predecessors in the faith we profess, found it otherwise.
All the harm that could be done unto them, by ruining their Families,
destroying their Estates, imprisoning, and torturing their Persons, and lastly,
burning their Bodies in fire, they received at his hands. If the alteration
pretended, be not from the shortning of his Power, but the change of his Mind
and Will, I shall be very glad to hear of it. For the present, I confess, I had
rather take it for granted, whilst he is at this distance, than see him
trusted with Power, for the trial of his Will. I never heard of much of his
Repentance, for the Blood of those Thousands that has been shed by his
Authority, and in his Cause; which makes me suspect, he may be somewhat of the
same mind still, as he was. Time was, when the very worst of Popes exhausted
more Treasure out of this Nation, to spend it ab^oad to their own ends, th^^
some a^e willing to grant to the best of Kings, to spend at home for their
goods. I^ may be, he is changed, as to this Design also, but I do not know it;
nor is any p^oof offered of it, by our Autho^. Let us deal plainly one with
another, and (without telling us, That the Pope never did us harm, which is not
the way to make us believe, that he will not; because it makes us suspect, that
all we have suffered from him, is thought no harm) let him tell us how he will
assure us, That if this good Pope get us into his Power again, he will not burn
us, as he did our Forefathers, unless we submit our Consciences unto him in
all things; That he will not find out ways to draw the Treasure out of the
N^tion, nor absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, nor excommunicate, or
attempt the Deposition of our Kings, or the giving away of their Kingdoms, as
he has done in former days? That these things he has done, we know; that he
has repented of them, and changed his mind thereupon, we know not. To have any
thing to do with him, whilst he continues in such Distempers is not only
against the Principles of Religion, but of common Prudence also. For my part, I
cannot but fear, until I see Security tendered of this change in the Pope, that
all the good words that are given us concerning him, are but Baits to enveigle
us into his Power; and to tell you the truth terrent vestigia. How the Pope
imployes himself in seeking our good, which our Author paints out unto us, I
know not; when I see the effects of it, I shall be thankful for it. In the mean
time, being so great a stranger to Rome, as I am, I must needs say, I know
nothing that he does, but seek to destroy us, Body and Soul. Our Author pleads
indeed, That the care and inspection of our condition, is committed to him by
Christ: But he attempts not to prove it, which I somewhat marvel at: For having
professedly deserted the old way of pleading the Catholic Cause and Interest,
(which I presume he did, upon conviction of its insufficiency) whereas he is an
ingenious Person he could not but know, that Pasce ove^ meas, Tu es Petrus,
Tibi dabo claves, are as weak parts of the old Plea, as any made use of;
belonging nothing at all to the thing, whereunto they are applied; it is
somewhat strange, that he would substitute no new Proofs in their room. But, it
seems, it is not every ones h^p, with him of old, to want Opinions sometimes,
but no Arguments. When he has got Proofs to his purpose, we will again attend
unto him: In the mean time, in this case shall only mind him, That the taking
for granted in Disputations, that which should principally be proved, h^s got
an ill name amongst Learned men, being commonly called Begging.

X. The last Principle which I have observed, diffusing its influences
throughout the whole Discourse, is, That the Devotion of Catholics, far
transcends that of Protestants: Their Preaching also (which I forgot to mention
before) is far to be preferred above that of these: And for their Religion and
Worship, it is liable to no just exception. I desire that our Author would but
a little call to mind that Parable of our Savior, about the two men that went
up into the Temple to pray. To me this discourse smells rank of the Pharisee,
and I wish that we might all rather strive to grow in Faith, Love, Charity,
Self-denial, and universal Conformity unto our Lord Jesus; than to bristle up,
and cry, Stand further off, for I am holier than thou. In the mean time, for
the respect I bear him, I entreat our Author to speak no more of this matter,
lest some angry Protestant, or some Fanatic should take occasion to talk of
old matters, and rip up old sores, or give an account of the present state of
things in the Church of Rome; all which were a great deal better covered. If he
will not take my advice, he must thank himself for that, which will assuredly
follow. I must also say, by the way, That that Devotion, which consists so
much, as our Author makes it to do, in the sweeping of Churches, and tinckling
of Bells; in counting of Beads, and knocking of Breasts, is of very little
value with Protestants, who have obtained an experience of the excellency of
Spiritual communion with God in Christ Jesus. Now whether these parts of the
Profession and Practice of his Church, which he is pleased to undertake, not
only the Vindication, but the Adorning of, be liable to just exception or no,
is the last part of our work to consider; and which shall in its proper place
be done accordingly.

As I before observed, He that shall but cursorily run through this Discourse,
will quickly find, that these false Suppositions, ungrounded Presumptions, and
unwarrantable Pretensions, are the things which are disposed of, to be the
Foundations, Nerves, and Sinews of all the Rhetoric that it is covered and
wrought withal; and that the bare drawing of them out, leaves all the
remaining Flourishes in a more scattered condition, than the Sybils leaves;
which no man can gather up, and put together, to make up any significancy at
all, as to the Design in hand. I might then well spare all further labor, and
here put a Period to my Progress; and indeed would do so; were I secure I had
none to deal with, but Ingenious, and Judicious Readers; that have some to
tolerable acquaintance at least, with the estate of Religion of old, and at
present in Europe, and with the concernment of their own souls in these things.
But that no pretense may be left unto any, that we avoided any thing material
in our Author: Having passed through his Discourse unto the end of it, I shall
once more return to the beginning, and pass through its severals, leaving
behind in the way, such Animadversions as are any way needful to rescue such as
have not a mind to be deceived, from the Snares and Cobwebs of his Oratory.

CHAP. III.
Motive, Matter, and Method of our Author's Book.

WHat remains of our Author's Preface is spent in the persuit of an easy task
in all the branches of it. To condemn the late Miscarriages in these Nations,
to decry Divisions in Religion, with their pernicious consequences, to commend
my Lord Chancellour's Speech; are things that have little difficulty in them,
to exercise the skill of a man pretending so highly as our Author does. He may
secure himself, that he will find no opposition about these things from any man
in his right wits. No other man certainly can be so forsaken of Religion and
Humanity, as not to deplore the woeful undertakings and more woeful issues of
sundry things, whereunto the concernments of Religion have been pleaded to give
countenance. The rancour also of men, and wrath against one another on the same
accounts, with the fruits which they bring forth all the world over, are
doubtless a burden to the minds of all that love Truth and Peace. To prevent a
returnal to the former, and remove or at least allay the latter, how
excellently the speech of that great Counselor, and the things proposed in
it, are suited; all sober and ingenious men must needs acknowledge. Had this
then been the whole design of this Preface, I had given his Book many an Amen,
before I had come to the end. But our Author having wholly another mark in his
eye, another business in hand, I should have thought it a little uncivil in
him, to make my Lord Chancellour's Speech seemingly subservient to that which
he never intended, never aimed at, which no word or expression in it leads
unto; but that I find him afterward so dealing with the words of God himself.
His real work in this compass of words, is to set up a blind, or give a false
alarm, to arrest and stay his unwary Reader, whilst he prepares him for an
entertainment which he thought not of, The pretense he flourishes over both in
the Preface and sundry other parts of his Discourse, is, the hatefulness of our
Animosities in and about Religion, their dismal Effects, with the necessity and
excellency of Moderation in things of that nature; the real work in hand is, a
Persuasive unto Popery, and, unto that end (not of moderation, or forbearance)
are all his Arguments directed. Should a man go to him, and say, Sir, I have
read your learned Book, and find that heats, and contests, about differences in
Religion are things full of evil, and such as tend unto further misery; I am
therefore resolved quietly to persist in the way of Protestancy wherein I am,
without ever attempting the least violence against others for their dissent
from me, but only with meekness and quietness defend the Truth which I profess;
I presume, he will not judge his design half accomplished toward such a man,
if at all. Nay, I dare say with some confidence, that in reference to such a
one, he would say to himself, Op^ram and Oleum p^rdidi. And therefore does he
wisely tell us, page 12. that his matter is perceived by the prefixed general
Contents of his Chapters, his Design which he calls his Method, he confesses
that he does purposely conceal. But the truth is, it is easily discoverable,
there being few pages in the Book, that do not display it.

The Reader then must understand, that the plain English of all his
Commendations of Moderation, and all his Exhortations to a relinquishment of
those false Lights and Principles, which have lead men to a disturbance of the
Public Peace, and ensuing Calamities, is, that Popery is the only Religion in
the world, and that centring therein is the only means to put an end to our
differences, heats, and troubles. Unless this be granted, it will be very hard
to find one grain of sincerity in the whole Discourse: and if it be; no less
difficult to find so much of Truth. So that whatever may be esteemed suitable
to the fancies of any of them whom our Author courts in his Address, those who
know any thing of the holiness of God and the Gospel, of that Reverence which
is due to Christ and his Word, and wherewith all the concernments of Religion
ought to be managed, will scarsely judge, that, that blessed Fountain of Light
and Truth will immixe his pure beams and blessing, with such crafty, worldly,
sophistical devices; or such frothy ebullitions of Wit and Fancy as this
Discourse is stuffed withal. These are things, that may be fit to entangle
unstable spirits, who being regardless of Eternity, and steering their course
according to every blast of temptation, that fills their lusts and carnal
pleasures, are as ready to change their Religion (it men can make any change
in, or of, that which in reality they neither leave nor receive, but only sport
themselves to and fro with the cloud and shadow of it) as they are their
clothes and fashions. Those who have had experience of the power and efficacy
of that Religion which they have professed; as to all the ends for which
Religion is of God revealed, will be little moved, with the Stories, Pretenses
and Diversions of this Discourse.

Knowing, therefore, our Author's design, (and which we shall have occasion to
deal with him about, throughout his Treatise) which is to take advantage from
the late miscarriages amongst us, and the differences that are in the world in
Religion, to persuade men not indeed and ultimately to mutual moderation and
forbearance, but to a general acquiescency in the Roman-Catholicism, I shall
not here further speak unto it. The five Heads of his matter may be briefly run
over as he proposes* them, page 13. with whose consideration I shall take my
leave of his Preface.

The first is, That there is not any color of Reason, or just Title, to move
us to quarrel and judge one another, with so much heat about Religion* Indeed
there is not; nor can there be: no man was ever so madd as to suppose there
could be any reason or just Title for men to do evil; To quarrel and judge one
another with heats about Religion, is of that nature. But, if, placing himself,
to keep a decorum, amongst* Protestants, he would insinuate, that we have no
reason to contend about Religion, as having lost all Title unto it by our
departure from Rome, I must take leave unto this general head, to put in a
general Demurrer; which I shall afterward plead to, and vindicate.

His second is, That all things are so obscure, that no man in prudence can so
far presume of his own knowledge, as to set up himself a guide and leader in
Religion. I say so too; and suppose the words as they lie, whatever be intended
in them, are keenly set against the great Papal pretension: whatever he may
pretend, we know, the Pope sets up himself to be a guide to all men in
Religion; and, if he do it not upon a presumption of his own knowledge, we know
not on what better grounds he does it. And though we wholly condemn men's
setting up themselves to be Guides and Leaders to their Neighbors; yet, if he
intend, that all things are so obscure, that we have no means to come to the
knowledge of the Truth concerning God and his mind, so far as it is our duty to
know it; and therefore, that no man can teach or instruct another in that
knowledge; I say, as before, we are not yet of his mind: whether we shall be or
no, the process of our Discourse will show.

3. He adds, That no Sect has any advantage at all over another, nor all of
them together over Popery. Yes; They that have the Truth, wherein they have it,
have advantage against all others that have it not. And so Protestancy has
advantage over Popery. And here, the Pretext or Vizor of this Protestant begins
to turn aside: in the next head, it quite falls from him.

That is, (4.) That all the several kinds of Religion here in England, are
equally innocent to one another; And Popery, as it stands in opposition to
them, is absolutely innocent and unblameable to them all. I am little concerned
in the former part of these words, concerning the several kinds of Religion in
England, having undertaken the defense of one only; namely, Protestancy. Those
that are departed from Protestancy so far as to constitute another kind of
Religion; as to any thing from me, shall plead for themselves. However I wish,
that all parties in England were all equally innocent to one another, or that
they would not be willing to make themselves equally nocent. But the latter
part of the words contain, I promise you, a very high undertaking. Popery is
innocent, absolutely innocent and unblameable to them all. I fear we shall
scarce find it so, when we come to the trial. I confess I do not like this
pretense of absolute innocence and unblameableness. I suppose, they are Men
that profess Popery, and I do know that Popery is a Religion or Profession of
men's finding out; how it should come to be so absolutely innocent on a sudden,
I cannot imagine: but we will leave this until we come to the proof of it,
taking notice only, that here is a great promise made unto his noble and
ingenious Readers, that cannot advantage his cause, if he be not able to make
it good. The close is,

5. That as there neither is, nor can be any rational motive for Disputes and
Animosities about matters of Religion; so is there an indispensable moral
cause, obliging us to moderation, etc. But this, as I observed before, though
upon the first view of the sign hanging up at the door, a man would guess to be
the whole work that was doing in the house, is indeed no part of his business;
and is therefore thrust out at the postern, in two short leaves, the least part
of them, in his own words after the spending of 364 pages in the pursuit of his
proper design. But, seeing we must look over these things again, in the
Chapters assigned to their adorning, we may take our leave of them at present,
and of his Preface together.

CHAP. V.
and Chap. I. Contests about Religion and Reformation, Schoolmen, etc.

THe Title of this Chapter was proposed; the persuit of it, now ensues. The
first Paragraph is a declamation about sundry things which have not much
blameworthy in them. Their common weakness is, that they are common. They tend
not to the furtherance of any one thing more then another; but are such as any
Party may flourish withal, and use to their several ends as they please. That,
desire of honor and applause in the world, has influenced the minds of men to
great and strange Undertakings, is certain. That it should do so, is not
certain, nor true: so, that when we treat of Religion, if we renounce not the
Fundamental Principle of it in Self-denial, this consideration ought to have no
place. What then was done by Emperors and Philosophers of old, or by the later
Schoolmen on this account, we are little concerned in. Nor have I either
desire or design to vellicate any thing spoken by our Author, that may have an
indifferent interpretation put upon it; and be separated from the end which he
principally persues. As there is but very little spoken in this Paragraph,
directly tending to the whole end aimed at, so there are but three things, that
will any way serve to leaven the mind of his Reader, that he may be prepared to
be molded into the form he has fancyed to cast him into, which is the work of
all these previous Harangues.

The first is his in^^nuation, That the Reformation of Religion is a thing
pretended by aemulous Plebeians, not able to hope for that Supervisorship in
Religion which they see entrusted with others. How unserviceable this is unto
his Design as applied to the Church of England, all men know; for setting aside
the consideration of the influence of Sovereign Royal Authority, the first
Reformers amongst us, were persons who as they enjoyed the right of Reputation
for the Excellencies of Learning and Wisdom; so also were they fixed in those
places and conditions in the Church, which no Reformation could possibly
advance them above; and the attempt whereof cost them not only their dignities,
but their lives also. Neither were Hezekiah, Josiah, or Ezra, of old, aemulous
plebeians, whose lasting glory and renown arose from their Reformation of
Religion. They who fancy men in all great undertakings to be steered by desire
of applause and honor, are exceeding incompetent judges of those actions which
zeal for the glory of God, love to the Truth, sense of their duty to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and compassion for the souls of others, do lead men unto, and
guide them in; and such will the last Day manifest the Reformation traduced to
have been.

The Second, is a gallant commend^tion of the Ingenuity, Charity, Candor, and
sublime Science of the Schoolmen. I confess, they have deserved good words at
his hands: These are the men, who out of a mixture of Philosophy, Traditions,
and Scripture^ all corrupted and perverted, have hamm^^ed that faith, which was
afterward confirmed under so many Anathemaes at Trent. So that upon the
matter, he is beholden to them for his Religion; which I find he loves, and
has therefore reason to be thankful to its Contrivers. For my part, I am as
far from envying them their commendation, as I have reason to be, which I am
sure is far enough. But yet before we admit this Testimony, hand over head; I
could wish he would take a course to stop the mouths of some of his own Church,
and those no small ones neither, who have declared them to the world, to be a
pack of egregious Sophisters, neither good Philosophers, nor any Divines at
all; men who seem not to have had the least reverence of God, nor much regard
to the Truth in any of their Disputations, but we^^ wholly influenced by a vain
Reputation of Subtility, desire of Conquest, of leading and denominating
Parties, and that in a Barbarous Science, barbarously expressed, until they
had driven all Learning and Divinity almost out of the World. But I will not
contend about these Fathers of Contention: let every man esteem of them as he
seems good.

There is the same respect, in that bitter reflection which he makes on those,
who have managed differences in Religion in this last Age, the Third thing
observable. That they are the Writers, and Writings that have been published
against the Papacy which he intends; he does more than intimate. Their
Disputes, he rells us, are managed with so much unseemly behavior, such
unmanerly expressions, that discreet sobriety cannot but loath, and abhor to
read them; with very much more to this purpose. I shall not much labor to
persuade men not to believe what he says in this matter; for I know full well,
that he believes it not himself. He has seen too many Protestant Books, I
suppose, to think this Cen^^re will suit them all. This was meet to be spoken,
for the advantage of the Catholic cause: for what there has been of real
offense in this kind amongst us, we may say, Iliacos intra muros peccatur et
extra; Romanists are Sinners as well as others: And I suppose himself knows.
That the Reviling, and Defamations used by some of his Party, are not to be
paralleld in any Writings of mankind at this day extant.

About the Appellatio^s he shall think meet to make use of, in reference to the
Persons at variance, we will not contend with him: Only I desire to let him
know, That the reproach of Galilean from the Pagans, which he appropriates to
the Papists, was worn out of the World, before that Popery which he pleads for,
came into it. As Roman Catholics never tasted of the sufferings wherewith that
Reproach was attended, so they have no special right to the honor that is in
its remembrance. As to the sport he is pleased to make with his Contrymen,
in the close of this Paragraph, about losing their wits in Religious contests,
with the evils thence ensuing, I shall no further reflect upon; but once more
to mind the Reader, that the many words he is pleased to use in the
exaggerating the evils of mannaging differences in Religion with animosities
and tumults, so seemingly to persuade men to moderation and peace, I shall
wholly pass by, as having discovered, that that is not his business, nor
consequently at present, mine.

It is well observed by him in his second Paragraph, that most of the great
Contests in the world about perishing things, proceed from the unmortified
lusts of men. The Scripture abounds in Testimonies given hereunto: St. James
expressly; From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence
even of your lusts that war in your members? ye lust and have not, ye kill and
desire to have, and cannot obtain; you fight and war, yet you have not, chap.
4.1, 2. Men's lusts put them on endless irregularities, in unbounded desires,
and foolish sinful enterprises for their satisfaction. Neither is Satan the old
Enemy of the welfare of mankind wanting to excite, provoke, and stir up these
lusts by mixing himself with them in his temptations, thrusting them on, and
intangling them in their persuit. As to the Contests about Religion, which I
know not with what mind or intention he terms an empty airy business, a ghostly
fight, a skirmish of Shaddows or Horsemen in the clouds, he knows not what
principle, cause, or sourse, to aso^ibe them unto; That which he is most
inclinable unto, is, That there is something invisible above man, stronger and
more politic then he, that does this contumely to mankind, that casts in these
Apples of Contention amongst us, that hisses us to war and battle, as waggish
Boys do Dogs in the street. That which is intended in these words, and sundry
others of the like quality that follow, is, that this arises from the
intisements and impulsions of the Devil. And none can doubt, but that in these
works of darkness, the Prince of Darkness has a great hand. The Scripture also
assures us, that as the Scorpions which vexed the world issued out of the
bottomless pit, so also that these unclean spirits do stir up the powers of the
Earth to make opposition unto the Truth of the Gospel, and Religion of Jesus
Christ. But yet neither does this hinder, but that even these religious fewds
and miscarriages also, proceed principally from the ignorance, darkness, and
lusts of men* In them lies the true cause of all dissentions in and about the
things of God. The best know but in part, and the most love darkness more than
light, because their works are evils. A vain conversation received by tradition
from men's fathers; with inveterate prejudices, love of the world, and the
customs thereof, do all help on this s^d work wherein so many are employed.
That some preach the Gospel of God (...) with all their strength, in much
contention, and contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints;
as it is their duty, so it is no cause, but only an accidental occasion, of
differences amongst men. That the invisible substances our Author talks of,
should be able to sport themselves with us as Children do with Dogs in the
street, and that with the like impulse from them, as Dogs from these, we should
rush into our contentions, might pass for a pretty notion, but only that it
over-throws all Religion in the world, and the whole nature of man. There is
evil enough in corrupted nature to produce all these evils which are declaimed
against to the end of this Section, were there no Demons to excite men unto
them. The adventitious impressions from them, by temptations and suggestions,
doubtless promote them, and make men precipitate above their natural tempers in
their productions; but the principal cause of all our evils is still to be
looked for at home, Nec te quaesiveris extra.

Sect. 3. Page 34. In the next Section of this Chapter whereunto he prefixes,
Nullity of Title, he persues the persuasive unto Peace, Moderation, Charity,
and Quietness, in our several persuasions, with so many reasonings, and good
words, that a man would almost think that he began to be in good earnest, and
that those were the things which he intended for their own sakes to promote. I
presume, it cannot but at the first view seem strange to some, to find a man of
the Roman party so ingeniously arguing against the imposition of our senses in
Religion magisterially and with violence one upon the other; it being
notoriously known to all the world, that they are, if not the only, yet the
greatest Imposers on the minds and consciences of men that ever lived in the
earth; and which work they cease not the prosecution of, where they have power,
until they come to fire and faggot. I dare say, there is not any strength in any
of his queries, collections, and arguings, but an indifferent man would think
it at the first sight to be pointed against the Roman interest and practice.
For what have they been doing for some ages past, but under a pretense of
Charity to the souls of men, endeavoring to persuade them to their Opinions
and Worship, or to impose them on them whether they will or no? But let old
things pass; it is well if now at last they begin to be otherwise minded. What
then, if we should take this Gentleman at his word, and cry, A match; let us
strive and contend no more; Keep you your Religion at Rome to your selves, and
we will do as well as we can with ours in England; we will trouble you no more
about yours, nor pray do not you meddle with us or ours. Let us pray for one
another, wait on God for light and direction, it being told us, that If any one
be otherwise minded, (than according to the Truth) God shall reveal that unto
him. Let us all strive to promote Godliness, Obedience to the Commands of
Christ, Good works, and Peace in the world; but for this contending about
Opinions, or endeavoring to impose our several persuasions upon one another,
let us give it quite over. I fear he would scarsely close with us, and so wind
up all our Differences upon the bottom of his own Proposals; especially, if
this Law should extend it is self to all other Nations equally concerned with
England. He would quickly tell us, that this is our mistake; he intended not
Roman Catholics, and the differences we have with them in this Discourse; It
is Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, that he
deals with all, and them only, and that upon this ground, that none of them have
any Title or pretense of Reason to impose on one another, and so ought to be
quiet, and let one another alone in matters of Religion. But for the
Roman Catholics, they are not concerned at all in this Harangue, having a
sufficient Title to impose upon them all. Now truly, if this be all, I know not
what we have to thank you for, Tantumne est otii tibi abs re tua, aliena ut
cures, eaque quae ad te nihil at tinent? There are wise and learned men in
England, who are concerned in our differences, and do labor to compose them or
suppress them. That this Gentleman should come and justle them aside, and
impose himself an Umpire upon us, without our choice or desire, in matters that
belong not unto him, how charitable it may seem to be, I know not; but it is
scarsely civil. Would, he would be persuaded to go home, and try his remedies
upon the distempers of his own family, before he confidently vend them to us. I
know he has no Salves about him to heal diversities of Opinions, that he can
write Probatum est upon, from his Roman-Church. If he have, he is the most
uncharitable man in the world, to leave them at home brawling, and together by
the ears; to seek out practice where he is neither desired, nor welcome, when
he comes without invitation. I confess, I was afraid at the beginning of the
Section, that I should be forced to change the Title before I came to the end,
and write over it Desinit in piscem. The sum of this whole Paragraph is, that
all sorts of Protestants, and others, here in England, do ridiculously contend
about their several persuasions in Religion, and put trouble on one another on
that account, whereas it is the Pope only that has Title and Right to
prescribe a Religion unto us all; which is not to me unlike the fancy of the
poor man in Bedlam, who smiled with great contentment, at their folly, who
imagined themselves either Queen Elizabeth, or King James, seeing he himself
was King Henry the Eighth. But, seeing that is the business in hand, let us see
what is this Title, that the Pope has, which Protestants can lay no claim
unto. It is founded on that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, Did the Word of
God come forth from you, or came it unto you only? This is pretended the only
Rule to determine, with whom the pre-eminence of Religion does remain: Now the
Word came not out originally from Protestants, or Puritans, nor came it to them
alone. So that they have no reason to be imposing their conceptions on one
another, or own others that differ from them. But our Author seems here to have
fallen upon a great mis-adventure; There is not, as I know of, any one single
Text of Scripture, that does more fatally cut the throat of Papal pretensions,
than this that he has stumbled on. It is known, that the Pope and his
adherents claim a pre-eminence in Religion to be the sole Judges of all its
concernments, and the imposers of it in all the world. What men receive from
them, that is Truth; what they are any otherwise instructed in, it is all false
and naught. On this pretense it is, that this Gentleman pleads Nullity of Title
amongst us as to all our contests; though we know, that Truth carries its Title
with it, in whose hands soever it be found. Give me leave then to make so bold
(at least at this distance) as to ask the Pope and his Adherents An a vobis
verbum Dei processit, an ad vos solos pervenit? Did the Gospel first come from
you, or only unto you, that you thus exalt your selves above your Brethren all
the World over? Do we not know by whom it first came to you, and from whom? Did
it not come to very many parts of the World before you? to the whole World as
well as to you? Why do you then boast your selves as though you had been the
first revealers of the Gospel, or that it had come unto you in a way or manner
peculiar and distinct from that by which it came to other places? Would you
make us believe, that Christ preached at Rome, or suffered, or rose from the
dead there, or gave the Holy Ghost first to the Apostles there, or first there
founded his Church, or gave order for the empaling it there, when it was built?
Would we never so fain, we cannot believe such prodigious Fables. To what
purpose then do you talk of Title to impose your conceits in Religion upon us?
Did the Gospel first come forth from you, or came it unto you only? Will not
Rome notwithstanding its seven Hills, be laid in a level with the rest of the
World, by virtue of this Rule? The truth is, as to the Oral dispensation of the
Gospel, it came forth from Jerusalem, by the Personal Ministry of the Apostles,
and came equally to all the world: That Spring being long since dried up, it
now comes forth to all from the written word; and unto them who receive it in
its Power and Truth does it come, and unto no other. What may further be
thought necessary to be discussed, as to the matter of fact, in reference to
this Rule, the Reader may find handled under that consideration of the first
supposition; which our Author builds his Discourse upon.

Sect. 4. Page 48. Heats and Resolution, is the Title of this Section; in which
if our Author be found blameless, his charge on others will be the more
significant: The Impartial Reader, that will not be imposed on by smooth words,
will easily know what to guess of his temper. In the mean time, though we think
it is good to be well-resolved, in the things that we are to believe and
practice in the worship of God; yet all irregular, and irrational Heats, in the
prosecution, or maintenance of men's different conceptions and apprehensions in
Religion, we desire sincerely to avoid and explode. Nor is it amiss, that, to
further our moderation, we be minded of the temper of the Pagans, who in their
Opinion-Wars (we are told) used no other Weapons but only of Pen and Speech:
For our Author seems to have forgotten, not only innumerable other Instances to
the contrary, but also the renowned Battle between Ombos and Tentyra. But this
forgetfulness was needful, to aggravate the charge on Christians, that are not
Romanists, for their heat, fury, and Fightings, for the promotion of their
Opinions; as being in this so much the worse than Pagans, who in Religion used
another manner of moderation. And who I pray is it, that manageth this charge?
Whence comes this Dove, with an Olive Branch? This Orator of Peace? If we may
guess from whence he came, by seeing whither he is going, we must say that it
was from Rome. This is their Plea, this the persuasion of men of the
Roman-Interest: This their charge on Protestants: To this height the confidence
of men's ignorance, inadvertency, and fullness of present things amounts. Could
ever any one rationally expect, that these Gentlemen would be public decryers
of Fury, Wars, and Tumults for Religion? May not Protestants say to them, Quae
regio in terris nostri non plena cruoris? Is there any Nation under the
Heavens, whereunto your power extends, wherein our blood has not given
testimony to your wrath and fury? After all your cursings, and attempted
depositions of Kings and Princes, translations of Title to Sovereignty and
Rule, invasions of Nations, secret Conspiracies, Prisons, Racks, Swords, Fire,
and Faggot, do you now come and declaim about moderation? We see you not yet
cease from killing of men, in the pursuit of your fancies and groundless
Opinions; any where, but either where you have not power, or can find no more
to kill: So that certainly, whatever reproach we deserve to have cast upon us
in this matter, you are the unfittest men in the world to be mannagers of it.
But I still find my self in a mistake in this thing: It is only Protestants and
others, departed from the Roman Church, that our Author treats: It is they, who
are more fierce and disingenious than the Pagans, in their contests amongst
themselves, and against the Romanists; as having the least share of Reason, of
any upon the earth. His good Church is not concerned, who as it is not lead by
such fancies and motives as they are, so it has right (where it has power) to
deal with its Adversaries as seems good unto it. This then, Sir, is that which
you intend; that we should agree amongst our selves, and wait for your coming
with power to destroy us all. It were well indeed, if we could agree; it is our
fault and misery, if we do not, having so absolutely a perfect Rule and means
of agreement as we have. But yet, whether we agree, or agree not, if there be
another Party distinct from us all, pretending a right to exterminate us from
the earth, it behooves us to look after their proceedings. And this is the true
state of all our Author's Pleas for Moderation; which are built upon such
Principles as tend to the giving us up unarmed and naked to the power and will
of his Masters.

For the rest of this Section, wherein he is pleased to sport himself in the
miscarriages of men in their coining and propagating of their Opinions, and to
gild over the care and success of the Church of Rome, in stifling such births
of pride and darkness, I shall not insist upon it. For as the first as
generally tossed up and down, concerns none in particular, though accompanied
with the repetition of such words as ought not to be scosfed at; so the latter
is nothing but what violence and ignorance may any where, and in any age,
produce. There are Societies of Christians, not a few, in the East, wherein
mere darkness and ignorance of the Truth, has kept men at peace in Errors,
without the least disturbance by contrary opinions amongst themselves, for
above a 1000 years; and yet they have wanted the help of outward force to
secure their Tranquillity. And is it any wonder, that where both these powerful
Engines are set at work for the same end, if in some measure it be compassed and
effected. And if there be such a thing among the Romanists (which I have reason
to be difficult in admitting the belief of) as that they can stisle all
Opinions, as fast as they are conceived, or destroy them as soon as they are
brought forth; I know it must be some device or artifice unknown to the
Apostles and Primitive Churches; who notwithstanding all their Authority and
care for the Truth, could not with many compass that end.

Sect. 5. Page 54. The last Section of this Chapter contains motives to
moderation three in number; And I suppose, that no man doubts, but that many
more might be added, every one in weight out-doing all these three. The first
is that alone which Protestants are concerned to look unto: not that
Protestants oppose any motive unto moderation; but knowing that in this
Discourse, Moderation is only the pretense, Popery (if I may use the word
without incivility) the Design and aim, it concerns them to examine, which of
these pretended motives, that any way regards their real principle, does tend
unto; Now this Motive is, the great ignorance our state and condition is
involved in, concerning God, his Works, and Providence; a great motive to
Moderation, I wish all men would well consider it. For I must acknowledge, that
I cannot but suppose them ignorant of the state and condition of mortality, and
so consequently their own, who are ready to destroy and exterminate their
neighbors of the same flesh and blood with them, and agreeing in the main
Principles of Religion, that may certainly be known, for lesser differences,
and that by such rules as within a few years may possibly reach their nearest
Relations. Our Author also lays so much weight on this Motive, that he fears
an anticipation, by men, saying, That the Scripture reveals enough unto us;
which therefore he thinks necessary to remove. For my part; I scarce think, he
apprehended any real danger, that this would be insisted on as an Objection
against his motive to moderation. For to prevent his tending on toward that
which is indeed his proper end, this obstacle is not unseasonably laid, that
under a pretense of the ignorance unavoidably attending our state and
condition, he might not prevail upon us to increase and aggravate it, by
entising us to give up our selves by an implicit faith to the conduct of the
Roman-Church. A man may easily perceive the end he intends, by the Objections
which he fore-sees. No man is so madd, I think, as to plead the sufficiency of
Scripture-Revelation against Moderation; when in the Revelation of the Will of
God contained in the Scripture, Moderation is so much commended unto us, and
pressed upon us: But against the pretended necessity of resigning our selves to
the Romanists for a relief against the unavoidable ignorance of our state and
condition, besides that we know full well, such a resignation would yield us no
relief at all; this plea of the sufficiency of Scripture-Revelation is full and
unanswerable. This put our Author on a work which I have formerly once or twice
advised him to meddle no more; being well assured, that it is neither for his
reputation, nor his advantage, much less for his souls health. The pretenses
which he makes use of, are the same that we have heard of many and many a time;
The abuse of it by some, and the want of an Infallible Interpreter of it as to
us all. But the old tale is here anew gilded with an intermixture of other
pretty stories, and application of all to the present humors of men; not
forgetting to set forth the brave estate of our forefathers, that had not the
use of the Scripture; which what it was, we know well enough, and better then
the prejudices of this Gentleman will give him leave to tell us. But if the
lawful and necessary use of any thing may be decryed, because of its abuse, we
ought not only to labor the abolishing of all Christian Religion in general,
and every principle of it in particular out of the world; but the blotting out
of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, out of the Firmament of Heaven, and the
destruction of the greatest and most noble parts, at least, of the whole
Creation: But as the Apostles continued in the work of Preaching the Gospel,
though by some, the grace they taught was turned into lasciviousness; so shall
we abide to plead for the use of the Scripture, whatever abuse of them by the
wicked lusts of men can be instanced in. Nor is there any reason in the world,
why food should be kept from all men, though some have surfeited, or may yet so
do. To have a compendious Narration of the Story and Morality of the Scripture
in the room of the whole, which our Author allows of, is so jejune, narrow, and
empty a Conception, so unanswerable to all those divine Testimonies given to
the excellency of the Word of God, with Precepts to abide in the meditation and
study of it, to grow in the knowledge of it, and the mysteries contained in it,
the commendations of them that did so, in the Scripture it self, so
blasphemously derogatory to the Goodness, Love, and Wisdom of God, in granting
us that inestimable benefit, so contrary to the redoubled Exhortations of all
the Ancient Fathers, that I wonder any one who dares pretend to have read it,
or to be a Christian, can own and avow such a notion. All the fine Stories,
Allusions, and Speculations, about madness, that he is pleased to flourish
withal in this matter, are a covering too short and narrow to hide that
wretched contempt of the holy Word of the great God, which in these Notions
discovers its self. Men who by corrupt Principles have been scared from the
study of the Scripture, or by their lusts kept from its serious perusal, or
attendance unto it, that value not the Authority of God, of Christ, or his
Apostles, commanding and requiring the diligent study of it, that dis-regard
the glorious mysteries, revealed in it on set purpose that we might all come to
an acquaintance with them, and so, consequently, that have had no experience of
the excellency or usefulness of it, nor lie under any conviction of their own
duty to attend unto it; may perhaps be glad to have their lusts and unbelief so
far accommodated, as to suffer themselves to be persuaded, that there is no
need that they should any further regard it, than hitherto they have done. But
in vain is the Net spread before the Eye of any thing that has a wing; for
them who have tasted the sweetness of the good Word of God, who have attained
any acquaintance with its usefulness and excellency, who have heard the voice
of God in it, making the knowledge of his Will revealed therein of
indispensable necessity to the salvation of their souls; believe me, Sir, all
your Rhetoric and Stories, your pretenses and flourishes, will never prevail
with them to cast away their Bibles, and resolve for the future to believe only
in the Pope. Of the interpretation of the Scripture I have spoken before, and
showed sufficiently, that neither are we at any such a loss therein, as to
bring us to any incertainty about the Principles of our Religion; nor, if we
were, have we the least reason to look for any relief from Rome. When I happen
upon any of these Discourses, I cannot but say to my self; What do these men
intend? Do they know what they do, or with whom they have to deal? Have they
ever read the Scripture, or tasted any sweetness in it? If they instruct their
Disciples unto such mean thoughts of the holy Word of God, they undo them for
ever. And if I meet with these bold efforts against the wisdom of God twenty
times, I cannot but still thus startle at them.

The two following Motives being taken up, as far as I can apprehend, to give
our Author an advantage to make sport for himself and others, in canvasing some
expressions and discourses of our talkative times, and the vulgar brutish
management of our differences, by some weak unknowing Persons, need not detain
us. Did I judge it a business worthy of any prudent man's consideration, it were
easy to return him for his requital, a collec^^on of the pretty Prayers and
Devotions of his good Catholics, of their kind treatments one of another, or
the doubty Arguments they make use of amongst themselves and against us;
abundantly enough to repay him his kindness, without being beholding to any of
those Legends, which they formerly accommodated the people withal, in room
both of Scripture and Preaching; though of late they begin to be ashamed of
them.

CHAP. VI.
to Chap II. Obscurity of God, etc.

UNto the ensuing whole Chapter, wherein our Author exspatiates, with a most
luxuriant Oratory, throughout; and often times soars with Poetical raptures, in
setting forth the obscurity and darkness of all things, (...) ignorance and
disability, to attain a right and perfect knowledge of them, canting by the
way, many of those pretty Notions, which the Philosophical discoursive men of
our days do use to whet their wits upon, over a glass of Wine; I have not much
to offer: Nor should I once reflect upon that discourse, were it not designed
to another end, than that which it is ushered in by, as the thing aimed to be
promoted by it. Forbearance of one another in our several persuasions, on a
sense of our infirmity and weakness, and the obscurity of those things, about
which our minds and contemplations are conversant, is flourished at the
entrance of this Harangue: After a small progress, the Snake begins to hiss in
the grass, and in the Close openly to show it self, in an enticement unto an
embracing of the Roman-Religion; which, it seems, will disintangle our minds
out of that maze about the things of God and Man, in which, without its
guidance, we must of necessity wander for ever. As for his Philosophical
notions, I suppose they were only vented, to show his skill in the Learned
talks of this Age, and to toll on the Gallants, whom he has most hope to
enveagle; knowing them to be Candidates for the most part, unto that Sceptism
which is grown the entertainment of Tables and Taverns. How a man that is
conversant in his thoughts about Religion, and his choice of, or settlement
therein, should come to have any concernment in this Discourse, I cannot
imagine. That God, who is infinitely wise, holy, good, who perfectly knows all
his own excellencies, has revealed so much of Himself, his Mind, and Will, in
reference to the Knowledge which he requires of himself, and Obedience unto him,
as is sufficient to guide us whilst we are here below, to steer our Course in
our subjection to him, and dependence on him, in a manner acceptable unto him,
and to bring us to our utmost end and blessedness in the enjoyment of him: This
Protestants think sufficient for them, who as they need not, so they desire not
to be wise above what is written; nor to know more of God, than he has so
revealed of himself, that they may know it. Those barren, fruitless
Sp^culations, which some curious Serpentine Wits, casting off all reverence of
the Sovereignty and Majesty of God, have exercised themselves in and about,
even in things too high and hard f^r them, darkning counsel and wisdom, by
words of pretended subtilty, but real folly; are fitter to be exploded out of
the world, then fomented and cherished in the m^nds of men.

Nor does that discourse about God and his Essence, which lies before us, seem
to grow on any other roots than ignorance and curiosity; Ignorance of what it
is that God requires us to know of him, and how; and Curiosity in prying into,
and using words about what we do not understand, nor is it the mind of God that
we should. Were poor sinners thoroughly sensible of their own condition, and
what acquaintance with God their concernment does lie in, they would little
value such vain towering imaginations as some men's minds are exercised withal.
Come, Sir, Let us leave these vain flourishes, and in deepest abasement of soul
pray that we may know how the Father, whom no man has seen at any time, is
revealed by the only begotten Son, who is in his bosom. What he is in his Law
toward impenitent sinners, what in the Covenant of his Grace to them that fly
for refuge to the hope that is set before them; even that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of our understanding being
enlightened, we may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of
the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness
of his power toward them that believe, according to the working of the might
of his power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in heavenly places; that our hearts may be
comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the FULL
ASSURANCE OF UNDERSTANDING to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, and by whom alone we may obtain any saving acquaintance with them;
who also is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that
is true.

This is the Port-Haven of Protestants, whatever real darkness may be about
them, or whatever mists may be cast on them by the sleights of men that lie in
wait to deceive, That they need know no more of God, that they may love him,
fear him, believe in him, and come to the enjoyment of him, than what he has
clearly and expressly in Christ revealed of himself by his Word. Whether the
storms of this Gentleman's indignation be able to drive them, or the more
pleasant gales of his Eloquence to entise them, from this Harbor, time will
show. In the mean while, that indeed, they ought not so to do, nor will do so
with any but such as are resolved to steer their course by some secret
distempers of their own, a few strictures on the most material passages of this
Chapter will discover.

It is scarce worth while, to remark his mistake in the foundation of his
discourse of the Obscurity of God, as he is pleased to state the matter, from
that of the Prophet, asserting, that God is a God who hides himself; or, as he
renders it, an hidden God. His own Prophet will tell him, that it is not
concerning the Essence of God, but the Dispensation of his Love and Favor
toward his People, that those words were used by the Prophet of old, and so
are unwillingly pressed to serve in the design he has in hand. Neither are we
more concerned in the ensuing Discourse of the Soul's cleaving to God by
Affection, upon the Metaphysicall representation of His excellencies and
perfections unto it; it being purely Platonical, and no way suited to the
revelation made of God in the Gospel, which acquaints us not with any such
amiableness in God, as to endear the souls of sinners unto him, causing them to
reach out the wings of their love after him, but only as he is in Christ Jesus,
reconciling the world to himself; a consideration that has no place, nor any
can obtain, in this flourish of words: And the reason is, because they are
sinners, and therefore without the Revelation of an Atonement, can have no
other apprehension of the infinitely Holy and Righteous God, but as of a
devouring Fire, with whom no sinner can inhabit. Nor yet in the aggravation of
the obscurity of God from the restless endeavors of mankind in the
disquisition of him, who, as he says, show their love in seeking him, having
at their birth an equal right to his favor, which they could no wise demerit
before they were born, being directly contrary to the Doctrine of his own
Church, in the head of Original Sin.

That which first draws up toward the design he is in persuit of, is his
Determination, That the issuing of men's perplexities in the investigation of
this hidden God, must be by some Prophet or Teacher, sent from God unto men;
but the uncertainty of coming into any better condition thereby, is so
exaggerated by a contempt of those ways and means, that such Prophets have
fixed on to evidence their coming forth from God, by Miracles, Visions,
Prophesies, ashew of Sanctity, with a concourse of Threats and Promises, as
that means also is cashiered from yielding us any relief. Neither is there any
thing intimated, or offered, to exempt the true Prophets of God, nor the Lord
Christ himself, from being shuffled into the same bag with false pretenders in
the close, that were brought forth to play their game in this pageant. Yea, the
difficulty put upon this help of the loss we are at in the knowledge of God, by
Prophets and Prophesies, seems especially to respect those of the Scripture, so
to manifest the necessity of a further evidence to be given unto them, then any
they carry about them, or bring with them, that they may be useful to this end
and purpose: And this intention is manifest a little after, where the Scripture
is expressly reckoned among those things which all men boast of, none can come
to certainty or assurance by. Thus are poor unstable souls ventured to the
Borders of Atheism, under a pretense of leading them to the Church. Was this
the method of Christ, or his Apostles, in drawing men to the Faith of the
Gospel? this the way of the holy men of old, that labored in the Conversion of
Souls from Gentilism and Heresy? Were ever such bold assaults against the
immovable Principles of Christianity made by any, before Religion came to be a
matter of carnal Interest? Is there no way to exalt the Pope, but by
questioning the Authority of Christ, and Truth of the Scripture? Truly, I am
sorry, that wise and considering men should observe such an irreverence of God
and his Word to prevail in the spirits of men, as to entertain thoughts of
persuading them to desert their Religion, by such presumptious Insinuations of
the uncertainty of all Divine Revelation. But all this may be made good on the
consideration of the changes of men after their profession of this or that
Religion; namely, That, notwithstanding their former pretensions, yet indeed,
they knew nothing at all, seeing that from God and the Truth no man does
willingly depart; which if it be universally true, I dare say, there is not one
word true in the Scripture. How often does God complain in the Old Testament,
that his people forsook Him for that which was not God? and how many do the
Apostles show us in the New, to have forsaken the Truth? It is true, that under
the notion of God the chiefest Good, and of Truth the proper object and rest of
the understanding, none can willingly and by choice depart: but, that the
minds of men might be so corrupted and perverted by their own lusts, and
temptations of Satan, as willingly and by choice to forsake the one or the
other, to embrace that which in their stead presents it self unto them; is no
less true, than, that twice two make four. And it is mere weakness and
ignorance of the condition of mankind, since the entrance of sin, to conclude,
that, because men may forsake the Truth which they have professed, therefore
there is no Evidence in that Truth which they so forsake; as though, Truth and
its Evidence were to be measured and judged by the carriage and deportment of
corrupt and unstable men toward it. Though the Sun continue to shine in the
Firmament, yet there be a thousand ways whereby men may become blind, and so
rendered unable to see it. And there are no fewer* ways whereby men either
wilfully themselves darken the eyes of their understanding, or suffer them to
be put out by others. Shall the Truth be thence calumniated, as though it sent
forth no beams whereby it may be clearly discerned? Are they not rather justly
to be supposed blind themselves, who can entertain such thoughts of it?

We dwell too much on these remote attempts toward the special end aimed at.
The Rhetoric of this Discourse is wound up, Page 76, 77, 78, 79. in a
persuasive unto Popery; The substance whereof is, that the Papacy being
rejected, there is a necessity that all men must become Atheists; which
requires a little further consideration. He says, then, That these dissentions
of ours (he means, of Protestants, one of whom he most undecently personates)
about the Faith in its branches so hot, so various, so extravagant, are apt to
infer a suspicion in its very root; Are not a hundred in our own Country
become Atheists already upon that very notion? And these men supposing
substantial change once made in Religion, and deliberately admitted, are rather
to be commended for their wit, than blamed. For they do but that suddenly,
which all the Land will come to by degrees. This in general; in which entrance
into his further application of what he had largely, and indeed loosly, before
discoursed to his present purpose; I wish I could find any thing sound. If
dissentions about the Faith, however extravagantly managed, are apt to infer
a suspicion in its very root, it is most certain, that since the first
preaching of it, or within a few years after its first Revelation, causes of
suspicion have been given, and will be given, and it is the mind of God should
be given, who said, there must be Heresies, that the approved may be tried. And
this very argument did Celsus press against Christianity almost 1500. years
ago; which is worthily answered by Origin* nor is there need of adding any
thing to what that excellent man replied unto one of the first Coyners of this
Objection. The truth is; our dissentions are evils; our evils, the evils of men
that are engaged in them. And yet it may be, not all out so evil in themselves
as is pretended; They are far enough from meriting the Title of, lo here is
Christ, and, lo there is Christ; Protestants are all of them well enough
agreed, who is Christ, and where alone he is to be found: If they jump not
wholly into the same conceptions, about some few things of less importance in
the way and manner of the worship of Christ, it is no more, but what has been
the lot of the best of men ever since Christ was preached on the Earth, that
were not infallibly inspired; Such contests ever were, and he that knows what
men are, will have little cause given him to suspect the truth of the
foundation of that about which they contend. Nor is any ground of such
suspicion administered by these differences; Men of corrupt minds, may take
occasion from them to vent the enmity which is in their hearts against the
faith; ground of suspicion none is given unto them. Nay rather, it is a strong
evidence of the certainty of the faith in general, that all those who contend
about the branches of it, do every one of them charge one another with the
failure; and all agree, that the faith it self about which they contend, is
certain, sure, and stable. And, I hope, the Gentleman is mistaken in the
calculation of the numbers that are become Atheists in our Country; or, if he
have brought them to the pole, I do not believe, that he has taken a
particular account of the occasions and reasons that cast them on that
commendable piece of wit, as he styles it; and so knows not, but that they may
have been made witty by some of those ways, whereby, if a learned Friar may be
believed, there were no less then 60000. become Atheists, and that not of
Protestants, but good Catholics, in one City in our neighbouring-Nation. But
this falls out, says he, by a supposal of a substantial change made in
Religion, and deliberately admitted. This, indeed, were something; but, Whoever
supposed so? The Religion of Jesus Christ, is the same, once delivered unto the
Saints. This is still one and the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever,
unalterable; as Christ himself. Men indeed, who are liars, are changeable
Worms; and many, as to their Profession in Religion, alter, change, turn,
apostatize, with or without deliberation: but he that shall thence conclude,
that his best course is speedily to be an Atheist, will not deserve much
commendation for his wit, less for his wisdom; and, for his grace, none at all.
That the Land will come to Atheism by degrees, is the Prognostication of our
Author, calculated from the Meridian of Rome. For my part, I fear not such kind
of Prophets: Protestant Religion has, by the blessing of God, retrived the
Nation from the doors of Atheism, and kept it safe almost these hundred years,
notwithstanding the woeful miscarriages of some that have professed it; why they
must now all by degrees turn Atheists, I know no reason to fear, nor presume
does our Author, but that he is prompted to like his conjecture, by his love to
his Countrymen, desiring they may follow them, who are so commended for their
wit.

But we must proceed with the improvement of this consideration. Page 11. If
the Papist, or Roman- Catholic, who first brought the news of Christ and his
Christianity into the Land, as all men must needs know, that have either heard
or read of Christianities* ingress into England, or other Countries and
Kingdoms, (for we do no sooner hear news of Christianity than Popery, and its
Crucifixes, Monasteries, Relics, Sacrifice, and the like), I say, If the
Papist le now become so odious, as we see he is, and if the faith he brought
and maintained a thousand years together, be now rent all asunder by Sects and
Factions, which bandy all to the ruin of that Mother-Religion; if all her
practical Truths, wherein chiefest Piety consists, be already abandoned as
erroneous; does not this justify the Pagan whom this Catholic Christian
displaced to make way for his own Law? And must not this be a certain way and
means to introduce Atheism, which naturally follows that faith once removed,
even as a carcass succeeds a living body once deceased? For, one truth denied,
is a fair way to question another, which came by the same hand; and this, a
third: till the very Authority of the first Revealer be at stake, which can no
more defend himself then he can his Law? For the same Axe and Instrument, that
cut down the branches, can cut up the root too; and, if his reverence, for
which all the rest was believed, defend not their truth, it must needs at
length utterly fail in his own; for all the Authority they had was purely from
him, and he fails in them before he falls in himself. (...). That the Papists,
or Roman Catholics, first brought Christ and his Christianity into this Land,
is most untrue; and I wonder how any one that has read any story of the Times
that are past, should so often aver what he cannot but know to be untrue. The
Gospel might have been brought into England by Romans, and yet not by Papists;
for I cannot find, nor can this Gentleman show, that the Romans St. Paul wrote
unto, were any one of them, in any one point, Papists. But neither was it
brought hither by Romans, but came immediately out of the East; from whence
also about the same time it came to Rome. Nor is it any jot truer, That we no
sooner heard news of Christianity, than Popery, with its Crucifixes,
Monasteries, Relics, Sacrifice, (that is, the Mass), and the like; Apage
nugas! What do we talk of tother-day things, when we speak of the first news of
Christianity? The first planting and watering of these things, was in
after-Ages, and their growing up to that consistency, wherein they may justly
be called Popery, a work of many Centuries. And yet, I shall grant, that most
of them got the start in the World, of that Papal Sovereignty, whence Popery is
peculiarly denominated. But the first news we hear of Christianity, is in the
Gospel; where there is not the least tidings of these trifles, nor was there in
some Ages, that next succeeded the publication of it. If this Gentleman, give
any further occasion, the particulars shall be evinced to him. For my part, I
know not how, nor to whom a Papist is become odious, which nextly he complains
of. I can, and do love their persons, pity them in their mistakes, hate only
their vices. But yet, certain it is, a Papist may be odious, that is, men may
not love those parts of his Religion, from whence he is so denominated, without
the least impeachment of that faith that extirpated Gentilism in the World. It
is for that faith which ruined Gentilism, that we contend against Papists. Let
us have that, and no more, and there is an end of all our Contests. The things
we strive about, sprang up since Gentilism was buried, the most of them out of
its grave, some from a deeper place, if there be a deeper place. For the
practical Truths of the Papists, which he complains to be abolished, I was in
good hope, he would not have mentioned them; their speculations are better then
their practices, whether he intends their moral Divinity, or their agenda in
Worship; I would desire this Gentleman to mention them no more, lest he hear
that of them, which, I know, he is not willing to do. As for the Practical
Truths of the Gospel, they are maintained, and asserted in the Church of
England, and by all Protestants; and about others, we are not solicitous. What
tendency then, the Rejection of Popery, which had no hand in supplanting
Gentilism, and which is no part of the Religion of Christ, has to the leading
of men into Atheism, is as hard to discover, as the quadrature of a Circle, or
a Subterranean passage into the Indies. But he gives his reasons; If one truth
be denied, a fair way is made to question another, which came by the same hand,
and this a third, till the very Authority of the first Revealer be at stake,
which can no more defend himself then he can his Law. This first Revealer, I
take to be the Lord Christ; he that grants a thing, or doctrine, to be taught
and delivered by him, yet denies it to be true, does indeed deny his Authority:
However, he will defend himself and his Law, let men do what they please. But,
he that denies such a thing to be truth, because it is not revealed by him, nor
consistent with what is revealed by him, doing this out of subjection of soul
and conscience to his Authority, is in no danger of questioning or opposing
that Authority. Nay, be it, that it be indeed a truth which he denies: being
only denied by him, because he is persuaded, that it is not of Christ, the
first Revealer, and therefore not true; there is no fear of the danger
threatened. But the matter is, That all that is brought from Christ by the same
hand, must be equally received. It is true, If it be brought from Christ by the
same hand, it must be so; not, because by the same hand, but because from
Christ; They that preached Christ, and withal, that men must be circumcised,
had put men into a sad condition; if, in good sooth, they had been necessitated
to embrace all that they taught; the same men teaching Christ to be the
Messiah, and Circumcision to be necessary to life eternal. Amongst those that
were converted to the Gospel by the Jews that were zealous of the Law, how
easy had it been for their Teachers, to have utterly frustrated St. Paul's
Doctrine of Christian liberty, by telling them, that they could not forgo
Circumcision, but they must forgo Christ also; for, all those things they
received by the same hand. If, indeed, a man comes and delivers a Systeme of
Religion upon his own Authority and Reputation only, he that denies any one
point of what he delivers, is in a fair way of everting all that he asserts.
But if he come, as sent from another, and affirm, that this other commanded him
to declare, that which he delivers for Truth in his Name, and produce for that
end his Commission, wherein all the Truths that he is to deliver, are written;
if he deliver what he has not received in Commission, that may honestly be
rejected, without the least impeachment of any one Truth that was really
committed unto him, by him that sent him. And this was the way, this the
condition of them who planted the Gospel in the Name of Christ, not being
themselves divinely inspired. So that, if in the second Edition of
Christianity, in some parts of this Nation by Austine, and his Associates, any
thing was taught or practiced, that was not according to the Rule and
Commission given by Christ, it may be rejected, without the least impeachment
to the Authority of the first Revealer; nay, his Authority being once received,
cannot be preserved entire without such rejection. I confess, I do almost
mistrust, that by this Revealer of Christianity, and his Authority, which he
discourses about, our Author intends the Pope; which, if so, what we have
discoursed of Christ, is, I confess, to little purpose; and it were easy to
turn our Reply that way; but, because I have not clear Evidence for it, I will
not charge him with so horrid a presumptuous Insinuation; when he declares his
mind, he shall hear more of ours.

But he further specifies his meaning in an enumeration of Doctrines that were
preached by the first Planters of the Gospel, in and unto the extirpation of
Gentilism. If, says he, the Institution of Monasteries, to the praise and
service of God, day and night, be thought as it has been now these many years
a Superstitious folly; If Christian Priests and Sacrifices be things of high
Idolatry; If the seven Sacraments be deemed vain, most of them; If it suffice
to Salvation, only to Believe, whatever life we lead; If there be no value, or
merit, in Good Works; If God's Laws be impossible to be kept; If Christ be not
our Lawmakers and Director of doing well, as well as Redeemer from ill; If
there be no Sacramental Tribunal for our Reconciliation ordained from by Christ
on the Earth; If the real Body of our Lord be not bequeathed unto his Spouse in
his last Will and Testament; If there be not under Christ a general Head of the
Church, who is chief Priest and Pastor of all Christians upon Earth under God,
whose Vicegerent he is in Spiritual Affairs; all which things are now held
forth by us, manifestly against the Doctrine of the first Preachers of
Christianity in this Land; then I say, Paganism was unjustly displaced by these
Doctrines, and Atheism must needs succeed; for if Christ deceived us, upon whom
shall we rely; and if they that brought us the first news of Christ, brought
along with it so many grand lies, why may not the very story of Christ be
thought a Romance?

I could wish there had been a little more clearness and ingenuity in this
annumeration; the mixing of what he takes to be Truths, with some Negatives
that he condemns in the same Series, breeds some confusion in the Discourse:
And I am also compelled to complain of want of candor and ingenuity in his
representation of the Protestant Doctrine in every particular, wherein he takes
occasion to mention it: Let us then separate the things that have no place of
their own in this Argument, than what is ambiguously proposed: after which,
what remains may be distinctly considered.

1. What makes that enquiry in our way at this time, If it suffice to
Salvation, to believe, whatever life we lead? Who ever said so, taught so,
wrote so, in England? Is this the Doctrine of the Church of England? or of the
Presbyterians, or Independents? Or whose is it? Or what makes it in this place?
If this be the way of gaining Catholics, let them that please make use of it.
Protestants dislike the Way as much as the End.

2. What is the meaning of that which follows, If there be no value or merit in
good Works? Who ever taught that there is no value in good Works? that they are
not commanded of God, that they are not accepted with him, that they are not
our duty to be careful in the performance of; that God is not honored, the
Gospel adorned, the Church and the World advantaged by them? Do all these
things put no value on them? For their merit, the expression being ambiguous,
unscriptural, and, as commonly interpreted, derogatory to the glory of Christ,
and the Grace of God; we shall let it pass, as proper to his purpose: and much
good may it do him with all that he gains by it.

3. If (says he) God's Laws be impossible to be kept; but, Who said so?
Protestants teach indeed, that men in their own strength cannot keep the Laws
of God; That the Grace received in this life extends not to an absolute sinless
perfection in their observation, which is inconsistent with the Covenant of
Grace, and men's walking with God therein: but, that the Laws of God were in
their own nature impossible to be observed by them to whom they were first
given, or, that they are yet impossible to be kept in that way of their sincere
observation which is required in the Gospel, Protestants teach not that I know
of. He proceeds.

4. If Christ be not our Lawmakers and Director of doing well, as well as our
Redeemer from ill. This is a little too open and plain; does he think any man
will believe him, that Protestants or Presbyterians* teach that Christ is not
our Lawmakers and Director of doing well, etc. I dare say, he believes not one
word of it himself, what confidence soever he has taken upon him of imposing
on the minds of weak and unstable men.

Other things mentioned by him are ambiguous; as, If the seven Sacraments be
deemed vain, most of them, etc. Of the things themselves, which they term
Sacraments, there is scarce any of them by Protestants esteemed vain; that one
of Unction, which they judge now useless, they only say, is an unwarrantable
imitation of that which was useful: Of the rest, which they reject, they reject
not the things, but those things from being Sacraments; and a practice in
Religion is not presently condemned as vain, which is not esteemed a Sacrament.
There is no less ambiguity in that other Supposition, If the real Body of our
Lord be not bequeathed to his Spouse in his last Will and Testament; which no
Protestant ever questioned; though there be great contests about the manner of
the Sacramental Participation of that real Body; the same may be said of some
other of his Supposals. But I need not go over them in Particular: I shall only
say in General; that take from amongst them, what is acknowledged to be the
Doctrine of the Papists, and, as such, is opposed by the Church of England, or
by Presbyterians (as Papal Supremacy, Sacrifice of the Mass, Monasteries of
Votaries under special and peculiar Vows and Rules, necessity of auricular
Confession, Transubstantiation, which are the things gilded over by our Author)
and prove that they were the Doctrines, all, or any of them, whereby, and
wherewith, the first Preachers of Christianity in this Nation, or any where
else in the old known World, displaced Paganism; and, for my part, I will
immediately become his Proselyte. What then can be bound with this Rope of
Sand? The first Preachers of Christianity preached the Pope's Supremacy, the
Mass, etc. By these Doctrines Paganism was displaced; If these Doctrines now be
decryed, as lies, why may not Christ himself be esteemed a Romance? For neither
did the first Preachers of Christianity, preach these Doctrines; nor was
Paganism displaced by them; nor is there any ground to question the Authority
and Truth of Christ, in case those that do first preach him, do therewithal
preach somewhat that is not true, when they bring along with them an authentic
conviction of their own mistakes, as was manifested before, and might be made
good by innumerable other Instances.

I shall not need to follow him in his declamation to the end of this
Paragraph; the whole foundation of his many flourishes and pretenses being
totally taken out of the way.

CHAP. VII.
Scripture Vindicated.

WIth his three following Paragraphs, from page 82. unto 108. which have only a
very remote and almost imperceptible tendency unto his purpose in hand, though
they take up so long a Portion of his Discourse, (seeming to be inserted,
either to manifest his skill and proficiency in Philosophical Skepticism* or to
entertain his Readers with such a delightful diversion, as that having taken in
it a taste of his ingenuity, they may have an edge given their appetite unto
that which is more directly prepared for them,) I shall not trouble my self,
nor detain my Reader about. If any one a little skilled in the Discourses of
these days, have a mind to vye conjectures and notions with him, to vellicate
commonly received Maxims and vulgar Opinions, to exspatiate on the events of
Providence in all Ages, he may quickly compose as many learned leaves; only if
he would be pleased to take my advice with him, I should wish him not to
flourish and guild over things uncertain and unknown, to the disadvantage of
things known and certain; nor to vent conjectures about other worlds, and the
nature of the heavenly bodies, derogatory to the love of God in sending his Son
to be incarnate, and to dye for sinners that live on this Earthly Globe.
Neither do I think it well done, to mix St. Paul and his Writings, in this
Skepticism, men^ioning in one place his fancy, in another his conceit, which he
seems to oppose; such is the reverence these men bear to the Scripture and holy
Penmen thereof; so also, that whole scorn that he casts on Man's Dominion over
the Creatures, reflects principally on the beginning of Genesis, and the eighth
Psalm.

An unsearchable abyss in many of God's Providential dispensations, wherein
the Infinite Sovereignty, Wisdom, and Righteousness of Him who gives no
account of his matters, are to be adored, we readily acknowledge; and yet I
dare freely say, that most of the things instanced in by our Author, are
capable of a clear resolution according to known Rules and Principles of Truth
revealed in the Scripture; such are, God's suffering the Gentiles to wander so
long in the dark, not calling them to repentance; with the necessity of
Christian Religion, and yet the punishment of many of the Professors of it by
the power of Idolaters and Pagans, as the Church of the Jews was handled of old
by the Assyrians, Babylonians, and others. Of this sort also, is his newly
inserted Story of the Cirubrians, which it may be was added to give us a cast
of his skill in the investigation of the original of Nations, out of Cambden;
For if that which himself affirms of them, were true, namely, That they were
devout adoring the Crucifix, which men usually are, when they cease to worship
aright him who was crucified, (the sin mentioned, Romans 1.25.) we need not much
admire, that God gave them up to be scourged by their Pagan adversaries; but,
not to mention that which is not only uncertain whether it be true, but is most
probably false; If our Author had ever read the Stories of those Times, and the
Lamentations made for the sins of them, by Gildas, Salvianus, and others, he
would have found enough to justify God in his proceedings and dealing with his
Cirubrians, according to the known Rules of his Word. The like may be affirmed
concerning the Irish; whose decay, like a true Englishman, he dates from the
Interest of our Kings there, and makes the progress of it commensurate to the
prevalency of their Authority; when it is known to all the world, that by that
means alone they were reclaimed from Barbarism, and brought into a most
flourishing condition, until by their rebellion and unparalleled cruelties;
they precipitated themselves into confusion and ruin. As for that which is
insinuated as the conclusion, fit to be made out of all these premises,
concerning the obscurity of God's Nature, and the works of Providence, viz.
that we betake our selves to the infallible determination of the Roman-Church,
I shall only say; that as I know not, that as yet the Pope has undertaken
Pontifically to interpose his definitive Sentence, in reference to these
Philosophical Digladiations he glanceth on in the most part of his Discourse;
so I have but little reason on the resignation required, to expect an
illumination from that obscurity about the Deity which he insists on; finding
the children, indeed the Fathers, of that Church, of all men in the Earth most
to abound in contradictory Disputes and endless Quarrels, about the very nature
and properties of God himself.

But his direct improvement of this long Oration that he enters on, Page 122.
may be further considered. It is, in short, this; That by the Scripture no man
can come to the knowledge of, and settlement in, an assurance of the Truth; nor
is there any hope of relief for us in this sad condition, but that living Papal
Oracle, which if we are wise we will acquiesce in, Page 125, 126. To this
purpose, men are furnished with many exceptions against the Authority of the
Scripture, from the uncertainty of the rise and spring of it, how it came to
us, how it was authorized, and by whom, the doubtfulness of its sense and
meaning, the contemptible condition of the first Penmen of it, seeming a
company of ignorant men imposing their own fancies, as Oraculous Visions upon
us; of whom how can we know that they were inspired, seeing they say no such
things of themselves; not those especially of the New Testament: besides, the
many appearing contradictions with other humane infirmities, seeming unto
Critics ever and anon to occur in them; and why might not illiterate men
fail as well as, etc. With much more of the same nature and importance; unto
all which, I shall need to say nothing but that of Job, Vain man would be wise,
but is like to the wild Asse's Colt. Never is the folly of men more eminently
displayed, than when confidence of their wisdom makes them bold and daring. I
doubt not, but our Author thought, that he had so acquitted himself in this
passage, as that his Readers must need resolve to quit the Scripture, and turn
Papists; but there is an evident gulf between these Reasonings and Popery,
whereunto they will certainly carry any that shall give way to their force and
efficacy: This is no other but down right Atheism; This the supplying of men
with cavils against the Scripture its Power and Authority do directly lead
unto. Our Author would have men to believe these suggestions, at least so far
as not to seek for rest and satisfaction in the Scriptures, or he would not: If
he would not; to what end does he mention them, and sport himself in showing
the luxuriancy of his wit and fancy in cavilling at the Word of God? Is not
this a ready way to make men Atheists, if only by inducing them to an imitation
of that, which by his example he commends unto them? But it will be said, He
only shows the uncertainties that are about Scripture, that men may not expect
by, or from them, deliverance from the darkness and ignorance before spoken of?
Suppose then they come to be persuaded of such an uncertainty, What course
shall they take? Apply themselves to the Roman-Church and they are safe. But
seeing the being of a Church, (much less the Roman-Church) has no foundation
in the light of Nature, and men can never know any thing of it, especially of
its Prerogative, but by and from the Scripture whose Authority you have taught
them to question, and made doubtful to them, What remains for rational men but
to renounce both Scripture and Church, and betake themselves to your
commendable piece of witty Atheism. This is the old lurry, The Scripture cannot
be known, believed, understood, but by the Church; the Church cannot be proved
to have Being, Constitution, or Authority but by the Scripture; and then if you
doubt of the Authority of that proof of the Church, you must return to the
Church again; and so on, until all Faith and Reason vanish, or men make
shipwreck of their Faith, and become brutish in their Understanding, pretending
to believe, they know neither what nor why. And this employment of raising
surmises and stirring up jealousies about the Word of God, it is Penmen, and
their Authority, do men put themselves upon, I will not say, to gratify the
Roman-Court; but, I will say, in obedience to their prejudices, lusts, and
darkness, and saddest drudgery that any of the sons of men can be exercised
withal. And if he would be believed, he professes himself an Anti-Scripturist,
and in that profession which he puts upon himself, an Atheist. For my part, I
am amazed to think how men are able to hold their Pens in their hands, that an
horror of the work they have before them, does not make them shake them out,
when they are thus traducing the holy Word of Christ, and exciting evil
surmises about it. Should they deal with a man of any Power and Authority, they
might not expect to escape his indignation; even, to publish to all the World,
that he is indeed an honorable person, but yet, if men will question his
Honor, Truth, Honesty, Authority, and affirm him to be a Cheat, Thief,
Murderer, Adulterer, they cannot see how they can be disproved; at least, he
would have a difficult task in hand, that should endeavor to free him from
objections of that nature: Yet thus men dare to deal with the Scripture, that
Word which God has magnified above all his Name; If this be the Spirit that
breathed in the Apostles, the holy Army of Martyrs of old, and all the Fathers
of the Primitive Church, I am much mistaken; nay, I am greatly so, if with one
consent they would not denounce an Anathema against such a defense of any
Religion whatever. But you will say, The same person defends also the
Scripture; just as he in the Poet did Pelilius. Me Capitolinus convictore usus
amicoque
A puero est, causaque mea permulta rogatus
Fecit, and incolumnis laetor quod vivit in urbe;
Sed tamem admiror quo pacto Judicium illud
Fugerit. --
A defense worse and more bitter then a downright accusation. I am not now to
observe what prejudice this excuse brings to the cause of our Author, with all
intelligent persons, having noted it once and again before; nor what
contentment Protestants take, to see that the Truth they profess cannot be
shaken without inducing men to question the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Religion; and, if this course be persisted in, for ought that I can understand,
the whole Controversy between us and the Romanists, must needs be at last
reduced unto this head, Whether the Scripture of the Old and New Testament, was
given by Divine Inspiration. For the present, having, in the consideration of
the general suppositions of this Treatise, spoken before to this head, I shall
not need to answer particular Exceptions given in against its Authority; nor do
I think it incumbent on me so to do; unless our Author own them for his sense,
which if he be pleased to do, I promise him, if God give me life, to give him a
distinct answer to every one of them, and all that is contained in them.
Moreover these things will again occur in his 15. Section, where he expressly
takes the Scripture to task, as to its pleas for judging of, and settling Men in
the Truth.

Proceed we to his next Section, p. 126.

CHAP. VIII.
Use of Reason. Sect. 11.

THis Section is set apart for the cashiering of Reason from having any hand in
the business we deal about; and the truth is, if our Author can persuade us
first to throw away our Bibles, and then to lay aside the use of our Reason, I
suppose, there is no doubt but we shall become Roman Catholics. This work, it
seems, cannot be effected, unless men are contented to part with Scripture and
Reason; all that whereby they are Christians and Men. But unless our Author
have emptyed Circe's Box of Ointment, whereby she transformed Men into Swine,
he will confess it somewhat a difficult task that he has undertaken. Methinks
one of these demands might suffice at once. But he presumes he has put his
Contrymen into a good humor, and knowing them free and open-hearted, he
plyes them whilst they are warm.

We have, indeed, in this Section, as fair a flourish of words as in any other;
but, there can be but little reason in the words that men make use of, to plead
against Reason it self. And yet I am persuaded* most Readers think as well of
this (...) as any in the Book. To whom the un^easonableness of this is evident,
that of the others is so also; and those who willingly imbibe the other parts
of his Discourse, will little strain at this. Nothing is to be trusted unto
Prejudice. Nor, if we will learn, are we to think strange of any thing. Let us
weigh then impartially, what is of Reason in this Discourse against the use of
Reason. What ever he pretends, he knows full well, that he has no difference
with any sort of Protestants about finding out a Religion by Reason, and
adhereing only to its dictates in the Worship of God. All the World of
Protestants profess, that they receive their Religion wholly by Revelation from
God, and no otherwise; Nor is it about ascribing a Sovereignty to Reason to
judge of the particulars of Religion so Revealed, to accept or refuse them,
according as that shall judge them suitable, or not, to its principles and
liking. This is the Sovereign dictate of Reason, That whatever God reveals to
be believed, is true, and as such must be embraced, though the bottom of it
cannot be sounded by Reason's line; and that because (...) reason of a man is
not absolutely reason* but being the reason of a man, is variously limited,
bounded, and made defective in its ratiocinations. An objective Truth our
Reason supposes* all that it has to do, is but to judge of what is proposed to
it according to the best Principles that it has; which is all that God in that
kind requires of us; unless in that work wherein he intends to make us more
then men, that is, Christians, he would have us make our selves less then Men,
even as Brutes. That in our whole obedience to God, we are to use our Reason,
Protestants say indeed; and moreover, that what is not done reasonably, is not
Obedience. The Scripture is the Rule of all our Obedience, Grace the Principle
enabling us to perform it; but the manner of its performance must be Rational,
or it is not the supposition of Rule or Principle that will render any act of a
man, Obedience. Religion, say Protestants, is revealed in the Scripture,
proposed to the minds and wills of men for its entertainment by the Ministry of
the Church; Grace to Believe, and Obey, is supernaturally from God; but, as to
the Proposals of Religion from Scripture, they aver, that men ought to admit
and receive them as men, that is, judge of the sense and meaning of them,
discover their truth, and finding them revealed, acquiesce in the Authority of
him by whom they are first revealed. So far as men, in any things of their
concernments that have a moral good or evil in them, do refuse, in the choice
or refusal of them, to exercise that judging and discerning, which is the
proper work of Reason, they un-Man themselves, and invert the order of Nature;
dethroning the (...) of the Soul, and causing it to follow the faculties that
have no light but what they receive by and from it. It Is true, all our carnal
reasonings against Scripture-Mysteries, are to be captivated to the Obedience
of Faith; and, this is highly reasonable, making only the less, particular,
defective collections of reason, give place to the more noble, general and
universal principles of it. Nor is the denying of our reason any where
required, as to the sense and meaning of the words of the Scripture, but as to
the things and matter signified by them. The former, Reason must judge of, if
we are men; the latter, if, in conjunction with unbelief and carnal lusts, it
tumultuate against it, is to be subdued to the Obedience of Faith. All that
Protestants in the business of Religion ascribe unto men, is but this, that in
the business of Religion they are, and ought to be men; that is, judge of the
sense and truth of what is spoken to them according to that Rule which they
have received for the measure and guide of their Understandings in these
things. If this may not be allowed, you may make a Herd of them, but a Church
never.

Let us now consider what is offered in this Section about Reason, wherein the
concernment of any Protestants may lie. As the matter is stated, about any
one's setting up himself to be a new and extraordinary Director unto men in
Religion, upon the account of the irrefutable Reason he brings along with him,
which is the spring and sourse of that Religion which he tenders unto them; I
very much question, Whether any instance can be given of any such thing from
the foundation of the World. Men have so set up indeed sometimes, as that Good
Catholic Vanine did not long since in France, to draw men from all Religions;
but, to give a new Religion unto men, that this pretension was ever solely made
use of, I much question. As true Religion came by Inspiration from God, so all
Authors of that which is false, have pretended to Revelation. Such were the
pretensions of Minos, Lycurgus, and Nunia of old, of Mahomet of late, and
generally, of the first Founders of Religious Orders in the Roman-Church; all
in imitation of real Divine Revelation, and in answer to indelible impressions
on the minds of all men, that Religion must come from God. To what purpose
then, the first part of his Discourse about the coining of Religion from
Reason, or the framing of Religion by Reason, is, I know not; unless it be to
cast a Blind before his unwary Reader, whilst he steals away from him his
Treasure, that is, his Reason, as to its use in its proper place. Though
therefore there be many things spoken, unduly, and, because it must be said,
untruly also, in this first part of his Discourse, until toward the end of Page
131. which deserve to be animadverted on; yet, because they are such as no sort
of Protestants has any concernment in, I shall pass them over. That wherein he
seems to reflect any thing upon our Principles, is in a supposed reply to what
he had before delivered; whereunto indeed it has no respect or relation, being
the assertion of a Principle utterly distant from that imaginary one, which he
had timely set up, and stoutly cast down before. It is this; That we must take
the words from Christ and his Gospel; but the proper sense, which the words of
themselves cannot carry with them, our own reason must make out. If it be the
Doctrine of Protestants, which he intends in these words, it is most
disadvantagiously and uncandidly represented, which becomes not an ingenious
and learned person. This is that which Protestants affirm: Religion is Revealed
in the Scripture; that Revelation is delivered* and contained in Propositions
of Truth. Of the sense of those words, that carry their sense with them, Reason
judges, and must do so; or we are Brutes; and that every ones Reason, so far
as his concernment lies in what is proposed to him.

Neither does this at all exclude the Ministry or Authority of the Church, both
which are entrusted with it by Christ, to propose the Rules contained in his
Word unto Rational Creatures, that they may understand, believe, love, and obey
them. To cast out this use of Reason, with pretense of an ancient sense of the
words, which yet we know they have not about them, is as vain as any thing in
this Section, and that is vain enough. If any such ancient sense can be made
out, or produced, that is a meaning of any Text that was known to be so, from
their Explication who gave that Text, it is by reason to acquiesced in. Neither
is this to be make a man a Bishop, much less a chief Bishop, to himself. I
never heard that it was the office of a Bishop, to know, believe, or understand
for any man, but for himself. It is his Office, indeed, to instruct and teach
men; but they are to learn and understand for themselves, and so to use their
Reason in their Learning. Nor does the variableness of men's thoughts and
reasonings infer any variableness in Religion to follow; whose stability and
sameness depends on its first Revelation, not, our manner of Reception. Nor
does any thing asserted by Protestants, about the use of Reason in the business
of Religion, interfere with the rule of the Apostle about captivating our
Understandings to the Obedience of Faith, much less to his assertion, That
Christians walk by Faith, and not by Sight; seeing that without it we can do
neither the one nor the other. For I can neither submit to the truth of things
to be believed, nor live upon them, or according unto them, unless I understand
the Propositions wherein they are expressed; which is the work we assign to
Reason. For those who would resolve their Faith into Reason, we confess, that
they overthrow not only Faith, but Reason it self; there being nothing more
irrational, than that belief should be the product of Reason, being properly an
assent resolved into Authority, which if Divine, is so also. I shall then
desire no more of our Author, nor his Readers, as to this Section, but only
this, that they would believe, that no Protestant is at all concerned in it:
and so I shall not further interpose, as to any contentment they may find in
its review or perusal.

CHAP. IX.
Jews Objections.

THe title of this Third Chapter is that, No Religion, or Sect, or Way, has
any advantage over another, nor all of them over Popery. To this we excepted
before in general, that that way which has the truth with it, has in that
wherein it has the truth, the advantage against all others. Truth turns the
scales in this business, wherever and with whomsoever be found; and if it lie
in any way distant from Popery, it gives all the advantage against it that need
be desired. And with this only enquiry, With whom the Truth abides, is this
disquisition, What ways in Religion have advantage against others, to be
resolved. But this course and procedure, for some reasons which he knows, and
we may easily guess at, our Author liked not; and it it is now too late for us
to walk in any path* but what he has trodden before us, though it seem rather a
maze, then a way for Travelers to walk in, that would all pass on in their
Journey.

His first Section is entitled, Light and Spirit; the pretense whereof, he
treats after his manner, and cashiers from giving any such advantage as is
inquired after. But neither yet are we arrived to any concernment of
Protestants. That which they plead as their advantage, is not the empty names
of Light and Spirit; but, the truth of Christ revealed in the Scripture. I know
there are not a few who have impertinently used these good words, and
Scripture-expressions, which yet ought no more to be scoffed at by others, then
abused by them. But that any have made the plea here pretended as to their
settlement in Religion, I know not. The truth is, if they have, it is no other
upon the matter, but what our Author calls them unto; to a naked Credo he would
reduce them, and that differs only from what seems to be the mind of them that
plead Light and Spirit, that he would have them resolve their faith
irrationally into the Authority of the Church, they pretend to do it into the
Scripture.

But what he aims to bring men unto, he justifies from the examples of
Christians in ancient times, who had to deal with Jews and Pagans, whose
disputes were rational and weighty, and pusled the wisest of the Clergy to
answer, So that after all their ratiocination ended, whether it sufficed or no,
they still concluded with this one word, Credo; which in Logic and Philosophy,
was a weak answer, but in Religion, the best and only one to be made. What
could be spoken more untruely, more contumeliously, or more to the reproach of
Christian Religion, I cannot imagine. It Is true indeed, that as to the
resolution, satisfaction, and settlement of their own souls, Christians always
built their faith, and resolved it into the Authority o^ God in his word; but
that they opposed their naked Credo to the disputes of Jews or Pagans, or
rested in that for a solution of their objections, is heavenly-wide; as far
from truth, (...). I wonder any man who has ever seen, or almost heard of the
Disputes and Discourses of Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin,
Theophilus Antiochenus, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Lactantius, Chrysostom,
Austin, Theodoret, and innumerable others, proving the faith of the Christian
Religion against the Jews from Scripture, and the reasonableness of it against
the Pagans, with the folly and foppery of theirs, could on any account be
induced to cast out such a reproach against them. But it seems Jacta est alea,
and we must go on; and therefore to carry on the design of bringing us all to a
naked Credo, resolved into the Authority of the present Church, a thing never
heard of, spoken of, nor that it appears dreamed of, by any of the ancient
Christians. The objections of the Jews against the Christian Religion are
brought on the stage, and an enquiry made, how they can be satisfactorily
answered. His words are Page 142. In any age of the Christian-Church a Jew
might say thus to the Christians then living; Your Lord and Master was born a
Jew, and under the jurisdiction of the High Priests; these he opposed, and
taught a Religion contrary to Moses, (otherwise how comes there to be a
faction?) but how could he justly do it? no humane Power is of force against
God's, who spak^ (as you also grant) by Moses and the Prophets; and Divine
Power it could not be, for God is not contrary to himself. And although your
Lord might say, as indeed he did, that Moses spoke of him as of a Prophet to
come, greater then himself; yet, Who shall judge that such a thing was meant of
his person? For suice that Prophet is neither specifyed by his name, nor
characteristical properties (well said Jew) who could say it was he more then
any other to come? And if there were a greater to come then Moses were, surely
born a Jew, he would, being come into the world, rather exalt that Law to more
ample glory, then diminish it. And if you will further contest, that such a
Prophet was to abrogate the first Law, and bring in a new one, Who shall judge
in this case? the whole Church of the Hebrews, who never dreamed of any such
thing; or one member thereof who was born a subject to their judgments. This,
says he, is the great Occumenical difficulty, and he that in any age of
Christianity could either answer it, or find any bulwark to set against it, so
that it should do no harm; would easily either salve; or prevent, all other
difficulties, etc.

The difficulty, as is evident, lay in this, That the Authority and Judgment of
the whole Church of the Hebrews, lay against Christ and the Gospel. That Church
when Christ conversed on earth, was a true Church of God, the only Church on
earth, and had been so for 2000 years without interruption in its self, without
competition from any other. It had its High Priest confessedly instituted by
God himself in an orderly succession to those days. The interpretation of
Scripture, it pretended, was trusted with it alone; and traditions they had
good store, whose original they pleaded from Moses himself, directing them in
that interpretation; Christ and his Apostles, whom they looked upon as poor
ignorant contemptible persons, came and preached a doctrine, which that Church
determined utterly contrary to the Scripture and their Traditions: what shall
now be answered to their Authority which was unquestionably all that ever was,
or shall be, entrusted with any Church on the earth. Our Author tells us, that
this great argument of the Jews could not be any way warded or put by, but by
recourse unto the Churches infallibility, page 146. Which, sit verbo venia, is
so ridiculous a pretense, as I wonder how any block in his way could cause him
to stumble upon it. What Church, I pray? the Church of Christians? When that
argument was first used by the Jews against Christ himself, it was not yet
founded; and if an absolute infallibility be supposed in the Church, without
respect to her adherence to the rule of infallibility, I dare boldly pronounce
that argument indissoluble; and that all Christian Religion must be therein
discarded. If the Jewish-Church which had at that day, as great Church Power,
and prerogative, as any Church has or can have, were infallible in her
Judgment, that she made of Christ and his Doctrine; there remains nothing but
that we renounce both him and it, and turn either Jews or Pagans, as we were of
old. Here then, by our Authors confession, lies a plain Judgment, and
Definition of the only Church of God in the world, against Christ and his
Doctrine; and it is certainly incumbent on us to see how it may be wa^ed. And
this, I suppose, we cannot better be instructed in, then by considering, what
was answered unto it by Christ himself, his Apostles, and those that succeeded
them in the profession of the faith of the Gospel. (1) For Christ himself; its
certain he pleaded his miracles, the Works which he wrought, and the Doctrine
that he revealed: but withal, as to the Jews with whom he had to do, he pleads
the Scriptures, Moses and the Prophets, and offers himself and his Doctrine to
be tried, to stand or fall by their verdict, Joh. 5.39, 46. Mat. 22.42. Luke
24.27. I say, besides the testimony of his Works and Doctrine, to their
authority of the Church, he opposes that of the Scripture, which he knew the
other ought to give place unto. And it is most vainly pretended, by our Author,
in the behalf of the Jews, that the Messiah, or great Prophet to come, was not
in the Scripture specified by such Characteristicall Properties, as made it
evident that Jesus was the Messiah; all the descriptions given of the one, and
they innumerable, undeniably centring in the other. The same course steered the
Apostle Peter, Act. 2. and 3. And expressly in his second Epistle, chap. 2. v.
17, 18, 19. And Paul, Act. 13.16, 17, etc. And of Apollos, who openly disputed
with the Jews upon this Argument, it is said, that he mightily convinced the
Jews, publicly showing by the Scripture, that Jesus is the Christ, Act. 18.28.
And Paul persuaded the Jews concerning Jesus at Rome, both out of the Law of
Moses, and out of the Prophets, from morning until evening, Act. 28.23.
Concerning which labor and disputation, the censure of our Author, p. 149. is
very remarkable. There can be no hope, says he, of satisfying a Querent, or
convincing an Opponent, in any point of Christianity, unless he will submit to
the splendour of Christ's Authority in his own Person, and the Church descended
from him: which I take to be the Reason, why some of the Jews in Rome, when St.
Paul labored so much to persuade Christ out of Moses and the Prophets,
believed in him, and some did not. Both the coherence of the words and design
of the Preface, and his whole scope manifest his meaning to be, That no more
believed on him, or that some disbelieved, notwithstanding all the pains he
took with them.

And what was the reason of this failure? Why St. Paul fixed on an unsuitable
means of persuading them, namely Moses and the Prophets, when he should have
made use of the Authority of the Church. Vain, and bold man, that dares oppose
his prejudices to the Spirit and Wisdom of Christ in that great and holy
Apostle, and that in a way and work wherein he had the express pattern and
example of his Master! If this be the Spirit that rules in the Roman-Synagogue,
that so puffes up men in their fleshly minds, as to make them think themselves
wiser then Christ and his Apostles, I doubt not, but men will every day find
cause to rejoice, that it is cast out of them; and be watchful, that it return
to possess them no more. But this is that which galls the man; The difficulty
which he proposes as insoluble by any ways but an acquiescing in the
Authority of the present Church, he finds assoyled in Scripture on other
Principles. This makes him fall soul on St. Paul, whom he finds most frequent
in answering it from Scripture, not considering, that, at the same time* he
accuses St. Peter of the like folly, though he pretend for him a greater
reverence. However, this may be said in defense of St. Paul, that by his
Arguments about Christ and the Gospel from Moses and the Prophets, many
thousands of Jews all the World over were converted to the Faith; when it is
hard to meet with an instance of one in an age, that will any way take notice
of the Authority of the Roman-Church. But to return; this was the constant way
used by the Apostles, of answering that great difficulty pleaded by our Author
from the Authority of the Hebrew-Church. They called the Jews to the Scripture,
the plain Texts and Contexts of Moses and the Prophets, opposing them to all
their Churches real or pretended Authority; and all her Interpretations
pretended to be received by Tradition from of old; so fixing this for a
perpetual standing Rule to all Generations, that the Doctrine of the Church is
to be examined by the Scripture, and where it is found contradictory of it, her
authority is of no value at all, it being annexed unto her attendance on that
Rule. But it may be replied, That the Church in the days of the Apostles was
not yet settled, nor made firm enough to bear the weight that now may be laid
upon it, as our Author affirms* page 149. So that now the great Resolve of all
doubts must be immediately upon the Authority of the present Church; after that
was once well cleared, the fathers of old pleaded that only in this case, and
removed the Objections of the Jews by that alone. I am persuaded, though our
Author be a great admirer of the present Church, he is not such a stranger to
Antiquity, as to believe any such thing. Is the Authority of the Church pleaded
by Justine Martyr, in that famous dispute with Trypho the Jew, wherein these
very Objections instanced by our Author are thoroughly canvassed? Does he not
throughout his whole Disputation prove out of the Scriptures, and them alone,
that Jesus was the Christ, and his Doctrine agreeable unto them? Is any such
thing pleaded by Origin, Tertullian, Chrysostom, or any one that had to deal
with the Jews? Do they not wholly persist in the way traced for them by Paul,
Peter, and Apollos, mightily convincing the Jews out of Scripture? Let him
consult their Answers, he will not find them such poor empty jejune Discourses,
as that he supposes they might make use of, page 148. and to the proofs
whereof, by Texts of Scripture, he says, the Rabbis could answer by another
Interpretation of them. He will find another Spirit breathing in their
Writings, another efficacy in their Arguments, and other evidence in their
Testimonies, than it seems he is acquainted with; and such as all the Rabbis
in the World are not able to withstand. And I know full well, that these
insinuations, that Christians are not able justifiably to convince, confute,
and stop the mouths of Jews from the Scripture, would have been abhorred as the
highest piece of blasphemy by the whole ancient Church of Christ: and it is
meet it should be so still by all Christians.

Is there no way left to deny pretenses* of Light and Spirit, but by
proclaiming, to the great scandal of Christianity, that we cannot answer the
Exceptions of Jews unto the Person and Doctrine of our Savior out of the
Scriptures? And has Rome need of these bold Sallyes against the vitals of
Religion? Is she no other way capable of a defense? Better she perished 10000
times, than that any such reproach should be justly cast on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel. But whatever our Author thinks of himself, I have very
good ground to conjecture, that he has very little acquaintance with Judaical
Antiquity, Learning, or Arguments; nor very much with the Scripture: and may
possibly deserve on that account some excuse, if he thought those Exceptions
insoluble, which more learned men than himself know how to answer and remove,
without any considerable trouble.

This difficulty was fixed on by our Author, that upon it there might be stated
a certain retreat, and assured way of establishment against al of the like
nature. This he assigns to be, the Authority of the present Church;
Protestants, the Scripture: wherein, as to the instance chosen out as most
pressing, we have the concurrent suffrage of Christ, his Apostles, and all the
ancient Christians; so that we need not any further to consider the pretended
pleas of Light and Spirit, which he has made use of, as the Orator desired his
Dialogist would have insisted on the Stories of Cerberus and Cocytus, that he
might have showed his skill and activity in their Confutation. For, what he
begs in the way, as to the constitution of St. Peter, and his Successors in the
Rule of the Church, as he produces no other proof for it, but that doughty
one, that, It must needs be so; so, if it were granted him, he may easily
perceive by the Instance of the Judaical Church that himself thought good to
insist upon, that it will not avail him in his plea, against the final
resolution of our Faith into the Scripture, as its senses are proposed by the
Ministry of the Church, and rationally conceived or understood.

CHAP. X.
Protestant Pleas.

HIs Sect. 13. p. 155. entitled Independent and Presbyterians Pleas, is a
merry one. The whole design of it seems to be, to make himself and others sport
with the miscarriages of men in and about Religion. Whether it be a good work
or no, that day that is coming will discover. The Independents he divides into
two parts, Quakers and Anabaptists. Quakers he begins withal, and longest
insists upon, being, as he says, well read in their Books, and acquainted with
their persons; some commendation he gives them, so far as it may serve to the
disparagement of others, and then falls into a fit of Quaking, so expressly
imitating them in their Discourses, that I fear he will confirm some in their
surmises, that such as he, both set them on work, and afterward assisted them
in it. For my part, having undertaken only the defense of Protestancy and
Protestants, I am altogether inconcerned in the entertainment he has provided
for his Readers, in this personating of a Quaker, which he has better done,
and kept a better decorum in, than in his personating of a Protestant; a thing
in the beginning of his Discourse he pretended unto. The Anabaptists, as far
as I can perceive, he had not meddled with, unless it had been to get an
advantage of venting his pretty Answer to an Argument against Infant Baptism;
but the truth is, if the Anabaptists had no other Objections against
Infant Baptism, nor Protestants no better Answers to their Objections then what
are mentioned here by our Author, it were no great matter what become of the
Controversy: but it is Merriment, not Disputation, that he is designing; and I
shall leave him to the solace of his own fancies.

No otherwise, in the next place, does he deal with the Presbyterians: in
personating of whom, he pours out a long senseless rapsody of words, many
insignificant expressions, vehement exclamations, and uncouth terms, such, as
to do them right, I never heard uttered by them in preaching, though I have
heard many of them; nor read written by them, though, I suppose, I have
perused, at least as many of their Books as our Author has done of the
Quakers. Any one with half an Eye, may see what it is which galls the man, and
his Party; which, whether he has done wisely to discover, his (...) will
inform him, that is, the Preaching of all sorts of Protestants, that he
declares himself to be most perplexed with, and therefore most labors to
expose it to reproach and obloquy. And herein he deals with us, as in many of
their Stories, their Demoniacks do with their Exorcists; discover which Relick,
or which Saints name, or other Engine in that bufle most afflicts them; that so
they may be paid more to the purpose. Somewhat we may learn from hence; Fas est
and ab host doceri. But he will make the Presbyterians amends for all the
scorn he endeavors to expose them to, by affirming, when he has assigned a
senseless Harangue of words unto them, that the Protestants are not able to
answer their Objections. Certainly, if the Presbyterians are such pitiful
souls, as not to be able any beter to defend their cause, than they are
represented by him here to do; those Protestants are beneath all consideration,
who are not able to deal and grapple with them: And this is as it should be;
Roman Catholics are wise, learned, holy, angelical, seraphical persons; all
others, ignorant dolts, that can scarce say Boe to a Goose. These things
considered in themselves are unserious trifles* but seria ducunt. We shall see,
presently, whither all this lurry tends; for the sting of this whole
Discourseis fixed in the Scripture.

Of the same importance is the next Section, page 170. Entitled Protestants
Pro and Con, wherein the differences that are amongst many in these Nations are
notably exagitated. I presume, in the intention of his mind upon his present
design, he forgot that by a new change of Name, the same things may be uttered,
the same words used, of and concerning Christians in general, ever since,
almost, that name was known in the world. Was there any thing more frequent
among the Pagans of old, than to object to Christians their Differences and
endless Disputes? I wish our Author would but consider, that which remains of
the Discourse of Celsus on this Subject: particularly, his charge on them, that
at their beginnings, and whilst they were few, they agreed well enough; but
after they increased, and were dispersed into several Nations, they were every
where at variance among themselves, whereas all sorts of men were at peace
before their pretended Reformation of the Worship of God; and he will find in
it the sum of this, and the four following Sections to the end of this Chapter.
And, if he will but add so much to his pains, as to peruse the excellent
Answers of Origin in his third Book; he will, if not be persuaded to desist
from urging the objections of Celsus, yet discern what is expected from him to
reply unto, if he persist in his way. But, if we may suppose, that he has not
that respect for the honor of the first Christians; methinkes, the intestine
irreconcilable brauls of his own Mothers children, should somewhat allay his
heat and confidence, in charging endless differences upon Protestants, of whom
only I speak. Yea, but you will say, They have a certain means of ending their
Controversies, Protestants have none. And have they so? the more shame for them
to trouble themselves, and others, from one generation unto another with
Disputes and Controversies, that have such a ready way to end them when they
please; and Protestants are the more to be pitied, who perhaps are ready, some
of them, at least, as far as they are able, to live at Peace. But why have not
Protestants a sure and safe way to issue all their differences? Why; Because
every one is Judge himself, and they have no Umpire in whose decision they are
bound to acquiesce. I pray, Who told you so? Is it not the Fundamental
Principle of Protestantism, that the Scripture determines all things necessary
unto Faith and Obedience, and that in that determination ought all men to
acquiess? I know few Roman Catholics have the prudence, or the patience, to
understand what Protestancy is. And certain it is, that those who take up their
knowledge of it, from the Discourses and Writings of such Gentlemen as our
Author, know very little of it, if any thing at all: And those who do at any
time get leave to read the books of Protestants, seem to be so filled with
prejudices against them, and to be so biased by corrupt affections, that they
seldom come to a true apprehension of their meanings; for who so blind as he
that will not see? Protestants tell them, that the Scripture contains all
things necessary to be believed and practiced in the Worship of God; and those
proposed with that perspicuity and clearness which became the wisdom of it is
Author, who intended to instruct men by it, in the knowledge of them; and in
this Word and Rule, say they, are all men to rest and acquiess. But, says our
Author, why then do they not do so, why are they at such fewds and differences
amongst themselves? Is this in truth his business? Is it Protestants he blames,
and not Protestancy? men's miscarriages, and not their Rule's imperfection? If
it be so, I crave his pardon for having troubled him thus far. To defend
Protestants for not answering the Principles of their Profession, is a task too
hard for me to undertake, nor do I at all like the business; let him lay on
blame still, until I say, Hold. It may be, we shall grow wiser, by his reviling,
as Monica was cured of her intemperance, by the reproach of a Servant. But I
would fain prevail with these Gentlemen, for their own sakes, Not to cast that
blame which is due to us, upon the holy and perfect Word of God. We do not say,
nor ever did, that who ever acknowledges the Scripture to be a perfect Rule,
must upon necessity understand perfectly all that is contained in it; that he
is presently freed from all darkness, prejudices, corrupt affections, and
enabled to judge perfectly and infallibly of every truth contained in it, or
deduced from it. These causes of our differences belong to individual persons,
not to our common Rule: And, if because no men are absolutely perfect, and some
are very perverse and froward, we should throw away our Rule, the blessed Word
of God, and run to the Pope for rule and guidance; it is all one, as if at
noonday, because some are blind and miss their way, and some are drunk and
stagger out of it, and others are variously entised to leave it, we should all
conspire to wish the Sun out of the Firmament, that we might follow a Will with
a Wisp.

I know not what, in general, needs to be added further to this Section. The
mistake of it is palpable; some particular passages may be remarked in it
before we proceed: page 173. he Pronounces an heavy doom on the Prelate
Protestants; making them Prevaricators, Impostors, Reprobates; an hard
sentence, but that it is hoped it will prove like the flying Bird, and Curse
causeless! But what is the matter? Why, in dealing with the Presbyterians, They
are forced to make use of those Popish Principles which themselves at first
rejected, and so building them up again, by the Apostles rule deserve no better
terms; But, what I pray are they? why, the difference betwixt Clergy and Laity,
the efficacy of Episcopal Ordination, and the Authority of a visible Church,
unto which all men are to obey. There are but two things our Author needs to
prove to make good his charge. First, that these are Popish Principles.
Secondly, That as such they were at any time cast down and destroyed by
Prelate-Protestants. I fear his mind was gone a little astray, or that he had
been lately among the Quakers, when he hammered this charge against Prelate
Protestants. For as these have been their constant Principles ever since the
beginning of the Reformation, so they have as constantly maintained, that in
their true and proper sense they are not Popish. Nor is the difference about
these things, between any Protestants whatever, any more then verbal. For
those terms of Clergy and Laity, because they had been abused in the Papacy,
though anciently used, some have objected against them; but for the things
signified by them, namely, that in the Church there are some Teachers, some to
be taught, Bishops and Flocks, Pastors and People, no Protestant ever
questioned. Our Author then does but cut out work for himself, without order
from any Protestant; when he sets up an excuse for this change in them by a
relinquishment of their first Principles, and re-assuming Popish ones for their
defense against the Presbyterians. He that set him a work may pay him his
wages. Protestants only tell him, that what was never done, needs never be
excused.

Nor will they give him any more thanks for the plea he interposes in the
behalf of Episcopacy, against Presbyterians and Independents; being interwoven
with a plea for the Papacy, and managed by such arguments as end in the
exaltation of the Roman-See; and, that partly, because they know that their
Adversaries will be easily able to disprove the feigned Monarchical Government
of the Church under one Pope; and to prove that, that fancy really everts the
true and only Monarchical State of the Church in reference to Christ; knowing
that Monarchy does not signify two heads, but one: and partly, because they
have better Arguments of their own to plead for Episcopacy then those that he
suggests here unto them; or then any man in the world can supply them with, who
thinks there is no communication of Authority from Christ to any on the Earth,
but by the hands of the Pope. So that upon the whole matter, they desire him,
that he would attend his own business, and not immix their cause in the least
with his, which tends so much to their weakening and disadvantage. If this may
be granted, which is but reasonable, they will not much be troubled about his
commendation of the Pope, page 178. as the Substitute of Christ, our only
visible Pastor, the chief Bishop of the Catholic Church, presiding, ruling,
and directing, in the place of Christ, and the like elogium's: being resolved,
when he goes about to prove any thing, that he says, that they will consider
of it. But he must be better known to them then he is, before they will believe
him on his bare word, in things of such importance; and some suppose, that the
more he is known, the less he will be believed. But that he may not for the
present think himself neglected, we will run over the heads of his plea,
pretended for Episcopacy, really to assert the Papal Sovereignty. First, he
pleads, That the Christian Church was first Monarchical under one Sovereign
Bishop, when Christ who sounded it was upon the Earth. True; and so it is
still. There is one sheepfold, one Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; he that
was then bodily present, having promised That presence of Himself with his
Church to the end of the World, wherein he continues its one Sovereign Bishop.
And, although the Apostles after him, had an equality of power in the Church
among themselves, as Bishops after them have also; yet this does not denominate
the Government of the Church, Aristocratical; no more then the equality of the
Lords in Parliament, can denominate the Government of this Kingdom to be so.
The denomination of any Rule is from him, or them, in whom the Sovereignty does
reside, not from any subordinate Rulers. So is the Rule of the Church
Monarchical. The subversion of this Episcopacy, we acknowledge subverts the
whole Polity of the Church, and so all her Laws and Rule, with the guilt
whereof Protestants charge the Romanists. He adds, It will not suffice, to
say, that the Church is still under its Head Christ, who being in Heaven, has
his spiritual influences over it. It will not indeed; But yet we suppose, that
his presence with It by his Spirit and Laws will suffice; Why should it not?
Because the true Church of Christ, must have the very same Head she had at
first, or else she cannot be the same Body: Very good; and so she has; the
very same Christ that was crucified for her, and not another; But that Head was
Man-God Personally present in both his Natures here on Earth. But is he not, I
pray, the same Man-God, still? the same Christ, though the manner of his
presence be altered? This is strange, that being the same as he was, and being
presert still, one circumstance of the manner of his presence, should hinder
him from being the same head. I cannot understand the Logic, Reason, nor
Policy of this Inference. Suppose we should on these trisling instances,
exclude Jesus Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, from
being the same Head of his Church as he was; Will the Pope supply his room? Is
he the same Head that Christ was? Is he God-Man, bodily present? or what would
you have us to conclude? A visible Head or Bishop if the Church has not now
over her as at first she had, she is not the same she was, and consequently in
the way to ruin. This too much alters the Question: At first it was, that she
must have the same Head she had at first, or she is not the same; Now, that she
must have another Head that is not the same; or she is not the same. For the
Pope is not Jesus Christ. These arguings hang together like a rope of Sand; And
what is built on this foundation (which indeed is so weak, that I am ashamed
further to contend with it) will of its own accord fall to the ground.

CHAP. XI.
Scripture; and new Principles.

THe next Paragraph, p. 182. is a naughty one. A business it is spent in and
about, that I have now often advised our Author to meddle with no more: If he
will not for the future take advice, I cannot help it; I have showed my good
will toward him: It is his debating of the Scripture and its Authority which I
intend. This with the intertexture of some other gentle suppositions is the
subject of this and the following Section. And because I will not tire my self
and Reader, in tracing what seems of concernment in this Discourse, backward
and forward, up and down, as it is by him dispersed and disposed to his best
advantage in dealing with unwary men; I shall draw out the Principles of it,
that he may know them where ever he meets them, though never so much masked and
disguised, or never so lightly touched on, and also what judgment to pass upon
them. Their foundation being so taken away, these Sections, if I mistake not,
will sink of themselves.

Some of these Principles are co-incident with those general ones insisted on
in the entrance of our Discourse; others of them are peculiar to the design of
these Paragraphs; The first I shall only point unto, the latter briefly discuss.

1. It is supposed in the whole Discourse of these Sections; That from the
Roman- Church so stated, as now it is, or from the Pope, we here in England
first received the Gospel; which is the Romanists own Religion, and theirs by
donation from them, whom they have here pleased to accommodate with it. This
animates the whole, and is besides the special life of almost every sentence. A
lifeless life; for, that there is not a syllable of truth in it, has been
declared before; nor, were it so, that by the Ministry of the Roman-Church of
old, the Faith was first planted in these Nations, would that one inch promote
our Author's pretensions, unless he could prove, that they did not afterward
lose, or corrupt, at least, that which they communicated unto us; which he
knows to be the thing in Question, and not to be granted upon request, though
made in never so handsome words. To say then, That the Gospel is the Romanists
own Religion, from them you had it, you contend about that which is none of
your own; hear them whose it is, from whom you had it, who have the precedence
before you; is but to set up scare-Crows to fright fools and children: Men who
have any understanding of things past, know that all this bluster and noise
comes from emptiness of any solid matter or substance to be used in the case.

2. It is also doughtily supposed, That whatever is spoken of the Churnh in the
Scripture, belongs to the Roman- Church, and that alone; The Privileges, the
Authority, the Glory of the Church are all theirs; as the madd-man at Athens
thought all the Ships to be his, that came into the Harbor. I suppose, he will
not contend, but that, if you deny him this, all that he has said besides, is
to little purpose. And, I believe, he cannot but take it ill, that any of his
Readers should call him to an account, in that which he every where puts out of
question. But this, he knew well enough, that all Protestants deny; that they
grant no one privilege of the Catholic Church as such, to belong to the
Roman. All, that any of them will allow her, is but to be a putrid corrupt
member of it; some say, cut off, dead, and rotten. But yet that the Catholic
Church and the Roman are the same, must be believed, or you spoil all his
market. The Church is before the Gospel, gives testimony unto it, none could
know it, but by her Authority, nothing can be accepted as such, but what she
sets her seals unto; so that, to destroy the Church, is to destroy the Gospel?
What then, I pray? Suppose all this, and all the rest of his Assertions about
the Church, page 199, 200, etc. to be true, as some of them are most
blasphemously false; yet, What is all this to his purpose? Why this is the
Roman-Church of which all these things are spoken. It may be, the Roman-Church
indeed, of which much of it is spoken, even all that is sinfully derogatory to
the glory of Christ and his Apostles upon whom and whose Authority the Church
is built, and not their Authority on it, Ephesians. 2.18, 19, 20. But, what is
truly spoken in the Scripture of the Church, does no more belong to the Roman,
then to the least Assembly of Believers under Heaven; wherein the Essence of a
true Church is preserved; if it belongs unto it at all. And yet this rude
Pretense, and palpable Artifice is the main Engine in this Section, applied to
the removal of men from the Basis of the Scripture. The Church, the Church! the
Roman-Church, the Roman-Church! and these forsooth are supposed to be one and
the same; and the Pope to have Monopolized all the privileges of the Church,
contrary to express Statute Law of the Gospel. Hence he pretends, That if to go
out from the Catholic be evil, then not to come into the Roman is evil; when
indeed the most ready way to go out of the Catholic, is to go into the Roman.

3. Moreover, it is taken for granted, That the Roman- Church is every way what
it was, when first planted. Indeed, if it were so, it would deserve as much
particular respect as any Church of any City in the World, and, that would be
all: As it is, the case is altered. But its unalteredness being added to the
former Supposition of its Oneliness and Catholicism, it is easy to see what
sweet work a witty man, as our Author is, may make with this Church among good
company. Many and many a time have the Romanists attempted to prove these
things; but failing in their attempt, they think it now reasonable to take them
for granted. The Religion they now profess, must be that which first entered
England; and there, says our Author, it continued in peace for a thousand
years; when the truth is, after the entrance of their Religion, that is, the
corruption of Christianity by Papal usurpations, these Nations never passed one
age without tumults, turmoils, contentions, disorders; nor many without wars,
blood and devastations, and those arising from the Principles of their Religion.

4. To this is added, That the Bible is the Pope's own Book, which none can lay
claim to, but by and from him. This will be found to be a doubtful assertion,
and it will be difficult to conclude aright concerning it. He that shall
consider, what a worthy person the Pope is represented to be by our Author,
especially, in his just dealing and mercifulness, so, That he never did any man
wrong; and, shall take notice how many he has caused to be burned to death,
for having and using the Bible without his consent, must need suppose, that it
is his Book. For surely, his heavenly mind, would not have admitted of a
provocation to such severity; unless they had stolen his goods out of his
Possession. But on the other side, he that shall weigh aright his vilifying and
under-valuing of it, his preferring himself and Church before and above it;
seeing we are all apt to set a high price upon that which is our own; may be
ready to question whether indeed he have such a property in it as is pretended.
Having somewhat else to do, I shall not interpose my self in this difference,
nor attempt to determine this difficulty, but leave it as I find it, free for
every man to think as he sees cause.

5. But that which is the chief ingredieet of these Sections, is the plea, that
We know not the Scripture to be the word of God, but by the Church, that is,
the present Church of Rome; which he manageth by urging sundry objections
against it, and difficulties which men meet withal in their enquiry, whether
it be so or no. Nor content with that plea alone, he interweaves in his
discourse, many expressions and comparisons, tending directly to the slighting
and contempt, both of its Penmen, and Matter, which is said to be, Laws, Poems,
Sermons, Histories, Letters, Visions, several fancies in a diversity of
composure; the whole, a book whereby men may as well prove their negative, in
denying the immortality of the soul, heaven or hell, or any other thing, which
by reason of many intricacies, are very difficult, if not impossible at all to
be understood; see p. 190, 191, 192, etc. Concerning all which, I desire to
know, whether our Author be in good earnest or no; or, whether he thinks as he
writes; or, whether he would only have others to believe what he writes, that
he may serve his turn upon their credulity. If he be in good earnest indeed, he
calls us to an easy, welcome employment; namely, to defend the holy Word of
God, and the wisdom of God in it, from such slight and trivial exceptions, as
those he lays against them. This path is so trodden for us by the Ancients, in
their Answers to the more weighty Objections of his Predecessors in this work,
the Pagans, that we cannot well err or faint in it: If we are called to this
task, namely, to prove that we can know and believe the Scriptrue to be the
Word of God, without any respect to the Authority or Testimony of the present
Church of Rome; that no man can believe it to be so, with faith Divine and
Supernatural upon that testimony alone; that the whole counsel of God in all
things to be believed or done, in order to our last end, is clearly delivered
in it; and that the composure of it, is a work of infinite wisdom, suited to
the end designed to be accomplished by it, that no difficulties in the
interpretation of particular places, hinder the whole from being a complete and
perfect rule of Faith and Obedience, we shall most willingly undertake it, as
knowing it to be as honorable a service and employment as any of the sons of
men can in this world be called unto. If indeed himself be otherwise minded,
and believes not what he says, but only intends to entangle men by his
Sophistry, so to render them pliable unto his further intention, I must yet
once more persuade him to desist from this course. It does not become an
ingenious man, much less a Christian, and one that boasts of so much
Mortification as he does, to juggle thus with the things of God. In the mean
time, his Reader may take notice, that so long as he is able to defend the
Authority, Excellency, and Usefulness of the Scripture, this man had nothing to
say to him, as to the change of his Religion from Protestancy to Popery. And
when men will be persuaded to let that go as a thing uncertain, dubious,
useless, it matters not much where they go themselves. And for our Author,
methinks, if not for reverence to Christ, whose book we know the Scriptures to
be; yet for the devotion he bears the Pope, whose book he says it is, he might
learn to treat it with a little more respect; or at least prevail with him, to
send out a book not liable to so many exceptions, as this is pretended to be.
However, this I know, that though his pretense be to make men Papists, the
course he takes is the readyest in the world to make them Atheists; and whether
that will serve his turn or no, as well as the other, I know not.

6. We have not yet done with the Scripture. That the taking it for the only
rule of faith, the only determiner of differences, is the only cause of all our
differences, and which keeps us in a condition of having them endless; is also
pretended and pleaded. But, how shall we know this to be so? Christ and his
Apostles were absolutely of another mind; and so were Moses and the Prophets,
before them. The ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church walked in their steps,
and umpired all differences in Religion, by the Scriptures; opposing,
confuting, and condemning Errors and Heresies by them; preserving, through
their guidance, the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. In these latter
days of the world, which surely are none of the best, we have a few unknown
persons come from Rome, would persuade us, that the Scripture, and the use of
it, is the cause of all our differences, and the means of making them endless.
But why so, I pray? Does it teach us to differ, and contend? Does it speak
contradictions, and set us at variance? Is there any spirit of dissension
breathing in it? Does it not deliver what it commands us to understand, so as
it may be understood? Is there any thing needful for us to know, in the things
of God, but what it reveals? Who can tell us, what that is? But do we not see,
de facto, what differences there are amongst you, who pretend, all of you, to
be guided by Scripture? Yea, and we see also, what Surfeitings and drunkenness
there is in the world; but yet, do not think, bread, meat, and drink to be the
causes of them; and yet they are to the full as much so, as the Scriptures are
of our Differences* Pray, Sir, do not think, that sober men will cast away
their Food, and starve themse^^es, because you tell them, that some continually
abuse and surfeit on that very kind of food which they use. Nor will some men's
abuse of it, prevail with others to cast away the food of their souls, if they
have any design to live eternally.

7. The great safety and security that there is in committing our selves as to
all the concernments of Religion, unto the guidance, rule and conduct of the
Pope, is another great principle of this Discourse. And here our Author falls
into a deep admiration of the Popes dexterity in keeping all his Subjects in
peace and unity, and subjection to him; there being no danger to any one for
fors^king him, but only that of Excommunication. The contest is between the
Scripture and the Pope. Protestants say, the safest way for men, in reference
to their eternal condition, is to believe the Scripture, and rest therein; The
Romanists say the same, of the Pope. Which will prove the best course,
methinks, should not be hard to determine. All Christians in the world ever did
agree, That the Scripture is the certain infallible word of God, given by him
on purpose, to reveal his mind and will unto us. About the Pope there were
great Contests ever since he was first taken notice of in the world. Nothing, I
confess, little or low, is spoken of him. Some say, he is the head and spouse
of the Church, the Vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, the supreme
Moderator of Christians, the infallible judge of Controversies, and the like;
others, again, that he is Antichrist, the man of sin, a cruel Tyrant, and
Persecutor, the evil Servant Characterized, Mat. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. But all,
as far as I can gather, agree, that he is a Man; I mean, that almost all Popes
have been so; for about every individual, there is not the like consent. Now
the question is, Whether we shall rest in the Authority and Word of God, or in
the Authority and Word of a Man, as the Pope is confessed to be? and, whether
is like to yield us more security in our assiance? This being such another
difficult matter and case, as that before mentioned, about the Bibles being the
Popes book, shall not be by me decided; but left to the Judgment of wiser men.
In the mean time, for his feat of Government, it is partly known what it is; as
also what an influence into the effects of peace mentioned that gentle means of
Excommunication has had. I know one that used in the late times to say of the
Excommunication in Scotland, He would not care for their Devil, were it not for
his horn; and, I suppose, had not Papal Excommunication been always attended
with Wars, Blood, Seditions, Conspiracies, Depositions and Murders of Kings,
Fire and Faggot, according to to the extent of their Power, it would have been
less effectual then our Author pretends it to have been. Sir, do but give
Christians the liberty that Christ has purchased for them, lay down your
carnal weapons, your Whips, Racks, Prisons, Halters, Swords, Faggots, with your
Unchristian Subtilties, Slanders, and fleshly Machinations, and we and you
shall quickly see what will become of your Papal Peace and Power.

These are the goodly Principles, the honest Suppositions of the discourse
which our Author ends his Third Book withal. It could not but have been a
tedious thing, to take them up by pieces, as they lie scattered up and down,
like the limbs of Medea's Brother, cast in the way to retard her persuers. The
Reader may now take a view of them together, and thence of all that is offered
to persuade him to a relinquishment of his present profession and Religion. For
the Stories, Comparisons, Jests, Sarcasms, that are intermixed with them, I
suppose he will know how to turn them to another use.

Some very few particulars need only to be remarked. As,

1. No man can say what ill Popery did in the world until Henry the Eighths
days. Strange! when it is not only openly accused, but proved guilty of almost
all the evil that was in the Christian world, in those days; particularly of
corrupting the Doctrine and Worship of the Gospel, and debauching the lives of
Christians,

2. With the Roman Catholics unity ever dwelt. Never; The very name of Roman
Catholic, appropriating Catholicism to Romanism, is destructive of all
Gospel-unity.

3. Some Protestants say, they love the Persons of the Romanists, but hate
their Religion: the Reason is plain, they know the one, and not the other. No,
they know them both; And the pretense, that people are kept with, as from
knowing what the Religion of the Romanists is; is vain, untrue; and, as to what
color can possibly be given unto it, such an infant in comparison of that vast
Giant, which of the same kind lives in the Romish Territories, that it deserves
not to be mentioned.

4. Protestants are beholding to the Catholics, (that is, Romanists) for their
Universities, Ben^fices, Books, Pulpits, Gospel. For some of them, not all; For
the rest, as the Israelites were to the Egyptians for the Tabernacle they
built in the Wilderness.

5. The Pope was anciently believed sole Judge and general Pastor over all.
Prove it; ask the ancient Fathers, and Councils, whether they ever heard of any
such thing? they will universally return their answer in the Negative.

6. The Scripture you received from the Pope. Not at all, as has been proved;
but from Christ himself, by the Ministry of the first planters of Christianity.

7. You cannot believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, but upon the
Authority of the Church. We can and do, upon the authority of God himself, and
the influence of the Churches Ministry or Authority into our believing,
concerns not the Church of Rome,

8. You account them that brought you the Scriptures, as liars. No otherwise
then as the Scripture affirms every man to be so; not in their Ministry,
wherein they brought the Word unto us.

9. The Gospel separate from the Church can prove nothing. Yes, it is self to be
sent of God; and so doing, is the foundation of the Church. Sundry other
passages of the like nature might be remarked, if I could imagine any man would
judge them worthy of consideration.

CHAP. XII.
Story of Religion.

THe fourth and last part of our Author Discourse, is spent in two Stories: one
of Religion; the other of himself. His first of Religion, is but a summary of
what was diffused through the others parts of his Treatise, being insinuated
piecemeal, as he thought he could make any advantage of it to his purpose. Two
things he aims to make his Readers believe, by it; First, That we in these
Nations had our Religion from Rome; And secondly, That it was the same which is
there now professed. Those whom he tells his Tale unto, are, as he professes,
such as are ignorant of the coming into, and progress of Religion amongst us;
wherein he deals wisely, and as became him; seeing he might easily assure
himself, that those who are acquainted before his Information with the true
state of these things, would give little credit to what he nakedly averrs upon
his own Authority. For my part, I shall readily acknowledge, that for ought
appears in this Book, he is a better Historian then a Disputant; and has more
reason to trust to his faculty of telling a Tale, than managing of an Argument.
I confess also, that a slight and superficial view of Antiquity, especially, as
flourished over by some Roman-Legendaries, is the best advantage our
Adversaries have to work on; as a thorough Judicious search of it, is fatal to
their pretensions. He, that from the Scriptures, and the Writings extant of the
first Centuries, shall frame a true Idea of the State and Doctrine of the first
Churches, and then observe the adventitious accessions made to Religion in the
following ages, partly by men's own inventions, but chiefly by their borrowing
from, or imitation of, the Jews and Pagans, will need very little light or help
from artificial Arguments to discover the defections of the Roman-Party, and
the true means whereby that Church arrived unto its present condition. To
pursue this at large is not a work to be undertaken in this seambling chase. It
has been done by others, and those, who are not unwilling to be at the cost
and pains in the disquisition of the Truth, which it is really worth, may
easily know where to find it, Our present task is, but to observe our Author's
motions, and to consider whether what he offers, has any efficacy toward that
he aims at.

A triple Conversion he assigns to this Nation. The first by Joseph of
Arimathea; about which, as to matter of fact, we have no contest with him. That
the Gospel was preached here in the Apostles days either by him, or some other
Evangelist, is certain, and taken for granted on all hands; nor can our Author
pretend that it came hither from Rome; but grants it to have come immediately
from Palestine. Whether this does not overthrow the main of his plea in his
whole Discourse, concerning our dependence upon Rome for our Religion, I leave
to prudent men to judge. Thus far then we are equal. As the Gospel came to
Rome, so it came to England; to both from the same place, and by the same
Authority, the same Ministry. All the question is, Whether Religion they
brought with them? that now professed in England, or that of Rome? If this be
determined, the business is at an issue; We are persuaded Joseph brought no
other Religion with him, then what was taught by Peter and Paul, and the rest
of the Apostles and Evangelists in other parts of the World. What Religion men
taught viva voce in any age, is best known by their Writings, if they left any
behind them. No other way have the Romanists themselves, nor other do they use,
in judging what was the Doctrine of the Fathers in the following ages. The
writings of the Apostles are still extant; by them alone can we judge of the
Doctrine that they preached. That Doctrine then unquestionably taught Joseph in
Britain; and that Doctrine (blessed be God) is still owned and professed
amongst us. All, and only what is contained in their Writings is received with
us, as necessary to Salvation. This Conversion was wholly ours. Quod
antiquissimum id verissimum. Being the first, it was certainly the best. Our
Author indeed tells us of Crosses, Shrines, Oratories, Altars, Monasteries,
Vigils, Ember^, honoring of Saints, (you must suppose all in the Roman-mode)
making Oblations and Orisons for the dead, and that this was the Religion in
those days planted amongst us. If this be so, I wonder what we do to keep the
Bible, which speaks not one word of that Religion, which the Apostles and
Apostolical men preached. Strange! that in all their writings they should not
once mention the main parts and duties, of the Doctrines and Worship which they
taught and propagated; that Paul in none of his Epistles, should in the least
give the Churches any direction in, or concerning, the things and ways wherein
their Worship principally consisted and their Devotion was chiefly exercised?
but how comes our Author to know, that these things, in the Roman-mode, were
brought into England at the first entrance of Christianity? Would he would give
us a little Information from what Writings or Monuments of those times he
acquired his knowledge. I know it is unreasonable to put an Historian to his
Oath; but yet, unless he can plead, that he received his acquaintance with
things that are so long past by inspiration, as Moses wrote the Story of the
Creation and Ages before the Flood, being destitute of any other Monuments or
Testimony that might give evidence to what he says, I hope he will not be
offended, if we suspend our belief. Solus enim hoc Ithacus nullo sub test
canebat: This first conversion then, as was said is wholly ours, it neither
came from Rome, nor knew any thing of that which is the present Religion of
Rome, wherein they differ from us.

That which is termed our second Conversion, is the Preaching of Damianus and
Fugatius, sent hither by Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, in the days of King
Lucius, in the year 190. as our Author says, Beda 156. Nauclerus, Baronius,
178. Henricus de Erfordia, 169. in the days of Aurelius, or Commodus. I have
many reasons to question this whole Story. And sundry parts of it, as those
about the Epistles of Lucius and Eleutherius are palpably fictitious. But let
us grant, that about those days, Fugatius and Damianus, came hither from Rome,
and furthered the Preaching of the Gospel, which had taking footing here so
long before, and was no doubt preserved amongst many; We know God in his
Providence used many various ways for the propagating of his Gospel; Sometimes
he did it by Merchants, sometimes by Soldiers, sometimes by Captives; as a
poor Maid gave occasion to the Conversion of a whole Province. What will hence
ensue to the advantage of the pretensions of the Romanists? The Religion they
planted here, was, doubtless, that, (and no other) which was then professed at
Rome, and in most other places in the world, with some small differences in
outward observances, wherein each Church took liberty to follow Traditions or
Prudential Reasonings of its own. When our Author, or any for him, can make it
appear, that any thing material in that which we call Popery, was in those days
taught, believed, preached, or known among the Churches of Christ, they will do
somewhat to the purpose, But the present flourish about the Catholic Faith,
planted here, which no man ever denied, is to none at all. It was the old
Catholic Faith we at first received, and therefore not the present Romish.

After those days wherein this Propagation of Christianity by the Ministry of
Fugatius and Damianus in this Province, is supposed to have fallen out; a sad
decay in faith and holiness of life, befell Professors, not only in this Nation,
but for the most part, all the world over; which, especially, took place after
God had graciously in the Conversion of the Emperors to the Faith, entrusted
them with outward Peace and Prosperity. I desire not to make naked their
miscarriages, whom I doubt not, but in mercy, God has long since pardoned; but
it cannot be denied, that the Stories of those days are full of nothing more
then the oppressions, luxury, and sloth of Rulers, the Pride, Ambition, and
unseemly scandalous contests for pre-eminence of Sees and extent of
Jurisdiction, among Bishops, the sensuality and ignorance of the most of men.
In this season it was, that the Bishop of Rome advantaged by the Prerogative of
the City, the ancient Seat and Spring of the Empire, began gradually to attempt
a Super-intendency over his Brethren, according as any advantages for that end
(which could not be wanting in the intestine Tumults and Seditions wherewith
Christians were turmoyled) offered themselves unto him. Wherever an
opportunity could be spyed, he was still interposing his Umpirage, and
Authority amongst them, and that sometimes not without sinful Ar^ifices, and
downright forgeries, wherein he was always accepted, or refused, according as
the Interest of them required with whom he had to do. What the lives of Priests
and People, what their knowledge and profession of the Gospel, of the poor
Britains, especially, in those days were, our own Countryman Gildas does
sufficiently testify and bewail. Salvianus does the same for other parts of
the world. And generally, all the pious men of those ages; whilst the Priests
strove for Sovereignty and Power, the people perished through ignorance and
sensuality. Neither can we possibly have a more full conviction of what was the
state of Christians and Christianity in those days in the world, than may be
seen and read in the horrible Judgments of God wherewith he punished their
wickedness and ingratitude. When he could no longer bear the provocations of
his people, he stirred up those swarms of Northern Nations Goths, Vandals,
Hunnes, Franks, Longobards, Alans, Saxons, etc. Some few of them Arians, the
most Pagans, and poured them out upon the Western Empire, to the utter ruin of
it, and the Division of the Provinces amongst themselves. After a while, these
fierce, cruel and barbarous Nations, having executed the Judgments of God
against the ungodliness of men, seating themselves in the warmer Climates of
those whom they had in part subdued, in part exstirpated, as is the manner of
all persons in transmigration from one Country to another, began to unlearn
their ancient Barbarism, and to incline to the Manners, Fashions, and Religion
of the people, to whom they were come, and with whom after their heats were
over and lusts satisfied, they began to incorporate and coalesce; Together, I
say, with their manners, they took up by various ways and means the Religion
which they did profess. And the Bishop of Rome having kept his outward Station
in that famous City during all those turmoils, becoming venerable unto them,
unto him were many Applications made, and his Authority was first signally
advanced by this new race of Christians. The Religion they thus took up, was
not a little degenerated from its Primitive Apostolical purity and splendour.
And they were among the first, who felt the effects of their former barbarous
inhumanity, in their sedulous endeavor to destroy all Books and Learning out
of the World, which brought that darkness upon mankind* wherewith they wrestled
for many succeeding generations. For having themselves made an intercision of
the current and progress of studies and learning, they were forced to make use
in their entertainment of Christianity, of men meanly skilled in the knowledge
of God or themselves, who some of them, knew little more of the Gospel, then
what they had learned in the outward observances and practices of the places
where they had been educated. Toward the beginning of this hurry of the world,
this shuffling of the Nations, was the Province of Britain, not long before,
exhausted of it stores of Men and Arms, and defeated by the Romans, invaded by
the Saxons, Picts, Angles, and others out of Germany, who accomplishing the
will of God, exstirpated the greatest part of the British Nation, and drove the
remainders of them to shelter themselves in the Western Mountainous parts of
this Island. These new Inhabitants after they were somewhat civilized* by the
Vicinity of the Provincials; and had got a little breathing from their own
intestine feuds, by fixing the limits of their Leader's Dominions, which they
called Kingdoms, began to be in some preparedness to receive impressions of
Religion, above that rude Paganism which they had before served Satan in. These
were they to whom came Austine from Rome; a man, as far as appears by the
story, little acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel; yet one whom it
pleased God graciously to use, to bring the Scripture amongst them that
inexhaustible Fountain of Light and Truth; and by which those to whom he
preached might be infallibly freed from any mixture of mistakes, that he might
offer to them. That he brought with him a Doctrine of Observances, not formerly
known in Britain, ^s notorious, from the famous* Story of those many
Professors of Christianity (...) which he caused to be murdered by Pagans, for
not submitting to his power, and refusing to practice according to his
Traditions; whose unwillingness to the ^^ain if they could have otherwise
chosen, is that, which, I suppose, our Author call's their disturbing good St.
Austine in his pious work. But you neither will this Conversion of the Saxons
begun by Austine the Monk, at all advantage our Author as to his pretensions.
The Religion he taught here, as well as he could, was doubtless no other than
that which at those days was professed at Rome; mixtures of humane Traditions,
worldly Policies, Observances trenching upon the Superstitions of the Gentiles,
in many things it had then revived; but however it was far enough from the
present Romanism, if the Writers and chief Bishops of those days knew what was
their Religion, Papal Supremacy and Infallibility, Transubstantiation,
religious veneration of Images in Churches, with innumerable other prime
fundamentals of Popery, were as great strangers at Rome in the days of Gr^gory
the great, as they are at this day to the Church of England.

After these times, the world continuing still in troubles, Religion began more
and more to decline, and fall off from its pristine purity. At first, by
degrees insensible and almost imperceptible, in the broaching of new opinions
and inventing new practices in the worship of God. At length, by open
presumptuous transgressions of its whole rule and genius, in the usurpation of
the Pope of Rome and impositions of his Authority on the ne^ks of Emperors,
Kings, Princes, and people of all sorts. By what means this work was carried
on, what advantages were taken for, what instruments used in it, what
opposition by Kings and learned men was made unto it, what testimony was given
against it by the blood of thousands of Martyrs, others have at large declared;
nor will my present design admit me to insist on particulars. What contests,
debates, tumults, wars, were by papal pretensions raised in these nations,
what shameful entreating of some of the greatest of our Kings, what absolutions
of subjects from their Allegiance, with such like effluxes of an abundant
Apostolical piety, this nation in particular was exercised with from Rome, all
our Historians sufficiently testify. Tantaemolis erat Romanam condere gentem!
The truth is, when once Romanism began to be enthroned, and had driven
Catholicism out of the world, we had very few Kings that past their days in
peace and quietness from contests with the Pope, or such as acted for him, or
were stirred up by him. The face in the mean time of Christianity was sad and
deplorable. The body of the people being grown dark, and profane, or else
superstitious, the generality of the Priests and Votaries ignorant and vicious
in their conversations, the oppressions of the Hildebrandine faction
intolerable, Religion dethroned, from a free generous obedience according to
the rule of the Gospel, and thrust into cells, orders, self-invented devotions
and forms of worship, superstitious and unknown to Scripture and antiquity, the
whole world groaned under the Apostasy it was fallen into, when it was almost
too late; the yoke was so fastened to their necks and prejudices so fixed in the
minds of the multitude. Kings began to repine, Princes to remonstrate their
grievances, whole Nations to murmr, some learned men to write and preach
against the superstitions and oppressions of the Church of Rome. Against all
which complaints and attempts, what means the Popes used for the safe-guarding
their Authority, and opinions subservient to their carnal worldly interests,
deposing some, causing others to be murdered that were in supreme power,
bandying Princes and Great men one against another, exterminating others with
fire and sword, is also known unto all, who take any care to know such things,
what ever our Author pretends to the contrary. This was the state, this the
peace, this the condition of most Nations in Europe, and these in particular
where we live; when occasion was administered in the providence of God, unto
that Reformation which in the next place he gives us the story of. Little cause
had he to mind us of this story; little to boast of the primitive Catholic
faith; little to pretend the Romish Religion to have been that which was first
planted in these Nations; His concernments lie not in those things, but only in
that Tyrannical usurpation of the Popes, and irregular devotions of some
Votarys, which latter ages produced.

CHAP. XIII.
Reformation.

THe story of the Reformation of Religion he distributes into three parts, and
allots to each a particular Paragraph, the first is of its occasion and rise in
general, the second of its entrance into England, the third of its progress
amongst us. Of the first, he gives us this account: The pastor of Christianity
upon some solicitation of Christian Princes for a general compliance to their
design, sent forth in the year 1517. a plenary Indulgence in favor of the
Cruciata against the Turk. Albertus the Archbishop of Ments being delegated by
the Pope to see it executed, committed the promulgation of it to the Dominican
Friars; which the Hermits of St. Augustine in the same place to^k ill,
especially Martin Luther, etc. Who vexed that he was neglected, and
undervalued, fell a-writing and preaching first against Indulgencies, then
against the Pope. etc. He that had no other acquaintance with Christian
Religion, but what the Scriptures and ancient Fathers will afford him, could
not bu^ be amazed at the canting Language of this Story; it being impossible
for him to understand any thing of it aright. He would admire who this Pastor
of Christianity should be, what this plenary Indulgence should mean, what was
the preaching of plenary indulgence by Dominicans, and what all this would
avail against the Turk. I cannot but pity such a poor man to think what a loss
he would be at* like one taken from home and carried blindfold into the midst
of a Wilderness, where when he opens his eyes, every thing scares him, nothing
gives him guidance or direction. Let him turn again to his Bible, and Fathers
of the first ^or 500 years, and I will undertake he shall come off from them,
as wise, as to the true understanding of this story, (...) he went unto them.
The Scene in Religion is plainly changed, and this appearance of an Universal
Pastor, Plenary indulge^^es, Dominicans and Cruciata's, all marching against
the Turk, must needs affright a man accustomed only to the Scripture-notions of
Religion, and those embraced by the Primitive Church. And I do know, that if
such a man could get together two or three of the wisest Romanists in the
world, which were the likeliest way for him to be resolved in the signification
of these hard names, they would never well agree to tell him what this plenary
Indulgence is. But for the present, as to our concernment, let us take these
things, according to the best understanding, which their framers and founders
have been pleased to give us of them; the Story intended to be ^old, was indeed
neither so, nor so. There was no such solicitation of the Pope by Christian
Princes at that time, as is pretended; no Cruciata against the Turk undertaken;
no attempt of that nature ensued, not a penny of indulgence-Money, laid out to
any such purpose. But the short of the matter is, that the Church of Mentz,
being not able to pay for the Archiepiscopal Pall of Albertus from Rome, having
been much exhausted by the purchase of one or two for other Bishops, that died
suddenly before, the Pope grants to Albert a number of pardons, of, to say the
truth, I know not what, to be sold in Germany, agreeing with him, that one half
of the gain he would have in his own right, and the other for the pall. Now the
Pope's Merchants that used to sell pardons for him in former days were the
Preaching friars, who upon Holy Days, and Festivals, were wont to let out
their ware to the people, and in plain terms, to cheat them of their money; and
well had it been, if that had been all. What share in the dividend, came to the
venders, well I know not: probably they had a proportion according to the
commodity that they put off; which stirred up their zeal to be earnest and
diligent in their work. Among the rest, one Friar Tecel, was so warm in his
employment, and so intent upon the main end that they had all in their eye that
Preaching in or about Wittenberg, it sufficed him not in general, to make an
offer of the pardon of all sins that any had committed, but, to take all
scruples from their Consciences, coming to particular instances, carried them
up to a cursed blasphemous supposition of ravishing the blessed Virgin; so
coc^sure he made of the forgiveness of any thing beneath it, Provided, the
price were paid that was set upon the pardon. Sober men being much amazed and
grieved at these horrible impieties, one Martin Luther, a Professor of Divinity
at Wittenberg, an honest, warm, zealous Soul, set himself to oppose the Friars
Blasphemies; wherein his zeal was commended by all, his discretion by few, it
being the joynt-opinion of most, that the Pope would quickly have stopped his
mouth by breaking his neck. But God, as it afterward appeared, had another
work to bring about, and the time of entering upon it was now fully come. At the
same time, that Luther set himself to oppose the pardons in Germany, Zwinglius
did the same Switzerland. And both of them, taking occasion from the work, they
first engaged in, to search the Scriptures, so to find out the Truth of
Religion, which they discovered to be horribly abused by the Pope and his
Agents, proceeded farther in their discovery, then at first they were aware of.
Many Nations, Princes, and people, multitudes of learned and pious men, up and
down the world, that had long groaned under the bondage of the Papal yoke, and
grieved for the horrible abuse of the worship of God, which they were forced to
see and endure, hearing, that God had stirred up some learned men seriously to
oppose those corruptions in Religion, which they saw and mourned under,
speedily either countenanced them, or joined themselves with them. It fell out
indeed, as it was morally impossible it should be otherwise, that multitudes of
learned men undertaking, without advising or consulting one with another, in
several far distant Nations, the discovery of the Papal Errors, and the
Reformation of Religion, some of them had different apprehensions and
persuasions in, and about some points of doctrine, and parts of Worship of no
great weight and importance. And, he that shall seriously consider, what was
the state of things, when they began their work, who they were, how educated,
what prejudices they had to wrestle with, and remember withal, that they were
all Men; will have ten thousand times more cause to admire at their agreeement
in all fundamentals, then at their difference about some lesser things.
However, whatever were their personal failings and infirmities, God was pleased
to give testimony to the uprigh^ness and integrity of their hearts; and to
bless their endeavors with such success, as answered in some measure the
Primitive work of planting and propagating the Gospel. The small sallies of our
Author upon them in some legends about what Luther should say or do, deserve
not the least notice from men, who will seriously contemplate the hand, power,
and wisdom of God in the work accomplished by them.

The next thing undertaken by our Author, is the ingress of Protestancy into
England, and its progress there. The old story of the love of King Henry the
Eighth to Ann Bullen, with the divorce of Queen Katharine, told over and over
long ago by men of the same principle and design with himself, is that which he
chooses to flourish withal. I shall say no more to the story, but that
Englishmen were not wont to believe the whispers of an unknown Friar, or two,
before the open redoubled Protestation of one of the most famous Kings that
ever swaid the Scepter of this Land, before the union of the Crowns of England
and Scotland. These men, whatever they pretend, show what reverence they have
to our present Sovereign* by their unworthy defamation of his Royal
Predecessors. But let men suppose the worst they please of that great Heroic
Person: What are his miscarriages unto Protestant Religion; for neither was he
the Head, Leader, or Author of that Religion; nor did he ever receive it,
profess it, or embrace it; but, caused men to be burned to death, for its
profession. Should (...), by way of Retaliation, return unto our Author, the
lives and practices; of some, of many, not of the great, or leading men of his
Church, but of the Popes themselves, the Head, sum, and, in a manner, whole of
their Religion, at least so far that without him) they will not acknowledge
any, he knows well enough what double measure, shaken together, pressed down,
and running over, may be returned unto him. A work this would be, I confess, no
way pleasing unto my self* for who can delight in raking into such a sink of
Filth, as the lives of many of them have been; yet because he seems to talk
with a confidence of willingness to revive the memory of such ulcers of
Christianity, if he proceed in the course he has begun, it will be necessary
to mind him of not boxing up his eyes when he looks toward his own home. That
Poysonings, Adulteries, Incests, Conjurations, Perjuries, Atheism, have been no
strangers to that See; if he knows not, he shall be acquainted from stories,
that he has no color to except against. For the present, I shall only mind
him, and his friends, of the Comaedian's advice; Dehinc ut quiescunt, porro
m^neo, and desinant
Maledicere, malefactae ne noscant su^.


The declaration made in the days of that King, that he was Head of the Church
of England, intended no more, but that there was no other person in the world,
from whom any Jurisdiction to be exercised in this Church over his Subjects
might be derived, the Supreme Authority for all exterior Government being
vested in him alone* That this should be so, the Word of God, the nature of the
Kingly Office, and the ant^ent Laws of this Realm, do require. And I challenge
our Author to produce any one Testimony of Scripture, or any one word out of
any general Council, or any one Catholic Father or Writer, to give the least
countenance to his assertion of two heads of the Church in his sense; an head
of Influence, which is Jesus himself; and an head of Government, which is the
Pope, in whom all the sacred Hierarchy ends; This taking of one half of Christ's
Rule, and Headship out of his hand, and giving it to the Pope, will not be
salved, by that expression thrust in by the way, under him; For the Headship of
influence is distinctly ascribed unto Christ; and that of Government to the
Pope; which evidently asserts, that he is not in the same manner, head unto his
Church in both these senses, but He in one, and the Pope in another.

But whatever was the cause, or occasion of the dissension between King Henry
and the Pope, it is certain, Protestancy came into England, by the same way and
means, that Christianity came into the World; the painful, pious Professors,
and Teachers of it, sealed its truth with their blood; and what more honorable
entrance it could make, I neither know, nor can it be declared. Nor did England
receive this Doctrine from others; in the days of King Henry, it did but revive
that light which sprung up amongst us long before, and by the fury of the Pope,
and his adherents, had been a while suppressed. And it was with the blood of
Englishmen, dying patiently and gloriously in the flames, that the truth was
sealed in the days of that King, who lived and dyed himself, as was said, in
the profession of the Roman faith. The Truth flourished yet more in the days
of his pious and hopeful Son. Some stop, our Author tells us, was put to it in
the days of Queen Mary. But, what stop? of what kind? of no other than that
put to Christianity by Trajan, Dioclesian, Julian; a stop by fire and sword,
and all exquisite cruelties, which was broken through, by the constant death,
and invincible patience and prayers, of Bishops, Ministers, and People
numberless; a stop, that Rome has cause to blush in the remembrance of, and
all Protestants to rejoice, having their faith tried in the fire, and coming
forth more precious than Gold. Nor did Queen Elizabeth, as is falsely pretended,
endeavor to continue that stop, but cordially, from the beginning of her
Reign, embraced that faith, wherein she had before been instructed. And in the
maintenance of it, did God preserve her from all the Plots, Conspiracies, and
Rebellions of the Papists; Curses, and Depositions, of the Popes; with
Invasions of her Kingdoms by his instigation, as also her renowned Successor,
with his whole Regal posterity from their contrivance for their Martyrdom and
ruin. During the Reign of those Royal and Magnificent Princes, had the Power
and Polity of the Papal world, been able to accomplish what the men of this
innocent and quiet Religion, professedly designed, they had not had the
advantage of the late miscarriages, of some professing the Protestant Religion,
in reference to our late King of glorious Memory, to triumph in; though they
had obtained that which would have been very desirable to them, and which we
have but sorry evidence that they do not yet aim at, and hope for. As for what
he declares in the end of his 10th. Paragraph, about the Reformation here, that
it followed, wholly, neither Luther, nor Calvin, which he intermixes with many
unseemly taunts, and reflections on our Laws, Government, and Governors, is, as
far as it is true, the glory of it. It was not Luther, nor Calvin, but the Word
of God, and the practice of the primitive Church, that England proposed for her
rule and pattern in her Reformation; and, where any of the Reformers forsook
them, she counted it her duty, without reflections on them, or their ways, to
walk in that safe one, she had chosen out for her self.

Nor shall I insist on his next Paragraph, destined to the advancement of his
interest, by a proclamation of the late Tumults, Seditions, and Rebellions in
these Nations, which he ascribes to the Puritans. He has got an advantage, and
it is not equal we should persuade him to forego it; only I desire prudent men
to consider, what the importance of it is, as to this case in hand; for, as to
other considerations of the same things, they fall not within the compass of
our present discourse. It Is not of Professions, but of persons that he treats.
The crimes he insists on, attend not any avowed Principles, but the men that
have professed them. And if a rule of choosing or leaving Religion, may from
thence be gathered, I know not any in the world, that any can embrace, much
less can they rest in none at all. Professors of all Religions, have in their
seasons sinfully miscarried themselves, and troubled the world with their
lusts, and those, who have professed none, most of all. And of all, that is
called Religion, that of the Romanists might by this rule be first cashiered.
The abominable bestial lives of very many of their chief Guids, in whom they
believe; the Tumults, Seditions, Wars, Rebellions, they have raised in the
World; the Treasons, Murders, Conspiracies, they have countenanced, encouraged,
and commended, would take up not a single Paragraph of a little Treatise, but
innumerable Volumes, should they be but briefly reported; they do so already;
and which renders them abominable, whilst there is any in the world, that see
reason not to submit themselves unto the Papal Sovereignty, their professed
Principles lead them to the same courses; and when men are brought to all the
bestial subjection aimed at; yet pretenses will not be wanting to set on foot
such practices, They were not in former days, when they had obtained an
uncontrouleable omnipotency. If our Author supposes this a rational way for
the handling of differences in Religion, that leaving the consideration of the
Doctrines and Principles, we should insist on the vices and crimes of those who
have professed them, I can assure him he must expect the least advantage by it
to his party, of any in the world; nor need we choose any other Scene than
England, to try out our contests by this rule; I hope, when he writes next, he
will have better considered this matter, and not flatter himself, that the
crimes of any Protestants, do enable him to conclude as he does, that the only
way for Peace, is an extermination of Protestancy, and so his tale about
Religion is ended; he next brings himself on the stage.

CHAP. XIV.
Popish Contradictions.

THis is our last task; our Author's own Story of himself, and rare
observations in the Roman-Religion, make up the close of his Discourse, and
merit in his thoughts the title of Discovery. The design of the whole is to
manifest his Catholic Religion to be absolutely unblameable, by wiping off
some spots and blemishes that are cast upon it; indeed by gilding over with
fair and plansible words some parts of their profession and worship which he
knew to be most liable to the exceptions of them with whom he intends to deal.
His way of managing this Design, that he may seem to do something new, is, by
telling a fair tale of himself, and his Observations with the effects they had
upon him; which is but the putting of a a new tune to an old Song, that has
been chanted at our doors, these 100. years; and some he hopes are so simple,
as to like the new tune, though they were sick of the old Song. His entrance
is, a blessing of the world with some knowledge of himself, his Parentage,
Birth, and Education, and proficiency in his Studies* as not doubting, but that
great enquiry must needs be made after the meanest concernments of such an
Hero, as by his acchievements and travails he has manifested himself to be.
And indeed, he has so handsomely and delightfully given us the Romance of
himself and Popery, that it was pity he should so unhappily stumble at the
threshold, as he has done, and fall upon a misadventure that to some men will
render the design of his discourse suspected. For whereas he does elsewhere
most confidently averr, that no trouble ever was raised amongst us by the
Romanists; here at unawares he informs us, that his own Grandfather lost both
his life and his estate, in a Rebellion raised in the North on the account of
that Religion. Just as before, attempting to prove, that we received
Christianity originally from Rome, he tells us, that the first Planters of it,
came directly from Palestina. It is in vain for him to persuade us, that what
has been, can never be again, unless he manifest the Principles which formerly
gave it life and being, to be vanished out of the world; which as to those of
the Romanists, tending to the disturbance of these Kingdoms, I fear he is not
able to do.

There is not any thing else, which Protestants are universally bound to
observe in the course of his life, before he went beyond the Seas, but only the
offense he took at men's preaching at London against Popery; not, that he was
then troubled, if we may believe him, that Popery was ill reported of, but the
miscarriage of the Preachers in bringing in the Papal Church hand over-head in
their Sermons, speaking all evil and no good of it, and charging it with
contradictions, was that, which gave him distaste. He knows himself best what
it was that troubled him, nor shall I set up conjectures against his
assertions. The triple evil mentioned, so far as it is evil, I hope, he finds
now remedyed. For my part, I never liked of men's importune diversions from
their Texts, to deal with, or confute Papists, which is the first part of the
evil complained of. I know a far more effectual way to preserve men from
Popery, namely, a solid instruction of them in the Principles of Truth with an
endeavor to plant in their hearts the power of those Principles, that they may
have experience of their worth and usefulness. That nothing but evil was spoken
of Popery by Protestants, when they spoke of it, I cannot wonder; they account
nothing evil in the Religion of the Romanists but Popery; which is the name of
the evil of that Religion. Noe Protestants ever denied, but that the Romanists
retained many good things in the Religion, which they profess; but those good
things, they say, are no part of Popery; so that our Author should not by
right, have been so offended, that men spoke no good of that, which is the
expression of the evil of that, which in its self, is good, as Popery is of the
Papists Christianity. The last parcel of that which was the matter of his
trouble and offense, he displayes by sundry of the contradictions, which
Protestants charged Popery withal. To little purpose; for, either, the things
he mentions, are not by any charged on Popery, or not in that manner he
expresses, or the contradiction between them, consists not in the assertions
themselves, but in some additional terms supplied by himself to make them
appear Contradictions. For instance, (to take those given by himself) if one
say, the Papists worship stocks and stones, another say, they worship a piece
of Bread, here is no contradiction. Again, If one charge them with having their
Consciences affrighted with Purgatory and Domesday, and Penances for their sins
that they never live a quiet life; another, that they carry their top and top
gallant so high, that they will go to Heaven without Christ, or (as we in the
Country phrase it) trust not to his merits and righteousness alone for
salvation, here may be no contradiction: for all Papists are not, we know it
well enough, of the same mould and form. Some may more imbibe some Principles
of Religion tending in appearance to mortification, some those that lead to
pride and presumption; and so be liable to several charges. But neither are
these things inconsistent in themselves. Men in their greatest consternation of
spirit from sense of punishment, real or imaginary, wherewith they are
disquieted, may yet proudly reject the righteousness of Christ; and if our
Author knows not this to be true, he knows nothing of the Gospel. The next
instance is of the same nature. One, he says, affirms, that Murders,
Adulteries, Lies, Blasphemies, and all sin make up the bulk of Popery; another,
that Papists are so wholly given to good Works, that they place in them
excessive confidence. I scarce believe, that he ever heard any thus crudely
charging them with either part of the imagined contradictory Proposition,
Taking Popery, as the Protestants do, for the exorbitancy of the Religion,
which the Romanists profess; and considering the product of it in the most of
mankind, it may be some by an usual hyperbole have used the words first
mentioned; but, if we should charge the Papists, for being wholly given to good
works, we should much wrong both them and our selves, seeing we perfectly know
the contrary. The sum of both these things brought into one, is but this, that
many Papists in the course of a scandalously sinful life, do place much of
their confidence in good works; which is indeed, a strange contradiction in
Principles, between their speculation and practice; but we know well enough,
there is none in the charge. Let us consider one more; one affirmed, that the
Pope and all his Papists fall down to pictures, and commit Idolatry with them;
another, that the Pope is so far from falling down to any thing, that he
exalts himself above all, that is called God, and is very Antichrist. If one
had said, he falls down to Images, another, that he falls not down to Images,
there had been a contradiction indeed; but our Author by his own testimony
being a Civil Logician, knows well enough that the falling down in the first
Proposition, and that in the second are things of a diverse nature, and so are
no contradiction. A man may fall down to Images, and yet refuse to submit
himself to the power that God has set over him. And those of whom he speaks,
would have told him, that a great part of the Popes exalting himself against
God, consists in his falling down to Images, wherein he exalts his own Will and
Tradition, against the Will and express commands of God. The same may be showed
of all the following instances, nor can he give any one that shall manifest
Popery to be charged by sober Protestants with any other contradictions, than
what appears to every eye in the inconsistency of some of their Principles one
with another, and of most of them with their practice. In the particulars by
himself enumerated, there is no other show of the charge of contradictory evils
in Popery, then what by his Additions and wresting expressions is put upon them.

Weary of such preaching in England, our Author addressed himself to travail
beyond the Seas, where what he met withal, what he observed, the weight and
strength of his own Conversion, being laid in pretense upon it, (indeed an
Apology for the more generally excepted against parts of his Roman practice,
and worship, being intended and persued) must be particularly considered and
debated.

CHAP. XV.
Mass. SECT. 22.

THe Title our Author gives to his first head of Observation, is Messach, on
what account I know not; unless it be with respect to a ridiculous Hebrew
Etymology of the word Missa; as though it should be the same with (...) a word
quite of another signification. If this be that which his title intends, I wish
him better success in his next Etymologizing, for this attempt has utterly
failed him. Missa never came out of the East nor has any affinity with those
tongues; being a word utterly unknown to the Syrians; and Graecians also, by
whom all Hebrew words that are used in Religion came into Europe. He that will
trouble himself to trace the pedigree of Missa, shall find it of no such
ancient stock, but a word, that with many others came into use in the
destruction of the Roman-Empire, and the corruption of the Latine-tongue. But
as it is likely our Author having not been accustomed to feed much upon Hebrew
roots, might not perceive the insipidness of this pretended traduction of the
word Missa, so also on the other side, its not improbable, but that he might
only by an uncouth word think to startle his poor Countrymen, at the entrance
of the story of his Travels, that they might look upon him as no small person
who has the Messach, and such other hard names, at his fingers ends: as the
Gnostics heightened their Disciples, into an admiration of them by Paldab^oth,
Astaphaeum, and other names of the like hideous noise and found.

Of the Discourse upon this Messach what ever it is, there are sundry parts.
That he begins with, is a preference of the devotion of the Romanists
incomparably above that of the Protestants. This was the entrance of his
Discovery. Catholics Bells ring oftener then ours, their Churches are swept
cleaner then ours; yea, ours in comparison of theirs are like stables to a
Princely Palace; their People are longer upon their knees, than ours, and upon
the whole matter they are excellent every way in their Worship of God, we every
way blame worthy and contemptible: Unto all which, I shall only mind him of
that good old advice; Let thy neighbor praise thee, and not thine own mouth.
And as for us, I hope we are not so bad, but that we should rejoice truly to
hear, that others were better. Only we could desire, that we might find their
excellency to consist in things not either indifferent wholly in themselves, or
else disapproved by God, which are the ways that Hypocrisy usually vents it
self in, and then boast of what it has done. Knowledge of God and his Will, as
revealed in the Gospel, real mortification, abiding in spiritual Supplications,
diligent in Universal Obedience, and fruitfulness in good works, be as I
suppose, the things which render our profession beautiful, and according to the
mind of God. If our Author be able, to make a right Judgment of these things,
and find them really abounding amongst his party, I hope, we shall rejoice with
him, though we knew the Spring of them is not their Popery, but their
Christianity. For the outside-shews, he has as yet instanced in, they ought
not, in the least, to have influenced his Judgment in that disquisition of the
Truth, wherein he pretends he was engaged. He could not of old have come
amongst the Professors and Mystae of those false Religions, which by the light
and power of the Gospel, are now banished out of the World, where he should not
have met with the same Vizards and appearances of Devotion, so that hitherto we
find no great discoveries, in his Messach.

From the Worship of the Parties compared, he comes to their Preaching, and
finds them as differing as their devotion. The Preaching of Protestants of all
sorts, is sorry pitiful stuff. Inconsequent words, senseless notions, or, at
least, Rhetorical flourishes, make it up; the Catholics, grave and pithy.
Still all this, belongs to persons, not things. Protestants preach as well as
they can, and, if they cannot preach so well as his wiser Romanists, it is
their unhappiness, not their fault. But yet I have a little reason, to think,
that our Author is not altogether of the mind that here he pretends to be of,
but that he more hates, and fears, then despises, the Preaching of Protestants.
He knows well enough, what mischief it has wrought his Party, though prejudice
will not suffer him to see what good it has done the world; and therefore
doubting, as I suppose, lest he should not be able to prevail with his Readers
to believe him in that, which he would fain, it may be, but cannot believe
himself, about the excellency of the Preaching of his Catholics above that of
Protestants, he decryes the whole work, as of little or no use or concernment
in Christian Religion. This it had been fair for him to have openly pleaded,
and not to have made a flourish with that which he knew, he could make no
better work of. Nor is the preaching of the Protestants, as is pretended,
unlike that of the Ancients. The best and most famous Preacher of the ancient
Church, whose Sermons are preserved, was Chrysostom. We know, the way of his
proceeding in that work, was to open the words and meaning of his Text; to
declare the Truth contained and taught in it, to vindicate it from Objections,
to confirm it by other Testimonies of Scripture, and to apply all unto practice
in the close. And as far as I can observe, this, in general, is that method
used by Protestants, being that indeed, which the very nature of the work
dictates unto them; wherefore mistrusting lest he should not be able to bring
men out of love with the Preaching of Protestants, in comparison of the
endeavors of his Party in the same kind, he turns himself another way and
labors to persuade us, as I said, that preaching its self is of little or no
use in Christian Religion; for, so he may serve his own design, he cares not,
it seems, openly to contradict the practice of the Church of God, ever since
there was a Church in the world. To avoid that Charge he tells us, That the
Apostles and Apostolical Churches, had no Sermons, but all their Preaching was
merely for the Conversion of men to the faith, and, when this was done, there
was an end of their preaching, and, for this he instanceth in the Sermons
mentioned in the Acts, chapter 2, 3, 5, 10, 7, 8, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24,
26, 28. I wonder, what he thinks of Christ himself, whether he preached or no,
in the Temple, or in the Synagogues of the Jews; and whether the Judaical
Church to whose Members he preached, were not then a true, yea, the only Church
in the world; and, whether Christ was not anointed and sent to preach the
Gospel to them? If he know not this, he is very ignorant; if he does know it,
he is somewhat that deserves a worse name: To labor to exterminate that out of
the Religion of Christ, which was one of the chief works of Christ (for we do
not read, that he went up and down singing Mass, though I have heard of a
Friar, that conceived, that to be his employment) is a work unbecoming any man,
that would count himself wronged, not to be esteemed a Christian. But what ever
Christ did, it may be, it matters not; the Apostles and Apostolical Churches
had no Sermons, but only such as they preached to Infidels and Jews to convert
them; that is, they did not labor to instruct men in the knowledge of the
mysteries of the Gospel, to build them up in their Faith, to teach them more
and more the good knowledge of God, revealing unto them the whole counsel of his
will. And is it possible that any man who has ever read over the New
Testament, or any one of Paul's Epistles, should be so blinded by prejudicies,
and made so confident in his assertions, as to dare, in the face of the Sun,
whilst the Bible is in every ones hand, to utter a matter so devoid of truth,
and all color or pretense of probability? Methinks men should think it enough
to sacrifice their consciences to their Moloch, without casting wholly away
their reputation to be consumed in the same flames. It is true, the design of
the story of the Acts, being to deliver unto us the progress of the Christian
faith, by the Ministry of the Apostles, insists principally on those Sermons
which God in an especial manner, blessed to the conversion of souls, and
increase of the Church thereby; but, Is there therefore no mention made of
Preaching in it, to the edification of their Converts? or, Is there no mention
of Preaching, unless it be said, that such a one preached at such a time, so
long, on such a Text? When the people abode in the Apostles Doctrine, Acts
2.42. I think the Apostle taught them. And the Ministry of the Word, which they
gave themselves unto, was principally in reference unto the Church, Chapter 7.4. So
Peter and John preached the Word to those whom Philip had converted at Samaria,
Chapter 18.25. A whole year together Paul and Barnabas assembled themselves
together with the Church of Antioch, and taught much people, Chapter 12.26. At
Troas, Paul preached unto them who came together to break bread, (that is, the
Church) until midnight, Chapter 20.7, 9. which, why our Author calls a dispute; or,
what need of a dispute there was, when only the Church was assembled, neither
I, nor he, do know. And ver. 20. and 27. he declares, that his main work and
employment was, constant Preaching to the Disciples and Churches; giving
commands to the Elders of the Churches to do the same. And what his practice
was, during his imprisonment at Rome, the close of that book declares. And
these not footsteps, but express examples of, and precepts concerning,
Preaching to the Churches themselves, and their Disciples, we have in that book
purposely designed, to declare their first calling and planting, not their
progress and edification. Should I trace the commands given for this work, the
commendation of it, the qualifications and gifts for it bestowed on men by
Christ, and his requiring of their exercise, recorded in the Epistles, the work
would be endless, and a good part of most of them must be transcribed. In
brief, if the Lord Christ continue to bestow Ministerial gifts upon any, or to
call them to the Office of the Ministry, if they are bound to labor in the
Word and Doctrine, to be instant in Season, and out of Season in Preaching the
Word to those committed to their charge; if that be one of the directions given
them, that they may know how to behave themselves in the Church, the house of
God; if they are bound to trade with the Talents their Master entrusts them
with, to attend unto Doctrine with all diligence; if it be the duty of
Christians to labor to grow and increase in the knowledge of God and his will,
and that of indispensable necessity unto salvation, according to the measure of
the means God is pleased to afford unto them; if their perishing through
ignorance, will be assuredly charged on them who are called to the care, and
freedom, and instructing of them; This business of Preaching, is an
indispensible duty among Christians. If these things be not so indeed, for
ought I know, we may do what our Adversary desires us; even burn our Bibles,
and that as books that have no truth in them. Our Authors denial of the
practice of Antiquity, conformable to this of the Apostles, is of the same
nature. But that it would prove too long a diversion from my present work; I
could as easily trace down the constant sedulous performance of this duty from
the days of the Apostles, until it gave place to that ignorance which the
world was beholding to the Papal Apostasy for, as I can possibly write so much
paper, as the story of it would take up. But to what purpose should I do it?
Our Author, I presume, knows it well enough; and others, I hope, will not be
too forward in believing his affirmations of what he believes not himself.

The main design of this discourse is, to cry up the Sacrifice that the
Catholics have in their Churches, but not the Protestants. This Sacrifice he
tells us, was the sum of all Apostolical Devotion, which Protestants have
abolished. Strange! that in all the writings of the Apostles, there should not
one word be mentioned of that which was the sum of their Devotion. Things,
surely, judged by our Author, of less importance, are at large handled in them.
That they should not directly, nor indirectly, once intimate that which, it
seems, was the sum of their devotion, is, I confess, to me, somewhat strange.
They must make this concealment, either by design or oversight. How consistent
the first is with their goodness, holiness, love to the Church; the latter with
their wisdom and infallibility, either with their office, and duty; is easy to
judge. Our Author tells us, They have a Sacrifice after the order of
Melchizedeck, Paul tells us, indeed, that we have a High Priest, after the
order of Melchizedech; but, as I remember, this is the first time that ever I
heard of a Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech; though I have read
somewhat that Roman Catholics say about Melchisedechs Sacrifice. Our Priest
after the Order of Melchisedech, offered a Sacrifice, that none ever had done
before, nor can do after him, even Himself. If the Romanists think to offer
him, they must kill him. The Species of Bread and Wine, are but a thin
Sacrifice, next door to nothing, yea, somewhat worse then nothing, a figment of
a thing impossible, or the shadow of a dream, nor will they say they are any.
It is true, which our Author pleads in justification of the Sacrifice of his
Church, That there were Sacrifices among the Jews, yea, from the beginning of
the World, after the entrance of sin, and promise of Christ to come made to
sinners. For, in the state of innocence, there was no Sacrifice appointed,
because there was no need of an atonement. But all these Sacrifices, properly
so called, had no other use in Religion, then to prefigure and represent the
great Sacrifice of himself to be made, by the Son of God, in the fullness of
time. That being once performed, all other Sacrifices were to cease; I mean,
properly so called; for we have still Sacrifices Metaphorical, called so by
Analogy, being parts of Gods worship tendered unto him, and accepted with him,
as were the Sacrifices of old. Nor is it at all necessary, that we should have
Proper Sacrifices, that we may have Metaphorical. It is enough, that such there
have been, and that of Gods own appointment. And we have still that only one
real Sacrifice, which was the life and soul of all them that went before. The
substance being come, the light shaddowing of it, that was before, under the
Law, is vanished. The Apostle does expressly place the opposition that is
between the Sacrifice of Christian-Church, and that of the Judaical in this,
that they were often repeated, this was performed once for all, and is a living
abiding Sacrifice, constant in the Church for ever, Heb. 10.1, 2. So that, by
this rule, the repetition of the same, or any other Sacrifice in the
Christian-Church, can have no other foundation, but an apprehension of the
imperfection of the Sacrifice of Christ; For, says he, where the Sacrifice is
perfect, and makes them perfect that come to God by it, there must be no more
Sacrifice. This then seems to be the real difference between Protestants, and
Roman Catholics in this business of Sacrifice. Protestants believing the
Sacrifice of Christ to be absolutely perfect, so that there is no need of any
other, and that it is (...), a fresh and living way of going to God
continually, with whom, by it, obtaining remission of sin, they know there is
no more offering for sin; they content themselves with that Sacrifice of his,
continually in its virtue and efficacy residing in the Church. Romanists
looking on that as imperfect, judge it necessary to institute a new Sacrifice
of their own, to be repeated every day, and that without any the least color
or warrant from the word of God, or example of the Apostles. But our Author
puts in an exception, and tells us those words of Luke, Acts 13.2. (...), are
well and truly rendered by Erasmus, sacrificantibus illis Domino: which one
text, says he, gives double testimony to Apostolical Sacrifice and Priestly
Ordination; and he strengthens the Authority of Erasmus with reason also, for
the word can import nothing but Sacrifice, since it was made (...): for other
inferior Ministeries of the Word and Sacraments are not made to God, but the
people; but the Apostles were (...), Administering, Liturgying, Sacrificing to
our Lord. For what he adds of Ordination, it belongs not unto this discourse.
Authority and Reason are pleaded to prove, I know not what, Sacrifice to be
intended in these Words. Erasmus is first pleaded, to whose interpretation,
mentioned by our Author, I shall only add his own Annotations in the
explication of his meaning; (...), says he, Quod proprium est operantium
sacris, nullum autem Sacrificium Deo gratius, quam impartiri doctrinam
Evangelicam. So that, it seems, the Preaching of the Gospel, or taking care
about it, was the Sacrifice that Erasmus thought of in his Translation and
Exposition: Yea, but the word is truly translated Sacrisicantilus. But who, I
pray, told our Author so? The Original of the word is of a much larger
signification. Its common use is, to minister in any kind; its so translated,
and expounded by all learned impartial men, and is never used in the whole new
Testament to denote Sacr^ficing. Nor is, (...), ever rendered in the Old
Testament by the 70. (...) or (...), but (...), etc. Nor is that word used
absolutely, in any Author, Profane or Ecclesiastical, to signify, precisely,
Sacrificing. And I know well enough what it is that makes our Author say, It is
properly translated Sacrificing; and I know as well, that he cannot prove what
he says; but he gives a Reason for what he says, It Is said, to be made to the
Lord, whereas other inferior Ministerial acts, are made to the people. I wish,
heartily, he would once leave this scurvy trick of cogging in words, to deceive
his poor unwary Reader; for what, I pray, makes his, made, here? what is it
that is said to be made to the Lord? It is, when they were Ministering to the
Lord, so the words are rendered; not when they were making, or making Sacrifice,
or when they made Sacrificing unto the Lord. This wild guord, made, puts death
into his Pot. And we think here in England, that in all Ministerial acts,
though performed toward the people, and for their good, yet men administer to
the Lord in them, because performing them by his appointment, as a part of that
worship which he requires at their hands. In the close of our Authors
discourse, he complains of the persecutions of Catholics: which what ever they
are, or have been, for my part, I neither approve, nor justify; and do
heartily wish, they had never showed the world those ways of dealing with
them, who dissented from them in things concerning Religion, whereof themselves
now complain; how justly, I know not. But if it be for the Mass that any of
them have felt, or do fear Suffering, which I pray God avert from them, I hope
they will at length come to understand how remote it is from having any
affinity with the devotion of the Apostolical Churches, and so free themselves,
if not from suffering, yet at lest from suffering for that which being not
accepted with God, will yield them no solid Gospel-consolation in what they may
endure or undergo.

CHAP. XVI.
Blessed Virgin. SECT. 23. Page 267.

THe twenty second Paragraph concerning the blessed Virgin, is absolutely the
weakest and most disingenious in his whole discourse. The work he has in hand^
is to take off offense from the Roman Doctrine and Practice, in reference unto
her. Finding that this could not be handsomely gilded over, being so rotten and
corrupt, as not to bear a new varnish, he turns his pen to the bespattering of
Protestants, for contempt of her, without the least respect to truth or common
honesty. Of them it is, that he says, That they vilify and blaspheme her, and
cast Gibes upon her, which he sets off with a pretty tale of a Protestant
Bishop, and a Catholic boy; and lest this should not suffice to render them
odious, he would have some of them thought to taunt at Christ himself; one of
them, for ignorance, passion, and too much haste for his breakfast. Boldly to
calumniate, that something may cleave, is a Principle that too many have
observed in their dealings with others in the world. But, as it contains a
renuntiation of the Religion of Jesus Christ, so it has not always well
succeeded. The horrid and incredible reproaches that were cast by the Pagans on
the primitive Christians, occasioned sundry ingenious persons to search more
into their way, then otherwise they would have done; and thereby, their
conversion. And I am persuaded, this rude charge on Protestants, as remote from
truth, as any thing that was cast on the first Christians by their adversaries,
would have the same effects on Roman Catholics, might they meet with the same
ingenuity and candor. That any Protestant should be moved or shaken in his
Principles, by such Calumnies, is impossible. Every one that is so, knows, that
as the Protestants believe every thing that is spoken of the blessed Virgin, in
the Scripture, or Creed, or whatever may be lawfully deduced from what is so
spoken; so they have all that honor and respect for her, which God will allow
to be given to any creature. Surely, a confident accusation of incivility and
blasphemy, for not doing that, which they know they do, and profess to all the
world they do, is more like to move men in their patience toward their
accusers, then to prevail with them, to join in the same charge against others,
whom they know to be innocent as themselves. Neither will it relieve our Author
in point of ingenuity and truth, that, it may be, he has heard it reported, of
one or two brainsick, or frantic persons in England, that they have cast out
blasphemous reproaches against the blessed Mother of God. It is credibly
testified, that Pope Leo should, before witnesses, profess his rejoicing at the
advantages they had at Rome, by the fable of Christ. Were it handsome now in a
Protestant, to charge this blasphemy upon all Papists, though uttered by their
head and guide; and to dispute against them from the confession of the Jews,
who acknowledge the story of his death and suffering to be true; and of the
Turks, who have a great honor and veneration for him unto this day. Well may
men be counted Catholics, who walk in such paths, but I see no ground or
reason why we should esteem them Christians. Had our Author spoken to the
purpose, he should have proved the lawfulness* or if he had spoken to his own
purpose, with any candor of mind, or consistency of purpose, in the pursuit of
his design, have gilded over the practice of giving Divine honor to the holy
Virgin; of worshipping her with Adoration, as Protestants say, due to God
alone; of ascribing all the Titles of Christ unto her, turning Lord, in the
Psalms, in most places, into Lady; praying to her, not only to entreat, yea, to
command her Son to help and save them, but to save them her self, as she to
whom her Son has committed the administration of Mercy, keeping that of
Justice to himself; with many other the like horrid blasphemies, which he shall
hear more of, if he desire it. But in stead of this difficult task, he takes up
one, which, it seems, he looked on as far easier, falsely to accuse Protestants
of blaspheming her. We usually smile in England at a short answer that one is
said to have given Bellarmine's works; I hope, I may say without offense, that
if it were not uncivil, it might suffice for an answer to this Paragraph. But
though most men will suppose, that our Author has overshot himself, and gone
too far in his Charge, he himself thinks, he has not gone far enough; as well
knowing, there are some bounds, which when men have passed, their only course
is to set a good face upon the matter, and to dare on still. Wherefore to
convince us of the truth of what he had delivered concerning Protestants
reviling and blaspheming the blessed Virgin, he tells us, that it is no wonder,
seeing some of them in foreign parts, have uttered words against the very
honor of Jesus Christ himself. To make this good, Calvin is placed in the Van,
who is said, to taunt at His ignorance, and passion, and too much haste for his
breakfast, when he cursed the figtree, who if, as is pretended, he had studied
Catholic Divines, they would have taught him a more modest and pious
interpretation. It is quite beside my purpose and nature of the present
discourse, to recite the words of private men, and to contend about their sense
and meaning. I shall therefore only desire the Reader, that thinks himself
concerned in this report, to consult the place in Calvin pointed unto; and if
he finds any such taunts, as our Author mentions, or any thing delivered
concerning our Lord Christ, but what may be confirmed by the Judgment of all
the ancient Fathers, and many learned Romanists; I will be content to lose my
reputation with him, for any skill in judging at the meaning of an Author. But
what thoughts he will think meet to retain for this informer, I leave to
himself. What Catholic Divines Calvin studied, I know not; but, I am sure, if
some of those whom his adviser accounts so, had not studied him, they had never
stole so much out of his Comments on the Scripture, as they have done The next
primitive Protestants, that are brought in, to make good this charge, are
Servetus, Gibraldus, Lasmaninus, and some other Anti-trinitarian Heretics; in
opposition to whose errors, both in their first rise, and after-progress, under
the management of Faustus Socinus, and his followers, Protestants all Europe
over, have labored far more abundantly, and with far greater success, then all
his Roman Catholics. It seems they must now all pass for primitive
Protestants, because the interest of the Catholick-cause requires it should be
so. This is a communicable branch of Papal Omnipotency, to make things and
persons to be, what they never were. From them, a return is made again, to
Luther, Brentius, Calvin, Swinglius, who are said to nibble at Arianism, and
shoot secrets darts at the Trinity; though all impartial men must needs
confess, that they have asserted and proved the Doctrine of it, far more
solidly then all the Schoolmen in the world were able to do. But the main
weight of the discourse of this Paragraph, lies upon the pretty tale, in the
close of it, about a Protestant Bishop, and a Catholic Boy; which he must be a
very Cato that can read without smiling. It is a little too long to transcribe,
and I cannot tell it over again without spoiling of it, having never had that
faculty in gilding of little stories, wherein our Author excels. The sum is,
that the boy being reproved by the Bishop, for saying a Prayer to her, boggled
at the repetition of her name when he came to repeat his Creed, and cried, My
Lord, here she is again, what shall I do with her now? To whom the Bishop
replied, You may let her pass in your Creed, but not in your Prayers.
Whereupon our Author subjoyns, as though we might have Faith, but neither Hope
nor Charity for her. Certainly, I suppose, my Countrymen cannot but take it
ill, that any man should suppose them such stupid blockheads, as to be imposed
on with Sophistry, that they may feel through a pair of Mittens; Tam vacui
capitis populum Phaeaca putasti? For my part, I can scarce think it worth the
while to relieve men, that will stoop to so naked a lure. But that I may pass
on, I will cast away one word, which nothing but gross stupidity can
countenance from needlesseness. The blessed Virgin is mentioned in the Creed,
as the person of whom our Savior was born: and we have therefore faith for
her; that is, we believe that Christ was born of her; but do we therefore
believe in her? Certainly no more then we do in Pontius Pilate, concerning whom
we believe that Christ was crucified under him: A bare mention in the Creed,
with reference to somewhat else believed in, is a thing in its self
indifferent; and we see occasionally befell the best of Women, and one of the
worst of Men; and what Hope and Charity should we thence conclude, that we
ought to have for her? We are past charitable hopes that she is for ever
blessed in heaven, having full assurance of it. But if by Hope for her, he
means the placing of our hope, trust, and confidence in her, so as to pray unto
her, as his meaning must be, how well this follows from the place she has in
the Creed, he is not a man who is not able to judge.

CHAP. XVII.
Images. SECT. 24.

THe next excellency of the Roman-Church, which so exceedingly delighted our
Author in his travails, is their Images. It was well for him that he travailed
not in the days of the Apostles, nor for 4 or 500 years after their decease.
Had he done so, and, in his choice of a Religion, would have been influenced by
Images and Pictures, he had undoubtedly turned Pagan; (or else a Gnostick; for
those pretended Christians, indeed wretches worse then Pagans, as Epiphanius
informs us, had got Images of Christ, which, they said, were made in the days
of Pontius Pilate, if not by him.) Their Temples being richly-furnished and
adorned with them, whilst Christian Oratories were utterly destitute of them.
To forward also his inclination, he would have found them not the
representations of ordinary men, but of famous Hero's, renowned throughout the
whole World, for their noble acchievements and inventions of things necessary
to humane life; and those pourtrayed to the life, in the performance of those
actions which were so useful to mankind, and by which they had stirred up just
admiration of their virtue in all men. Moreover, he would have found their
learned men profound Philosophers, devout Priests, and Virgins, contemning the
Christians for want of those helps to devotion toward God, which in those
Images they enjoyed; and objecting to them their rashness, fury, and ignorance
in demolishing of them. As far as I can perceive by his good inclination to
this excellency of Religion (the imagery of it) had he lived in those days, he
would have as easily bid adieu to Christianity, as he did in these to
Protestantism.

But the excellent thoughts, he tells us that such Pictures and Images are apt
to cast into the minds of men, makes them come to our Mount Zion, the City of
the living God, to celestial Jerusalem, and Society of Angels, and so onward,
as his Translation somewhat uncouthly, and improperly renders that place of the
Apostle, Hebr. 12. A man indeed distraught of his wits, might possibly
entertain some such fancies upon his entering of an House, full of fine Pictures
and Images; but that a sober man should do so, is very unlikely. It is a sign
how well men understand the Apostle's words, when they suppose themselves
furthered in their meditation on them by Images and Pictures; and yet it were
well, if this abuse were all the use of them in the Romish Church: I wish, our
Author would inform us truly, whether many of those whom he tells us, he saw so
devout in their Churches, did not lay out a good part of their devotion upon
the fine Pictures, and Images he saw them fall down before. Images began first
in being ignorant peoples Books, but they ended in being their Gods or Idols:
Alas poor souls! they know little of those many curious windings, and turnings
of mind, through the Maeanders of various distinctions, which their Masters
prescribe to preserve them from Idolatry, in that veneration of Images, which
they teach them; when it is easy for them to know, that all they do in this
kind, is contrary to the express will and command of God. But that our Author
may charge home upon his Countrymen, for removing of Images out of Churches, he
tells us, that it is the judgment of all men, that the violation of an image,
redounds to the Prototype. True, provided it be an image rightly and duly
destined to represent him that is intended to be injured. But suppose, any man
against the express command of a King, should make an Image of him, on purpose
to represent him deformed and ridiculous to the people, would he interpret it
an injury, or dishonor done unto him, if any one, out of allegiance, should
break or tear such an Image in pieces? I suppose, a wise and just King would
look on such an action as a rewardable piece of service; and would in time take
care for the punishment of him that made it. The hanging of Traitors in
effigy, is not to cast a dishonor upon the person represented, but a
declaration of what he does deserve, and is adjudged unto. The Psalmist indeed
complains, that they broke down the (...), or carved works, in the walls and
seeling of the Temple; but that those apertiones, or incisurae, were not
Pictures and Images for the people to adore and venerate, or were appointed for
their instruction, if our Author knows not, he knows whither to repair to be
instructed, viz. to any Comment, old or new, extant on that Psalm. And it is no
small confidence to use Scripture out of the old Testament, for the Religious
use of images, of men's finding out and Constitution; whereas they may find as
many Testimonies for more Gods; enough indeed, wherein the one are denied, and
the other forbidden.

Nor will the ensuing contemplation of the means whereby we come to learn
things we know not, namely by our senses, whence Images are suited to do that
by the eye, which Sermons do by the ear, and that more effectually, yield him
any relief in his devotion for them. There is this small difference between
them, that the one means of instruction is appointed by God himself; the other,
that is pretended to be so, absolutely forbidden by him.

And these fine Discourses of the actuosity of the eye above the ear, and its
faculty of administering to the fancy; are but pitiful weak attempts for men
that have no less work in hand, then to set up their own wisdom in the room of,
and above, the wisdom of God.

And our Author is utterly mistaken, if he think, the sole end of preaching the
Cross and Death of Christ, is to work out such representations to the mind, as
Oratory may effect for the moving of corresponding affections. This may be the
end of some men's Rhetorical Declamations about it. If he will a little
attentively read over the Epistles of Paul, he will discern other ends in his
preaching Christ, and him crucified, which the fancies he speaks of, have
morally little affinity with all.

But what if Catholics having nothing to say for their practice in the
adoration of Images, seeing the Protestants have nothing but simple pretenses
for their removal out of Churches; these simple pretenses are express reiterate
commands of God: which what value they are of with the Romanists, when they lay
against their ways and practice, is evident. The Arguments of Protestants when
they deal with the Romanists, are not directed against this, or that, part of
their doctrine or practice about Images, but the whole; that is, the making of
them, some of God himself, the placing of them in Churches, and giving them
religious adoration; not to speak of the abominable miscarriages of many of
their Devotionists in teaching, or of their people in committing with them as
gross Idolatry, as ever any of the ancient Heathens did; which shall at large
be proved, if our Author desires it. Against this principle, and whole
practice, one of the Protestants pretenses, as they are called, lays in the
second Commandment, wherein the making of all Images for any such purpose, is
expressly forbidden: But the same God, say they, commanded Cherubims to be made,
and placed over the Ark. He did so; but I desire to know, what the Cherubs were
Images of; and that they would show, He ever appointed them to be adored, or to
be the immediate Objects of any veneration, or to be so much as historical
means of instruction, being always shut up from the view of the people, and
representing nothing that ever had a real subsistence in rerum natura. Besides,
Who appointed them to be made? As I take it, it was God himself, who did
therein no more contradict himself, then he did, when he commanded his people
to spoil the Egyptians, having yet forbid all men to steal. His own special
dispensation of a Law, constitutes no general Rule. So that (whoever are blind,
or fools) it is certain, that the making of Images for Religious veneration, is
expressly forbidden of God unto the sons of men. But alas! they were foreign
images, the ugly faces of Moloch, Dagon, Ashtaroth; he forbad not his own. Yea,
but they are Images or likenesses of Himself, that in the first place, and
principally, he forbids them to make, and he enforces his command upon them
from hence, that when he spoke unto them in Horeb, they saw no manner of
similitude, Deuteronomy. 5.15. which surely concerned not the ugly face of Moloch. And
it is a very pretty fancy of our Author, and inferior to none of the like kind,
that we have met with, that they have in their Catholic Churches, both, Thou
shall not make graven images, and Thou shall make graven Images; because they
have the Image of St. Peter, not of Simon Magus; of St. Bennet, or good St.
Francis, not of Luther and Calvin. I desire to know, Where they got that
command, Thou shall make Images? in the Original and all the Translations,
lately published in the Biblia Polyglotta, it is, Thou shall not. So it is in
the Writings of all the Ancients; As for this new Command, Thou shall make
graven Images; I cannot guess from whence it comes; and so shall say no more
about it. Only I shall ask him one question in good earnest, desiring his
resolution the next time he shall think fit to make the world merry with his
witty Discourses; and it is this. Suppose the Jews had not made the Images of
Jannes and Jambres, their Simon Magus's, but of Moses and Aaron; and had placed
them in the Temple and worshipped them as Papists do the Images of Peter or the
Blessed Virgin, whether he thinks it would have been approved of God or no* I
fear, he will be at a stand. But I shall not discourage him, by telling him
before hand, what will befall him, on what side soever he determines the
question.

He will not yet have done, but tells us, The Precept lies in this, That men
shall not mak^ to themselves: as if he had said, When you come into the Land
among the Gentiles, let none of you make to himself any of the Images he shall
see there set up by the Inhabitants contrary to the Law of Moses, and the
practice of the Synagogue, which does so honor her Cherubims, that she
abominates all Idols and their Sculpture* and thus if any Catholic should make
to himself contrary to what is allowed, any peculiar Image of the Planets, etc.
But that Nil admirari relieves me, I should be at a great loss in reading these
things; for truly a man would think, that he that talks at this rate, had read
the Bible no otherwise then he would have our people to do it, that is, not at
all. I would I could prevail with him for once to read over the Book of
Deuteronomy. I am persuaded, he will not repent him of his pains, if he be a
Lover of Truth, as he pretends he is. At least, he could not miss of the
advantage of being delivered from troubling himself and others hereafter with
such gross mistakes. If he will believe the Author of the Pentateuch, it was
the Image of the true God, that was principally intended in the prohibition of
all Images whatever, to be made objects of Divine Adoration, and that without
any respect unto the Cherubims over the Ark, everlastingly secluded from the
sight of the people. And the Images of the false Gods are but in a second place
forbidden; the Gods themselves being renounced in the first Commandment. And
it is this making unto a man's self any Image whatever, without the appointment
of God, that is the very substance of the Command. And I desire to know of our
Author, how any Image made in his Church comes to represent him to whom it is
assigned, or to have any religious Relation to him; For instance to St. Peter,
rather then to Simon Magus, or Judas, so that the honor done unto it, should
redound to the one, rather then to the other. It is not from any appointment of
God, nor from the nature of the thing it self; for the carved piece of wood, is
as fit to represent Judas as Peter; not from any influence of virtue and
efficacy from Peter, into the Statua, as the Heathens pleaded for their
Image Worship of old. I think, the whole relation between the Image and the
pretended Prototype, depends solely on the imagination of him that made it, or
him that reverenceth it. This creative faculty in the imagination, is that
which is forbidden to all the sons of men in the Non facies tibi, Thou shall
not make to thy self; and when all is done, the Relation supposed, which is the
pretended ground of Adoration is but Imaginary and Fantastic. A sorry basis
for the building erected on it. This whimsical termination of the Worship in
the Prototype by virtue of the imaginations Creation of a relation between it
and the Image, will not free the Papists from downright Idolatry in their
abuse of Images; much less will the pretense that it is the true God they
intend to worship, that true God having declared all Images of himself set up
without his command, to be abominable Idols.

CHAP. XVIII.
Latin Service. SECT. 25. Page 250.

THe next thing he gilds over, in the Roman practice is, that which he calls,
their Latin Service; that is, their keeping of the Word of God, and whole
worship of the Church, (in which two, all the general concernments of
Christians do lie) from their understanding, in an unknown tongue. We find it
true, by continual experience, that great successes, and confidence in their
own abilities, do encourage men to strange attempts; what else could make them
persuade themselves that they should prevail with poor simple mortals to
believe, that they have nothing to do with that, wherein, indeed, all their
chiefest concernments do lie; and that contrary to express direction of
Scripture, universal practice of the Churches of old, common sense, and the
broadest light of that reason, whereby they are men, they need not at all
understand the things wherein their communion with God does consist, the means
whereby they must come to know his will, and way wherein they must worship him.
Nor does it suffice these Gentlemen to suppose, that they are able to flourish
over their own practice with such pretenses, as may free it from blame; but
they think to render it so desirable, as either to get it embraced willingly by
others, or countenance themselves in imposing it upon them whether they will or
no. But as they come short of those advantages, whereby this matter, in former
days, was brought about, or rather come to pass: So to think, at once, to cast
those shackles on men now they are awake, which were insensibly put upon them
when they were asleep, and rejected on the first beam of Gospel Light that
shined about them; is, I hope, but a pleasing dream. Certain I am, there must
be other manner of reasonings, then are insisted upon by our Author, or have
been by his Masters as yet, that must prevail on any who are not on the account
of other things, willing to be deluded in this. That the most of Christians
need never to read the Scripture, which they are commanded by God to meditate
in day and night, to read, study, and grow in the knowledge of, and which by
all the ancient Fathers of the Church they are exhorted unto; that they need
no^ understand those Prayers which they are commanded to pray with
understanding, and wherein lies a principal exercise of their faith and love
toward God, are the things which are here recommended unto us: Let us view the
arguments, wherewith, first the general custom of the Western Empire, in
keeping the Mass and Bible in an unknown tongue, is pleaded. But, What is a
general Custom of the Western Empire, in opposition to the command of God, and
the evidence of all that reason that lies against it? Have we not an express
Command, not to follow a multitude to do evil? Besides, What is, or ever was,
the Western Empire unto the Catholicism of the Church of Christ, spread over
the whole world? Within an hundred years after Christ, the Gospel was spread to
Nations, and in places, whither the Roman power never extended it self, Romany
inaccessa loca; much less that branch of it, which he calls the Western Empire?
But neither yet was it the custom of the Western Empire, to keep the Bible in
an unknown Tongue, or to perform the worship of the Church in such a Language.
Whilst the Latin Tongue was only used by them, it was generally used in other
things, and was the vulgar Tongue of all the Nations belonging unto it. Little
was there remaining of those Tongues in use, that were the Languages of the
Provinces of it, before they became so. So that though they had their Bible in
the Latin Tongue, they had it not in an unknown; no more than the Grecians had,
who used it in Greek. And when any people received the Faith of Christ, who had
not before received the Language of the Romans, good men translated the Bible
into their own; as Hierom did for the Dalmatians. Whatever then may be said of
the Latin, there is no pretense of the use of an unknown Tongue, in the worship
of the Church in the Western Empire, until it was overrun, destroyed, and
broken in pieces by the Northern Nations, and possessed by them, (most of them
Pagans) who brought in several distinct Languages into the Provinces, where
they seated themselves. After those tumults ceased, and the Conquerors began to
take up the Religion of the people, into whose Countries they were come, still
retaining with some mixtures, their old Dialect; that the Scripture was not in
all places (for in many it was) translated for their use, was the sin and
negligence of some, who had other faults besides. The Primitive use of the
Latin Tongue in the worship of God, and translation of the Bible into it in the
Western Empire, whilst that Language was usually spoken and read, as the Greek
in the Grecian, is an undeniable argument of the Judgment of the ancient
Church, for the use of the Scripture, and Church-Liturgies in a known Tongue.
What ensued on; What was occasioned by that inundation of barbarous Nations,
that buried the world for some ages in darkness and ignorance, cannot
reasonably be proposed for our imitation. I hope, we shall not easily be
induced either to return unto, or embrace, the effects of Barbarism. But, says
our Author, Secondly, Catholics have the sum of Scripture, both for history
and dogm, delivered them in their own Language, so much as may make for their
salvation; good orders being set and instituted for their proficiency therein;
and what needs any more? or why should they be further permitted, either to
satifie curiosity, or to raise doubt^, or to wrest words and examples there
recorded unto their own ruin, as we see now by experience men are apt to do.
What Catholics have, or have not, is not our present dispute. Whether what
they have of story and dogm in their own Language, be that which Paul calls the
whole Counsel of God, which he declared at Ephesus, I much doubt. But the
question is, Whether they have what God allows them, and what he commands them
to make use of? We suppose, God himself, Christ, and his Apostles, the ancient
Fathers of the Church, any of these, or, at least, when they all agree, may be
esteemed as wise as our present Masters at Rome. Their sense is, That all
Scripture given by inspiration from God, is profitable for Doctrine; it seems
these judge not so, and therefore they afford them so much of it as may tend to
their good. For my part, I know whom I am resolved to adhere to, let others do
as seems good unto them. Nor where God has commanded and commended the use of
all, do I believe, the Romanists are able to make a distribution, that so much
of it, makes for the salvation of men, the rest only serves to satisfy
curiosity, to raise doubts, and to occasion men to wrest words and examples.
Nor, I am sure, are they able to satisfy me, why any one part of the Scripture
should be apt to do this more then others. Nor will they say this at all of any
part of their Mass. Nor is it just to charge the fruits of the lusts and
darkness of men, on the good word of God. Nor is it the taking away from men of
that alone, which is able to make them good and wise, a meet remedy to cure
their evils and follies. But these Declamations against the use and study of
the Scripture, I hope, come too late. Men have found too much spiritual
advantage by it, to be easily driven from it. It self gives light to know its
excellency, and defend its use by. But the Book is sacred, he says, and
therefore not to be sullied by every hand; what God has sanctified, let not
man make common. It seems then those parts of the Scripture, which they afford
to the people, are more useful, but less sacred, than those that they keep
away. These reasons justle one another unhandsomly. Our Author should have made
more room for them; for they will never lie quietly together. But what is it,
he means by the Book? the Paper, Ink, Letters, and Covering? His Master of the
Schools will tell him, These are not sacred; if they are, the Printers dedicate
them. And it is a pretty pleasant Sophism, that he adds, That God having
sanctified the Book, we should not make it common. To what end I pray, has God
sanctified it? Is it, that it may be laid up, and be hid from that people,
which Christ has prayed, might be sanctified by it? Is it any otherwise
sanctified, but as it is appointed for the use of the Church of all that
believe? Is this to make it common, to apply it unto that use, whereunto of God
it is segregated? Does the Sanctification of the Scripture, consist in the
laying up of the Book of the Bible, from our profane Utensils? Is this that,
which is intended by the Author? Would it do him any good to have it granted,
or further his purpose? Does the mysteriousness of it, lie in the Books being
locked up? I suppose, he understands this Sophistry well enough, which makes it
the worse.

But we have other things, yet pleaded, as the Example of the Hebrew Church,
who neither in the time of Moses, nor after, translated the Scripture into the
Syriack; yea, the book was privately kept in the Ark or Tabernacle, not touched
or looked on by the people, but brought forth at times to the Priest, who might
upon the Sabbath day read some part of it to the people, and put them in mind
of their Laws, Religion, and Duty.

I confess, in this passage, I am compelled to suspect more of ignorance then
fraud; notwithstanding the flourishing made in the distribution of the old
Testament, into the Law, Prophets, and H^giography. For first, as to the
Translation of the Scripture by the Jews into the Syriack Tongue, to what
purpose does he suppose, should this be done? it could possibly be for no other
than that, for which, his Masters keep the Bible in Latin. I suppose, he
knows, that at least until the Captivity, when most of the Scripture was
written, the Hebrew, and not the Syriack, was the vulgar language of that
people. It Is true indeed, that some of the noble and chief men that had the
transaction of affairs with Neigbhour-Nations, had learned the Syriack language
toward the end of their Monarchy; but the body of the people were all ignorant
of it, as is expressly declared, 2 Kings 18.26. To what end then should they
translate the Scripture into that Language, which they knew not, out of that,
which alone they were accustomed to from their infancy, wherein it was written?
Had they done so, indeed it would have been a good argument for the Romanists
to have kept it in Latin, which their people understand almost as well as the
Jews did Syriack. I thought, it would never have been questioned, but that the
Judaical Church had enjoyed the Scripture of the Old Testament, in their own
vulgar language, and that without the help of a Translation. But we must not be
confident of any thing for the future. For the present this I know, that not
only the whole Scripture that was given the Church for its use before the
Captivity, was written in the Tongue that they all spoke and understood, but
that the Lord sufficiently manifests, that what he speaks unto any, he would
have it delivered unto them in their own Language; and therefore appointing the
Jews what they should say unto the Chaldean Idolaters, he expresses his mind
in the Caldee Tongue, Jerem. 10.11. Where alone, in the Scripture, there is any
use made of a Dialect, distinct from that in vulgar use; and that because the
words were to be spoken unto them, to whom that Dialect was vulgar. And when
after the Captivity, the people had learned the Caldee Language, some parts of
some books then written, are therein expressed to show, that it is not this, or
that Language, which on its own account, is to confine the compass of Holy
Writ; but that that, or those, are to be used, which the people, who are
concerned in it, do understand. But what Language soever it was in, it was kept
privately in the Ar^ or Tabernacle, not touched, not looked upon by the people,
but brought forth at times to the Priest. (...) what Book was kept in the Ark?
the Law, Prophets, and Hagiography? who told you so? A Copy of the Law indeed,
or Pentateuch, was by God's command put in the side of the Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.26.
That the Prophets, or Hagiography, were ever placed there, is a great mistake
of our Author; but not so great as that that follows; that the Book placed in
the side of the Ark, was brought forth for the Priest to read in on the Sabbath
days; when as all men know, the Ark was placed in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the
Tabernacle and Temple, which only the High Priest entered, and that once a a
year, and that without liberty of bringing any thing out which was in it, for
any use whatever. And his mistake is grossest of all, in imagining, that they
had no other copies of the Law or Scripture, but what was so laid up in the
side of the Ark. The whole people being commanded to study in it continually,
and the King in special, to writeout a Copy of it with his own hand, Deuteronomy.
17.18. out of an Authentic Copy; yea, they were to take sentences out of it;
to write them on their fringes, and posts of their doors and houses, and on
their gates; all to bind them to a constant use of them. So that this Instance,
on very many accounts was unhappily stumbled on by our Author, who, (as it
seems) knows very little of these things. He was then evidently in haste, or
wanted better provision, when on this vain surmise, he proceeds to the
encomiums of his Catholic Mother's indulgence to her children, in leaving of
the Scripture in the hands of all that understand Greek and Latin (how little a
portion of her family; and to a declamation against) the preaching and
disputing of men about it, with a commendation of that reverential ignorance,
which will arise in men from whom the means of their better instruction is kept
at a distance.

Another Discourse we have annexed to prove, That the Bible cannot be well
translated, and that it loses much of its grace and sweetness, arising from a
peculiarity of Spirit in its writers, by any Translation whatever. I do, for my
part, acknowledge, that no Translation is able in all things universally to
exhibit, that fullness of sense, and secret virtue, to intimate the Truth it
expresses to the mind of a believer, w^^ is in many passages of Scripture in
its Original Languages; but how this will further the Romanists pretensions who
have enthroned a Translation for the use of their whole Church, and that none
of the best neither, but in many things corrupt and barbarous, I know not:
Those who look on the Tongues wherein the Scripture was Originally written as
their Fountains, if at any time they find the streams not so clear, or not to
give so sweet a relish as they expected, are at liberty, if able, to repair to
the fountains themselves. But those who reject the Fountains, and betake
themselves to one only stream, for ought I know must abide by their own
inconveniences, without complaining. To say, the Bible cannot be well
translated, and yet to make use, principally at least, of a Translation, with
an undervaluing of the Originals, argues no great consistency of Judgment, or
a prevalency of Interest. That which our Author in this matter sets off with a
handsome flourish of words, and some very unhandsome similitudes, considering
what he treats of, he sums up, p. 283. in these words; I would by all say thus
much, The Bible Translated out of its own Sacred phrase into a profane and
Common one, loses both its propriety and amplitude of meaning, and is likewise
divested of its peculiar Majesty, Holiness, and Spirit: which is reason enough,
if no other, why it should be kept inviolate in its own style and speech. So
does our Author advance his Wisdom and Judgment above the Wisdom and Judgment
of all Churches and Nations that ever embraced the Faith of Christ for a 1000
years; all which, notwithstanding what there is of truth in any of his
insinuations, judged it their duty, to translate the Scripture into their
Mother Tongues, very many of which Translations are extant even to this day.
Besides, he concludes with us in general ambiguors terms, as all along in other
things his practice has been.

What means he by the Bible's own Sacred phrase, opposed to a profane and
common one. Would not any man think, that he intended the Originals wherein it
was written? but I dare say, if any one will ask him privately, he will give
them another account; and let them know, that it is a Translation, which he
adorns with those Titles; so, that upon the matter, he tells us, that seeing
the Bible cannot be without all the inconveniences mentioned, it is good for us
to lay aside the Originals, and make use only of a Translation; or at least
prefer a Translation before them. What shall we do with those men that speak
such Swords and Daggers, and are well neither full nor fasting, that like the
Scripture, neither with a Translation, nor without it? Moreover, I fear, he
knows not well, what he means, by its own Sacred phrase, and a profane common
one; Is it the Syllables and words of this or that language, that he intends?
How comes one, to be Sacred, another profane and common? The languages wherein
the Scriptures were originally written, have been put to as bad uses, as any
under Heaven; nor is any Language profane or common so, as that the Worship of
God performed in it, should not be accepted with him, That there is a frequent
loss of Propriety and amplitude of meaning in Translations, we grant. That the
Scriptures by Translations, if good, true, and significant, according to the
capacity and expressiveness of the Languages whereinto they are translated, are
divested of the Majesty, Holiness, and Spirit, is most untrue. The Majesty,
Holiness, and Spirit of the Scriptures, lies not in words and Syllables, but in
the Truths themselves expressed in them: and whilst these are incorruptedly
declared in any language, the Majesty of the Word is continued. It is much,
that men preferring a Translation before the Originals, should be otherwise
minded; especially, that Translation being, in some parts, but the Translation
of a Translation, and that the most corrupt in those parts, which I know
extant. And this with many fine words, pretty Allusions, and Similitudes, is the
sum of what is pleaded by our Author, to persuade men to forgo the greatest
privilege, which from Heaven they are made partakers of, and the most necessary
radical duty that in their whole lives is incumbent on them. It is certain,
that the giving out of the holy Scripture from God, is an effect of infinite
love and mercy; I suppose it no less certain, that the end for which he gave
it, was, that men by it might be instructed in the knowledge of his will, and
their obedience that they owe unto him, that so at length they may come to the
enjoyment of him. This it self declares to be its end. I think also, that to
know God, his mind and Will, to yield him the obedience that he requires, is
the bounden duty of every man; as well as, to enjoy him, is their blessedness.
And, can they take it kindly of those, who would shut up this gift of God from
them whether they will or no? or be well pleased with them that go about to
persuade them, that it is best for them, to have it kept by others for them;
without their once looking into it, If I know them aright, this Gentleman will
not find his Contrymen willing to part with their Bibles on such easy
terms.

From the Scripture, concerning which he affirms, That it lawfully may, and
in reason ought, and in practice ever has been segregated in a language not
common to vulgar ears, all which things are most unduly affirmed, and, because
we must speak plainly, falsely; he proceeds to the worship of the Church, and
pleads that that also ought to be performed in such a language. It were a long
and tedious business, to follow him in his guilding over this practice of his
Church; we may make short work with him. As he will not pretend, that this
practice has the least countenance from Scripture; so, if he can instance in
any Church in the world, that for 500 years, at least, after it, set out in the
use of a Worship, the Language whereof the people did not understand, I will
cease this contest. What he affirms of the Hebrew Church keeping her Rites in a
language differing from the Vulgar, whether he intend before or after the
Captivity, is so untrue, as that I suppose, no ingenious man would affirm it,
were he not utterly ignorant of all Judaical Antiquity, which I had cause to
suspect before, that our Author is. From the days of Moses to the captivity of
Babylon, there was no Language in vulgar use among the people, but only that
wherein the Scripture was written, and their whole Worship celebrated. After
the captivity, though insensibly they admitted corruptions in their language,
yet they all generally understood the Hebrew, unless it were the Hellenists,
for whose sakes they translated the Scripture into Greek; and, for the use of
the residue of their people, who began to take in a mixture of the
Syro-Chaldean Language with their own, the Targum were found out. Besides, to
the very utmost period of that Church, the solemn Worship performed in the
Temple, as to all the interest of words in it, was understood by the whole
people, attending on God therein. And in that language did the Bible lie open
in their Synagogues, as is evident from the offer made by them to our Savior
of their Books to read in, at his first entrance into one at Capernaum.

These flourishes then of our Orator, being not likely to have the least effect
upon any who mind the Apostololical advice of taking heed lest they be beguiled
with enticing words, we shall not need much to insist upon them. This custom of
performing the Worship of God in the Congregation in a Tongue unknown to the
Assembly, renders, he tells us, that great act more majestic and venerable;
but why, he declares not. A blind veneration of what men understand not,
because they understand it not, is neither any duty of the Gospel, nor any part
of its Worship. St. Paul tells us, he would pray with the Spirit, and pray with
Understanding also; of this Majestic show, and blind Veneration of our Author,
Scripture, Reason, Experience of the Saints of God, Custom of the Ancient
Churches know nothing. Neither is it possible to preserve in men a perpetual
veneration of they know not what, nor, if it could be preserved, is it a thing
that any way belongs to Christian Religion. Nor can any rational man conceive,
wherein consists the Majesty of a man's pronouncing words, in matters wherein
his concernment lies, in a tongue that he understands not. And I know not
wherein this device for procuring veneration in men, exceeds that of the
Gnostics, who fraught their Sacred administrations, with strange uncouth names
and terms, intended, as far as appears, for no other end but to astonish their
Disciples. But then the Church, he says, as opposite to Babel, had one
Language all the world over, the Latin Tongue being stretched as large and as
wide as the Catholic Church, and so any Priest may serve in several Countries
administering presently in a place by himself or others converted, which are
conveniences attending this custom and practice. Pretty things to persuade men
to worship God they know not how; or to leave that unto others to do for them,
which is their own duty to perform; and yet neither are they true. The Church
by this means is made rather like to Babel, then opposite unto it: the fatal
ruining event of the division of the Tongues at Babel was, that by that means
they could not understand one another in what they said, and so were forced to
give over that design which before they unanimously carried on. And this is the
true, event of some men's performing the Worship of God in the Latin tongue,
which others understand not. Their Languages are divided as to any use of
language whatever. I believe, on this, as well as on other accounts, our Author
now he is warned, will take heed, how he mentions Babel, any more. Besides this
is not one to give one lip, one language, to whole Church, but in some things
to confine some of the Church, unto one language, which incomparably the the
greatest part of it do not understand. This is confusion not union. Still
Babel, returns in it. The use of a language that the greatest part of men do
not understand, who are engaged in the same work, whereabout it is employed, is
right old Babel. Nor can any thing be more vain then the pretense, that this
one is stretched, as large and as wide as the Catholic Church; far the
greatest part of it know nothing of this tongue, no^ did ever use a word of it
in their Church Service; so that the making of the use of one tongue necessary
in the service of the Church is perfectly schismatical; and renders the avowers
of that Principle, Schismatics, from the greatest part of the Churches of
Christ in the world, which are, or ever were in it, since the day of his
resurrection from the dead. And as for the convenience of Priests; there where
God is pleased to plant Churches, he will provide those, who shall administer
in his Name unto them, according to his mind. And those, who have not the
Language of other places, as far as I know, may stay at home, where they may be
understood, rather then undertake a pilgrimage to ca^t before Strangers, who
know not what they mean.

After an annumeration of these conveences, he mentions, that only
Inconvenience, which, as he says, attends the solemnization of the Churches
Worship in a Tongue unknown, namely that the vulgar people understand not what
is said. But, as this is not the only inconv^nience that attends it, so it is
one; if it must be called an inconvenience, and not rather a mischievous device
to render the worship of God useless, that has a womb full of many others,
more then can easily be numbered; but we must tie our selves to what our Author
pleases to take notice of. I desire then to know, What are these vulgar
people, of whom he talks? Are they not such as have souls to save? Are they not
incomparably the greatest part of Christians? Are they not such as God commands
to worship him? Are they not such, for whose sakes, benefit, and advantages,
all the worship of the Church is ordained, and all the admistration of it
appointed? Are they not those, whose good, welfare, growth in grace and
knowledge, and salvation, the Priests in their whole offices, are bound to seek
and regard? Are they not those, that Christ has purchased with his blood;
whose miscarriages he will require severely at the hands of those, who
undertake to be their guides, if sinning through a neglect of duty in them? Are
they not the Church of God, the Temple of the Holy Ghost? called to be Saints?
Or, Who, or What is it, you mean by this vulgar people? If they be those
described, certainly their understanding of what is done in the public worship
of God, is a matter of importance; and your driving them from it, seems to me
to give a supersedeas to the whole work it self, as to any acceptance with
God. For my part, I cannot as yet discern what that makes in the Church of God,
which this vulgar people must not understand; but this, says he, is of no
moment. Why so? I pray; to me it seems of great weight. No, it is of no moment,
for three Reasons. Which be they? 1. They have the scope of all, set down in
their Prayer-books, etc. whereby they may, if they please, as equally conspire,
and go along with the Priest, as if he spoke in their own Tongue. But, I pray,
Sir, tell me, Why, if this be good, that they should know something, and give a
guess at more; it is not better, that they should distinctly know and
understand it all? This Reason plainly cuts the throat, not only of some other
that went before, about the venerable Majesty of that, which is not understood,
but of the whole cause it self. If to know what is spoken, be good; the clearer
men understand it, I think, the better. This being the tendency of this Reason,
we shall find the last of the three, justling it as useless, quite out of
doors. Nor yet is there truth in this pretense; not one of a thousand of the
people, do understand one word, that the Priest speaks distinctly in their
whole service; so that this is but an empty flourish. He tells us, 2. Catholic
people come together, not for other business at the Mass, but only with fervor
of devotion, to adore Christ crucified; in that Rite he is there prefigured as
crucified before them, and by the mediation of that sacred blood, to pour forth
their supplications for themselves and others; which being done, and their good
purpose of serving and pleasing that holy Lord, that shed his blood for us,
renewed, they depart in peace: This is the general purpose of the Mass; so that
eyes and hands to lift up, knees to bow, and heart to melt, are there of more
use then ears to hear. For his Catholic peoples business at Mass, I shall not
much trouble my self. Christ I know, is adored by faith and love; that faith
and love, in the public worship of the Church, is exercised by prayer and
thanksgiving. For the lifting up of the eyes and hands, and bowing, and
cringing, they are things indifferent, that may be used, as they are animated
by that faith and love, and no otherwise. And, I desire to know, What
supplications they come to pour forth for themselves and others. Their private
devotions? They may do that at home; the doing of it in the Church, is contrary
to the Apostle's Rule. Are they the public prayers of the Church? Alas, the
trumpet to them, and of them, gives an uncertain found. They know not how to
prepare themselves to the work. Nor can they rightly say Amen, when they
understand not what is said. So that, for my part, I understand not what is the
business of Catholics at Mass; or how they can perform any part of their duty
to God in it, or at it. But what if they understand of it nothing at all? He
adds, 3. There is no need at all for the people to hear or understand the
Priest, when he speaks, or prays, and sacrifices to God, on their behalf.
Sermons to the people must be made in the peoples language; but prayers that
are made to God for them, if they be made in a language that God understands,
it is well enough. This reason renders the others useless, and especially shuts
the first out of doors. For, certainly it is nothing to the purpose, that the
people understand somewhat; if it be no matter whether they understand any
thing at all, or no. But I desire to know, What prayers of the Priest they are,
which it matt^rs not, whether the people hear or understand? Are they his
private devotions for them in his Closet or Cell, which may be made for them,
as well when they are absent, as present, and in some respect better too? These
doubtless are not intended. Are they any prayers that concern the Priest alone,
which he is to repeat, though the people be present? No, nor these neither; at
least not only these. But they are the prayers of the Church, wherein the whole
assembly ought to cry jointly unto Almighty God; part of that worship, wherein
all things are to be done to edification; which they are in this, and the
Quakers silent meetings, much alike. Strange! that there is no need, that men
should know or understand that, which is their duty to perform; and which if
they do it not, is not that, which it pretends to be; the worship of the
Church. Again, if the people neither need hear, nor understand what is spoken,
I wonder, what they make there. Can our Author find any Tradition (for, I am
sure, Scripture he cannot) for the setting up of a dumb show in the Church, to
edify men by signs, and gestures, and words insignificant? These are gallant
attempts. I suppose, he does not think it was so of old; for, sure I am, that
all the Sermons, which we have of any of the Ancients, were preached in that
very Language, wherein they celebrated all divine worship; so that if the
people understood the Sermons, as he says, they must be made to them in a
Language they understand; I am sure, they both heard and understood the worship
of the Church also: but Tempora mutantur; and, if it be enough, that God
understands the Language used in the Church, we full well know there is no need
to use any Language in it at all.

But to evidence the fertility of his invention, our Author offers two things
to confirm this wild Assertion. 1. That the Jews neither heard, nor saw when
their Priest went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, to offer prayers for them; as we
may learn from the Gospel, where the people stood without, whilst Zacharias
was praying at the Altar. 2. Saint Paul at Corinth, desired the prayers of the
Romans for him at that distance, who also then used a Language that was not
used at Corinth. These reasons, it seems, are thought of moment; let us a
little poize them. For the first, our Author is still the same in his discovery
of skill in the Rites and Customs of the Judaical Church; and, being so great,
as I imagine it is, I shall desire him, in his next, to inform us, who told
him, that Zacharias entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum to pray, when the people
were without; but let that pass: By the institution and appointment of God
himself, the Priests in their Courses, were to burn incense on the Altar of
incense, in a place separated from the people, it being no part of the worship
of the people, but a Typical representation of the Intercession of Christ in
heaven, confined to the performance of the Priests by God himself; ergo under
the Gospel, there is no need, that the people should either learn or understand
those prayers, which God requires by them, and amongst them. This is civil
Logic. Besides, I suppose, our Author had forgot, that the Apostle Paul in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, does purposely declare, how those Mosaical distances
are now removed by Christ, a free access being granted to Believers with their
worship, to the Throne of Grace. But there is scarce a prettier fancy in his
whole Discourse, then his application of St. Paul's desiring the Romans to pray
for him, when he was at Corinth, and so consequently the praying of all or any
of the people of God, for their absent friends, or the whole Church, to the
business in hand; especially as it is attended with the enforcement in the
Close, that they used a Language not understood at Corinth. But because I write
not to men, who care not whether they hear or understand, what is their duty in
the greatest concernments of their souls, I shall not remove it out of the way,
nor hinder the Reader from partaking in the entertainment it will afford him.

But our Author foreseeing, that even those with whom he intends chiefly to
deal, might possibly remember, that St. Paul had long ago stated this case in 1
Cor. 14. he finds it necessary to cast a Blind before them, that if they will
but fix their eyes upon it, and not be at the pains to turn to their Bibles, as
it may be some will not, he may escape that sword, which he knows is in the way
ready drawn against him; and therefore tells us, that if any yet will be
obstinate, and which after so many good words spent in this business, he seems
to marvel that they should, and object what the Apostle there writes against
praying and prophesying in an unknown Tongue, he has three Answers in a
readiness for him; whereof the first is that doubty one last mentioned; namely,
That the prayers, which the Apostle, when he was at Corinth, requested of the
Romans for him, was to be in an unknown Tongue to them that lived at Corinth;
when the only question is, whether they were in an unknown Tongue to them that
lived at Rome, who were desired to join in those Supplications. Surely this
Argument, that because we may pray for a man, when and where he knows not, and
in a Tongue, which he understands not, that therefore the worship of a Church,
all assembled together in one place, all to join together in it unto the
edification of that whole Society, may be performed in a Language unknown to
them so assembled; is not of such cogency, as so suddenly to be called over
again: wherefore letting that pass, he tells us, the design of the Apostle in
that place, is, to prevent the abuse of spiritual gifts, which in those days
men had received, and especially that of Tongues, which he lets them know, was
liable to greater inconveniences, then the rest there mentioned by him. But
what, I pray, if this be the design of the Apostle? does it follow, that in the
pursuit of this design, he teaches nothing concerning the use of an unknown
Tongue in the worship of God? Could I promise my self, that every Reader did
either retain in his memory what is there delivered by the Apostle, or would be
at the pains on this occasion to read over the Chapter, I should have no need
to add one word in this case more. For, What are the words of a poor weak man
to those of the Holy Ghost speaking directly to the same purpose? But this
being not from all to be expected, I shall only mind them of some few things
there determined by the Apostle; which if it do but occasion him to consider
the text it self, I shall obtain my purpose. The gift of speaking with strange
Tongues, being bestowed on the Church of Corinth, that they might be a sign
unto them that did not believe, of the power and presence of God amongst them,
ver. 22. diverse of them, finding, it seems, that the use of these Tongues, gave
them esteem and reputation in the Church, did usually exercise that gift in the
Assembly, and that with contempt and undervaluation of prophesying in a known
Tongue to the edification of the whole Church. To prevent this abuse, the
Apostle lays down this for a standing rule; that all things are to be done in
the Church unto edifying, and that this, all men, as to gifts, were to seek
for, that they might excel to the edifying of the Church; that is, the
instructing of others in knowledge, and the exciting of the grace of God in
them. And thereupon he shows them, that whatever is spoken in an unknown
Tongue, whether it be in a way of prayer, or prophesying in the Assemblies,
indeed tends nothing at all, to this purpose: unless it be so, that after a man
has spoken in a Tongue unknown, he does interpret what he has so spoken, in
that Language, which they do understand. For, says he, distribute the Church
into two parts, he that speaks with a Tongue (whether he pray or preach) and
those that hear; he that so prays and preaches, edifies and benefits himself;
but he does not benefit them that hear him: and that because they understand
not what he says, nor know what he means. For, says he, such words as are not
understood, are of no more use, than the indistinct noise of Harps, or the
confused noise of Trumpets. The words, it is true, have a signication in
themselves; but what is that, says he, to them that hear them, and understand
them not. They can never join with him, in what he speaks, nor say Amen, or
give an intelligent assent to what he has spoken. And therefore, he tells
them, that, for his part, he had rather speak five words, that being
understood, might be for their profit, then a thousand in an unknown Tongue;
which though they would manifest the excellency of his gift, yet would not at
all profit the Church, whether he prayed or prophesied; with much more to the
same purpose. It is hence evident to any Impartial Reader, that the whole
strength of the Apostle's discourse, and reasoning in this case, lies in this,
that praying or prophesying in the Church in a Tongue unknown, not understood
by the whole Church, though known and understood by him that uses it, is of no
use, nor any way tends to the benefit of the Church; but is a mere confusion to
be cast out from among them. The case is no other that lies before us. The
Priest says his prayers in a Tongue that, it may be, is known to himself, which
is no great gift; the people understand nothing of what he says. This, if the
Apostle may be believed, is a thing of no use, practiced to no purpose;
wherewith the people that understand not, cannot join, whereby they are not at
all profited, nor can they say Amen, or give a rational assent to what he
speaks. Now, says our Author, What is all this to the service of the Church? I
say, so much to that service, which he pleads for, as that it is condemned by
it, as altogether useless, unprofitable, and not to be longer insisted on; yea,
and this is so much worse than the case proposed by the Apostles, in as much as
those, who prayed and prophesied with Tongues, received the gift and ability of
so doing, in a miraculous manner from the Holy Ghost. And therefore might with
much color of reason plead for the free liberty of the exercise of those gift,
which they had so received; but our Readers of the Service, do with much labor
and pains get to read it in Latin; doing it by choice, without any intimation
for such a practice from any gift, that above others they have received.

If all this will not do, there is that which brings up the rear, that shall
make all plain. Namely, That whatever is pretended, yet indeed Latin is no
unknown Tongue, being the proper Language of Christians, united to the
Christian Faith, as a garment to a body? which he proves by many fine
Illustrations and Similitudes; telling us withal, that this one Language is
not spoken in a corner, but runs quite through the earth, and is common to all,
as they be ranked in the series of Christianity, wherein they are trained up by
the Father of the Family, and which, in reference to Religion, he only speaks
himself. But because, I hope, there is none of my Countrymen so stupid, as not
to have the wit of the Cynick, who, when a crafty companion would prove by
Syllogisms, that there is no such thing as motion, returned him no other
Answer, but by rising up and walking; and will be able at least to say, that
notwithstanding all these fine words, I know, that Latin to the most of
Christians is an unknown Tongue; I shall not much trouble my self to return any
Answer unto this Discourse. That there is an abstraction of Christian Religion,
from the persons professing it, which has a Language peculiar unto it; that
the Latin Tongue has a special relation to Religion above any other; that it
is any other way the trade-Language of Religion amongst learned men, but as
Religion comes under the notion of the things about which some men communicate
their minds one to another; that it is any way understood by the thousandth
part of Christians in the world, that constantly attend the worship of God; and
so that it is not absolutely as unknown a Tongue to them, when it is used in
the service of the Church, as any other in the world whatever; are such
monstrous Presumptions, as I wonder, a rational man would make himself guilty
of, by giving countenance unto them. For him, whom he calls the Father of the
Family of Christians; if it be God, he intends the only Father of the Family,
all men know, he (...) to any of the sons of men immediately, nor by any
Prophet by him inspired, communicated his mind in Latin: If it be the Pope of
Rome, whom he ascribes that title unto, I am sorry for the man; not knowing
how well he could make himself guilty of an higher Blasphemy.

CHAP. XIX.
Communion. Sect. 26.

IN the next Section, entitled Table, our Author seems to have lost more of
the moderation that he pretends unto, and to have put a keener edg upon his
spirit, then in any of those foregoing; and thence it is, that he falls out
into some more open revilings, and flourishes of a kind of a Dispute, than
elsewhere. In the entrance of his discourse, speaking of the administration of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper by Protestants, wherein the Laity are also
made partakers of the blessed Cup, according to the Institution of our Savior,
the practice of the Apostles and the Universal Primitive Church; this civil
Gentleman who complains of unhansome and unmannerly dealings, of others in
their writings, compares it to a treatment at my Lord Majors Feast, adding
scornfully enough, For who would not have drink to their meat? and what reason
can be given, that they should not? or that a feast with Wine should not,
caeteris paribus, be better then without. If he suppose, he shall be able to
scoff the Institutions of Christ out of the world, and to laugh men out of
their Obedience unto Him, I hope, he will find himself mistaken, which is all,
I shall at present say unto him; only, I would advise him to leave for the
future such unseemly taunts, lest he should provoke some angry men to return
expressions of the like contempt and scorn, upon the transubstantiated Host,
which he not only fancies, but adores.

From hence he pretends to proceed unto disputing; but being accustomed to a
loose Rhetorical Sophistry, he is not able to take one smooth step toward the
true stating of the matter he is to speak unto, though he says, he will argue
in his plain manner, that is, a manner plainly his, loose, in concluding,
sophistical. The plain story is this, Christ instituting his blessed Supper,
appointed Bread and Wine, to be blessed and delivered unto them that he invites
and admits unto it: of the effect of the blessing of these Elements of Bread
and Wine, whether it be a transubstantiation of them into the Body and Blood of
Christ, to be corporeally eaten; or a consecration of them into such signs and
symbols, as in and by the use thereof, we are made partakers of the body and
blood of Christ, feeding really on him by Faith, is not at all now under
dispute. Of the Bread and Cup so blessed, according to the appointment of
Christ, the Priests with the Romanists only do partake, the people of the Bread
only. This exclusion of the people from a participation of the Cup, Protestants
aver to be contrary to the institution of Christ, practice of the Apostles,
nature of the Sacrament, constant usage of them in the Primitive Church, and so
consequently highly injurious to the Sheep of Christ, whom he has bought with
the price of his Blood, exhibited in that Cup unto them. Instead of arguing
plainly, as he promised to do, in justification of this practice of the Church
of Rome, he tells us of the Wine they give their people after they have
received the Body; which he knows to be in their own esteem, a little common
drink to wash their mouths, that no crumbs of their Wafer should stick by the
way. What he adds, of Protestants not believing, that the consecrated Wine is
transubstantiated into the Blood of Christ, (which is not the matter by himself
proposed to debate), of the Priest's using both Bread and Wine in the
Sacrifice, (though he communicates not both unto the people,) when the Priest's
delivering of the Cup, is no part of the Sacrifice, but of the Communion,
(besides he knows, that he speaks to Protestants, and so should not have
pleaded his fictitious Sacrifice, which, as distinct from the Communion, Paul
speaks of, 1 Cor. 11. neither do they acknowledge, nor can he prove it very
vain, yet with these empty flourishes, it is incredible, how he triumphs over
Protestants, for charging the Romanists with excluding the People from the use
of the Cup in the Sacrament; when yet it is certain, they do so, nor can he
deny it. Yea, but Protestants should not say so, Seeing they believe not in
Transubstantiation. They believe every word, that Christ or his Apostles have
delivered, concerning the nature and use of the Sacrament, and all that the
Primitive Church taught about it; if this will not enable them to say, the
Romanists do that, which all the world knows they do, and which they will not
deny but that they do, unless they believe in Transubstantion also; they are
dealt withal on more severe terms, then I think our Author is authorized to
put upon them. But, it seems, the advantage lies so much in this matter on the
Roman Catholics side, that the Protestants may be for ever silent about it;
and why so? Why Catholics do really partake of the animated and living body of
their Redeemer; this ought to be done, to the end we may have life in us, and
yet Protestants do it not. Who told you so? Protestants partake of his Body and
his Blood too, which Papists do not; and that really and truly. Again;
Catholics have it continually sacrificed before their eyes and the very death
and effusion of their Lords blood prefigured and set before them, for faith to
feed upon: This Protestants have not. I think the man is mistaken; and that he
intended to say the Catholics have not, and to place Protestants in the
beginning of the sentence; for it is certain, that this is the very doctrine of
the Protestants concerning this Sacrament. They have in it the Sacrifice of
Christ before their eyes, and the death and effusion of his blood, figured,
(for how that should be prefigured which is past, I know not) and set forth for
faith to feed upon; This they say, this they teach, and believe; When I know
not how Catholics can have any thing figured unto them, nothing being the sign
of its self; nor is it the feeding of Faith, but of the Mouth, that they are
sollicitous about. But this, says he, they do not; though he had not spoken of
any doing before, which is an old last that we have been now well used to; and,
yet this, says he, ought to be done: For so our Lord commanded, when he said
to his Apostles, Hoc facite, This do ye, which ye have seen me to do, and in
that manner you see me do it; exercising before your eye my Priestly Function
according to the order of Melchisedech, with which power I do also invest you,
and appoint you to do the like, even unto the Consummation of the world, in
commemoration of my Death and Passion, exhibiting and showing forth your Lords
Death until he come. This Protestants do not, and we are mad-angry, that the
Papist does what his Redeemer enjoined him. I fear, his Readers, which shall
consider this odd medly, will begin to think, that they are not only
Protestants who use to be mad-angry. This kind of Writing argues, I will not
say, both madness and anger, but one of them it does seem plainly to do. For,
setting aside a far-fetched false notion or two about Melchisedech, and the
Doctrine of the Sacrament here expressed, is that which the Pope with Fire and
Sword has labored to exterminate out of the world, burning hundreds (I think)
in England for believing, that our Lord, instituting his blessed Supper,
commanded his Apostles to do the same that he then did, and in the same manner,
even to the Consummation of the world, in the commemoration of his Death, and
Passion, exhibiting and showing forth their Lord's death until he come; a man
would suppose, that he had taken these words out of the Liturgy of the Church
of England; for therein are they expressly found; and why then have not
Protestants that which he speaks of. Yea, but Christ did this in the exercise
of his Priestly Function, and with the same power of Priesthood, according to
the order of Melchisedech, invested his Apostles. Both these may be granted,
and the Protestants Doctrine, and Faith, concerning this Sacrament not at all
impeached; but the truth is, they are both false. The Lord Christ exercised
indeed his Priestly Function, when on the Cross he offered himself to God
through the Eternal Spirit a Sacrifice for the sins of the world; but it was by
virtue of his Kingly and Prophetical power that he instituted the Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, and taught his Disciples the use of it, commanding its
Observation in all his Churches to the end of the world. And as for any others,
being made Priests after the Order of Melchisedeck, besides himself alone, it is
a figment so expressly contrary to the words and reasoning of the Apostle, that
I wonder any man not mad or angry, could once entertain any approving thoughts
of it. That our Author may no more mistake in this matter, I desire he would
give me leave to inform him, that setting aside his proper Sacrificing of the
Son of God, and his hideous figment of Transubstanatition, both utter strangers
to the Scripture and Antiquity, there is nothing can by him be named,
concerning this Sacrament as to its honor or efficacy, but it is all admitted
by Protestants.

He pretends, after this loose Harangue, to speak to the thing it self; and
tells us, that the consecrated CHALICE is not ordinarily given to people by the
Priest in private Communion; as though in some cases, it were given amongst
them to the body of the people, or that they had some public communion wherein
it was ordinarily so given; both which he knows to be untrue. So impossible it
seems for him to speak plainly and directly to what he treats on. But it is a
thing which has need of these artifices; If one falsity be not covered with
another, it will quickly rain through all. However, he tells us, that they
should do so, is neither expedient nor necessary as to any effects of the
Sacrament. I wish, for his own sake, some course might be found to take him off
this confidence of setting himself against the Apostles, and the whole
primitive Church at once; that he might apprehend the task too difficult for
him to undertake, and meddle with it no more. All expediency in the
administration of this great Ordinance, and all the effects of it, depend
solely on the institution and blessing of Christ; If he have appointed the use
of both elements, what are we, poor worms, that we should come, now in the end
of the world, and say, the use of one of them is not expedient nor necessary to
any effects of Communion? Are we wiser then he? Have we more care of his Church
then he had? or, Do we think, that it becomes us thus arbitrarily to choose, and
refuse in the institutions of our Lord and Master? What is it to us, what
Cavils soever men can lay, that it is not necessary in the way of Protestants,
nor in the way of Catholics; we know it is necessary in the way of Christ. And
if either Protestants or Catholics leave that way, for me they shall walk in
their own ways by themselves. But why is it not necessary in the way of
Protestants? Because they place the effect of the Communion in the operation of
faith, and therefore, according to them, one kind is enough; nay, if we have
neither kind, there is no loss but of a Ceremony, which may be well enough
supplied at our ordinary Tables. This is pretty Logic, which, it seems, our
Author learned out of Smith and Seaton. Protestants generally think, that men
see with their eyes; and yet they think the light of the Sun necessary to the
exercising of their sight; and though they believe, that all saving effects of
the Sacrament depend on the operation of faith, (and Catholics do so too, at
least, I am sure, they say so;) yet they believe also, that the Sacrament,
which Christ appointed, and the use of it, as by him appointed, is necessary in
its own kind, for the producing of those effects. These things destroy not, but
mutually assist one another, working effectually in their several kinds to the
same end and purpose. Nor can there be any operation of faith, as to the
special end of the Sacrament, without the administration of it, according to
the mind and will of Christ. Besides, Protestants know, that the frequent
distinct Proposals in the Scripture of the benefits of the death of Christ, as
arising sometimes from the suffering of the body, sometimes from the effusion
of the blood of their Savior, leads them to such a distinct acting of faith
upon him, and receiving of him, as must needs be hindered and disturbed in the
administration of the Sacrament under one kind; especially, if that Symbol be
taken from them, which is peculiarly called his Testament, and that blood
wherewith his Covenant with them, was sealed: So that, according to the
Principles of the Protestants, the Participation of the Cup is of an
indispensible necessity unto them that intend to use that Ordinance to their
benefit and comfort; and what he adds, about drinking at our ordinary tables;
because we are now speaking plainly, I must needs tell him, is a profane piece
of scurrility, which he may do well to abstain from for the future. What is, or
is not necessary, according to their Catholic Doctrine, we shall not trouble
our selves, knowing that which is so called by him, to be very far from being
truly Catholic; the Romanists Doctrine of Concomitancy, being a late Figment
to countenance their spoiling the people of the legacy of Christ, unknown to
Antiquity, and contrary to Scripture, and enervating the Doctrine of the death
of Christ, whose most precious blood was truly separated from his body, the
benefit of which separation is exhibited unto us in the Sacrament, by himself
appointed to represent it; we neither believe nor value.

As the necessity of it is denied, so also, that there is any precept for it;
what think you then of (...); drink you all of it; that is, this Cup: They
think this to be a Precept to be observed toward all those who come to this
Supper. What Christ did, that he commanded his Apostles to do; he gives the Cup
to all that were present at his Supper, and commands them all to dri^^ of it;
Why, I pray, are they not to do so? Why is not this part of his command as
Obligatory to them, as any others? Alas, They were the Priests that were
present, all Lay people were excluded; not one was excluded from the Cup that
was there at any part of the Ordinance. What, if they were all Priests, that
were there, as no one of them was, Was the Supper administered to them as
Priests, or as Disciples? or is there any color or pretense, to say, that one
kind was given to them as Priests, another as Disciples; Dic aliquem, dic,
Quintiliane, colorem. Was not the whole Church of Christ represented by them?
Is not the command equal to all? Nay, as if on purpose to obviate this
Sacrilegious figment, Is not this word ( Drink you all of this), added
emphatically, above what is spoken of the other kind? Many strange things there
are, which these Gentlemen would have us believe about this Sacrament; but none
of them of a more incredible nature then this, that when Christ says to all his
Communicants, Drink you all of this, and commands them to do the same that he
did, his meaning was, that we should say, Drink you none of this. They had
need, not of a Spatula linguae, to let such things as those down our Throats,
but a Bed-staffe to cram them down, or they will choke us in the swallowing;
and, I am sure, will not well digest, when received. He must have an
Iron-Stomach, that can concoct such crude morsels.

But if this will not do, he would fain have us grant, That the whole manner of
giving the Communion unto the Laity, whether under one, or both kinds, is left
to the disposition of the Church; I tell you truly, I should have thought so
too, had not Christ and his Apostles beforehand determined it: but as the case
stands, it is left so much to the disposition of the Church, whether the
blessed Cup shall be administered to the people, as it is, whether we shall have
any Sacraments or no, and not one jot more. And let not our Author flatter
himself, that it was a pre-conceived Opinion of the arbitrariness of this
business, that made men scruple it no more in former ages, when the Cup was
first taken from them. They scrupled it, until you had roasted some of them in
the fire, and shed the blood of multitudes by the Sword, which was the old way
of satisfying scruples.

At length our Author ventures on St. Paul, and hopes, if he can satisfy him
he shall do well enough; and tells us, This indifferent use of Communion
amongst the ancient Christians in either kind, sometimes the one, sometimes the
other, sometimes both, is enough to verify that of St. Paul, We are all
partakers of one Bread and of one Cup. But what is this indifferent use, and
who are these ancient Christians he tells us of? Neither is the use of one or
of both indifferent among the Papists, nor did the ancient Christians know any
thing at all of this business of depriving the People of the Cup; which is but
a by-blow of Transubstantiation. He knows they knew nothing of it, whatever he
pretends. Neither does the Apostle Paul say nakedly, and only, that We are all
partakers of one Bread and one Cup; but, instructing the whole Church of
Corinth in the right use of the Lords Supper, he calls to mind what he had
formerly taught them, as to the celebration of it; and this he tells them was
the imitation of the Lord himself, according as he had received it in command
from him, to give the blessed Bread and Cup to all the Communicants. This he
lays down as the Institution of Christ; this he calls them to the right use and
practice of; telling the whole Church, that as often as they eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup, (not eat the Bread without the Cup) they do show forth the
Lord's Death until he come. And therefore does he teach them how to perform
their duty herein, in a due manner: Ver. 28. Let, says he, a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Adding the
reason of his caution; for, he that eats, and drinks, unworthily, eats
and drinks, etc. intimating also, that they might miscarry in the use of
either Element. For, says he, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup unworthily. In the administration of the whole Supper, you may offend,
unless you give heed in the participation of either Element. What can possibly
be spoken more fully, distinctly, plainly, as to Institution, Precept,
Practice, and Duty upon all, I know not? And if we must yet dispute about this
matter, whilst we acknowledge the Authority of the Apostle, I think, there is
small hopes of being quit of Disputes, whilst this world continues. The
pitiful Cavils of our Author against the Apostle's express and often repeated
words, deserve not our notice; yet for the sake of those whom he intends to
deceive, I shall briefly show their insufficiency to invalidate St. Paul's
Authority and Reasonings.

1. He says, That we may easily see what was St. Paul 's opinion from those
words, whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink this cup of our Lord
unworthily; and so say I too, the meaning of them is before declared; but,
says he, repeating the institution as our Lord delivered, he makes him, after
the consecration of the bread, say absolutely, Do this in commemoration of me.
But after the chalice, he speaks with a limitation, Do this as often as you shall
drink it, in commemoration of me; What then? Pray, What are the next words? Are
they not, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup? Is not the
same term as often annexed to the one, as well as to the other? Is it a
limitation of the use of either, and not a limitation of that kind of
Commemoration of the Lord's Death to the use of both? From these doughty
observations, he concludes, that the particle [and] in the other Text, must
needs be taken disjunctively; we are all partakers of one bread, and of one
cup. That is, all of us, either partake of both, or each one, at least, either
of the one or other. A brave exposition! But, What shall we say to the other,
and, in the other Texts, so often occurring to the same purpose? Are they also
to be taken disjunctively? This, it seems, is to interpret Scripture according
to the sense of the Fathers; to vent idle cavils, which they were never so
weak, or perverse, as once to dream of. Had the Apostle but once used that
expression, this bread, and this cup, yet adjoining that expression to the
Institution of Christ, commanding the administration of that bread and cup, it
were temerarious boldness so to disjoynt his words, and render them incongruous
to his purpose? But repeating the same expression so often as he does, still
with respect to the Institution of the Ordinance whereof he speaks, to make us
believe, that in all those expressions, he intended quite another thing then
what he says, is a wild attempt. Miserable error! What sorry shifts do thou
cast thy Patrons upon? Who would love such a beast, that so claws and tears her
embracers? The trivial instances of the use of the Particle ( and or et)
disjunctively, as in that saying, Mulier est domus salus, and ruina? which is
evidently used not of the same individual person, nor of the same actions* but
only expresses the different actings of several individuals of the same
Species, concern not this business; whose argument is far from being founded
alone on the signification of that particle (though its use be constant enough
to found an Inference, not to be shaken by a few anomalous instances) but from
the necessary use of it in this place, arising from the context of the Apostles
Discourse.

Our Author further adds, that sometimes the whole sacred Synaxis is called
Breaking of bread, without any mention of the chalice. And what then? I pray,
is not the body of Christ, sometimes mentioned without speaking of the blood,
and the blood oftener without speaking of the body; Is not the whole Supper
called the Cup, without mentioning of the Bread? 1 Cor. 10.21. all by the same
Synecdoche? I shall not insist on his gross, palpable mistakes, from Luke
24.30. Nothing but domineering prejudices could ever put men upon such
attempts, for the justifying of their errors. Upon the whole matter, we may
easily discern, what small cause our Author has from such feeble Premises, to
erect his Triumphant Conclusion of the Non-necessity of participation of the
blessed Cup by the people in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. As little
cause has he to mention Antiquity and Tradition from the Apostles, which lie
universally against him in this matter; and that there is now no such Custom
in the Romish Church, it is because they have taken up a practice contrary to
the command and practice of Christ and his Apostles, and contrary to the Custom
in obedience thereunto, of all the Churches in the whole world.

CHAP. XX.
Saints. SECT. 27.

FRom the Communion, we come to Saints; and these take up the longest Discourse
of any one Subject in the Book. Our Author found it not an easy task to set
this practice of his Church, in the Worship and invocating of Saints, right and
straight in the minds of sober men. Several ways he turns himself in his
attempt, all, as far as I can perceive, to very little purpose. In all of them,
it is evident, that he is ashamed of their practice and principles in this
matter; which makes his undertaking as to Protestants so much the worse, in
that he invited them to feed upon that, which he himself is unwilling to taste,
lest he should be poisoned. At first, he would persuade us, that they had only
a respectful memory and reverence for the Saints departed, such as ingenuous
persons will have for any worthy Personages that have formerly ennobled their
families: To this, he adds the consideration of their example, and the patterns
they have set us in the ways of holiliness, to persuade, and prevail with us to
imitate and follow them. And with sundry Arguments, does he dispute for his
honorable esteem and imitation of the Saints departed. Herein then, it may be,
lies the difference between them and Protestants; that they contend, that the
true Saints are to be thus honored and followed; Protestants are of the mind,
that neither of them is to be done: True; for, Luther, Wickliff, and especially
Calvin, have intemperately opened their mouths against all the Saints; Calvin
in special, against the persons renowned in the Old and New Testament, Noah,
Abraham, Rebecca, Jacob, Rachel, Moses, etc. with a great number of others.
Naughty man, what has he said of them? It is certain in general, that he has
said, that they were all in their days sinners. Is this to be endured, that
Calvin, that holy-faced man should say of such holy persons, that they had need
to be redeemed and saved by Jesus Christ? who can bear such intemperate
Theiomachy? Nay, but he has gone further, and charged them every one with sins
and miscarriages: If he has spoken any thing, of their sins and failings, but
what God has left upon record on set purpose in his Word, that they might be
examples of humane frailty, and testimonies of his grace and mercy in Christ
toward them, for the encouragement of others that shall be overtaken in the
like temptation, as some of them were, let him bear his own burden. If he have
said no more, but what the Holy Ghost has recorded, for him and others to make
use of, I envy not their cheer, who triumph in falsely accusing of him. But is
this indeed the difference between Papists and Protestants about the Saints? Is
this the doctrine of the Papists concerning them? Is their practice confined
within the limits of these principles? Are these the things, which in their
principles and practice, are blamed by Protestants? The truth is, this is the
very Doctrine, the very Practice of Protestants. They all jointly bear a due
respect to the memorial of all the Saints of God, concerning whom they have
assurance that they were so indeed. They praise God for them, admire his grace
in them, rejoice in the fruits of their labors and sufferings for Christ, and
endeavor to be followers of them in all things wherein they were followers of
Christ; and hope to come to be made partakers with them of that glory and joy
which they are entered into. Is this the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, or of
the Harmony of Confessions? Does this represent the practice of Papists, or
Protestants? It is very seldom, you shall hear a Sermon of a Protestant,
wherein the example of one Saint or other, is not in one thing or other,
insisted on, and proposed to imitation. If this venerable esteem, and sedulous
imitation of Saints, with praising God, for his Graces in them, his mercy
toward them, and an endeavor to obtain the crown they have received, be the
doctrine, and the whole doctrine of the Church of Rome about the Saints
departed, why should we contend any longer? All parties are agreed. Let us
contend no more about that which is not; but if it be otherwise, and that
neither are these things, all the things that the Papists assert and maintain
in this matter, nor are these things at all opposed by the Protestants, a man
may easily understand, to what end our Author makes a flourish with three or
four leaves of his Book; as though they were in difference between us. Such
artifices will neither advantage his cause, nor his person with sober knowing
men. As to his whole Discourse then, I shall only let him know, that
Protestants are unconcerned in it. They bear all due reverence to the Saints
departed this life, and strive to follow them in their course; although I must
add also, that their example is very remote from being the chiefest incentive,
or rule unto, and in, the practice of un^versal obedience. The example of
Christ himself, and the revealed Will of God, in his Word, are their rule and
guide; in attendance whereunto thousands amongst them (be it spoken to the
praise of his glorious grace) do instantly serve God in all good conscience day
and night, and holding the Head, grow up into him, who is the fullness of him
that fills all in all.

To close this Discourse, and to come to that, which he seems to love as a Bear
does the Stake; the practice of the Romish Church, in the invocation and
adoration of Saints; he tells us, to usher it in, two pretty stories out of
Antiquity: The first, of the Jews; and last, of the Pagans. 1. For the Jews;
that they accused the Christians* before the Roman Emperors for three things:
That they had changed the Sabbath, that they worshipped images of the Saints,
that they brought in a strange God named Jesus Christ. What if they did so? Was
all true, that the Jews accused the Christians of? Besides, what is here about
the invocation of Saints? somewhat indeed we have about pictures and images,
which, it seems, are contrary to the Judaical Law; not a word do we meet with
about their invocation of Saints. But indeed this is a pretty midnight story, to
be told, to bring children asleep; as though the Jews durst accuse the
Christians before Pagans, for having images and pictures, when the Pagans were
ready every day to destroy those Jews, because they would have none? A likely
matter they would admit of their complaint against them that had them, or that
the Jews had no more wit then to disadvantage themselves in their contest by
such a complaint? Besides, the whole insinuation is false* neither did the Jews
so accuse them; nor had the Christians admitted any religious use of Pictures
or Images in those days. And this their defense to the accusation of the
Pagans, that they rejected all Images, makes as evident as if it were written
by the Sunbeams to this day. Being charged by the Pagans with an Image-less
Religion, they everywhere acknowledge it, giving their Reason why they neither
did, nor could admit of a Religious use of any Image at all. I presume, our
Author knows this to be so, and I know, if he do not, he is a very unfit person
to talk of Antiquity.

Of the like nature is the Story which he tells us of the things the Pagans
laughed at the Christians for. Amongst these was the Worship of an Asses-head,
which shows, says he, the use and respect they had for Images. For the Jews
had defamed our Lord Jesus Christ, whose head and half-pourtraict Christians
used upon their Altars, even as they do at this day, amongst other things of
his great simplicity and ignorance. So use men to talk, who either know not, or
care not, what to say. I would gladly impute this Story of the Asseshead, and
the Jews accusation, to our Author's simplicity and ignorance; because, if I do
not so, I shall be compelled to do it unto somewhat in him of a worse name; and
yet that by-insinuation of the use of the Head and half-portrait of our Savior
upon Altars by the old Christians, before Constantine's days of whom he
speaks, will not allow me to lay all the misadventure of this Tale upon
ignorance. Surely, he cannot but know, that what he suggests, is most
notoriously false, and that he cannot produce one Authentic Testimony, no not
one, of any such thing; whereas innumerable lay expressly against it, almost in
all the reserved Writings of those days. For the Story of the Asses-head;
seeing, it seems he knows not what I thought ever puny-Scholar to be acquainted
with, I hope, he will give me leave to inform him, that it was an imputation
laid upon the Jews, not the Christians, and that the Christians were no
otherwise concerned in the Fable, but as they were at any time mistaken to be
Jews. The figment was inverted, long before the Name of Christians was known in
the World, and divulged before and after, by as great wits as any were in the
World, as Appian, Tacitus, Trogus, and others. The whole rumor arising from
their Worshipping a Golden Calf in the Wilderness, and afterward his imitation
progeny at Dan and Bethel. The confutation of the Lie by Josephus, is known to
all learned men; who tells Appian, That if he had not had the Head of an Ass,
and the face of a Dog, he would never have given credit unto, or divulged, so
loud a lie. Little countenance therefore is our Author like to obtain from this
loud lie, invented against the Jews, to prove the worshipping of Pictures and
Images among Christians; nor is that his business in hand, if he be pleased to
remember himself, but the Invocation of Saints, which now at length he is
resolved (but I see unwillingly) to speak unto.

Had he intended plain dealing, and to persuade men by Reason and Arguments, he
should nakedly and openly have laid down the doctrine and practice of his
Church in this matter, and have attempted to justify the one and the other.
This had been done like a man who liked and approved what his Interest forced
him to defend; and upon honest Principles sought to draw others to share with
him in their worth and excellency. But he takes quite another course, and bends
his design to cover his ware, and to hood-wink his Chapmen, so to strike up a
blind bargain between them.

Two things he knows, that in the Doctrine of his Church about the Veneration
of Saints, Protestants are offended at.

1. That we ought religiously to invocate and call upon, pray unto them, flying
unto them for help and assistance; which are the very words of the
Trent-Council, the avowed Doctrine of his Church, which whosoever believes not
is cursed.

2. That we may plead for acceptance, grace and mercy with God, for their
merits and works, which our Author gilds over, but cannot deny. If he will
plainly undertake the defense of either of these, and endeavor to vindicate
the first from Superstition and the latter from being highly derogatory, to the
mediation of Christ, both, or either, to have been known or practiced in the
first Churches, he shall be attended unto. To tell us fine Stories, and to
compare their invocation of Saints, to the Psalmists Apostrophe's unto the
works of the Creation to set forth the praise of the Lord, which they do in
what they are, without doing more, and to deny direct praying unto them; is but
to abuse himself, his Church, his Reader, and the Truth; and to proclaim to
all, that he is indeed ashamed of the Doctrine which he owns, because it is not
good or honest, as the Orator charged Epicurus. In the practice of his Church,
very many are the things which the Protestants are offended with. Their
Canonization framed perfectly after the manner of the old Heathen Apotheosis;
Their exalting men into the Throne of religious Worship, some of a dubious
existence, others of a more dubious Saintship; their Dedication of Churches,
Altars, Shrines, Days to them. Their composing multitudes of Prayers for their
people to be repeated by them: Their divulging feigned, ludicrous, ridiculous
Legends of their lives to the dishonor of God, the Gospel, the Saints
themselves, with innumerable other things of the like nature, which our Author
knows full well to be commonly practiced and allowed in his Church. These are
the things that he ought to defend and make good their Station, if he would
invite others to a fellowship and Communion with him. Instead of this, he tells
us, that his Catholics do not invocate Saints directly; when I shall undertake
(what he knows can be performed), to give him a Book bigger then this of his,
of Prayers allowed by his Church, and practiced by his Catholics, made unto
Saints directly, for help, assistance, yea grace, mercy, and heaven, or
desiring those things for their merit, and upon their account; which as I
showed are the two main parts of their doctrine condemned by Protestants. I can
quickly send him Bonaventure's Psalter, Prayers out of the course of hours of
the blessed Virgin, our Ladies Antiphonies of her sorrows, her seven corporeal
joys, her seven heavenly joys, out of her Rosary. Prayers to St. Paul, St.
James, Thomas, Panoratius, George, Blase, Christopher, Who not? all made
directly to them, and that for mercies spiritual and temporal; and tell him how
many years of indulgences, yea thousands of years, his Popes have granted to
the saying of some of the like stamp; and all these not out of musty Legends,
and the devotion of private Monks and Friars; but the Authentic Instruments of
his Churches worship and Prayers. Let our Author try whether he can justify
any of these opinions or practices, from the words of the Lord in Jeremy,
Though Moses and Samuel should stand before me, yet is not my Soul unto this
people, declaring, his determinate counsel for their destruction, not to be
averted by Moses or Samuel, were they alive again, who in their days had stood
in the gap and turned away his wrath, that his whole displeasure should not
arise; or from the words of Moses, praying the Lord to remem^er Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob his Servants; which he immediately expounds, as they are also in a
hundred other places by remembering his Covenant made with them, and the Oath he
swear unto them; these are pitiful poor Pillars to support so vast and
tottering a Superstruction. And yet they are all that our Author can get to
give any countenance to him in his work, which indeed is none at all.

Neither do we charge the Romanists, with the particular fancies of their
Doctors, their Speculum Trinitatis, and the like; no, nor yet with the grosser
part of the people's practice, in constituting their Saints in special
presidentships, one over Hoggs, another over Sheep, another over Cows and
Cocks, like the ruder sort of the ancient Heathen, which we know our Author
would soon disavow; but the known doctrine and approved practice of his whole
Church, he must openly defend, or be silent in this cause hereafter. This
mincing of the matter by praying Saints, not praying to them, praying to them
indirectly not directly; praying them, as David calls on Sun, Moon, and Stars
to praise the Lord, so praying to them, as it is to no purpose, whether they
hear us or no, is inconsistent with the doctrine and practice of his own Church
to which he seems to draw men, and not to any private opinion of his own. And
a wise piece of business it is indeed, that our Author would persuade us, that
we may as well pray to Saints in the Roman-Mode, as Paul desired the Saints
that were then alive to pray for him. We know, it is the duty of living Saints
to pray for one another; we know a certain way to excite them to the
performance of that duty in reference unto us; we have Rule, President, and
Command in the Scripture to do so, the requests we make to them are no elicite
acts of Religion; we pray to them neither directly nor indirectly; but desire
them by virtue of our Communion with them, to assist us in their prayers, as we
might ask an Alms, or any other good turn at their hands. I wonder wise men are
not ashamed thus to dally with their own and others eternal concernments. After
all this, at one breath he blows away all the Protestants as childish (just as
Pyrgopolenices did the Legions of his Enemies) they are all childish; Let him
show himself a man, and take up any one of them as they are managed by any one
learned man of the Church of England, and answer it if he can. If he cannot,
this boasting will little avail him with considering men. I cannot close this
Paragraph without marking one passage toward the close of it. Laying down three
Principles of the Saints Invocation, whereof the first it self is true, but
nothing to his purpose; the second is true, in the substance of it, but false
in an addition of merit, to the good works of the Saints, and not one jot more
to his purpose then the other; the third is, That God cannot dislike the
reflections of his divine Nature diffused in the Saints out of the fullness of
his Beloved Son, when any makes use of them the easier to find mercy in his
sight. These are good words; and make a very handsome sound. Will thou Reader
know the meaning of them, and withal discern how thy pretended Teacher has
colluded with thee in this whole Discourse? The plain English of them is this.
God cannot but approve our pleading the merits of the Saints for our obtaining
mercy with him. A Proposition as destructive to the whole tenor of the Gospel
and mediation of Jesus Christ, as in so few words could well be stamped and
divulged.

CHAP. XXI.
Purgatory. SECT. 28.

WE are at length come to Purgatory, which is the Pope's Indies; his
Subterranean Treasure-house, on the Revenues whereof he maintains a hundred
thousand fighting men, so that it is not probable, he will ever be easily
dispossessed of it. This is the only root of Dirge, though our Author
flourishes, as though it would grow on other stocks. It is their Prayer for the
dead, which he so entitles, and in the excellency of their Devotion in this
particular he is so confident, that he deals with us as the Orator told Q.
Caecilius, Hortensius would with him, in the Case of Verres, bid him take his
option and make his choice of what he pleased, and it should all turn to his
disadvantage; Hortensius by his eloquence would make any thing that he should
fix on, turn to his own end. He bids us on the matter, choose whether to think
the souls they pray for, to be in Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory; all is one, he
will prove praying for them to be good and lawful. Suppose they be in Heaven,
What then? What then? may we not as well pray for them, as for sanctifying the
Name of God, which will be done whether we pray or no. Suppose they are in
Hell; yet we know it not, and so may show our Charity toward them; but suppose
they be in Purgatory, It is the only course we can take to help them. [Of
Purgatory we shall speak anon.] If there be no other receptacle for Saints
departed, but Heaven and Hell, it is but a flourish of our Author, to persuade
us, that Prayers for them in the Roman-mode, would be either useful or
acceptable to God. Suppose them you pray for, to be in Hell; the best you can
make of your Prayers, is but a vain babbling against the Will and Righteousness
of God; an unreasonable troubling of the Judge after he has pronounced his
Sentence. Yea, but you do not know them to be in Hell, then neither do you
suppose them to be there; which yet is the case you undertake to make good;
Suppose they be in Hell, yet its well done to pray for them, and to say they
may not be there, is to suppose they are not in Hell, not to suppose they are;
unless you will say, Suppose they are not in Hell, you may pray for them,
suppose they are in Hell; hereunto does this subtilty bring us. But it is not
the Will of God, that you should pray for any in Hell; no not for any in
Heaven, unless it be the will of God, that you should oppose his will in the
one, and exercise you selves in things needless and unprofitable in the other;
both which are far enough from his mind, and that Word, which I believe, at
last, will be found, the only true and infallible rule of Worship and Devotion.
When we pray for the sanctifying of God's Name, the coming of his Kingdom, the
doing of his will, we still pray for the continuance of that which is as to
outward manifestation, in an alterable condition; for the Name of God may be
more or less sanctified in the world; and for that which is future. But, to
pray for them that are in Heaven, is to pray for that for them, which they are
in the unalterable enjoyment of: and besides, to do and practice that in the
Worship of God, which we have no precept, no precedent, no rule, no
encouragement for, in the Scripture; nor the approved examples of any Holy men
from the foundation of the world. Whatever Charity there can be in such
prayers, I am sure, faith there can be none, seeing there is neither precept
for them, nor promise of hearing them.

But it is Purgatory that must bear the the weight of this duty. This, says
our Author need not to be so condemned, being taught by Pagans and ancient
Rabbis, and so came down from Adam by a popular Tradition through all Nations,
a great many of whose names are reckoned up by him, declaring by the way, which
of them came from Shem, which from Ham, which from Japhet, to whom the Hebrews
are most learnedly assigned. For the Pagans, Virgil, Cicero, and Lucretius, are
quoted, as giving testimony to them. This testimony is true; in the first
especially lies the whole Doctrine of Purgatory. Some Platonic Philosophers,
whom he followed, have been the inventers of it. That some of the Pagans
invented a Purgatory, and that Roman Catholics have borrowed their seat for
their own turn, is granted. What our Author can prove more by this Argument, I
know not. The names of the old Hebrew Rabbis that had taught, or did believe
it, he was pleased to spare; and I know his reason well enough, though he is
not pleased to tell us. And it is only this, that there are no such old
Rabbis, nor ever were in the world; nor was Purgatory ever in the Creed of the
Judaical Church, nor of any of the ancient Rabbis. Indeed here and there one
of them seemed to have dreamed, with Origin, about an end of the pains of
Gehenna; and some of the latter Masters, the Cabbalists especially, have
espoused the Pythagorean Metempsychosis; but for the Purgatory of the Pagans
and Papists, they know nothing of it.

On these testimonies he tells us, that this opinion of the Soul's immortality,
and its detention after death in some place citra coelum, is not any new thing
freshly taught, either by our Savior or his Apostles, as any peculiar Doctrine
of his own, but taken up as granted by the tradition of the Hebrews, and
supposed, and admitted by all sides as true, upon which our Lord built much of
his Institutions. Gallantly ventured however! I confess, a man shall seldom
meet with pretier shuffling.

Purgatory, it seems, is the doctrine of the Soul's Immortality, and detention
in some place citra coelum: Who would ever have once dreamed of this, had not
our Author informed him? This it is to be learned in the Roman Mystery; the
doctrine of Purgatory, is the doctrine of the Soul's Immortality; never was
doctrine so foully mistaken as that has been; but if it be not, yet it is of
the detention of the souls in some place citra coelum: It is indeed; but yet
our Author knows, that in these words, as bad, if not a worse fraud than under
the other is couched. It was the opinion of many of the Ancients, that the
souls of the Saints that departed under the old Testament, enjoyed not the
blessed presence of God, but were kept in a place of rest until the Ascension
of Christ. And this our Author would have us to think, is the doctrine of
Purgatory; he himself, I hope, enjoyes the contentment of believing the
contrary. But he tells us, that our blessed Savior and his Apostles were not
the first that taught this Doctrine, that is, of Purgatory. As though they had
taught it at all, or had not taught that which is inconsistent with it, and
destructive of it, which is notorious that they have! And for the Traditions of
the Hebrew Church; as that was none of them, so I believe, our Author knows but
little what were. But he takes a great deal of pains to prove, though very
unsuccessfully, that the Jews did believe, that the souls of those that
departed before the resurrection of the Messiah, did not enter heaven; as
though that was any thing to his purpose in hand; but he is, as I said,
mavelous unsucessful in that attempt also. The Parable of Lazarus and the
Rich man, prove only that Lazarus's soul was in Abraham's bosom; that Abraham's
bosom was not in Heaven, it does not prove. Peter, in the second of the Asts,
proves no more, than that the whole person of David, body and soul, was not
ascended into Heaven; the not ascending of his soul alone, being nothing to his
purpose. But what he cannot evince by Testimonies, we will win by dint of
Arguments. The Jews, says he, could not believe what God had never promised;
but heavenly bliss was none of the promises of Moses 's Law nor were they ever
put in hope of it, for any good work that they should do. It seems then, that
which was promised them in Moses's Law, was Eternal Life in some place citra
coelum, or citra culum, until the coming of the Messiah; for this he would fain
prove that they believed, and that rightly. This I confess, is a rare notion:
and I know not whether it be do fide, or no; but this I am sure, that it is the
first time that ever I heard of it, though I have been a little conversant with
some of his great masters. But the truth is, our Author has very ill success
for the most part, when he talks of the Jews; as most men have, when they talk
of what they do not understand. Eternal life, and everlasting reward, the
enjoyment of God in bliss, was promised no less truly in the old Testament,
then under the new, though less clearly; and our Author grants it, by
confessing that the estate of the Saints in rest extra Coelum, to be admitted
thither upon the entrance made into it by the Messiah, was promised to them,
and believed by them, though any such promise made to them, or any such belief
of them, as should give us the specification of the reward they expected, he is
not able to produce.

The Promise of Heaven is made clear under the New Testament, yet not so, he
tell us, but that in the execution of this promise, it is sufficiently
insinuated, that if any spirit issue out of his body, not absolutely purified,
himself may indeed by the use of such Means of Grace, as our Lord instituted,
be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. I think, I know well enough what he aims
at; but the sense of his words I do not so well understand. Suppose a spirit so
to issue forth as he talks? seeing we must not believe, that the blood of Jesus
purges us from all our sins; Who, or What is it then that he means by himself?
Is it the spirit after it is departed? Or is it the person before its
departure? If the latter, to what end is the issuing forth of the spirit
mentioned? And what is here for Purgatory, seeing the person is to be saved by
the means of grace appointed by Christ? If the former; as the expression is
uncouth, so I desire to know, Whether Purgatory be an instituted means of Grace
or no? and, Whether it was believed so by Virgil, or is by any of the more
learned Romanists? I think it my duty a little to retain my Reader in this
stumbling passage. Our Author having a mind to beg some countenance for
Purgatory from 1 Cor. 3. and knowing full well, that there is not one word
spoken there, about the spirits of men departed, but of their trials in this
life, was forced to confound that living, and dead, means of grace, and
punishment, things present, and to come, that somewhat might seem to look
toward Purgatory, though he knew not what. Nor does he find any better
shelter, for his poor Purgatory turned naked out of doors, throughout the whole
Scripture, as injurious to the grace of God, the mediation of Christ, the tenor
of the Covenant of Grace, and contrary to express Testimonies; in those words
of our Savior, Mat. 5. who speaking of sinners, dying in an unreconciled
condition, having made no peace or agreement with God, says, that being
delivered into prison, they should not go forth, until they had paid the
utmost farthing. For as the persons, whom he parabolically sets forth, are such
as die in an absolute estate of enmity with God; which kind of persons, as I
take it, Roman Catholics do not believe to go to Purgatory; so, I think, it is
certain, that those enemies of God, who are, or shall be, cast into hell, shall
not depart until they have paid the uttermost farthing; and, that the
expression, until, does in Scripture always denote a limitation of time to
exspire, and the accomplishment afterward of what is denied before; I suppose,
nay, I know, he will not say. So that their lying in Prison until they pay the
uttermost farthing of their debts (which is not Gods way of dealing with them
whom he washes and pardons in the blood of Christ, who are not able to pay one
farthing of them) is their lying there to eternity. And so also the sins of
which it is said, they shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come, in one Gospel; its said, in another, that they shall never be forgiven;
that is, not really forgiven here, nor declared, or manifested to be forgiven
hereafter. Besides, methinks this should make very little for Purgatory,
however the words should be interpreted; for they are a great aggravation of
the sins spoken of, as the highest and most mortal that men may contract the
guilt of, that can be pardoned, if they can be pardoned. That the remission of
such sins may be looked for in Purgatory, as yet we are not taught: Nay, our
own Author tells us, That mortal sins must be remitted, before a man can be
admitted into Purgatory; so that certainly there is not a more useless text in
the Bible to his present purpose then this is, though they be all useless
enough in all Conscience.

But here a matter falls across his thoughts, that does not a little trouble
him; and it is this, That St. Paul, in his Epistles, never makes use of
Purgatory, directly at least as a topick-place, either in his exhortations to
virtue, or disswasions from vice; and I promise you, it is a shrewd Objection.
It cannot but seem strange, that St. Paul should make no use of it; and his
Church make use almost of nothing else. Little, surely, did St. Paul think, how
many Monasteries and Abbeys this Purgatory would found; how many Moncks and
Friars it would maintain; what revenue it would bring into the Church, that he
passes it by so slightly; but St. Paul's business was to persuade men to
virtue, and dehort them from vice. And he informs us, that there is such a
contemperation of heat and cold in Purgatory, such an equal balance between
pains and hopes, good and evil, that it is not very meet to be made a Topic
for these ends and purposes; that is that indeed that is of no use in Religion.
The trouble and comfort of it, are, by a due mixture, so allaid, as to their
proper qualities, that they can have no operation upon the minds of men, to
sway them one way or other. Had some of our Forefathers been so far
illuminated, all things had not been at the state wherein they are at this day
in the Papacy; but, it may be, much more is not to be expected from it, and
therefore it may now otherwise be treated than it was yerst-while, when it was
made the sum and substance of Religion. However, the time will come, when this
Platonical Signet that has no color from Scripture, but is opposite to the
clear testimonies of it; repugnant to the grace, truth, and mercy of God;
destructive to the mediation of Christ; useless to the souls of men, serving
only to beget false fears in some few, but desperate presumptions, from the
thoughts of an after-reserve, and second venture after this life is ended; in
the most, abused to innumerable other Superstitions, utterly unknown to the
first Churches, and the Orthodox Bishops of them, having by various means and
degrees crept into the Roman-Church, (which shall be laid open, if called for)
shall be utterly exterminated out of the confines and limits of the Church of
God. In the mean time, I heartily beg of our Romanists, that they would no more
endeavor to cast men into real scorching consuming fire, for refusing to
believe that which is only imaginary and fantastical.

CHAP. XXII.
Pope. SECT. 29.

IT is not because the Pope is forgotten all this while, that he is there
placed in the rear, after Images, Saints, and Purgatory. It is plain, that he
has been born in mind all along; yea, and so much mentioned, that a man would
wonder, how he comes to have a special. Paragraph here alloted to him. The
whole book seems to be all-Pope, from the very beginning, as to the main design
of it; and now to meet, Pope, by himself again, in the end, is somewhat
unexpected. But, I suppose, our Author thinks he can never say enough of him.
Therefore lest any thing fit to be insisted on, should have escaped him in his
former discourses, he has designed this Section, to gather up the
Paralipomena, or ornaments he had forgotten before to set him forth withal.
And indeed, if the Pope be the man he talks of in this Section, I must
acknowledge he has had much wrong done him in the world. He is one, it seems,
that we are beholding unto for all we have that is worth any thing;
particularly for the Gospel which was originally from him; for Kingly
Authority, and his Crown land with all the honor and power in the Kingdom;
One, that we had not had any thing left us, at this day, either of Truth or
Unity, humanely speaking, had not he been set over us. One, in whom Christ has
no less shown his Divinity and Power, than in himself; in whom he is more
miraculous, then he was in his own person. One that by the only Authority of
his place and person, defended Christ's being God against all the world;
without which, humanely speaking, Christ had not been taken for any such person
as he is believed this day. So as not only we, but Christ himself is beholding
to him, that any body believes him to be God. Now truly, if things stand thus
with him, I think it is hightime for us to leave our Protestancy, and to betake
our selves to the Irish man's Creed, That if Christ had not been Christ when he
was Christ, St. Patrick (the Pope) would have been Christ. Nay, as he is,
having the hard fate to come into the World, so many ages after the Ascension
of Christ into heaven, I know not what is left for Christ to be, or do. The
Scripture tells us, that the Gospel is Christ's, originally from him; now we
are told, It is the Popes, originally from him; That, informs us that by Him,
(the wisdom of God) Kings Reign, and Princes execute Judgment; now we are
taught, That Kingly Authority, with his Crown-land, is from the Pope. That
instructs us, to expect the preservation of Faith and Truth, in the world, from
Christ alone; the establishment of his Throne and Kingdom for ever and ever*
His building, guidance, and protection of his Church: but, we are now taught,
that for all these things we are beholding to the Pope, who, by his only
Authority, keeps up the faith of the Deity of Christ; who surely is much
engaged to him, that he takes it not to himself. Besides, what he is, for our
better information, that we may judge aright concerning him, we may consider
also what he does; and has been doing, it seems, a long time; He is one that
has never been known to let fall the least word of passion against any, nor
move any engine for revenge; one whose whole life, and study is, to defend
innocence, etc. That by his general Councels, all held under, and by him;
especially that of Nice, has done more good than can be expressed; Careful,
and more than humanely happy, in all ages, in reconciling Christian Princes,
etc. One who let men talk what they will, if he be not an unerring guide in
matters of Religion and Faith, all is lost. But how shall we come to know, and
be assured of all this? Other men, as our Author knows and complains, speak
other things of him; Is it meet, that in so doubtful and questionable a
business, and of so great importance to be known, we should believe a stranger
upon his word, and that against the vehement affirmations at least, of so many
to the contrary: The Scripture speaks never a word that we can find of him, nor
once mentions him at all. The ancient Stories of the Church are utterly silent
of him, as for any such person as he is here described, speaking of the Bishop
of Rome, as of other Bishops in those days many of the Stories of after-ages
give us quite another Character of him both as to his personal qualifications
and employment. I mean, of the greatest part of the series of men going under
that name. In stead of Peacemaking and Reconciliation, they tell us of fierce
and cruel wars, stirred up and managed by them; of the ruin of Kings, and
Kingdoms, by their means: and instead of the meekness pretended, their
breathing out threatenings against men that adore them not; persecuting them
with Fire and Sword, to the utter depopulation of some Countries, and the
defiling of the most of Europe with bloody cruelties. What course shall we take
in the contest of assertions, that we may be able to make a right Judgment
concerning him? I know no better than this, a little to examine apart the
particulars of his Excellency as they are given us by our Author, especially
the most eminent of them; and weigh whether they are given in according to
truth or no.

The first that we mentioned was, That the Gospel was originally from him, and
to him we are beholding for it. This we cannot readily receive; it is certainly
untrue, and fearfully blasphemous to boot. The Gospel was originally from
Christ; and to him alone are we beholding for it, as has been before declared.
Another is, That Kingly Authority amongst us, and his Crown-Land is from him.
This is false and seditious. Kingly Authority in General is from God, and by
his Providence was it established in this Land, before the Pope had any thing
to do here; nor does it lean in the least on his warranty, but has been
supported without the Papacy, and against all its Oppositions, which have not
been a few. A third is, that, humanely speaking, had not he been set over us,
we had not had this day either Truth or Unity. I know not well, what you mean
by, humanely speaking; but I am sure, so to blaspheme the care and love of
Christ to his Church, and the sufficiency of his Word and promised Spirit to
preserve Truth in the World, without the Pope, whose aid in this work he never
once thought of, requested appointed, is, if not inhumane and barbarous, yet
bold and presumptuous. That Christ has no less showed his Divinity in him then
in his own person, is an expression of the same nature, or of a more dreadful,
if possible it may be. I speak seriously, I do not think this is the way to
make men in love with the Pope. No sooner is such a word spoken, but
immediately the wicked beastial lives, the ignorance, Atheisms, and horrid ends
of many of them, present themselves to the thoughts of men, and a tremor comes
over their hearts, to hear men open their mouths with such blasphemies, as to
affirm, that the Lord Christ did as much manifest his Divinity and Power in
such Beasts, as in his own Person. Yea, that he is more miraculous in him, then
he was in himself: What proof, Sir, is there of this? Where is the Scripture,
where the Antiquity, where the Reason for it? We tell you truly, we cannot
believe such monstrous figments upon their bare affirmation. Yea, but this is
not all, Christ is beholding to him for all the faith of his Deity that is in
the world; Why so? Why, by the only Authority of his place and person, he
defended it. When? When it was opposed by the Arrians, and he called his
Council of Nice, where he condemned them. Who would not be sick of such
trifles? Is it possible that any man in his right wits should talk at such a
rate? Consult the writings of those days, of Alexander of Alexandria, of
Athanasius, Gregory, Basil, Chrysostom, Austine, who not? Go over the Volumes
of the Councils of those days; if he can once find the Authority of the Pope
of Rome, and his Person, pleaded as the Pillar of the Faith of Christ's Diety,
or as any argument for the proof of it, let him triumph in his Discovery. Vain
man that dares to make these flourishes, when he knows how those ancient
Christian Hero's, of those days, mightily proved the Deity of Christ from the
Scriptures, and confounded their Adversaries with their Testimonies, both in
their Councils, Disputes, and Writings, which remain to this day; Was not the
Scripture accounted, and pleaded by them all as the Bulwark of this Truth? and
did not some of them, Athanasius for instance, do and suffer for the
maintaining of it, more then all the Bishops of Rome in those days, or since?
and, what a triffling is it to tell us of the Popes Council at Nice? As though
we did not know who called that Council, who praesided in it, who bare the
weight of the business of it, of whom none were Popes, nor any sent by Popes;
nay, as if we did not know, that there was then no such Pope in the world, as
he about whom we contend. Indeed it is not candid and ingenious for a man to
talk of these things in this manner. The like must be said of the six first
Councils mentioned by him; in some of which the power of the Bishop of Rome was
expressly limited, as in that of Nice, and that of Chalcedon, and in the
others; though he was ready enough to pretend to more, yet he had no more power
then the Bishops of other Cities, that had a mind to be called Patriarcks. We
do not then, as yet, see any reason to change our former thoughts of the Pope,
for any thing here offered by our Author; and we cannot but be far enough from
taking up his, if they be those which he has in this discourse expressed, they
being all of them Erroneous, the most of them Blasphemous.

But yet, if we are not pleased with what he is, we may be pleased with what he
does; being so excellent a well accomplished person as he is; for he is one
that was never known to let fall a word of passion. That, for casting off his
Authority should procure thousands to be slain, and burned, without stirring up
any Engine of Revenge, these are somewhat strange stories. Our Author
grievously complains of uncivil carriage toward the Pope in England in all
sorts, Men, Women, and Children. For my part, I justify no reviling accusation
in any, against any whatever; but yet, I must tell him, that if he thinks to
reclaim men from their hard thoughts of him, (that is, not of the person of
this or that Pope, but of the office as by them managed) it must not be by
telling him, he is a fine accomplished Gentleman, that he is a Prince, a
Stranger, a Great way off, whom it is uncivil and unmannerly to speak so hardly
of: but labor to show, that it is not his principle to impose upon the
consciences of men, his apprehensions in the things of God; that he is not the
great proclaimer of many false Opinions, Heresies, and Superstitions, and that
with a pretense of an Authority, to make them receive them whether they will or
no; that he has not caused many of their forefathers to be burned to death,
for not submitting to his dictates, nor would do so to them, had he them once
absolutely in his Power; that he has never given away this Kingdom to
strangers, and cursed the lawful Princes of it; that he pleads not a
Sovereignty over them, and their Governors, inconsistent with the Laws of God
and the Land: Haec, cedo, ^dmoveant templis, and far litabo. For whilst the
greatest part of men amongst us, do look upon him as the Antichrist foretold in
the Scripture, guilty of the blood of innumerable Martyrs, and Witnesses of the
truth of Christ; Others who think not so hardly of him, yet confess he is so
like him, that by the marks given of Antichrist, he is the likeliest Person on
the earth, to be apprehended on suspicion; all of them think, that if he could
get them into his Power, which he endeavors continually, he would burn them to
ashes;and that, in the mean time, he is the corrupt Fountain and Spring of all
the false Worship, Superstition, and Idolatry, wherewith the faces of many
Churches are defiled. To suppose he can persuade the^ to any better respect of
him than they have, by telling them how fine a gallant Gentleman he is, and
what a great way off from them, and the like stories, is to suppose, that he is
to deal with fools and Children. For my own part, I approve no man's cursing or
reviling of him; let that work be left to himself alone for me: I desire, men
would pray for him, that God would convert him, and all his other enemies to
the truth of the Gospel; and in the mean time to deliver all his from their
policy, rage, and fury.

We may easily gather what is to be thought of the other encomiums given to him
by our Author, by what has been observed concerning those we have passed
through; as that his whole life and study is to defend innocence, etc. It must
needs be granted, that he has taken some little time to provide for himself in
the world* he had surely never arrived else to that degree of excellency, as to
tread on the necks of Emperors, to have Kings hold his stir up, to kick off
their Crowns, to exceed the Rulers of the earth in worldly pomp, state, and
treasures, which came not to him by inheritance from St. Peter; and whether he
has been such a defender of Innocence and Innocents, the day wherein God shall
make inquisition for blood, will manifest. The great work he has done by his
General Councils, a summary of which is given us by our Author, is next
pretended. All this was done by him, yea, all that good that was ever done by
General Councils in the world was done by him; for they were all his Councils,
and that which was not his, is none. I shall only mind our Author of what was
said of old, unto one talking at that rate that he is pleased here to do:
Labor alieno magnam partam gloriam
Verbis saepe in se transmovet, qui habet salem
Qui in te est.


All the glory and renown of the old ancient Councils, all their labors for
the extirpation of heresies, and errors, and the success that their honest
endeavors were blessed withal, with the seasoning of one little word, [his]
are turned over to the Pope. They were his Councils; a thing they never once
dreamed of; nor any mortal man in the days wherein they were celebrated.
Convened they were in the Name, and upon the Institution of Christ, and so were
[H^s] Councils; were called together, as to their solemn external Convention,
by the Emperors of those days, and so were, not their Councels, but Councils
held by their Authority, as to all the external concernments of them. This the
Councils themselves did acknowledge; and so did the Bishops of Rome in those
days, when they joined their Petitions with others unto the Emperors, for the
convening of them; and seldom it was, that they could obtain their meetings in
any place they desired; though they were many of them wise at an after game,
and turned their remoteness from them into their advantage. As they were called
by the Emperors, so they were composed of Bishops, and others, with equal
suffrages. How they come to be the Pope's Councils, he himself only knows, and
those to whom he is pleased to impart this secret, of other men not one. Indeed
some of them may be called his Councils, if every thing is his, wherein he is
any way concerned; such was the first Council of Nice, as to his pretended
Jurisdiction; such that of Chalcedon, as to his Primacy; such were sundry
famous Conventions in Asrick, wherein his pretentions unto Authority, were
excluded, and his unseemly frauds discovered. Nay, there is not any thing upon
the Roll of Antiquity of greater and more prodigious scandal, then the contests
of Popes in some African Councils, for Authority and Jurisdiction. Their claim
was such, as that the Good Fathers assembled wrote unto them, that they would
not introduce secular pride and ambition into the Church of Christ; and the
manner of managing their pretentions, was no other but downright forgery, and
that of no less then Canons of the first memorable Council of Nic^; which to
discover, the honest African Bishops were forced to send to Constantinople,
Alexandria, and Antioch, for Authentic Copies of those Canons; upon the
receipt whereof, they mollified the forgery with much Christian sobriety and
prudence unto the Bishop of Rome himself, and enacted a Decree for the future,
to prevent his pretentions and claims. Besides, as the good Bishops averr, God
himself testified against the irregular interposition of the pretended power of
the Bishop of Rome; for whilst they being synodically assembled, were detained
and hindered in their procedure, by the Romanists contests for Superiority;
Apiarius, the guilty person, being convinced in his conscience of his many
notorious evils and crimes, from a just censure whereof, the Roman
Interposition was used to shelter him, of his own accord cast himself at the
feet of the Assembly, confessing all his wickedness and folly. Of the six first
Councils then there is no more reason to call them the Pope's, or to ascribe
their atchievments unto him, then there is to call them any other Bishop's of
any City then famous in the world. In that which he calls the seventh General
Council, indeed a Coventicle of ignorant, tumultuous, superstitious
Iconolaters, condemned afterward by a Council held at Frankfurt, by the the
Authority of Charles the Great, he stickled to some purpose for Images, which
then began to be his darlings; and though we can afford that Council to be His,
for any concernment we have in it, yet the story of it will not allow us to do
so; it being neither convened nor ruled by his Authority; though the brutish
Monks in it* were willing to shelter themselves under the splendour and luster
of his See. About those that follow, we will not much contend: it matters not
whose they were, unless they had been better; especially such as laid
foundations for, and stirred up Princes to shed the innocent blood of the
Martyrs of Christ, to some of their perpetual ignominy, reproach, and ruin. But
yet our Author knows, or may know what long contests there have been, even in
latter ages, Whether the Council should be the the Pope's Council, or the Pope
should should be the Council's Pope; and how the Pope carried it at last, by
having more Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics in his disposal than the Councils
had. And so much for the Pope's Councils.

Our Author adds, that he has been more than humanely happy in reconciling
Christian Princes; but yet I will venture a wager with him, that I will give
more Instances of his setting Princes together by the ears, then he shall of
reconciling them; and I will manifest, that he has got more by the first work,
than the latter. Let him begin the vye when he pleases; If I live, and God
will, I will try this matter with him before any competent Judges; Tu dic
mecum, quo pignore? How else to end this matter, I know not.

I see not then any Ground my Countrymen have to alter their thoughts
concerning the Pope, for any thing here tendered unto them by this Author; yea I
know they have great reason to be confirmed in their former apprehensions
concerning him. For all that truly honor the Lord Jesus Christ, have reason to
be moved* when they hear another, if not preferred before him, nor set up in
competition with him, yet openly invested with many of his Privileges and
Pre^ogatives; especially considering, that not only the person of Christ, but
his word also is debased to make way to his exaltation and advancement. Thence
it is, that it is openly averred, that were it not for his infallibility, we
should all this time have been at a loss for truth and unity. Of so small
esteem with some men, is the wisdom of Christ, who left his Word with his
Church for these ends, and his Word its self. All is nothing without the Pope.
If I mistake not in the light and temper of my Countrymen, this is not the way
to gain their good opinion of him. Had our Author kept himself to the general
terms of a good Prince, an universal Pastor, a careful Guide* and to general
stories of his wisdom, ^a^e, and circumspection for public good* which
discourse makes up what remains of this Paragraph; he might perhaps have got
some ground on their affection and esteem, who know nothing concerning him to
the contrary; which in England are very few. But these Notes above Ela, these
transcendent Encomiums have qui^e marred his Marker. And if there be no medium,
but men must believe the Pope to be either Christ, or Antichrist, it is evident
which way the general vogue in England will go, and that at least until fire
and faggot come* which, blessed be God, we are secured from, whilst our
present Sovereign swayes the Scepter of this Land; and hope, our posterity may
be so, under his Offspring, for many Generations.

CHAP. XXIII.
Popery. SECT. 30.

OUR Author hopes, it seems, that by this time he has brought his Disciples to
Popery; that is the Title of the last Paragraph, to his business, not of his
Book; for that which follows, being a parcel of the excellent speech of my Lord
Chancellor, is about a matter wherein his concernment lies not: This is his
close and farewell. They say, there is one, who, when he goes out of any place,
leaves a worse favor at his departure, then he gave all the time of his abode;
and he seems here to be imitated. The disingenuity of this Paragraph, the want
of care, of truth, and of common honesty, that appears in it, sends forth a
worse favor then most of those, if not than any, or all of them, that went
before. The design of it, is to give us a parallel of some Popish and
Protestant Doctrines, that the beauty of the one may the better be set off by
the deformity of the other. To this end he has made no Conscience of mangling,
defacing, and defiling of the latter. The Doctrines, he mentions, he calls the
more plausible parts of Popery. Such as he has labored in his whole discourse
to gild and ^rick up with his Rhetoric, nor shall I quarrel with him for his
doting on them: only, I cannot but wish, it might suffice him to enjoy and
proclaim the beauty of his Church, without open slandering and defaming of
ours. This is not handsome, civil, mannerly, nor conscientious. A few instances
will manifest, whether he has failed in this kind or no. The first plausible
piece of Popery, as he calls it, that he presents us in his Antithesis, is the
Obligation which all have who believe in Christ to attend unto good works, and
the merit and benefit of so doing; in opposition whereunto he says Protestants
teach, that there be no such things as good works pleasing unto God; but all be
as menstruous rags, filthy odious, and damnable in the sight of Heaven; That,
if it were otherwise, yet they are not in our power to perform. Let other men
do what they please, or are able; for my part, if this be a good work, to
believe, that a man conscientiously handles the things of Religion, with a
Reverence of God, and a regard to the account he is to make at the last day,
who can thus openly calumniate, and equivocate; I must confess, I do not find
it in my power to perform it. It may be, he thinks it no great sin to
calumniate and falsely accuse Heretics; or, if it be, but a venial one. Such a
one as has no respect to Heaven or Hell, but only Purgatory, which has no
great influence on the minds of men to keep them from vice, or provoke them to
virtue. Do Protestants teach, There are no such things as good works pleasing
to God, or that those that believe, are not obliged to good works? In which of
their Confessions do they so say? In what public writing of any of their
Churches? What one individual Protestant was ever guilty of thinking or venting
this folly? If our Author had told this story in Rome or Italy, he had wronged
himself only in point of Morality; but telling it in England, if I mistake not,
he is utterly gone also as to reputation. But, yet you will say, That if there be
good works, yet it is not in our power to perform them. No more will Papists
neither, that know what they say, or are in their right wits, That it is so,
without the help of the grace of God; and the Protestant never lived, that I
know of, that denied them by that help and assistance to be in our power. But
they say, They are all as filthy rags, etc. I am glad he will acknowledge
Isaiah, to be a Protestant, whose words they are concerning all our
righteousness, that he traduceth; we shall have him sometime or other denying
some of the Prophets, or Apostles to be Protestants; and, yet it is known, that
they all agreed in their doctrine and Faith. Those other Protestants whom he
labors principally to asperse, will tell him, that although God do
indispensibly require good works of them that do believe, and they by the
assistance of his grace do perform constantly those good works, which both for
the matter, and the manner of their perforance are acceptable to him, in Jesus
Christ, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, and which, as the
effect of his grace in us, shall be eternally rewarded; yet, that such is the
infinite purity and holiness of the great God with whom we have to do, in whose
sight the Heavens are not pure, and who charges his Angels with folly, that, if
he should deal with the best of our works, according to the exigence and rigor
of his Justice, they would appear wanting, defective, yea silthy, in his sight;
so, that our work^ have need of acceptance in Christ no less then our persons;
and they add this to their faith in this matter, that they believe, that those
who deny this, know little of God or themselves. My pen is dull, and the Book
that was lent me for a few days is called for. Ex hoc uno; by this instance;
we may take a measure of all the rest wherein the same ingenuity and
conscientious care of offending is observed, as in this; that is, neither the
one, or other, is so. The residue of his Discourse is but a commendation of his
Religion, and the Professors of it, whereof I must confess, I begin to grow
weary; having had so much of it, and so often repeated, and that from one of
themselves, and that on principles which will not endure the trial and
examination: Of this sort is the suffering for their Religion, which he extols
in them. Not what God calls them unto, or others impose upon them in any part
of the world* wherein they are not to be compared with Protestants, nor have
suffered from all the world for their Papal Religion, the hundredth part of
what Protestants have suffered from themselves alone, for their refusal of it;
does he intend; but what of their own accord they undergo. Not considering,
that as outward affliction and persecution from the world, have been always
the constant lot of the true Worshippers of Christ in all Ages; so, voluntary*
Self-macerations have attended the ways of false-worship among all sorts of
men from the foundation of the world.

FINIS.

