A DISCOURSE OF THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN PRAYER. WITH A brief Enquiry
into the Nature and Use of Mental Prayer and Forms.

By JOHN OWEN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock, in the
Poultry, near the Church, 1682.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is altogether needless to premise any thing in this place, concerning the
Necessity, Benefit and Use of Prayer in general. All men will readily
acknowledge, that as without it there can be no Religion at all, so the Life
and Exercise of all Religion does principally consist therein. Wherefore that
Way and Profession in Religion, which gives the best Directions for it, with
the most effectual Motives unto it, and most abounds in its Observance, has
therein the Advantage of all others. Hence also it follows, that as all Errors
which either pervert its nature, or countenance a neglect of a due
Attendanceunto it, are pernicious in Religion; so Differences in Opinion, and
Disputes about any of its Vital Concerns cannot but be dangerous, and of evil
consequence. For on each hand, these pretend unto an immediate Regulation of
Christian practice in a matter of the highest Importance unto the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of the Souls of men. Whereas therefore there is nothing more
requisite in our Religion, than that true Apprehensions of its Nature and Use
be preserved in the minds of men, the Declaration and Defense of them, when
they are opposed or unduely traduced, is not only justifiable but necessary
also.

This is the Design of the ensuing Discourse. There is in the Scripture a
Promise of the Holy Ghost to be given unto the Church as a Spirit of Grace and
Supplications. As such also, there are particular Operations ascribed unto him.
Mention is likewise frequently made of the Aids and Assistances which he
affords unto Believers in and unto their Prayers. Hence they are said to PRAY
ALWAYS, WITH ALL PRAYER AND SUPPLICATIONS IN THE SPIRIT. Of the want of these
Aids and Assistances to enable them to pray according to the Mind of God, some
do profess that they have Experience, as also of their Efficacy unto that End
when they are received. Accordingly these regulate themselves in this whole
Duty, in the Expectation or Improvement of them. And there are those who, being
accommodated with other Aids of another Nature, to the same purpose, which they
esteem sufficient for them, do look on the former Profession and Plea of an
Ability to pray by the Aids and Assistances of the Holy Spirit, to be a mere
empty pretense.

And in the management of these different Apprehensions, those at Variance seem
to be almost Barbarians one to another, the one being not able to understand
what the other do vehemently affirm. For they are determined in their minds,
not merely by notions of Truth and Falsehood, but by the Experience which they
have of the things themselves; a sense and understanding whereof they can by no
means communicate unto one another. For whereas spiritual Experience of Truth,
is above all other Demonstrations unto them that do enjoy it; so it cannot be
made an Argument for the Enlightening and Conviction of others. Hence those who
plead for Prayer by virtue of supplies of Gifts and Grace from the Holy Spirit,
do admire that the use or necessity of them herein should be contradicted. Nor
can they understand what they intend, who seem to deny, that it is every man's
Duty in all his Circumstances, to pray as well as he can, and to make use in
his so doing, of the Assistance of the Spirit of God. And by Prayer they mean
that, which the most eminent and only proper signification of the word does
denote, namely, that which is vocal. Some, on the other side, are so far from
the understanding of these things, or a conviction of their Reality, that with
the highest confidence they despise and reproach the pretense of them. To pray
in the Spirit is used as a notable Expression of scorn; the thing signified
being esteemed fond and contemptible.

Moreover in such cases as this, men are apt to run into Excesses in things and
ways, which they judge expedient, either to countenance their own Opinions, or
to depress and decry those of them from whom they differ. And no Instances can
be given in this kind of greater Extravagancies, than in that under
consideration. For hence it is, that some do ascribe the Original of Free
Prayer amongst us by the Assistance of the Spirit of God, unto an Invention of
the Jesuits; which is no doubt, to make them the Authors of the Bible. And
others do avow that all Forms of Prayer used amongst us in public Worship, are
mere Traductions from the Roman Breviaries and Missal. But these things will be
afterward spoken unto. They are here mentioned only to evince the use of a
sedate enquiry into the Truth or the mind of God in this matter, which is the
design of the ensuing Discourse.

That which should principally guide us in the management of this enquiry, is,
that it be done unto spiritual advantage and Edification, without strife or
contention. Now this cannot be without a diligent and constant Attendance unto
the two sole Rules of judgment herein, namely, Scripture-Revelation and the
Experience of them that do believe. For although the latter is to be regulated
by the former; yet where it is so, it is a safe Rule unto them in whom it is.
And in this case, as in water, Face answers unto Face; so do Scripture
Revelation and spiritual Experience unto one another. All other Reasonings from
Customs, Traditions, and feigned consequences, are here of no use. The
enquiries before us are concerning the Nature of the Work of the Holy Spirit in
the Aids and Assistances which he gives unto Believers in and unto their
Prayers, according unto the mind of God, as also what are the Effects and
Fruits of that Work of his, or what are the spiritual Abilities which are
communicated unto them thereby. Antecedently hereunto, it should be enquired,
whether indeed there be any such thing or no, or whether they are only vainly
pretended unto by some that are deceived. But the Determination hereof,
depending absolutely on the foregoing inquiry, it may be handled jointly with
them, and needs no distinct consideration. He that would not deceive nor be
deceived in his enquiry after these things, must diligently attend unto the two
forementioned Rules of Scripture Testimony and Experience. Other safe Guides he
has none. Yet will it also be granted, that from the Light of Nature, whence
this Duty springs, wherein it is founded, from whence as unto its Essence it
cannot vary, as also from generally received Principles of Religion suited
thereunto, with the uncorrupted practice of the Church of God in former Ages,
much direction may be given unto the Understanding of those Testimonies, and
Examination of that Experience.

Wherefore the foundation of the whole ensuing Discourse is laid in the
consideration and exposition of some of those Texts of Scripture wherein these
things are expressly revealed and proposed unto us; for to insist on them all,
were endless. This we principally labor in, as that whereby not only must the
controversy be finally determined; but the Persons that manage it be eternally
judged. What is added concerning the Experience of them that do believe the
Truth herein, claims no more of Argument unto them that have it not, than it
has Evidence of proceeding from, and being suited unto those Divine
Testimonies. But whereas the things that belong unto it, are of great moment
unto them who do enjoy it, as containing the principal Acts, Ways and Means of
our Intercourse and Communion with God by Christ Jesus, they are here somewhat
at large on all occasions insisted on for the Edification of those whose
concernment lies only in the practice of the Duty it self. Unless therefore it
can be proved, that the Testimonies of the Scripture produced and insisted on,
do not contain that sense and Understanding which the words do determinately
express (for that only is pleaded,) or that some have not an Experience of the
Truth and Power of that sense of them, enabling them to live unto God in this
Duty according to it, all other Contests about this matter are vain and useless.

But yet there is no such Work of the Holy Spirit pleaded herein, as should be
absolutely inconsistent with, or Condemnatory of all those outward Aids of
Prayer, by set composed Forms, which are almost every where made use of. For
the Device being ancient, and in some degree or measure received generally in
the Christian World, (though a no less general Apostasy in many things from the
Rule of Truth at the same time, in the same Persons and places, cannot be
denied) I shall not judge of what Advantage it may be, or has been unto the
Souls of men, nor what Acceptance they have found therein, where it is not too
much abused. The substance of what we plead from Scripture and Experience is
only this; That whereas God has graciously promised his Holy Spirit, as a
Spirit of Grace and Supplications, unto them that do believe, enabling them to
pray according to his Mind and Will, in all the circumstances and capacities
wherein they are, or which they may be called unto; it is the Duty of them who
are enlightened with the Truth hereof, to expect those promised Aids and
Assistances in and unto their Prayers, and to pray according to the Ability
which they receive thereby. To deny this to be their Duty, or to deprive them
of their Liberty to discharge it on all occasions, rises up in direct
opposition unto the Divine Instruction of the sacred Word.

But moreover as was before intimated, there are some generally allowed
Principles, which though not always duly considered, yet cannot at any time be
modestly denied, that give Direction toward the right Performance of our Duty
herein. And they are these that sollow.

1. It is the Duty of every man to pray for himself. The Light of Nature,
multiplied Divine Commands, with our necessary dependence on God and subjection
unto him, give Life and Light unto this Principle. To own a Divine Being, is
to own That which is to be prayed unto, and that it is our Duty so to do.

2. It is the Duty of some, by virtue of natural Relation, or of Office, to
pray with and for others also. So is it the Duty of Parents and Masters of
Families to pray with and for their Children and Households. This also derives
from those great Principles of natural Light, that God is to be worshipped in
all Societies of his own erection; and that those in the Relations mentioned,
are obliged to seek the chiefest good of them that are committed unto their
care; and so is it frequently enjoined in the Scripture. In like manner it is
the Duty of Ministers to pray with and for their Flocks, by virtue of especial
Institution. These things cannot be, nor so far as I know of, are questioned by
any: But practically the most of men live in an open neglect of their Duty
herein. Were this but diligently attended unto from the first instance of
natural and moral Relations, unto the instituted Offices of Ministers and
public Teachers, we should have less contests about the Nature and Manner of
praying than at present we have. It is holy practice that must reconcile
differences in Religion, or they will never be reconciled in this World.

3. Every one who prays either by himself and for himself, or with others and
for them, is obliged as unto all the uses, properties and circumstances of
Prayer, to pray as well as he is able. For by the Light of Nature every one is
obliged in all instances to serve God with his Best. The Consirmation and
Exemplification hereof, was one end of the Institution of Sacrifices under the
Old Testament. For it was ordained in them, that the chief and best of every
thing was to be offered unto God. Neither the nature of God, nor our own Duty
toward him, will admit that we should expect any Acceptance with him, unless
our design be to serve him with the Best that we have, both for matter and
manner. So is the mind of God himself declared in the Prophet. If you offer the
blind for Sacrifice, is it not Evil? and if you offer the Lame and the Sick, is
it not Evil? Ye brought that which was torn, and that which was Lame and Sick;
should I accept this at your hands, says the Lord? But cursed be the Deceiver,
who has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a
corrupt thing: For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is
dreadful among the Heathen.

4. In our Reasonable service, the Best wherewith we can serve God, consists in
the Intense sincere actings of the Faculties and Affections of our minds,
according unto their respective powers, through the use of the best Assistances
we can attain. And if we omit, or forgo in any instance, the Exercise of them
according to the utmost of our present Ability, we offer unto God the Sick and
the Lame. If men can take it on themselves in the Sight of God, that the
Invention and use of set Forms of Prayer and other the like outward modes of
Divine Worship, is the best that he has endowed them withal for his service,
they are free from the force of this consideration.

5. There is no man but, in the use of the Aids which God has prepared for
that purpose, he is able to pray according to the Will of God, and as he is in
Duty obliged, whether he pray by himself and for himself, or with others and
for them also. There is not by these means perfection attainable in the
performance of any Duty: Neither can all attain the same measure and degree as
unto the usefulness of Prayer and manner of praying; But every one may attain
unto that wherein he shall be accepted with God, and according unto the Duty
whereunto he is obliged, whether personally or by virtue of any Relation
wherein he stands unto others. To suppose that God requires Duties of men
which they cannot perform in an acceptable manner, by virtue and in the use of
those Aids which he has prepared and promised unto that End, is to reflect
Dishonor on his Goodness and Wisdom in his Commands. Wherefore no man is
obliged to pray in any Circumstances by virtue of any Relation or Office, but
he is able so to do according unto what is required of him; and what he is not
able for, he is not called unto.

6. We are expressly commanded to pray, but are no where commanded to make
Prayers for our selves, much less for others. This is supperadded for a
supposed convenience unto the light of Nature and Scripture-Institution.

7. There is Assistance promised unto Believers, to enable them to pray
according unto the Will of God; there is no assistance promised, to enable any
to make Prayers for others. The former part of this Assertion is explained and
proved in the ensuing discourse; and the latter cannot be disproved. And if it
should be granted, that the Work of composing Prayers for others is a good
Work, falling under the general Aids of the Holy Spirit necessary unto every
good Work whatever; yet are not those Aids of the same kind and nature with his
actual Assistances in and unto Prayer, as he is the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications. For in the use of those Assistances by Grace and Gifts, every
man that uses them does actually pray, nor are they otherwise to be used: But
men do not pray in the making and composing Forms of Prayer, though they may do
so in the reading of them afterward.

8. Whatever Forms of Prayer were given out unto the use of the Church by
Divine Authority and Inspiration, as the Lords Prayer and the Psalms or Prayers
of David, they are to have their Everlasting use therein, according unto what
they were designed unto. And be their End and Use what it will, they can give
no more warranty for Humane compositions unto the same End and the Injunction
of their use, than for other Humane Writings to be added unto the Scripture.

These and the like Principles which are evident in their own light and truth,
will be of Use to direct us in the Argument in hand, so far as our present
design is concerned therein. For it is the Vindication of our own Principles
and Practice, that is principally designed, and not an opposition unto those of
other men. Wherefore, as was before intimated, neither these Principles, nor
the Divine Testimonies, which we shall more largely insist upon, are engaged to
condemn all Use of set Forms of Prayers as sinful in themselves or absolutely
unlawful, or such as so vitiate the Worship of God as to render it wholly
unacceptable in them that choose so to worship him. For God will accept the
Persons of those who sincerely seek him, though through invincible ignorance
they may mistake in sundry things as unto the way and manner of his Worship.
And how far as unto particular instances of miscarriage this Rule may extend,
He only knows; and of men, whatever they pretend, not one. And where any do
worship God in Christ, with an Evidence of holy Fear and Sincerity, and walk in
a Conversation answerable unto the Rule of the Gospel, though they have
manifold Corruptions in the way of their Worship, I shall never judge severely
either of their present Acceptance with God, or of their future Eternal
Condition. This is a safe Rule with respect unto others; our own is, to attend
with all Diligence unto what God has revealed concerning his Worship, and
absolutely comply therewith, without which we can neither please Him, nor come
to the Enjoyment of Him.

I do acknowledge also that the general prevalency of the Use of set Forms of
Prayer of Humane Invention in Christian Assemblies for many ages (more than any
other Argument that is urged for their necessity) requires a tenderness in
judgment as unto the whole nature of them, and the Acceptance of their Persons
in the Duty of Prayer by whom they are used. Yet no consideration of this
usage, seeing it is not warranted by the Scriptures, nor is of Apostolical
Example, nor is countenanced by the practice of the primitive Churches, ought
to hinder us from discerning and judging of the Evils and Inconveniences that
have ensued thereon; Nor from discovering how far they are unwarrantable as
unto their Imposition. And these evils may be here a little considered.

The Beginnings of the Introduction of the Use of set Forms of Prayer of Humane
composition, into the Worship of the Church, are altogether uncertain. But that
the Reception of them was progressive by new Additions from time to time, is
known to all. For neither Rome, nor the present Roman Missal were built in a
day. In that and the Breviaries did the whole Worship of the Church issue, at
least in these parts of the World. No man is so fond as to suppose that they
were of one entire composition, the Work of one Age, of one man, or any
Assembly of men at the same time; unless they be so brutishly devout as to
suppose that the Mass Book was brought from Heaven unto the Pope by an Angel,
as the Alcoran was to Mahomet. It is evident indeed, that the common People, at
least, of the Communion of the Papal Church, do believe it to be as much of a
Divine Original, as the Scripture, and that on the same grounds of the proposal
of it unto them as the only means of Divine Worship, by their Church. Hence is
it unto them an Idol. But it is well enough known how from small Beginnings by
various Accessions it increased unto its present Form and Station. And this
Progress in the Reception of devised Forms of Prayer in the Worship of the
Church, carried along with it sundry pernicious concomitants, which we may
briefly consider.

1. In and by the Additions made unto the first received Forms, the
superstitious and corrupt Doctrines of the Apostasy in several Ages, were
insinuated into the worship of the Church. That such superstitious and corrupt
Doctrines were gradually introduced into the Church, is acknowledged by all
Protestants, and is sufficiently known; the supposition of it is the sole
foundation of the Reformation. And by this Artifice of new Additions to
received Forms, they were from time to time admitted into, and stated in the
Worship of the Church, by which principally to this very day, they preserve
their station in the minds of men. Were that foundation of them taken away,
they would quickly fall to the ground. By this means did those Abominations of
Transubstantiation and the Sacrifice of the Mass, both leaven and poison the
whole Worship of the public Assemblies, and imposed themselves on the
credulity of the People. The Disputes of Speculative men, superstitious and
subtle, about these things, had never infected the minds of the common People
of Christians nor ever been the means of that Idolatry, which at length spread
it self over the whole visible Church of these parts of the World, had not this
Device of prescribed Forms of Prayer wherein those Abominations were not only
expressed, but graphically represented and acted (so violently affecting the
carnal Minds of men superstitious and ignorant) imposed them on their practice;
which gradually hardened them with an obdurate credulity. For although they saw
no ground or reason Doctrinally to believe what was proposed unto them about
Transubstantiation and the Sacrifice of the Mass, and might easily have seen
that they were contradictory unto all the conductive Principles of men and
Christians, namely Faith, Reason and Sense; yet they deceived themselves into
an obstinate pretense of believing in the notion of Truth, of what they had
admitted in practice. Men I say of corrupt minds, might have disputed long
enough about vagrant Forms, Accidents without subjects, Transmutation of
substances without Accidents, Sacrifices bloody and unbloody, before they had
vitiated the whole Worship of the Church with gross Idolatry; had not this
engine been made use of for its introduction; and the minds of men by this
means inveagled with the practice of it. But when the whole matter and means of
it was gradually insinuated into, and at length comprised in those Forms of
Prayer, which they were obliged continually to use in Divine Service, their
whole Souls became leavened and tainted with a confidence in, and love unto
these Abominations.

Hence it was, that the Doctrines concerning the Sacraments and the whole
worship of God in the Church, as they became gradually corrupted, were not at
once Objectively and Doctrinally proposed to the minds and considerations of
men, to be received or rejected according to the Evidence they had of their
Truth or Error (a method due to the Constitution of our Natures) but gradually
insinuated into their practice by Additional Forms of Prayer, which they
esteemed themselves obliged to use and observe. This was the gilding of the
poisonous Pill, whose operation, when it was swallowed, was to bereave men of
their Sense, Reason, and Faith, and make them madly avow that to be true, which
was contrary unto them all.

Besides, as was before intimated, the things themselves that were the
groundwork of Idolatry, namely Transubstantiation and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, were so acted and represented in those Forms of Worship, as to take great
impression on the minds of carnal men until they were mad on their Idols. For
when all Religion and Devotion is let into the Soul by Fancy, and Imagination
excited by outward spectacles, they will make mad work in the World, as they
have done, and yet continue to do. But hereof I shall speak in the next place.

It had therefore been utterly impossible that an Idolatrous Worship should
have been introduced into the Church in general, had not the Opinion of the
necessity of devised Forms of Prayer been first universally received. At least
it had not been so introduced and so established, as to procure and cause the
shedding of the blood of thousands of Holy persons for not complying with it.
By this means alone was brought in that fatal engine of the Churches Ruin,
from whose murderous efficacy few escaped with their Lives, or Souls. Had all
Churches continued in the Liberty wherein they were placed and left by our Lord
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, it is possible that many Irregularities might
have prevailed in some of them, and many mistakes been admitted in their
practice; Yet this monster of the Mass devouring the Souls of the most, and
drinking the blood of many, had never been conceived nor brought forth, at
least not nourished into that terrible form and Power wherein it appeared and
acted for many Ages in the World. And upon the account thereof it is not
without cause that the Jews say that the Christians received their Tephilloth
or Prayerbooks from Armillus, that is, Antichrist.

It is true, that when the Doctrine of Religion is determined and established
by civil Laws, the Laws of the Nation where it is professed, as the Rule of all
outward Advantages, Liturgies composed in compliance therewithal, are not so
subject to this mischief: But this arises from that external cause alone.
Otherwise where ever those who have the ordering of these things do deviate
from the Truth once received, as it is common for the most so to do, Forms of
Prayers answerable unto those deviations would quickly be insinuated. And the
present various Liturgies that are amongst the several sorts of Christians in
the World, are of little other use than to establish their minds in their
peculiar Errors, which by this means they adhere unto as Articles of their
Faith.

And hereby did God suffer contempt to be cast upon the supposed Wisdom of men
about his Worship and the ways of it. They would not trust unto his
Institutions and his Care of them; but did first put the Ark into a Cart, and
then like Uzzah put forth a hand of force to hold it when it seemed to shake.
For it is certain that, if not the first Invention, yet the first public
Recommendation and prescription of devised Forms of Prayer unto the practice of
the Churches, were designed to prevent the insinuation of false opinions and
corrupt Modes of Worship into the public Administrations. This was feared from
Persons infected with Heresy that might creep into their Ministry. So the
Orthodox and the Arians composed Prayers, Hymns and Doxologies, the one against
the other, inserting in them passages confirming their own profession, and
condemning that of their Adversaries. Now however this Invention might be
approved whilst it kept within bounds, yet it proved the Trojan Horse that
brought in all evils into the City of God in its Belly. For he who was then at
work in the Mystery of Iniquity, laid hold on the Engine and occasion to
corrupt those Prayers, which by the constitution of them who had obtained Power
in them, the Churches were obliged and confined unto. And this took place
effectually in the constitution of the Worship of the second Race of
Christians, or the Nations that were converted unto the Christian Faith after
they had destroyed the Western Roman Empire. To speak briefly and plainly, it
was by this means alone, namely, of the necessary Use of devised Forms of
Prayer in the Assemblies of the Church, and of them alone, that the Mass, with
its Transubstantiation and Sacrifice, and all the Idolatrous Worship wherewith
they were accompanied, were introduced, until the World inflamed with those
Idols, drenched it self in the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Christ for
their Testimony against those abominations. And if it had been sooner
discovered, that no Church was entrusted with Power from Christ to frame and
impose such devised Forms of Worship, as are not warranted by the Scripture,
innumerable Evils might have been prevented. For that there were no Liturgies
composed, no imposed Use of them, in the Primitive Churches for some ages, is
demonstratively proved with the very same arguments whereby we prove that they
had neither the Mass, nor the use of Images in their Worship. For besides the
utter silence of them in the Apostolical writings, and those of the next
ensuing Ages, which is sufficient to discard their pretense unto any such
Antiquity, there are such descriptions given of the practice of the Churches in
their Worship, as are inconsistent with them and exclusive of them; besides,
they give such a new Face of Divine Worship, so different from the portraicture
of it delivered in the Scripture, as is hardly reconcilable thereunto, and so
not quickly embraced in the Church.

I do not say, that this fatal Consequence of the Introduction of humanely
devised set Forms of Prayer in the Worship of the Church in the horrible abuse
made of it, is sufficient to condemn them as absolutely unlawful. For where the
Opinions leading unto such Idolatrous practices are openly rejected and
condemned as was before intimated, there all the Causes, Means and Occasions of
that Idolatry may be taken out of them, and separate from them, as it is in the
Liturgies of the Reformed Churches whether imposed or left free. But it is
sufficient to lay in the Balance against that veneration which their general
observance in many ages may invite or procure. And it is so also to warrant the
Disciples of Christ to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith he has made them
free.

Another Evil which either accompanied or closely followed on the Introduction
of devised Forms of Prayer into the Church, was a supposed necessity of
adorning the Observance of them with sundry Arbitrary Ceremonies. And this also
in the End as is confessed among all Protestants, increased Superstition in its
Worship, with various practices leading unto Idolatry. It is evident that the
Use of free Prayer in Church Administrations, can admit of no Ceremonies but
such as are either of Divine Institution, or are natural circumstances of the
actions wherein the Duties of Worship do materially consist. Divine Institution
and Natural Light, are the Rules of all that order and Decency which is needful
unto it. But when these devised Forms were introduced, with a supposition of
their necessity and sole use in the Church in all acts of immediate Worship,
men quickly sound that it was needful to set them off with Adventitious
ornaments. Hereon there was gradually sound out and prescribed unto constant
Observation so many outward Postures and Gestures, with Attires, Music,
Bowings, Cringes, Crossings, Venerations, Censings, Altars, Images, Crucifixes,
Responds, Alternatives, and such a rabble of other Ceremonies, as rendered the
whole worship of the Church ludicrous, burdensome and superstitions. And hereon
it came to pass that he who is to officiate in Divine Service, is obliged to
learn and practice so many turnings and windings of himself, Eastward and
Westward, to the Altar, to the Wall, to the People; So many Gestures and
postures in kneeling, rising, Standings, Bowings, less and profound, secret and
loud speakings, in a due Observance of the Interposition of Crossings, with
Removals from one place to another, with provision of Attires, in their variety
of Colors and respect to all the Furniture of their Altars, as are difficult
to learn, and foolishly antic in their practice, above all the preparations of
Players for the Stage. Injunctions for these and the like observances, are the
subject of the Rubric of the Missal, and the Cautels of the Mass.

That these things have not only no Affinity with the purity, simplicity and
Spiritualty of Evangelical Worship, but were invented utterly to exclude it out
of the Church and the minds of men, needs no proof unto any, who ever read the
Scripture with due consideration. Nor is the Office of the Ministry less
corrupted and destroyed by it. For besides a so^^y Cunning in this practice,
and the reading of some Forms of words in an accommodation unto these Rites,
there was little more besides an easy good Intention to do what he does, and
not the quite contrary, required to make any one Man or Woman (as it once at
least fell out) to administer in all sacred Worship.

Having utterly lost the Spirit of Grace and Supplications, neglecting at best
all his Aids and Assistances, and being void of all Experience in their minds
of the Power and Efficacy of Prayer by virtue of them, they found it necessary
by these means to set off and recommend their dead Forms. For the lifeless
Carcass of their Forms merely alone, were no more meet to be esteemed Prayer,
than a Tree or a Log was to be esteemed a God, before it was shaped, fashioned,
gilded and adorned. By this means they taught the Image of Prayer which they
had made, to speak and act a Part to the satisfaction of the spectators. For
the bare reading of a Form of Words, especially as it was Ordered in an unknown
Tongue, could never have given the least contentment unto the multitude, had it
not been set off with this variety of Ceremonies composed to make an Appearance
of Devotion and sacred Veneration. Yet when they had done their utmost, they
could never equal the Ceremonies and Rites of the Old Temple-worship in Beauty,
Glory and Order; nor yet those of the Heathen in their sacred Eleusinian
Mysteries for number, solemnity, gravity and appearance of Devotion. Rejecting
the true Glory of Gospel Worship, which the Apostle expressly declares to
consist in the Administration of the Spirit, they substituted that in the room
thereof, which debased the profession of Christian Religion beneath that of the
Jews and Pagans; especially considering that the most of their Ceremonies were
borrowed of them or stolen from them. But I shall never believe that their
conversion of the Holy Prayers of the Church by an open contempt of the whole
Work of the Spirit of God in them, into a Theatrical Pompous Observance of
ludicrous Rites and Ceremonies, can give so much as present satisfaction unto
any who are not given up to strong Delusions to believe a Lie. The Exercise of
ingrafted prevalent Superstition, will appease a natural conscience; outward
Forms and Representations of things believed, will please the Fancy, and
exercise the Imagination; variety and frequent changes of modes, gestures and
postures, with a sort of Prayer always beginning and always ending, will
entertain present thoughts and outward senses, so as that men finding
themselves by these means greatly affected, may suppose that they pray very
well, when they do nothing less. For Prayer consisting in an holy Exercise of
Faith, Love, Trust, and Delight in God, acting themselves in the Representation
of our Wills and Desires unto him, through the Aid and Assistance of the Holy
Ghost, may be absent, where all these are most effectually present.

This also produced all the pretended ornaments of their Temples, Chapels, and
Oratories, by Crucifixes, Images, a multiplication of Altars, with Relics,
Tapers, Vestments and other Utensils.

None of these Things whereby Christian Religion is corrupted and debased,
would ever have come into the minds of men, had not a necessity of their
Invention been introduced by the establishment of set Forms of Prayer, as the
only way and means of Divine Worship. And wherever they are retained,
proportionably unto the principles of the Doctrine which men profess, some such
Ceremonies must be retained also. I will not therefore deny but that here lies
the foundation of all our present differences about the manner of Divine
Worship. Suppose a necessity of confining the Solemn Worship of the Church unto
set Forms of Prayer, and I will grant that sundry Rituals and Ceremonies may be
well judged necessary to accompany their observance. For without them they will
quickly grow obsolete and unsatisfactory. And if on the other hand, free Prayer
in the Church be allowed, it is evident that nothing but the Grace and Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, with a due regard unto the Decency of natural circumstances is
required in Divine service, or can be admitted therein.

Neither yet is this consequent, how inseparable soever it seems from the sole
public Use of set Forms of Prayer in sacred Administrations, pleaded to prove
them either in themselves or their use to be unlawful. The Design of this
consideration is only to show, that they have been so far abased, that they are
so subject to be abused, and do so always stand in need to be abused, that they
may attain the Ends aimed at by them, as much weakens the Plea of the necessity
of their imposition.

For this also is another evil that has attended their invention. The Guides
of the Church after a while were not contented to make use of Humanely devised
Forms of Prayer, confining themselves unto their use alone in all public
Administrations; but moreover they judged it meet to impose the same practice
on all whom they esteemed to be under their Power. And this at length they
thought lawful yea necessary to do on penalties Ecclesiastical and Civil, and
in the issue Capital. When this Injunction first found a prevalent
entertainment is very uncertain. For the first two or three Centuries there
were no Systemes of composed Forms of Prayer used in any Church whatever, as
has been proved. Afterward, when they began to be generally received, on such
grounds and for such Reasons as I shall not here insist on (but may do so in a
Declaration of the Nature and Use of spiritual Gifts, with their continuance in
the Church, and an enquiry into the causes of their Decay) the Authority of
some great Persons did recommend the Use of their Compositions unto other
Churches, even such as had a mind to make use of them, as they saw good. But as
unto this device of their Imposition, confining Churches not only unto the
necessary use of them in general, but unto a certain Composition and Collection
of them, we are beholding for all the advantage received thereby, unto the
Popes of Rome alone, among the Churches of the second Edition. For from their
own Good Inclination, and by their own Authority, without the advice of
Councils, or pretense of Traditions, the two Gorgons heads, whereby in other
cases they frighten poor Mortals, and turn them into Stones; by various Degrees
they obtained a pretense of Right to impose them, and did it accordingly. For
when the Use and Benefit of them had been for a while pleaded, and thence a
progress made unto their necessity, it was needful that they should be imposed
on all Churches and Christians by their Ecclesiastical Authority. But when
afterward they had insinuated into them, and lodged in their Bowels, the two
great Idols of Transubstantiation and the unbloudy Sacrifice, not only Mulcts
Personal and Pecuniary, but Capital punishments were enacted and executed to
enforce their observance. This brought Fire and Faggot into Christian Religion,
making Havoc of the true Church of Christ, and shedding Blood of thousands.
For the Martyrdom of all that have suffered death in the World for their
Testimony against the Idolatries of the Mass, derives originally from this
Spring alone of the necessary imposition of complete Liturgical Forms of
Prayer. For this is the sole foundation of the Roman Breviary and Missal, which
have been the Abaddons of the Church of Christ in these parts of the World, and
are ready once more to be so again. Take away this Foundation, and they all
fall to the ground. And it is worth Consideration, of what kind that Principle
is, which was naturally improved unto such pernicious effects; which quickly
was found to be a meet and effectual Engine in the Hand of Satan, to destroy
and murder the Servants of Christ.

Had the Churches of Christ been left unto their primitive Liberty under the
enjoined Duties of Reading and Expounding the Scripture, of Singing Psalms to
the praise of God, of the Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, and of diligent preaching the Word, all of them with Prayer
according unto the Abilities and spiritual Gifts of them who did preside in
them, as it is evident that they were for some Ages, it is impossible for any
man to imagine what evils would have ensued thereon, that might be of any
consideration, in comparison of those enormous mischiefs which followed on the
contrary practice. And as unto all the Inconveniences, which as it is
pretended, might ensue on this Liberty, there is sufficient Evangelical
Provision for their prevention or cure, made in the Gospel constitution and
Communion of all the true Churches of Christ.

But this was not the whole of the Evil that attended this Imposition. For by
this means all spiritual Ministerial Gifts were caused to cease in the Church.
For as they are Talents given to trade withal, or manifestations of the Spirit
given to profit or edify the Church, they will not reside in any subject, they
will not abide if they are by any received, if they are not improved by
continual Exercise. We see every day what effects the contempt or neglect of
them does produce. Wherefore this Exercise of them being restrained, and
excluded by this Imposition, they were utterly lost in the Church; so as that
it was looked on as a rare thing for any one to be able to pray in the
Administration of Divine Worship; Yea the pretense of such an Ability was
esteemed a Crime, and the Exercise of it a Sin, scarce to be pardoned; Yet do I
not find it in any of the ancient Canons reckoned among the faults for which a
Bishop or a Presbyter were to be deposed. But that hereon arose in those who
were called to officiate in public Assemblies, as unto the Gifts which they
had received for the Edification of the Church in Divine Administrations, that
neglect which has given a fatal wound unto the Light and Holiness of it, is
openly evident. For when the Generality of men of that Order, had provision of
Prayers made for them, which they purchased at an easy rate, or had them
provided for them at the charge of the People, they were contented to be at
Rest, freed from that Labor and Travel of mind, which are required unto the
constant Exercise and Improvement of spiritual Gifts. This Imposition was the
Grave wherein they were buried. For at length, as it is manifest in the Event,
our Lord Jesus Christ being provoked with their sloth and unbelief, did
withhold the Communication of such Gifts from the Generality of those who did
officiate in Divine Worship. And hereby they lost also one great Evidence of
the continuance of his mediatory Life in Heaven for the preservation of the
Church.

It is known that this was and is the State of things in the Roman Church, with
reference unto their whole Worship in their public Assemblies. And therefore
although they have indulged diverse Enthusiasts, whose Revelations and actings
pretended from the Holy Spirit, have tended to the confirmation of their
Superstitions; and some of them have ventured at Notions about Mental Prayer
which they understand not themselves; Yet as unto Free Prayer by the Assistance
of the Holy Ghost, in the Church Assemblies or otherwise, they were the first,
and continue to be the fiercest opposers of it: And it is their Interest so to
be. For shake this Foundation of the Imposition of an Entire Systeme of
Humanely devised Prayers for the only way and means of the Worship of the
Church, and the whole Fabric of the Mass, with all the weight of their
Religion (if vanity and Imagination may be said to have any weight) which is
laid thereon, will tumble into the Pit from whence it came. And therefore I
must here acquaint the Reader, that the first occasion of writing this
Discourse, was the perusal of Mr. Cressies Preface to his Church History,
wherein out of a design to advance the pretended Mental Prayer of some of his
Enthusiasts, he reflects with much contumely and Reproach upon that Free
praying by the Aids of the Spirit of God which we plead for. And he will find
that all his pretenses are examined in the latter part of this Discourse.

But notwithstanding these things, those of the Roman Church do at this day
boast themselves of their Devotions in their Prayers private and public; and
have prevailed thereby on many disposed unto a compliance with them, by their
own Guilt, Ignorance and Superstition. The vanity of their pretense has been
well detected by evincing the Idolatry whereby all or the most of their
Devotions are vitiated and rendered unacceptable. But this also is of weight
with me, that the provision of the Systeme and order of their whole Devotion
and its Exercise, is apparently composed and fitted unto the Exclusion of the
whole Work of the Spirit of God in Prayer. And yet do they continue under an
incredible Delusion as to oppose, revile and condemn the Prayers of others who
are not of their Communion, on this consideration, that those who make them,
have not the Holy Spirit nor his Aids, which are all confined unto their
Church. But if any Society of men in the World, maintaining the outward
profession of Christian Religion, can do more to exclude the Holy Ghost and all
his operations, in Prayer and Divine Worship, than their Church has done, I
shall acknowledge my self greatly mistaken. It is nothing but Ignorance of him
and his whole Work, with all the Ends for which he is promised unto the Church
(that I say not, an Hatred and Detestation of them) that causes any to embrace
their ways of Devotion.

But to return. The Things pleaded for may be reduced unto the ensuing Heads.

1. No Persons, no Churches are obliged by virtue of any Divine Constitution,
Precept, or approved Example, to confine themselves in their public or private
Worship, unto set or Humanely devised Forms of Prayer. If any such
Constitution, Precept, or Example can be produced, which hitherto has not been
done, it ought to be complied withal. And whilst others are left unto their
Liberty in their use, this is sufficient to enervate all Pleas for their
Imposition.

2. There is a Promise in the Scripture, there are many Promises made and
belonging unto the Church unto the End of the World, of the Communication of
the Holy Spirit unto it, as unto peculiar Aids and Assistances in Prayer. To
deny this, is to overthrow the foundation of the Holiness and comfort of all
Believers, and to bring present Ruin to the Souls of men in Distress.

3. It is the Duty of Believers to look after, to pray for those promised Aids
and Assistances in Prayer. Without this, all those Promises are despised, and
looked on as a Flourish of Words, without Truth, Power or Efficacy in them. But,

4. This they are commanded to do, and have blessed Experience of success
therein. The former is plain in the Scripture, and the latter must be left unto
their own Testimony living and dying.

5. Beyond the Divine Institution of all the Ordinances of Worship in the
Church, with the Determination of the Matter and Form which are essential unto
them, contained in the Scripture, and a due Attendance unto Natural Light in
outward Circumstances, there is nothing needful unto the due and orderly
Celebration of all public Worship in its Assembly. If any such thing be
pretended, it is what Christ never appointed, nor the Apostles ever practiced,
nor the first Churches after them, nor has it any Promise of acceptance.

6. For the preservation of the Unity of Faith, and the communion of Churches
among themselves therein, they may express an Agreement, as in Doctrine by a
joint Confession of Faith, so in a Declaration of the material and substantial
parts of Worship, with the Order and method thereof; on which foundation they
may in all things communicate with each other as Churches, and in the practice
of their Members.

7. Whereas the Differences about Prayer under consideration, concern Christian
practice in the Vitals of Religion, great respect is to be had unto the
Experience of them that do believe; where it is not obstructed and clouded by
prejudices, sloth, or adverse Principles and Opinions. Therefore the substance
of the greatest part of the ensuing Discourse consists principally in the
Declaration of those concernments of Prayer, which relate unto practice and
Experience. And hence it follows,

8. That the best Expedient to compose these Differences amongst us, is for
every one to stir up the Gift and Grace of God that is in him, and all of us to
give up our selves unto that Diligence, Frequency, Fervency and Perseverance in
Prayer which God requires of us, especially in such a season as that wherein
we live. A time wherein they, who ever they be, who trouble others, may for
ought they know, be near unto trouble themselves. This will be the most
effectual means to lead us all into the acknowledgement of the Truth, and
without which, an Agreement in Notions, is of little Use or value.

But I confess Hopes are weak concerning the due Application of this Remedy
unto any of our Evils or Distempers. The Opinions of those who deny all
internal, real, efficacious Operations of the Holy Spirit on the Souls of men,
and deride all their effects, have so far diffused and riveted themselves into
the minds of many, that little is to be expected from a Retreat unto those Aids
and Reliefs. This Evil in the profession of Religion, was reserved for these
latter Ages. For although the Work and Grace of the Holy Spirit in Divine
Worship was much neglected and lost in the World; Yet no Instances can be given
in Ages past, of such contempt cast upon all his internal Grace and Operations,
as now abounds in the World. If the Pelagians, who were most guilty, did fall
into any such Excesses, they have escaped the Records and monuments that remain
of their Deportment. Bold Efforts they are of Atheistical Inclinations, in men
openly avowing their own Ignorance and utter want of all experience in things
Spiritual and Heavenly. Neither does the Person of Christ or his Office, meet
with better entertainment amongst many; and by some have been treated with
scurrility and Blasphemy. In the mean time the contests about Communion with
Churches are great and fierce. But where these things are received and
approved, those who live not on a Traditionary Faith, will not forsake Christ
and the Gospel, or renounce Faith and Experience, for the Communion of any
Church in the World.

But all Flesh almost, has corrupted its Ways. The Power of Religion, and the
Experience of it in the Souls of Men being generally lost, the profession of it
is of no great use, nor will long abide. Yea multitudes all the World over,
seem to be weary of the Religion which themselves profess, so far as it is
pleaded to be of Divine Revelation, be it true or false, unless it be where
they have great secular advantages by their profession of it. There is no
greater pretense of a flourishing State in Religion, than that of some Churches
of the Roman Communion, especially one at this day. But if the account which is
given us from among themselves concerning it be true, it is not much to be
gloried in. For set aside the multitude of Atheists, Antiscripturists, and
avowed Disbelievers of the supernatural Mysteries of the Gospel, and the Herd
that remains influenced into an Hatred and persecution of the Truth by a
combination of men upholding themselves and their way by extravagant secular
Interests and Advantages, is not very highly considerable. Yea, their present
height seems to be on a precipice. What inroads in other places, bold Opinions
concerning the Authority of Scripture and the Demonstration of it, the Person
and Office of Christ, the Holy Spirit and all his operations, with the
Advancement of a pretense of Morality in opposition to Evangelical Grace in its
Nature and Efficacy, are made every day, is known unto all who consider these
things. And although the effects of this Poison discover themselves daily, in
the decays of Piety, the increase of Immoralities of all sorts, and the
abounding of flagitious Sins, exposing Nations unto the high Displeasure of
God; Yet the security of most in this state of things, proclaims it self in
various fruits of it, and can never be sufficiently deplored.

Whereas therefore, one means of the preservation of the Church, and its
Deliverance out of these Evils, is a due attendance unto the discharge of this
Duty of Prayer, the Declaration of its Nature, with a Vindication of the
Springs and Causes from whence it derives its efficacy, which are attempted in
the Ensuing Discourse, may, I hope, through the blessing of God, be of some Use
unto such whose minds are sincere in their Enquiries after Truth.

ERRATA.
Page 13. l. 17. (...). p. 16. l. 15. Supplication. And it is. l. 19. (...). p.
18. l. 13. these, r. therefore: l. 14. in, r. for. l. 15. but, r. put. p. 23.
l. 17. r. out for; p. 28. l. 1. r. prophecy. p. 41. margin. dele Abba Father,
the meaning of it. l. 7. r. Ymma. l. 9. in regard, r. is required. l. 11. (...)
r. (...) p. 51. l. 12. what whereas, r. that. p. 72. l. 26. liked not. p. 73.
These words in the margin, Omnino oportet nos, were the beginning of a
quotation which is omitted; the whole is as follows: Omnino oportet nos
orationis tempore in curiam intrare coelestem, illam utique curiam in qua Rex
Regum stellato sedet solio, circumdante innumerabili and inessabili beatorum
Spirituum exercitu. Quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta illuc
humilitate accedere debet, e palude sua procedens ranuncula vilis? quam
tremebundus, quam denique humilis and solicitus, and toto intentus animo
Majestatali gloriae! Bernard. Sermon. de quatuor orandi modis.] p. 74. l. 7. r.
Prayers. p. 119. l. 22. Others there are. p. 120. l. 28. unwearied, r.
unvaried. p. 142. l. 2. this, r. their. p. 144. l. 21. Afflictions, r.
Affections. p. 175. l. 21. their, r. these. p. 201. l. 26. the, r. their. p.
202. l. 11. r. noxious. l. 14. r. obnoxious.

THE WORK OF THE Holy Spirit IN PRAYER, AS The Spirit of Grace and
Supplications; and the Duty of Believers therein; with a brief enquiry into the
nature and use of Mental Prayer, and Forms.
CHAP. I.
The Use of Prayer, and the Work of the Holy Spirit therein.

THE Works of the Spirit of God toward Believers, are either general and not
confined with a respect unto any one Duty more than another; or particular,
with respect unto some especial Duty. Of the first sort are, Regeneration and
Sanctification, which being common unto them all, are the general Principles of
all actings of Grace or particular Duties, in them. But there are moreover
sundry especial Works or Operations of this holy Spirit in and toward the
Disciples of Christ, which although they may be reduced unto the general head
of Sanctification, yet they fall under an especial consideration proper unto
themselves; of this sort is the Aid or Assistance which he gives unto us, in
our Prayers and Supplications.

I suppose it will be granted that Prayer in the whole compass and extent of
it, as, comprizing Meditation, Supplication, Praise, and Thanksgiving, is one
of the most signal Duties of Religion. The Light of nature in its most pregnant
notions, with its practical Language in the Consciences of mankind, concur in
their suffrage with the Scripture in this matter. For they both of them jointly
witness that it is not only an important Duty in Religion, but also that
without it, there neither is nor can be the exercise of any Religion in the
world. Never any Persons lived in the acknowledgment of a Deity, but under the
conduct of the same apprehension, they thought the duty of Vows, Prayers and
Praises incumbent on them as they found occasion. Yea although they found out
external Ceremonious ways of solemnizing their Devotions, yet it was this Duty
of Prayer alone, which was their Natural, Necessary, fundamental Acknowledgment
of that divine Being which they did own. Neither are there any considerable
stories extant recording the monuments of the ancient Heathen Nations of the
World, wherein (to the shame of degenerate Christianity it may be spoken) there
are not more frequent accounts given of their sacred Invocations and
Supplications unto their supposed Gods, than are to be found in any of the
Historical Monuments and stories concerning the Actions of Christian Nations in
these latter Ages. This therefore is the most natural and most eminent way and
means of our Converse with God, without which converse we have no present
advantage above the beasts that perish; but such as will turn unto our eternal
disadvantage in that misery whereof they are incapable. This is the way whereby
we exercise toward him all that Grace which we do receive from him; and render
him an acceptable acknowledgment of that Homage and Revenue of Glory, which we
are never able to exhibit in their due kind and measure. Of what use and
advantage the due performance of this Duty is unto our selves, no man is able
fully to express; every one can add somewhat of his own experience. But we need
not insist on the Commendation of Prayer, for it will be said by whom was it
ever discommended?

And I wish I saw Reason to acquiesce in that Reply. For not only the Practice
of the most, but the declared Opinions of many do evidence, that neither the
Excellency of this Duty, nor its necessity, do find that acceptance and esteem
in the minds of men as is pretended. But this being not my present design, I
shall not further insist upon it.

For my purpose is not to treat of the Nature, Necessity, Properties, Uses,
Effects and Advantages of this gracious Duty, as it is the vital breath of our
spiritual Life, unto God. Its original in the Law of nature as the first and
principal means of the acknowledgment of a Divine Power, whereof the neglect is
a sufficient evidence of practical Atheism; (for he that prays not, says in
his heart there is no God) Its Direction in the Scripture as to the Rule,
manner and proper object of it; the Necessity of its constant use and practice,
both from especial Commands and our state in this World, with the whole variety
of inward and outward occasions that may befall us, or we may be exercised
withal; Arguments, motives and encouragements unto constancy, fervency, and
perseverance in the performance of the Duty of it; with known Examples of its
mighty efficacy and mavelous success; the certain Advantages which the Souls
of Believers, do receive thereby, in spiritual Aids and supplies of strength,
with peace and consolation, with sundry other of its concernments, although
much treated of already by many, might yet be further considered and improved.
But none of these are my present design. The interest of the Holy Spirit of God
by his gracious Operations in it, is that alone which I shall enquire into.

And it cannot be denied, but that the Work and actings of the Spirit of Grace
in and toward Believers with respect unto the Duty of prayer, are more
frequently and expressly asserted in the Scripture, than his Operations with
respect unto any other particular Grace or Duty what ever. If this should be
called into question, the ensuing Discourse I hope will sufficiently vindicate
and confirm Truth. But hereby Believers are instructed as in the importance of
the Duty it self, so in the use and necessity of the Aid and Assistance of the
Spirit of God in and unto the right discharge or performance of it. For where
frequent, plain Revelations concur in multiplied commands and directions, with
continual Experience as it is with them in this case, their Instruction is
firm, and in a way of being fixed on their minds. As this renders an Enquiry
hereinto both necessary and seasonable; for what can be more so, than that
wherein the spiritual life and comfort of Believers are so highly concerned,
and which exhibiteth unto us so gracious a condescension of Divine Love and
Goodness; so moreover, the opposition that is made in the World against the
Work of the Spirit of God herein, above all other his Operations, requires that
something be spoken in the vindication of it.

But the Enmity hereunto seems to be peculiar unto these latter Ages, I mean
among such as pretend unto any acquaintance with these things, from the
Scripture. It will be hard to find an instance in former Ages, of any unto whom
the Spirit of God, as a Spirit of Grace and Supplications, was a reproach. But
as now the contradiction herein is great and fierce; so is there not any
difference concerning any practical duty of Religion, wherein Parties at
variance are more confident and satisfied, in and about their own
apprehensions, than they are, who dissent about the Work of the Spirit of God
in our Prayers and Supplications. For those who oppose what is ascribed by
others unto him herein, are not content to deny and reject it, and to refuse a
communion in the faith and practice of the work so ascribed unto him; but
moreover, such is the confidence they have in their own conceptions, that they
revile and speak evil contemptuously and despitefully of what they do oppose.
Hence Ability to pray, as is pleaded, by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, is
so far from being allowed to be a Gift, or a Grace, or a Duty, or any way
useful among men, that it is derided and scorned as a paltry faculty fit to be
exploded from among Christians. And at length it is traduced as an invention
and artifice of the Jesuits, to the surprizal and offense of many sober
persons; the unadvisedness of which insinuation, the ensuing discourse will
manifest.

Others again, profess that of all the Privileges whereof they are made
partakers in this World, of all the Aids, Assistances or Gifts which they
receive from or by the Spirit of God, that which he communicates and helps them
withal in their Prayers and Supplications, is the most excellent and
inestimable. And herein they have living and dying, in all Troubles,
Distresses, Temptations and Persecutions, such assurance and satisfaction in
their minds, as that they are not in the least moved with all the scorn and
contempt that are cast upon their profession and practice in the exercise of
the Gift which they have received; but rather judge, that they contract the
guilt of great sin to themselves, by whom this work of the Spirit is
reproached. Hence I know not any difference about Religious things, that is
managed with greater Animosities in the minds of men, and worse Consequents,
than this which is about the work of the Spirit of God in Prayer, which indeed
is the hinge on which all other differences about Divine Worship do turn and
depend. It may therefore be well worth our while, yea it is our Duty, sedately
and diligently to enquire into what the Scripture teaches us in this matter,
wherein we must acquiesce, and whereby all Experiences on the one side or the
other must be tried and regulated. Two things therefore I do propose unto my
self in the ensuing Discourse, concerning both which I shall plainly and
briefly endeavor the satisfaction of indifferent and unprejudiced Readers. And
these are first, to evince that there is promised, and actually granted an
especial work of the Spirit of God in the Prayers or praises of Believers under
the New Testament; Secondly, to declare the Nature of that work wherein it does
consist, or the manner of the operation of the Holy Spirit therein. And if in
these things no impression can be made on the minds of men possessed with those
mighty prejudices which reject their very Proposal, and all consideration of
them with contempt; yet it may be of use, unto them, who being not biased with
the undue love or hatred of parties of men, nor elated with high valuations of
their own conceptions above those of others, whom they think they have reason
if not to hate, yet to scorn, do sincerely desire to live unto God, and to
prefer the performance of their Duty unto all other considerations,
endeavoring to subdue their inclinations and affections thereunto. Nor do I
desire more of any Reader, but that he will grant that he is herein conversant
about things, which will have an influence into his everlasting account.

CHAP. II.
Zech. 12. 10. Opened and vindicated.

THE especial Promise of the Administration of the Spirit of God unto the end
under consideration, is that which I shall lay as the foundation of the ensuing
discourse, Zech. 12. 10. I will pour upon the House of David, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of Grace and Supplications. The Spirit here
promised is the Spirit of God; the Holy Spirit, with respect unto the especial
end for which he is promised. And the manner of his Administration in the
accomplishment of the promise is expressed by (...) I will pour out. The same
word is used to the same purpose, Ezekiel. 39. 29. Joel 2. 28. as are also other
words of the same importance which we render by pouring out, as Prove. 1. 23.
Isa. 32. 15. Chap. 44. 3. Chap. 52. 10.

Two things have been elsewhere declared concerning this Expression, applied
unto the Communication of the Holy Ghost.

(1) That a plentiful Dispensation of him unto the end for which he is
promised, with respect unto a singular and eminent Degree in his operations, is
intended therein. The Apostle expresses this word, or the accomplishment of
what is promised in it, by (...), Tit. 3. 6. he has richly, or abundantly,
poured out his spirit. Not therefore a mere Grant and Communication of the
Spirit, but a plentiful Effusion of him is intended; which must have some
eminent Effects, as pledges and tokens thereof. For it is absurd to speak of a
plentiful abundant Effusion with Degrees above what was before granted, and yet
there be no certain ways or means whereby it may be evidenced and demonstrated.
The Spirit therefore is so promised in this place, as to produce some notable
and peculiar Effects of his Communication. (2.) That this Promise is peculiar
unto the Days of the Gospel; I mean every Promise is so, where mention is made
of pouring out the Spirit on men; which may be evinced by the consideration of
every place where this expression is used. But in this place it is most
unquestionable, the immediate effect of it, being a looking unto Christ as he
was pierced. And it may be yet further observed, that there is a tacit
comparison in it, with some other time or season, or some other act of God,
wherein or whereby he gave his Spirit before; but not in that way, manner, or
measure, that he now promises to bestow him. Of the whole of these
observations, Dydimus gives us a brief account, De Spir. Sanct. l. 1.
Significat autem effusionis verbum, largam, and divitem muneris abundantiam;
itaque cumunus quis alicubi, aut duo Spiritum Sanctum accipiunt, non dicitur,
Effundam de Spiritu meo, sed tunc quando in universas gentes munus Spiritus
Sancti redundaverit.

(2.) Those unto whom he is thus promised, are the House of David and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem; that is the whole Church expressed in a Distribution
into the ruling family and the body of the people under their rule. And the
Family of David, which was then in supreme power among the people, in the
Person of Zerubbabel, is expressly mentioned for three reasons: (1.) Because the
Faithfulness of God in his Promises, was concerned in the preservation of that
Family, whereof the Messiah was to spring, Christ himself being thereby in the
Rule of the Church typed out in an especial manner. (2.) Because all the
Promises in a peculiar manner, were first to be fulfilled in the Person of
Christ, so typed by David and his House. On him the Spirit under the New
Testament was first to be poured out in all fullness, and from him to be
communicated unto others. (3.) It may be to denote the especial Gifts and
Graces that should be communicated unto them, who were to be employed in the
Rule and conduct of the Church, under him, the King and Head thereof. And the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, is a phrase expressive of the whole Church; because
that was the seat of all their public ordinances of worship. See Psalm. 122. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Wherefore the whole spiritual Church of God, all
Believers are the object of this Promise as represented in the Family of David
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

(3.) The especial Qualifications of the promised Spirit are two: For (1.) He
is to be (...) a Spirit of Grace. (...) which the Greek constantly render
(...), and we from the Latin Gratia, Grace, is derived of (...), as is also
the following word, which signifies to have Mercy, or Compassion, to be
Gracious; as all the words whereby Gods Gracious dealings with Sinners in the
Hebrew do include the signification of Pity, Compassion, free Goodness and
Bounty. And it is variously used in the Scripture. Sometimes for the Grace and
Favor of God, as it is the fountain of all gracious and merciful effects
toward us, Romans 1. 7. Chap. 4. 4, 16. Chap. 5. 2, 14, 20. Chap. 6. 1. Chap.
11. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 3. and in other places innumerable; and sometimes for the
principal Effect hereof, or the gracious Favor of God whereby he accepts us in
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5. 2 These. 1. 12. which is the Grace the Apostle prays for in
the behalf of the Church, Romans 16. 20. 1 Cor. 16. 23. And sometimes it is
applied unto the Favor of men, and acceptance with them, called the finding
grace or favor in the sight of any, Genesis 39. 4, 21. Chap. 41. 24. 1 Samuel 2.
26. Romans 15. 11. Esther 2. 15, 17. Chap. 5. 2. Luke 2. 52. Acts 4. 33. And
sometimes for the free effectual Efficacy of Grace in those in whom it is, Acts
14. 26. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 9. And sometimes for our Justification and
Salvation, by the free Grace or favor of God in Christ, John 1. 17. 1 Pet. 1.
13. For the Gospel it self, as the instrument of the declaration and
communication of the Grace of God, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Ephesians. 3. 2. Col. 1. 6. Tit. 2.
11. For the free donation of the Grace and gifts of the Spirit, John 1. 16.
Ephesians. 4. 7. And many other significations it has, which belong not unto our
purpose.

Three things may be intended in this adjunct; of Grace.

(1.) A respect of the Sovereign Cause of his Dispensation, which is no other
but the mere Grace of God. He may be called a Spirit of Grace, because his
donation is an effect of Grace, without the least respect unto any desert in
those unto whom he is given. This Reason of the Appellation is declared, Titus
3, 4, 5, 6. The sole cause and reason in opposition unto our own works or
deservings of the pouring out of the Spirit upon us, is the Love and Kindness
of God in Jesus Christ; whence he may be justly called, a Spirit of Grace. (2.)
Because he is the Author of all Grace in and unto them on whom he is poured
out; So God is called the God of all Grace, because he is the Fountain and
Author of it. And that the Holy Spirit is the immediate efficient cause of all
Grace in us, has been elsewhere proved both in general and in the principal
instances of Regeneration and Sanctification, and it shall be yet further
confirmed in what does ensue. (3.) (...) is commonly used for that Grace or
Favor which one has with another: Let me find grace in thy sight, as in the
instances before-quoted. And so the Spirit also may be called a Spirit of
Grace, because those on whom he is poured out, have Grace and Favor with God;
they are gracious with him as being accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 2. 18.
Whereas therefore all these concur wherever this Spirit is communicated, I
know no reason why we may not judge them all here included; though that in the
second place be especially intended. The Spirit is promised to work Grace and
Holiness, in all on whom he is bestowed.

He is as thus poured out a Spirit (...), of Supplications, that is of Prayer
for Grace and mercy. The word is formed from (...) as the other, to be gracious
or merciful; and expressing our Act toward God, it is Prayer for Grace,
Supplication. And the original word is never used but to express vocal prayer,
either in the Assemblies of the people of God, or by private persons. Harken to
the voice of my Supplications is rendered by the Apostle Paul (...), Heb. 5. 7.
in which place alone in the Scripture that word is used. Originally it
signifies a Bough or Olive branch wrapped about with Wool or Bays, or something
of the like nature, which those carried in their hands and lifted up, who were
Suppliants unto others for the obtaining of Peace, or the averting of their
Displeasure. Hence came the phrase of velamenta praeferre, to hold out such
covered branches. So Livy de Bell. Punic. Ramas oleae, ac velamenta alia
Supplicantium portantes, orant ut reciperent sese: Holding forth Olive branches
and other covered tokens used by Suppliants, they prayed that they might be
received into Grace and Favor. Which custom Virgil declares in his Aeneas
addressing himself to Evander.

Optime Grajugenum, cui me fortuna precari,
Et vitta comptos voluit praetendere Ramos.
And they called them (...) Branches of Supplication, or Prayer. And they
constantly called those Prayers which they made solemnly unto their gods,
Supplicia and Supplicationes, Live. lib. 10. Eo anno multa prodigia erant,
quarum avertendarum causa Supplicationes in biduum Senatus decrevit. A form of
which kind of Prayer we have in Cato, de re rustica, cap 13. Mars pater te
precor quaesoque ut calamitates --.

Some render (...) by Miserationes, or Lamentationes, and interpret it of men's
bemoaning themselves in their Prayers for Grace and Mercy, which in the issue
varies not from the sense insisted on. But whereas it is derived from (...)
which signifies to be merciful or gracious, and expresses an act of ours
toward God, it can properly signify nothing but Supplications for Mercy and
Grace. Nor is it otherwise used in the Scripture. See Job 40. 21. Prove. 18. 23.
Dan. 9. 3. Jer. 31. 60. 2 Chronicles. 6. 21. Jer. 3. 21. Psalm. 28. 2, 6. 31, 23.
116. 1. 130. 2. 140. 7. 143. 1. Dan. 9. 18. 25. Psalm. 46. 6. which are all the
places, besides this, where the word is used; in all which it denotes,
deprecation of Evil and Supplication for Grace, constantly in the plural Number
to denote the Earnestness of Men.

(...) these are properly Supplications for Grace and Mercy in freedom and
deliverance from Evil, but by a Synecdoche for all sorts of Prayer whatever. We
may therefore enquire in what sense the Holy Spirit of God is called a Spirit
of Supplication, or what is the Reason of this Attribution unto him. And he
must be so either formally or efficiently, either because he is so in himself,
or unto us. If in the former way, then he is a Spirit who himself prays, and
according to the import of those Hebraisms, abounds in that Duty. As a man of
wickedness, Isaiah 55. 7. or a man of Blood is a man wholly given to wickedness
and violence; So on the other hand, a Spirit of Supplication should be a Spirit
abounding in Prayer for Mercy, and the diverting of evil, as the word imports.
Now the Holy Ghost cannot be thus a Spirit of Supplication, neither for himself
nor us. No Imagination of any such thing can be admitted with respect unto
himself, without the highest Blasphemy. Nor can he in his own Person make
Supplications for us. For besides that any such Interposition in Heaven on our
behalf is in the Scripture wholly confined unto the Priestly Office of Christ
and his Intercession, all Prayer, whether Oral or Interpretative only, is the
Act of a nature inferior unto that which is prayed unto. This the Spirit of
God has not, he has no Nature inferior unto that which is Divine. We cannot
therefore suppose him to be formally a Spirit of Supplication, unless we deny
his Deity. He is therefore so Efficiently with respect unto us, and as such he
is promised unto us. Our enquiry therefore in General is how or in what sense
he is so. And there are but two ways conceivable whereby this may be affirmed
of him. (1.) By working Gracious Inclinations and dispositions in us unto this
Duty. (2.) By giving a Gracious Ability for the discharge of it in a due
manner. These therefore must belong unto, and do comprise his Efficiency as a
Spirit of Supplication.

Both of them are included in that of the Apostle, The Spirit it self makes
Intercession for us, Romans 8. 26. Those who can put any other sense on this
Promise, may do well to express it. Every one consistent with the Analogy of
Faith shall be admitted, so that we do not judge the Words to be void of sense,
and to have nothing in them. To deny the Spirit of God to be a Spirit of
Supplication in and unto Believers, is to reject the Testimony of God himself.

By the ways mentioned we affirm that he is so, nor can any other way be
assigned.

(1.) He is so, by working gracious Inclinations and Dispositions in us unto
this Duty. It is he who prepares, disposes, and inclines the hearts of
Believers unto the Exercise thereof with delight and Spiritual Complacency. And
where this is not, no Prayer is acceptable unto God. He Delights not in those
cries which an unwilling mind is pressed and forced unto by Earthly desires,
distress or misery, James 4. 5. Of our selves, naturally, we are averse from
any converse and intercourse with God, as being alienated from living unto him,
by the Ignorance and vanity of our minds.

And there is a secret Alienation still working in us from all duties of
immediate Communion with him. It is he alone who works us unto that frame
wherein we Pray Continually, as it is required of us; Our Hearts being kept
ready and prepared for this Duty on all Occasions and Opportunities, being in
the mean time acted and steered under the Conduct and Influence of those Graces
which are to be exercised therein. This some call the Grace of Prayer that is
given us by the Holy Ghost, as I suppose improperly, though I will not contend
about it. For Prayer absolutely, and formally, is not a peculiar Grace distinct
from all other Graces that are exercised in it: But it is the Way and Manner
whereby we are to exercise all other Graces of Faith, Love, Delight, fear,
Reverence, self Abasement and the like, unto certain especial Ends. And I know
no Grace of Prayer distinct or different from the exercise of these Graces: It
is therefore an Holy commanded Way of the exercise of other Graces, but not a
peculiar Grace it self. Only where any Person is singularly disposed and
devoted unto this Duty, we may if we please, though improperly, say that he is
Eminent in the Grace of Prayer. And I do suppose that this part of his Work
will not be denied by any, no not that it is intended in the Promise. If any
are minded to stand at such a distance from other things which are ascribed
unto him, or have such an abhorrency of allowing him part or interest in our
Supplications, as that we may in any sense be said to Pray in the Holy Ghost,
that they will not admit of so much as the Work of his Grace, and that wrought
in Believers by virtue of this Promise, they will manage an Opposition unto his
other Actings, at too dear a rate to be gainers by it.

(2.) He is so by giving an Ability for Prayer, or communicating a Gift unto
the minds of men, enabling them profitably unto themselves and others, to
exercise all his Graces in that especial way of Prayer. It will be granted
afterward, that there may be a Gift of Prayer used where there is no Grace in
exercise, nor perhaps any to be exercised; that is, as some improperly express
it, the Gift of Prayer, where the Grace of Prayer is not. But in declaring how
the Spirit is a Spirit of Supplication, we must take in the Consideration of
both. He both disposes us to pray, that is to the Exercise of Grace in that
especial way, and enableth us thereunto. And where this Ability is wholly and
absolutely wanting, or where it is rejected or despised, although he may act
and exercise those very Graces which are to be exercised in Prayer, and whose
Exercise in that way is commonly called the Grace of Prayer, yet this Work of
his belongs unto the General head of Sanctification wherein he preserves,
excites and acts all our Graces, and not unto this especial Work of Prayer, nor
is he a Spirit of Supplication therein. He is therefore only a Spirit of
Supplication properly, as he communicates a Gift or Ability unto Persons to
exercise all his Graces in the way and Duty of Prayer. This is that which he is
here promised for, and promised to be poured out, for that is to be given in an
abundant and plentiful manner. Wherever he is bestowed in the accomplishment
of this Promise, he both disposes the hearts of men to pray, and enableth them
so to do. This Ability indeed, he communicates in great variety as to the
Degrees of it and usefulness unto others in its exercise, but he does it unto
every one so far as is necessary unto his own Spiritual Concernments, or the
discharge of his Duty toward God and all others. But, whereas this Assertion
contains the Substance of what we plead for, the farther confirmation of it
must be the Principal Subject of the ensuing Discourse.

That this is the sense of the place and the mind of the Holy Ghost in the
Words, needs no other Demonstration, but that it is expressive of their proper
Signification, neither can any other sense tolerably be affixed on them. To
deny the Holy Spirit to be denominated a Spirit of Supplication, because he
enclineth, disposes and enableth them to pray unto whom he is promised and on
whom he is bestowed as such, is to use a little too much Liberty in Sacred
things.

A Learned man of late out of hatred unto the Spirit of Prayer, or Prayer as
his Gift, has endeavored to deprive the Church of God of the whole benefit
and comfort of this Promise, Amyrald. praefat. in Psalm. For he contends that it
belongs not unto the Christian Church, but unto the Jews only. Had he said it
belonged unto the Jews in the first place who should be converted unto Christ,
he had not gone so wide from the Truth, nor from the sense of other Expositors,
though he had said more than he could prove. But to suppose that any Grace, any
Mercy, any Privilege by Jesus Christ, is promised unto the Jews wherein
Gentile Believers shall be no Sharers, that they should not partake of the same
kind, whoever has the Prerogative as to Degrees, is fond and impious. For if
they also are Children of Abraham, if the Blessing of Faithful Abraham do come
upon them also, if it is through them that he is the Heir of the World, his
Spiritual Seed inhabiting it by Right in all places, then unto them do all the
Promises belong that are made unto him and his Seed. And whereas most of the
Exceeding great and precious Promises of the Old Testament are made to Jacob
and Israel, to Jerusalem and Zion; it is but saying that they are all confined
unto the Jews, and so at once despoil the Church of God of all Right and Title
to them, which Impious folly and Sacrilege has been by some attempted. But
whereas all the Promises belong unto the same Covenant, with all the Grace
contained in them and exhibited by them, who ever is interessed by Faith in
that Covenant, is so in all the Promises of God that belong thereunto, and has
an equal Right unto them, with those unto whom they were first given. To
suppose, now that the Jews are rejected for their Unbelief, that the Promises
of God made unto them whilst they stood by Faith, are ceased and of no use, is
to overthrow the Covenant of Abraham, and indeed the whole Truth of the New
Testament. But the Apostle assures us that all the Promises of God are in
Christ Yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us: that is, in their
Accomplishment in us and toward us, 2 Cor. 1. 20. So also he positively
affirms that all Believers have Received those Promises which Originally were
made unto Israel, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. Chap 7. 1. And not only so, but he
declares also that the Promises which were made of old unto particular Persons
on especial Occasions, as to the Grace, Power and Love contained in them and
intended by them, do yet belong unto all individual Believers, and are
applicable by them unto all their especial Occasions, Heb. 13. 5, 6. And their
Right unto, or interest in all the Promises of God, is that which those who are
concerned in the Obedience of Faith, would not forego for all that this World
can supply them withal. This therefore is only a particular Instance of the
Work and Effect of the Spirit, as he is in general promised in the Covenant.
And as we have declared, the Promises of him, as a Spirit of Grace and Holiness
in the Covenant, belong unto the Believers of the Gentiles also. If they do
not, they have neither share nor Interest in Christ, which is a better Plea for
the Jew, than this peculiar Instance will afford. But this Promise is only an
especial Declaration of what in one case this Spirit shall do, who is promised
as a Spirit of Grace and Holiness in the Covenant. And therefore the Author of
the Evasion, suspecting that the fraud and Sacrilege of it would be detected,
betakes himself to other Subterfuges, which we shall afterward meet with, so
far as we are concerned.

It may be more soberly objected, that the Spirit of Grace and Supplication was
given unto Believers under the Old Testament; and therefore if there be no more
in it, if some Extraordinary Gift be not here intended, how comes it to be made
an Especial Promise with Respect unto the times of the New Testament? It may
therefore be supposed that not the Ordinary Grace or Gift of Prayer which
Believers, and especially the Officers of the Church do receive, but some
Extraordinary Gift bestowed on the Apostles and first Converts to the Church,
is here intended. So the Prophecies concerning the Effusion of the Spirit on
all sorts of Persons, Joel 2. is interpreted by Peter, and applied unto the
sending of the Holy Ghost in Miraculous Gifts on the Day of Pentecost, Acts 2.

Answer (1.) I have elsewhere already in General obviated this Objection, by
showing the prodigious folly of that Imagination, that the Dispensation of the
Spirit is confined unto the first times of the Gospel, whereof this Objection
is a Branch, as Enmity unto the matter treated of is the Occasion of the whole.
(2.) We no where find Grace and Prayer, the things here promised, to be
reckoned among the Extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit under the New Testament.
Prayer indeed in an Unknown Tongue was so; but Prayer it self was not so, no
more than Grace, which if it were, the whole present Church is Graceless. (3.)
The Promise in Joel had express Respect unto the Extraordinary Gifts of
Prophecy and Visions, and therefore had its Principal Accomplishment in the Day
of Pentecost. This Promise is quite of another nature. (4.) That which is
Necessary for, and the Duty of all Believers, and that always, is not an
Extraordinary Gift bestowed on a few, for a season. Now if there are any who
think that Grace and Prayer are not Necessary unto all Believers, or that they
may have Abilities, and exercise them without any Aid of the Holy Spirit, I
will not at present contend with them; for this is not a place to plead with
those by whom the principles of the Christian Faith are denied. Divine Commands
are the Rule of our Duty, not man's Imaginations. (5.) If this be not an
Especial Promise of the New Testament, because the matter of it, or Grace
Promised, was in some Degree and measure enjoyed under the Old, then is there
no Promise made with Respect unto that Season; For the Saints under the Old
Testament were really made Partakers of all the same Graces with those under
the New. Wherefore (6.) Two things are intended in the Promise with Respect
unto the times of the Gospel. (1.) An Ampliation and Enlargement of this Grace
or Favor as unto the Subjects of it Extensively. It was under the Old
Testament confined unto a few, but now it shall be communicated unto many, and
diffused all the World over. It shall be so poured out as to be shed abroad and
imparted thereby unto many. That which before was but as the watering of a
Garden by an especial hand, is now as the Clouds pouring themselves forth on
the whole Face of the Earth. (2.) An Increase of the Degrees of Spiritual
Abilities for the performance of it. Tit. 3. 5, 6. There is now a Rich
Communication of the Spirit of Grace and Prayer granted unto Believers, in
comparison of what was enjoyed under the Old Testament. This the very Nature of
the Dispensation of the Gospel, wherein we Receive from Jesus Christ Grace for
Grace, does evince and confirm. I suppose it needless to prove, that as unto
all Spiritual supplies of Grace there is brought in an abundant Administration
of it by Jesus Christ; the whole Scripture testifying unto it.

There were indeed under the Old Testament, Prayers and Praises of God dictated
by a Spirit of Prophecy, and Received by immediate Divine Revelation,
containing Mysteries for the Instruction of the Church in all Ages. These
Prayers were not suggested unto them by the Aid of the Spirit as a Spirit of
Supplication, but dictated in and to them by the Spirit, as a Spirit of
Prophecy. Nor did they themselves comprehend the mind of the Holy Spirit in
them fully, but inquired diligently thereinto, as into other Prophecies given
out by the Spirit of Christ which was in them, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. An Instance
whereof we may have in Psalm. 22. A Prayer it is with thanksgiving from first to
last. Now although David unto whom it was given by Inspiration, might find in
his own Condition things that had some low and mean Resemblance of what was
intended in the Words suggested unto him by the Holy Spirit, as he was a Type
of Christ, yet the Depth of the Mysteries contained therein, the principal
Scope and Design of the Holy Ghost, was in a great measure concealed from
himself, and much more from others. Only it was given out unto the Church by
immediate Inspiration, that Believers might search and diligently inquire into
what was signified and foretold therein, that so thereby they might be
gradually led into the Knowledge of the Mysteries of God according as he was
pleased graciously to communicate of his Saving Light unto them. But withal it
was Revealed unto David and the other Prophets, that in these things, they did
not minister unto themselves but unto us, as having Mysteries in them, which
they could not, which they were not, to comprehend. But as this Gift is ceased
under the New Testament after the finishing of the Canon of the Scripture, nor
is it by any pretended unto: So was it confined of old unto a very few inspired
Persons, and belongs not unto our present enquiry; for we speak only of those
things which are common unto all Believers. And herein a preference must in all
things be given unto those under the New Testament.

If therefore it could be proved, which I know it cannot be, that the
Generality of the Church under the Old Testament made use of any Forms of
Prayers as mere Forms of Prayer, without any other end, use or mystical
Instruction (all which concurred in their Prophetical Composures) for the sole
end of Prayer; yet would it not, whatever any pretend or plead, thence follow,
that Believers under the New Testament may do the same, much less that they may
be obliged always so to do. For there is now a more Plentiful and Rich Effusion
of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication upon them, than was upon those of old.
And as our Duty is to be regulated by Gods Commands, so Gods Commands are
suited unto the Dispensation of his Grace. For Persons under the New Testament
who are Commanded to Pray, not to make use constantly in their so doing, of the
Gifts, Aids, and Assistance of the Spirit, which are peculiarly dispensed and
communicated therein, on pretense of what was done under the Old, is to reject
the Grace of the Gospel, and to make themselves Guilty of the highest
Ingratitude. Wherefore although we may and ought to bear with them, who having
not received any thing of this promised Grace and Assistance, nor do believe
there is any such thing, do plead for the use of Forms of Prayer to be composed
by some and read by others or themselves, and that only, in the Discharge of
this Duty; Yet such as have been made Partakers of this Grace, and who own it
their Duty constantly to use and improve the promised Aids of the Spirit of
God, will be careful not to admit of any such principles or practice, as would
plainly annihilate the Promise.

Thus much then we may suppose our selves to have obtained in the Consideration
of this Testimony, That God has promised under the New Testament to give unto
Believers in a plentiful manner or measure, the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication, or his own Holy Spirit enabling them to pray according to his
mind and will. The way and manner of his Work therein, shall be afterward
declared. And it may suffice to oppose in General this one Promise unto the
open reproaches and bold Contempts that are by many cast on the Spirit of
Prayer, whose Framers unless they can blot this Text out of the Scripture, will
fail at last in their design. We shall not therefore need to plead any other
Testimony to the same purpose in the way of Promises. Only we may observe, that
this being expressly assigned as a part of the Gracious Work of the Holy Spirit,
as promised under the New Testament, there is no one Promise to that purpose,
wherein this Grace is not included: Therefore the known Multiplication of them
adds strength unto our Argument.

CHAP. III.
Gal. 4. 6. Opened and Vindicated.

THE next general Evidence given unto the Truth under Consideration, is the
Account of the Accomplishment of this Promise under the New Testament, where
also the Nature of the Operation of the Holy Spirit herein, is in general
expressed. And' this is, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son crying Abba Father. An Account as was said, is here given
of the Accomplishment of the Promise before explained. And sundry things may be
considered in the Words.

First, The Subject on whom he is bestowed and in whom he works, are
Believers or those who by the Spirit of Adoption are made the Children of God.
We receive the Adoption of Sons, and because we are Sons, he sends his Spirit
into our Hearts. And this privilege of Adoption we obtain by Faith in Christ
Jesus, John 1. 12. To as many as received him, he gave Power to become the Sons
of God, even to them that believed on his Name. Secondly. There is an especial
Appellation or Description of the Spirit as promised and given unto this
purpose, He is the Spirit of the Son. That the Original ground and Reason
hereof, is his Eternal Relation to the Son as proceeding from him, has been
elsewhere evinced. But there is something more particular here intended. He is
called the Spirit of the Son, with respect unto his Communication to Believers.
There is therefore included herein, that especial Regard unto Jesus Christ the
Son of God which is in the Work mentioned, as it is an Evangelical Mercy and
Privilege. He is therefore called the Spirit of the Son, not only because of
his eternal Procession from him; But (1.) Because he was in the first place
given unto him as the Head of the Church, for the Unction, Consecration and
Sanctification of his humane Nature. Here he laid the Foundation, and gave an
example of what he was to do in and toward all his Members. (2.) It is
immediately from and by him, that he is communicated unto us, and that two
ways: (1.) Authoritatively, by Virtue of the Covenant between the Fatherand
him, whereon, upon his Accomplishment of the Work of the Mediation in a State
of Humiliation according to it, he received the Promise of the Spirit, that is,
Power and Authority to bestow him on whom he would, for all the ends of that
Mediation, Acts 2. 33. Chap. 5. 31. (2) Formally, in that all the Graces of the
Spirit are derived unto us from him as the Head of the Church, as the spring of
all spiritual Life, in whom they were all treasured and laid up unto that
purpose, Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly, The Work of this
Spirit in general as bestowed on Believers, is partly included, partly
expressed in these words. In general (which is included) He enables them to
behave themselves suitably unto that state and condition whereunto they are
taken upon their Faith in Christ Jesus. They are made Children of God by
Adoption, and it is meet they be taught to carry themselves as becomes that new
Relation. Because ye are Sons, he has given you the Spirit of his Son, without
which they cannot walk before him as becomes Sons. He teaches them to bear
and behave themselves no longer as Foreigners and Strangers, nor as Servants
only, but as Children and Heirs of God, Romans 8. 15. He endoweth them with a
frame and disposition of heart unto Holy filial obedience: For as he takes away
the distance, making them to be nigh who were Aliens, and far from God; so he
removes that fear, dread and bondage which they are kept in who are under the
power of the Law, 2 Timothy 1. 7. For God has not given us the Spirit of fear,
but of power and love, and of a sound mind. Not the Spirit of fear, or a Spirit
of bondage unto fear, as Romans 8. 15. that is, in and by the efficacy of the Law
filling our minds with dread and such considerations of God as will keep us at
a distance from him. But he is in the Sons, on whom he is bestowed, a Spirit of
Power; strengthening and enabling them unto all Duties of Obedience. This (...)
is that whereby we are enabled to Obedience, which the Apostle gives thanks
for, 1 Timothy 1. 12. (...), to Christ that enableth me that is, by his Spirit of
Power. For without the Spirit of Adoption we have not the least strength or
Power to behave our selves as Sons in the Family of God. And he is also, as
thus bestowed, a Spirit of Love, who works in us that Love unto God and that
delight in him, which becomes Children toward their Heavenly Father. This is
the first genuine consequent of this Relation. There may be many Duties
performed unto God where there is no true Love to him; at least no love unto
him as a Father in Christ, which alone is genuine and accepted. And lastly, he
is also a Spirit (...), of a modest, grave and sober mind. Even Children are
apt to wax wanton and curious and proud in their Fathers House; but the Spirit
enables them to behave themselves with that Sobriety, Modesty and Humility
which becomes the Family of God. And in these three things, spiritual Power,
Love, and Sobriety of mind, consists the whole deportment of the Children of
God in his Family. This is the State and Condition of those who by the
effectual working of the Spirit of Adoption, are delivered from the Spirit of
Bondage unto fear, which the Apostle discourses of, Romans 8 15.

Those who are under the Power of that Spirit, or that efficacious working of
the Spirit by the Law, cannot by virtue of any Aids or Assistance make their
Addresses unto him by Prayer in a due manner. For although the means whereby
they are brought into this State, be the Spirit of God acting upon their Souls
and Consciences by the Law; yet formally, as they are in the State of Nature,
the Spirit whereby they are acted is the unclean Spirit of the World, or the
influence of him who rules in the Children of disobedience. The Law that they
obey, is the Law of the Members mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 7. The Works
which they perform, are the unfruitful works of darkness, and the fruits of
these unfruitful Works are Sin and Death. Being under this Bondage they have no
power to approach unto God, and their Bondage tending unto fear, they can have
no Delight in an access unto him. Whatever other provisions or preparations
such Persons may have for this Duty, they can never perform it unto the Glory
of God, or so, as to find acceptance with him. With those who are delivered
from this State, all things are otherwise. The Spirit whereby they are acted is
the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Adoption, of Power, Love and a sound mind. The
Law which they are under Obedience unto, is the Holy Law of God, as written in
the fleshly Tables of their Hearts. The Effects of it are Faith and Love with
all other Graces of the Spirit, whereof they receive the Fruits in peace with
joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Thirdly, An Instance is given of his effectual working these things in the
adopted Sons of God in the Duty of Prayer; crying Abba Father. (1.) The Object
of the especial Duty intended, is God even the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. Abba (...),
Abba is the Syriack or Chaldee name for Father, then in common use among the
Jews; And (...) was the same name amongst the Greeks or Gentiles, So that the
Common Interest of Jews and Gentiles in this Privilege may be intended. Or
rather an holy boldness and intimate confidence of Love is designed in the
Reduplication of the name. The Jews have a saying in the Babylonian Talmud in
the Treatise of Blessings Abba, Father, the meaning of it.
(...) Servants and handmaids (that is Bondservants) do not call on such a one
Abba or Imma, Freedom of State, with a Right unto Adoption, whereof they are
incapable in regard unto this Liberty and confidence. God gives unto his
adopted Sons (...) a free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 14. a Spirit of gracious filial
ingenuity. This is that Spirit which cries Abba; that is the word, whereby
those who were adopted, did first salute their Fathers, to testify their
affection and obedience. For Abba signifies not only Father, but my Father; For
(...) my Father in the Hebrew, is rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrast only (...)
Abba; see Genesis 19. 34. and elsewhere constantly. To this purpose speaks
Chrysostom, (...). Being willing to show the ingenuity (that is in this Duty)
he uses also the language of the Hebrews; and says not only Father, but Abba
Father, which is a word proper unto them who are highly ingenuous.

And this he effects two ways, (1.) By the Excitation of Graces and Gracious
Affections in their Souls in this Duty; especially those of Faith, Love and
Delight. (2) By enabling them to exercise those Graces and express those
Affections in Vocal Prayer. For (...) denotes not only crying, but an
earnestness of mind expressed in Vocal Prayer. It is praying (...), as it is
said of our Savior, Math. 27. 50. For the whole of our Duty in our
Supplications is expressed herein. Now we are not concerned or do not at
present enquire, what course they take, what means they employ, or what helps
they use in Prayer, who are not as yet Partakers of this privilege of
Adoption: It is only those who are so, whom the Spirit of God assists in this
Duty. And the only question is, What such Persons are to do, in compliance with
his Assistance, or what it is that they obtain thereby?

And we may compare the different expressions used by the Apostle in this
matter, whereby the general Nature of the Work of the Spirit herein, will
further appear. In this place he says, God has sent forth into our Hearts
(...), the Spirit of his Son, crying Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. He says we have
received (...), The Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of the Son given us because
we are Sons, whereby, or in whom we cry Abba Father. His acting in us, and our
acting by him is expressed by the same word. And the enquiry here is, how in
the same Duty he is said to cry in us, and we are said to cry in him. And there
can be no Reason hereof, but only because the same Work is both his and ours in
diverse Respects. As it is an Act of Grace and Spiritual Power, it is his, or it
is wrought in us by him alone. As it is a Duty performed by us, by virtue of
his Assistance, it is ours; by him we cry Abba Father. And to deny his actings
in our Duties is to overthrow the Gospel. And it is Prayer formally considered,
and as comprizing the Gift of it, with its outward Exercise, which is intended.
The mere excitation of the Graces of Faith, Love, Trust, Delight, Desire,
Self-abasement, and the like animating Principles of Prayer, cannot be
expressed by crying, though it be included in it. Their actual Exercise in
Prayer formally considered, is that which is ascribed unto the Spirit of God.
And they seem to deal somewhat severely with the Church of God and all
Believers, who will not allow that the Work here expressly assigned unto the
Spirit of Adoption or of the Son, is sufficient for its end, or the discharge
of this Duty, either in private or in the Assemblies of the Church. There is no
more required unto Prayer either way, but our crying Abba Father, that is, the
making our Requests known unto him as our Father in Christ, with Supplications
and Thanksgivings, according as our State and occasions do require. And is not
the Aid of the Spirit of God sufficient to enable us hereunto? It was so of
Old, and that unto all Believers according as they were called unto this Duty,
with respect unto their Persons, Families, or the Church of God. If it be not
so now, it is because either God will not now communicate his Spirit unto his
Children or Sons according to the Promise of the Gospel, or because indeed this
Grace and Gift of his is by men despised, neglected and lost. And the former
cannot be asserted on any safe grounds whatever: the latter is our interest to
consider.

This twofold Testimony concerning the Promise of the Communication of the
Holy Spirit, or a Spirit of Supplication, unto Believers under the New
Testament, and the accomplishment of it, does sufficiently evince our general
Assertion, that there is a peculiar Work or special gracious operation of the
Holy Ghost in the Prayers of Believers enabling them thereunto. For we intend
no more hereby, but that as they do receive him by virtue of that Promise,
which the World cannot do, in order unto his Gracious efficiency in the Duty of
Supplication; so he does actually incline, dispose, and enable them to cry Abba
Father, or to call upon God in Prayer as their Father by Jesus Christ. To deny
this therefore, is to rise up in contradiction unto the express Testimony of
God himself; and by our unbelief to make him a Liar. And had we nothing farther
to plead in this cause, this were abundantly sufficient to reprove the petulant
folly of them by whom this Work of the Holy Ghost, and the Duty of Believers
thereon to Pray in the Spirit, if we may use the despised and blasphemed
expressions of the Scripture, is scorned and derided.

For as to the Ability of Prayer which is thus received, some there are, who
know no more of it as exercised in a way of Duty, but the outside, shell and
appearance of it; and that not from their own Experience, but from what they
observed in others. Of these there are not a few who confidently affirm, that
it is wholly a Work of Fancy, Invention, Memory, and Wit, accompanied with some
Boldness and Elocution, unjustly fathered on the Spirit of God, who is no way
concerned therein. And it may be they do persuade many, no better skilled in
these things than themselves, that so it is indeed. Howbeit those who have any
Experience of the real Aids and Assistances of the Spirit of God in this Work
and Duty, any Faith in the express Testimonies given by God himself hereunto,
cannot but despise such fabulous Imaginations. You may as soon persuade them
that the Sun does not give Light, nor the Fire Heat, that they see not with
their Eyes, nor hear with their Ears, as that the Spirit of God does not enable
them to pray, or assist them in their Supplications. And there might some
probability be given unto these pretenses, and unto the total Exclusion of the
Holy Ghost from any concernment herein, if those concerning whom and their
Duties they thus judge, were generally Persons known to excel others in those
Natural Endowments and acquired Abilities whereunto this Faculty of Prayer is
ascribed. But will this be allowed by them who make use of this pretense,
namely, that those who are thus able to pray as they pretend by virtue of a
Spiritual Gift, are Persons excelling in Fancy, Memory, Wit, Invention, and
Elocution? It is known that they will admit of no such thing; but in all other
Instances they must be represented as dull, stupid, ignorant, unlearned and
brutish. Only in Prayer they have the advantage of those natural Endowments.
These things are hardly consistent with common Ingenuity. For is it not strange
that those who are so contemptible with respect unto natural and acquired
Endowments in all other things, whether of Science or of Prudence, should yet
in this one Duty or Work of Prayer so improve them, as to outgo the Imitation
of them by whom they are despised? For as they do not, as they will not pray as
they do, so their own Hearts tell them, they cannot, which is the true Reason
why they so despitefully oppose this praying in the Spirit, whatever Pride or
Passion pretends to the contrary. But things of this nature will again occurr
unto us, and therefore shall not be here further insisted on. Having therefore
proved that God has promised a plentiful dispensation of his Spirit unto
Believers under the New Testament to enable them to pray according unto his
mind; and that in general this Promise is accomplished in and toward all the
Children of God; It remains in the second place, as to what we have proposed,
that we declare what is the Work of the Holy Ghost in them unto this end and
purpose, or how he is unto us a Spirit of Prayer or Supplication.

CHAP. IV.
The nature of Prayer Romans 8. 26. Opened and Vindicated.

PRayer at present I take to be, a Gift, Ability or Spiritual Faculty of
exercising Faith, Love, Reverence, Fear, Delight, and other Graces in a way of
vocal Requests, Supplications, and Praises unto God. In every thing making our
Request known unto God, Phil. 4. 6.

This Gift and Ability, I affirm to be bestowed, and this Work by Virtue
thereof to be wrought in us by the Holy Ghost in the Accomplishment of the
Promise insisted on, so crying Abba Father in them that do believe. And this is
that which we are to given an account of, wherein we shall assert nothing but
what the Scripture plainly goes before us in, and what the experience of
Believers duly exercised in Duties of Obedience, does confirm. And in the Issue
of our Endeavor, we shall leave it unto the Judgment of God and his Church,
whether they are ecstatical, enthusiastical, unaccountable Raptures that we
plead for, or a real Gracious Effect and Work of the Holy Spirit of God.

The first thing we ascribe unto the Spirit herein is, that he supplieth and
furnishes the mind, with a due comprehension of the Matter of Prayer, or what
ought, both in general, and as unto all our particular occasions, to be prayed
for. Without this, I suppose it will be granted, that no man can pray as he
ought. For how can any man pray, that knows not what to pray for? Where there
is not a Comprehension hereof, the very nature and being of Prayer is
destroyed. And herein the Testimony of the Apostle is express, Romans 8. 26.
Likewise also the Spirit helps our Infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us
with groans that cannot be uttered.

It is that expression only which at present I urge, We know not what we should
pray for as we ought. This is generally supposed to be otherwise; Namely, that
men know well enough what they ought to pray for, only they are wicked and
careless, and will not pray for what they know they ought so to do. I shall
make no excuse or Apology for the wickedness and carelessness of men, which
without doubt are abominable. But yet I must abide by the truth asserted by the
Apostle, which I shall further evidence immediately, namely, that without the
especial Aid and Assistance of the Holy Spirit no man knows what to pray for
as he ought.

But yet there is another Relief in this matter, and so no need of any Work of
the Holy Ghost therein. And we shall be accounted Impudent, if we ascribe any
thing unto him, whereof there is the least colorable pretense, that it may be
otherwise effected or provided for: so great an unwillingness is there to allow
him either Place, Work, or Office in the Christian Religion, or the practice of
it. Wherefore it is pretended that although men do not of themselves know what
to pray for, yet this defect may be supplied in a Prescript form of words,
prepared on purpose to teach, and confine men unto, what they are to pray for.

We may therefore dismiss the Holy Spirit and his Assistance as unto this
Concernment of Prayer; for the due matter of it may be so set down and fixed on
Ink and Paper, that the meanest capacity cannot miss of his Duty therein. This
therefore is that which is to be tried in our ensuing discourse; Namely, what
whereas it is plainly affirmed that we know not of our selves what we should
pray for as we ought, (which I judge to be universally true, as unto all
Persons, as well those who prescribe Prayers, as those unto whom they are
prescribed) and that the Holy Spirit helps and relieveth us herein, whether we
may or ought to relinquish and neglect his Assistance, and so to rely only on
such supplies as are invented or used unto that end, for which he is promised;
that is plainly, whether the Word of God be to be trusted unto in this matter
or not.

It is true, that whatever we ought to pray for, is declared in the Scripture;
yea and summarily comprised in the Lords Prayer. But it is one thing to have
what we ought to pray for, in the Book; another thing to have it in our Mind,
and Hearts, without which it will never be unto us, the due matter of Prayer.
It is out of the abundance of the Heart that the Mouth must speak in this
matter, Mat. 12. 34. There is therefore in us a threefold defect with repect
unto the matter of Prayer; which is supplied by the Holy Spirit, and can be so
no other way, nor by any other means; And therein is he unto us a Spirit of
Supplication, according to the Promise.

For (1.) we know not our own wants, (2.) we know not the supplied of them that
are expressed in the Promises of God, and (3.) we know not the end whereunto
what we pray for, is to be directed, which I add unto the former. Without the
knowledge and understanding of all these, no man can pray as he ought; and we
can no way know them, but by the Aid and Assistance of the Spirit of Grace. And
if these things be manifest, it will be evident how in this first Instance we
are enabled to pray by the Holy Ghost.

(1.) Our wants, as they are to be the Matter of Prayer, may be referred unto
three Heads; and none of them of our selves do we know aright, so as to make
them the due Subject of our Supplications, and of some of them we know nothing
at all.

This first consists in our outward straits, pressures and Difficulties, which
we desire to be delivered from, with all other temporal things wherein we are
concerned. In those things it should seem wondrously clear, that of our selves
we know what to pray for. But the truth is, whatever our sense may be of them,
and our natural desires about them, yet how and when, under what conditions and
limitations, with what frame of heart and Spirit, what submission unto the
pleasure of God they are to be made the matter of our Prayers, we know not.
Therefore does God call the Prayers of most about them, howling, and not a
crying unto him with the Heart, Hos. 7. 14. There is indeed a Voice of nature
crying in its distress unto the God of nature. But that is not the Duty of
Evangelical Prayer which we enquire after. And men oft-times most miss it,
where they think themselves most ready and prepared. To know our Temporal wants
so as to make them the matter of Prayer according to the mind of God, requires
more Wisdom than of our selves we are furnished withal. For who knows what is
good for man in this Life, all the days of his vain life, which he spends as
a shadow? Eccl. 6. 12. And oft-times Believers are never more at a loss, than
how to pray aright about temporal things. No man is in pain or distress, or
under any wants, whose continuance would be destructive to his Being, but he
may, yea he ought to make deliverance from them the matter of his Prayer. So in
that case he knows in some measure, or in general, what he ought to pray for,
without any peculiar spiritual illumination. But yet the Circumstances of those
things, and wherein their respect unto the Glory of God and the supreme End, or
chiefest good of the Persons concerned, does stand, (with regard whereunto they
can alone be made the matter of prayer acceptable unto God in Christ) is that
which of themselves they cannot understand, but have need of an interest in
that Promise made to the Church, that they shall be all taught of God. And this
is so much more in such things as belong only unto the Conveniences of this
Life, whereof no man of himself knows what is good for him, or useful unto him.

(2.) We have Internal wants that are discerned in the light of a natural
Conscience: such is the Guilt of Sin, whereof that accuses; Sins against
natural Light and plain outward letter of the Law. These things we know
somewhat of without any especial Aid of the Holy Spirit, Romans 2. 14, 15. and
desires of Deliverance are inseparable from them. But we may observe here two
things, [1.] That the knowledge which we have hereof of our selves, is so dark
and confused, as that we are no ways able thereby to manage our wants in Prayer
aright unto God. A Natural Conscience awakened and excited by Afflictions or
other providential Visitations, will discover it self in unfeigned and severe
Reflections of Guilt upon the Soul. But until the Spirit does convince of Sin,
all things are in such disorder and confusion in the mind, that no man knows
how to make his Address unto God about it in a due manner. And there is more
required to treat aright with God about the Guilt of Sin, than a mere Sense of
it. So far as men can proceed under that sole conduct and guidance, the
Heathens went in dealing with their supposed Gods, without a due respect unto
the Propitiation made by the Blood of Christ. Yea Prayer about the guilt of Sin
discerned in the Light of a natural Conscience, is but an abomination.

Besides, [2.] We all know how small a portion of the concernment of Believers
does lie in those things which fall under the Light and determination of a
natural Conscience. For,

(3.) The things about which Believers do, and ought to treat principally, and
deal with God in their Supplications, are the inward Spiritual frames and
dispositions of their Souls, with the actings of Grace and Sin in them. Hereon
David was not satisfied with the Confession of his Original and all known
actual Sins, Psalm. 51. 5. nor yet with an acknowledgment that none knows his
own wanderings, whence he desires cleansing from unknown Sins, Psalm. 19. 12.
But moreover, he begs of God to undertake the inward search of his Heart, to
find out what was amiss, or right, in him, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. as knowing, that
God principally required Truth in the inward part, Psalm. 51. 6. Such is the
carrying on of the Work of sanctification in the whole Spirit and Soul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

The inward sanctification of all our faculties, is what we want and pray for.
Supplies of Grace from God unto this purpose, with a sense of the Power, Guilt,
violence and deceit of Sin in its inward actings in the mind and affections,
with other things innumerable thereunto belonging, make up the principal matter
of Prayer as formally Supplication.

Add hereunto, that unto the matter of Prayer taken largely for the whole Duty
so called, every thing wherein we have intercourse with God in Faith and Love,
does belong. The Acknowledgement of the whole mystery of his Wisdom, Grace and
Love in Christ Jesus, with all the Fruits, Effects and Benefits which thence we
do receive, all the Workings and actings of our Souls toward him, with their
Faculties and Affections; in brief, every thing and every conception of our
minds, wherein our spiritual Access unto the Throne of Grace does consist, or
which does belong thereunto, with all occasions and emergencies of Spiritual
Life, are in like manner comprised herein. And that we can have such an
Acquaintance with these things as to manage them acceptably in our
Supplications, without the Grace of spiritual illumination from the Holy Ghost,
few are so ignorant or profane as to assert. Some I confess seem to be
strangers unto these things, which yet renders them not of the less weight or
moment.

(...) For some can see no necessity of thus understanding the Grace and Mercy,
that is in the Promises unto Prayer; and suppose that men know well enough what
to pray for without it.

But those who so speak, neither know what it is to pray, nor it seems are
willing to learn. For we are to pray in Faith, Romans 10. 14. And Faith respects
Gods Promises, Heb. 4. 1. Romans 4. If therefore we understand not what God has
promised, we cannot pray at all. It is mavelous what thoughts such persons
have of God and themselves, who without a due comprehension of their own Wants,
and without an understanding of Gods Promises, wherein all their supplies are
laid up, do say their Prayers as they call it continually. And indeed in the
poverty, or rather misery, of devised Aids of Prayer, this is not the least
pernicious effect or consequent, that they keep men off from searching the
Promises of God, whereby they might know what to pray for. Let the matter of
Prayer be so prescribed unto men, as that they shall neverneed, either to
search their own Hearts or Gods Promises about it, and this whole Work is
dispatched out of the way. But then is the Soul prepared aright for this Duty,
and then only, when it understands its own condition, the supplies of Grace
provided in the Promise, the suitableness of those supplies unto its wants, and
the means of its Conveyance unto us by Jesus Christ. That all this we have by
the Spirit and not otherwise, shall be immediately declared.

Thirdly, Unto the matter of Prayer I join the End we aim at, in the things we
pray for, and which we direct them unto. And herein also are we in our selves
at a loss: And men may lose all the benefit of their Prayers by proposing undue
Ends unto themselves in the things they pray for. Our Savior says, Ask and
you shall receive; but the Apostle James affirms of some, Chap. 4. 3. Ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to consume it on your pleasures. To pray
for any thing, and not expressly unto the end whereunto of God it is designed,
is to ask amiss and to no purpose. And yet whatever confidence we may have of
our own Wisdom and Integrity; if we are left unto our selves, without the
especial guidance of the Spirit of God, our aims will never be suited unto the
Will of God. The ways and means whereby we may fail, and do so in this kind,
when not under the actual conduct of the Spirit of God, that is, when our own
natural and distempered Affections do immix themselves in our Supplications,
are innumerable. And there is nothing so excellent in its self, so useful unto
us, so acceptable unto God in the matter of Prayer, but it may be vitiated,
corrupted, and Prayer it self rendered vain, by an Application of it unto false
or mistaken Ends. And what is the Work of the Spirit to guide us herein, we
shall see in its proper place.

CHAP. V.
The Work of the Holy Spirit as to the matter of Prayer.

THese things are considerable as to the matter of Prayer; and with respect
unto them, of our selves we know not what we should pray for, nor how, nor
when. And the first Work of the Spirit of God, as a Spirit of Supplication in
Believers, is to give them an understanding of all their wants, and of the
supplies of Grace and Mercy in the Promises, causing a sense of them to dwell
and abide on their minds; as that, according unto their measure, they are
continually furnished with the matter of Prayer, without which men never pray,
and by which, in some sense, they pray always. For,

(1.) He alone does, and he alone is able to give us such an understanding of
our own wants, as that we may be able to make our thoughts about them known
unto God in Prayer and Supplication. And what is said concerning our wants, is
so likewise with respect unto the whole matter of Prayer, whereby we give Glory
to God, either in Requests or Prayers. And this I shall manifest in some
instances, whereunto others may be reduced.

(1.) The Principal matter of our Prayer concerns Faith and Unbelief. So the
Apostles prayed in a particular manner, Lord increase our Faith; and so the
poor man prayed in his distress, Lord help thou my unbelief. I cannot think
that they ever pray aright, who never pray for the pardon of Unbelief, for the
removal of it, and for the increase of Faith. If Unbelief be the greatest of
Sins, and if Faith be the greatest of the Gifts of God, we are not Christians,
if those things are not one principal part of the matter of our Prayers. Unto
this end we must be convinced of the nature and guilt of Unbelief, as also of
the nature and use of Faith; nor without that conviction do we either know our
own chiefest wants, or what to pray for as we ought. And that this is the
especial Work of the Holy Ghost, our Savior expressly declares, John 16. 9. He
convinces the World of Sin, because they believe not on him. I do, and must
deny, that any one is or can be convinced of the nature and guilt of that
Unbelief, either in the whole or in the remainder of it, which the Gospel
condemns, and which is the great condemning Sin under the Gospel, without an
especial Work of the Holy Ghost on his mind and Soul. For Unbelief as it
respects Jesus Christ, not believing in him, or not believing in him as we
ought, is a Sin against the Gospel, and it is by the Gospel alone that we may
be convinced of it, and that as it is the ministration of the Spirit. Wherefore
neither the Light of a natural Conscience, nor the Law, will convince any one
of the guilt of Unbelief with respect unto Jesus Christ, nor instruct them in
the nature of Faith in him. No innate Notions of our Minds, no Doctrines of the
Law will reach hereunto. And to think to teach men to pray, or to help them out
in praying, without a sense of Unbelief, or the remainders of it in its Guilt
and Power, the nature of Faith with its necessity, use and efficacy, is to say
unto the naked and the hungry, be ye warmed and filled, and not give them those
things that are needful to the Body. This therefore belongs unto the Work of
the Spirit as a Spirit of Supplication. And let men tear and tire themselves
Night and Day with a multitude of Prayers, if a Work of the Spirit of God in
teaching the nature and Guilt of Unbelief, the nature, efficacy and use of
Faith in Christ Jesus, go not with it, all will be lost and perish. And yet it
is mavelous to consider how little mention of these things occurreth in most
of those compositions, which have been published to be used as Forms of Prayer.
They are generally omitted in such endeavors, as if they were things, wherein
Christians were very little concerned. The Gospel positively and frequently
determines the present Acceptance of men with God, or their Disobedience, with
their future Salvation and Condemnation according unto their Faith or Unbelief.
For their Obedience or Disobedience are infallible consequents thereon. Now if
things that are of the greatest Importance unto us, and whereon all other
things, wherein our spiritual Estate is concerned, do depend, be not a part of
the subject matter of our daily Prayer, I know not what deserves so to be.

Secondly, The matter of our Prayer respects the Depravation of our natures and
our wants on that account. The Darkness and Ignorance that is in our
Understandings, our unacquaintedness with heavenly things, and Alienation from
the Life of God thereby, the secret workings of the Lusts of the mind under the
shades and Covert of this darkness; the stubbornness, obstinacy and
perverseness of our Wills by nature, with their reluctancies unto, and dislike
of things spiritual, with innumerable latent guiles thence arising, all keeping
the Soul from a due conformity unto the Holiness of God, are things which
Believers have an especial regard unto in their Confessions and Supplications.
They know this to be their Duty, and find by experience, that the greatest
concernment between God and their Souls, as to Sin and Holiness, do lie in
these things. And they are never more jealous over themselves, than when they
find their Hearts least affected with them. And to give over treating with God
about them, for Mercy in their pardon, for Grace in their removal, and the
daily Renovation of the Image of God in them thereby, is to renounce all
Religion, and all designs of living unto God.

Wherefore without a knowledge, a sense, a due comprehension of these things,
no man can pray as he ought, because he is unacquainted with the matter of
Prayer, and knows not what to pray for. But this knowledge we cannot attain of
our selves. Nature is so corrupted, as not to understand its own depravation.
Hence some absolutely deny this Corruption of it, so taking away all necessity
of laboring after its cure, and the Renovation of the Image of God in us. And
hereby they overthrow the Prayers of all Believers, which the Ancient Church
continually pressed the Pelagians withal. Without a sense of these things I
must profess, I understand not how any man can pray. And this knowledge, as was
said, we have not of our selves. Nature is blind, and cannot see them; it is
proud, and will not own them; stupid, and is senseless of them. It is the Work
of the Spirit of God alone, to give us a due conviction of, a spiritual insight
into, and sense of the Concernment of these things. This I have elsewhere so
fully proved, as not here again to insist on it.

It is not easy to conjecture, how men pray, or what they pray about, who know
not the plague of their own Hearts. Yea, this Ignorance, want of Light into, or
conviction of the depravation of their nature, and the remainders thereof, even
in those that are renewed, with the Fruits, Consequents and Effects thereof, is
the principal cause of men's Barrenness in this Duty, so that they can seldom
go beyond what is prescribed unto them. And they can thence also satisfy
themselves with a set or frame of well composed words, wherein they might
easily discern that their own condition and concernment are not at all
expressed, if they were acquainted with them. I do not fix measures unto other
men, nor give bounds unto their understandings; Only I shall take leave to
profess for my own part, that I cannot conceive or apprehend how any man does
or can know what to pray for as he ought, in the whole compass and course of
that Duty, who has no Spiritual illumination enabling him to discern in some
measure the Corruption of his nature, and the internal Evils of his Heart. If
men judge the faculties of their Souls to be undepraved, their minds free from
vanity, their Hearts from Guile and deceit, their Wills from perverseness and
carnality, I wonder not on what Grounds they despise the Prayers of others, but
should do so, to find real Humiliation, and fervency in their own.

Hereunto I may add the irregularity and disorder of our Affections. These I
confess are discernible in the Light of Nature, and the rectifying of them, or
an attempt for it, was the principal end of the old Philosophy. But the chief
respect that on this principle it had unto them, is, as they disquiet the mind,
or break forth into outward expressions, whereby men are defiled, or
dishonored, or distressed. So far natural Light will go, and thereby in the
working of their Consciences, as far as I know, men may be put to pray about
them. But the chief depravation of the Affections lies in their aversation unto
things spiritual and Heavenly.

They are indeed sometimes ready of themselves to like things spiritual under
false Notions of them, and divine Worship under Superstitious Ornaments and
meretricious dresses, in which respect they are the spring and life of all that
Devotion, which is in the Church of Rome. But take Heavenly and Spiritual
things in themselves with respect unto their proper Ends, and there is in all
our Affections, as corrupted, a dislike of them and aversation unto them, which
variously act themselves, and influence our Souls unto Vanities and disorders
in all Holy Duties. And no man knows what it is to pray, who is not exercised
in Supplications for mortifying, changing and renewing of these Affections as
spiritually irregular. And yet is it the Spirit of God alone, which discovers
these things unto us and gives us a sense of our concernment in them. I say the
Spiritual irregularity of our Affections, and their Aversation from spiritual
things, is discernible in no Light, but that of supernatural illumination. For
if without that, Spiritual things themselves cannot be discerned, as the
Apostle assures us they cannot, 1 Cor. 2. it is impossible that the disorder of
our Affections with respect unto them, should be so. If we know not an object
in the true nature of it, we cannot know the actings of our minds toward it.
Wherefore although there be in our Affections an innate universal aversation
from spiritual things, seeing by nature we are wholly alienated from the life
of God, yet can it not be discerned by us in any Light but that which discovers
these spiritual things themselves unto us. Nor can any man be made sensible of
the Evil and Guilt of that disorder, who has not a Love also implanted in his
Heart unto those things, which it finds obstructed thereby. Wherefore the
Mortification of these Affections and their Renovation with respect unto things
Spiritual and Heavenly, being no small part of the matter of the Prayers of
Believers, as being an especial part of their Duty, they have no otherwise an
acquaintance with them or sense of them, but as they receive them by Light and
Conviction from the Spirit of God. And those who are destitute hereof must
needs be strangers unto the Life and Power of the Duty of Prayer it self.

As it is with respect unto Sin, so it is with respect unto God and Christ, and
the Covenant, Grace, Holiness and Privileges. We have no spiritual conceptions
about them, no right Understanding of them, no insight into them, but what is
given us by the Spirit of God. And without an Acquaintance with these things,
what are our Prayers, or what do they signify? Men without them may say on to
the World's end, without giving any thing of Glory unto God, or obtaining of
any Advantage unto their own Souls.

And this I place as the first part of the Work of the Spirit of Supplications
in Believers, enabling them to pray, according to the mind of God, which of
themselves they know not how to do, as is afterward in the place of the Apostle
insisted on. When this is done, when a right apprehension of Sin and Grace, and
of our concernment in them, is fixed on our minds, then have we in some measure
the matter of Prayer always in readiness, which words and expressions will
easily follow, though the Aid of the Holy Spirit be necessary thereunto also,
as we shall afterward declare.

And hence it is, that the Duty performed with respect unto this part of the
Aid and assistance of the Spirit of God, is of late by some (as was said)
vilified and reproached. Formerly their exceptions lay all of them against some
Expressions or weakness of some Persons in conceived Prayer, which they liked.
But now scorn is poured out upon the matter of Prayer it self, especially the
humble and deep confessions of Sin, which on the discoveries before mentioned,
are made in the Supplications of Ministers and others. The things themselves
are traduced as absurd, foolish and irrational, as all Spiritual things are
unto some sorts of men. Neither do I see how this disagreement is capable of
any Reconciliation. For they who have no Light to discern those respects of Sin
and Grace, which we have mentioned, cannot but think it uncouth to have them
continually made the matter of men's Prayers. And those on the other hand who
have received a Light into them, and Acquaintance with them by the Spirit of
God, are troubled at nothing more, than that they cannot sufficiently Omnino
oportet nos.
abase themselves under a sense of them, nor in any words fully express that
impression on their minds which is put on them by the Holy Ghost; nor cloth
their desires after Grace and Mercy, with words sufficiently significant and
emphatical. And therefore this difference is irreconcilable by any but the
Spirit of God himself. Whilst it does abide, those who have respect only unto
what is discernible in the Light of Nature or of a natural Conscience in their
Prayers, will keep themselves unto general expressions and outward things, in
words prepared unto that purpose by themselves or others, do we what we can to
the contrary. For men will not be led beyond their own Light, neither is it
meet they should. And those who do receive the Supplies of the Spirit in this
matter, will in their Prayer be principally conversant about the spiritual
internal concernments of their Souls in Sin and Grace, let others despise them
and reproach them whilst they please. And it is in vain much to contend about
these things, which are regulated not by Arguments but by Principles. Men will
invincibly adhere unto the capacity of their Light. Nothing can put an end to
this difference, but a more plentiful Effusion of the Spirit from above, which
according unto the Promise we wait for.

Secondly, We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Holy Ghost
acquaints us with the Grace and Mercy which are prepared in the Promises of God
for our Relief. That the Knowledge hereof is necessary to enable us to direct
our Prayers unto God in a due manner, I declared before; and I suppose it will
not be denied. For what do we pray for? What do we take a prospect and design
of in our Supplications? What is it we desire to be made Partakers of? Praying
only by saying or repeating so many words of Prayer, whose sense and meaning
those who make use of them, perhaps understand not, as in the Papacy; or so as
to rest in the saying or Repetition of them without an especial design of
obtaining some thing or things which we make known in our Supplications, is
unworthy the Disciples of Christ, indeed of rational Creatures. Deal thus with
thy Governor, Will he be pleased with thee or accept thy Person? as Mal. 1. 8.
neither Ruler nor Friend nor Neighbor would accept it at our hands, if we
should constantly make solemn addresses unto them, without any especial design:
We must pray with our understanding; that is, understand what we pray for. And
these things are no other but what God has promised, which if we are not
regulated by in our Supplications, we ask amiss. It is therefore indispensably
necessary unto Prayer, that we should know what God has promised, or that we
should have an understanding of the Grace and Mercy of the Promises. God
knows our wants, what is good for us, what is useful to us, what is necessary
to bring us unto the enjoyment of himself, infinitely better than we do our
selves; Yea, we know nothing of these things but what he is pleased to teach
us. These are the things which he has prepared for us, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Cor. 2. 9. And what he has so prepared, he declares in the Promises of the
Covenant. For they are the declaration of the Grace and good pleasure which he
has purposed in himself. And hence Believers may learn, what is good for them
and what is wanting unto them in the Promises, more clearly and certainly than
by any other means whatever. From them therefore do we learn what to pray for
as we ought. And this is another Reason, why men are so barren in their
Supplications, they know not what to pray for, but are forced to betake
themselves unto a confused Repetition of the same requests; namely their
ignorance of the Promises of God, and the Grace exhibited in them. Our enquiry
therefore is, by what way or means we come to an Acquaintance with these
Promises, which all Believers have in some measure, some more full and distinct
than others, but all in an useful sufficiency. And this we say is by the Spirit
of God, without whose Aid and Assistance we can neither understand them, nor
what is contained in them.

I do confess, that some by frequent reading of the Scripture, by the only help
of a faithful Memory, may be able to express in their Prayers the Promises of
God, without any spiritual Acquaintance with the Grace of them, whereby they
administer unto others, and not unto themselves. But this Remembrance of Words
or Expressions belongs not unto the especial Work of the Holy Ghost in
supplying the Hearts and minds of Believers with the matter of Prayer. But this
is that which he does herein; He opens their Eyes, he gives an
understanding, he enlighteneth their minds, so that they shall perceive the
things that are of God prepared for them, and that are contained in the
Promises of the Gospel; and represents them therein in their beauty, Glory,
suitableness and desirableness unto their Souls. He makes them to see Christ
in them, and all the Fruits of his Mediation in them, all the effect of the
Grace and Love of God in them, the Excellency of Mercy and Pardon, of Grace and
Holiness, of a new Heart, with Principles, dispositions, Inclinations and
Actings, all as they are proposed in the Truth and Faithfulness of God. Now
when the mind and Heart is continually filled with an Understanding and due
Apprehensions of these things; it is always furnished with the matter of Prayer
and praise unto God, which Persons make use of according as they have actual
assistance and utterance given unto them. And whereas this Holy Spirit together
with the knowledge of them, does also implant a Love unto them upon the minds
of Believers, they are not only hereby directed what to pray for, but are
excited and stirred up to seek after the enjoyment of them, with ardent
Affections and earnest Endeavors, which is to pray. And although among those
on whose Hearts these things are not implanted, some may (as was before
observed) make an appearance of it, by expressing in Prayer the words of the
Promises of God retined in their memories, yet for the most part they are not
able themselves to pray in any tolerable useful manner, and do either wonder
at, or despise those that are so enabled.

But it may be said, that where there is any defect herein, it may be easily
supplied. For if men are not acquainted with the Promises of God themselves in
the manner before described, and so know not what they ought to pray for,
others who have the understanding of them may compose Prayers for their use
according to their Apprehensions of the mind of God in them, which they may
read, and so have the matter of Prayer always in a readiness.

I answer, (1.) I do not know that any one has a Command, or Promise of
Assistance, to make or compose Prayers to be said or read by others as their
Prayers; and therefore I expect no great matter from what any one shall do in
that kind. The Spirit of Grace and Supplication is promised, as I have proved,
to enable us to pray, not to enable us to make or compose Prayers for others.

(2.) It savours of some unacquaintance with the Promises of God, and the Duty
of Prayer, to imagine that the matter of them so as to suit the various
conditions of Believers, can be pent up in any one Form of man's devising. Much
of what we are to pray about, may be in general and doctrinally comprised in a
Form of Words, as they are in the Lords Prayer, which gives directions in, and
a boundary unto our requests: But that the things themselves should be prepared
and suited unto the condition and wants of them that are to pray, is a fond
imagination.

(3.) There is a vast difference between an objective Proposal of good things
to be prayed for, unto the consideration of them that are to pray, which men
may do; and the implanting an acquaintance with them and Love unto them upon
the mind and Heart, which is the Work of the Holy Ghost.

(4.) When things are so prepared and cast into a form of Prayer, those by whom
such forms are used, do no more understand them, than if they had never been
cast into any such form, unless the Spirit of God give them an understanding of
them, which the form it self is no sanctified means unto. And where that is
done, there is no need of it.

(5.) It is the Work of the Holy Spirit to give unto Believers such a
comprehension of promised Grace and Mercy, as that they may constantly apply
their minds unto that or those things in an especial manner which are suited
unto their present daily wants and occasions, with the frame and dispositions
of their Souls and Spirit. This is that which gives spiritual beauty and order
unto the Duty of Prayer; namely, the suiting of Wants and Supplies, of a
thankful disposition and Praises, of Love and Admiration unto the excellencies
of God in Christ, all by the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost. But when a Person is
made to pray by his Directory for things though good in themselves, yet not
suited unto his present state, frame, inclination, wants and desires, there is
Spiritual Confusion and disorder and nothing else.

Again, What we have spoken concerning the Promises, must also be applied unto
all the Precepts or Commands of God. These in like manner are the matter of our
Prayers, both as to Confession and Supplication. And without a right
understanding of them, we can perform no part of this duty as we ought. This is
evident in their apprehension who repeating the words of the Decalogue, do
subjoyn their acknowledgments of a want of Mercy, with respect unto the
Transgression of them, I suppose, and their desires to have their hearts
inclined to keep the Law. But the Law with all the Commands of God are
Spiritual and inward, with whose true sense and importance in their extent and
latitude, we cannot have an useful Acquaintance, but by the enlightening,
instructing efficacy of the Grace of the Spirit. And where this is, the mind is
greatly supplied with the true matter of Prayer. For when the Soul has learnt
the Spirituality and Holiness of the Law, its extent unto the inward frame and
disposition of our Hearts, as well as unto outward Actions, and its requiring
absolute Holiness, Rectitude and Conformity unto God at all times, and in all
things; then does it see and learn its own discrepancy from it, and coming
short of it, even then when as to outward Acts and Duties, it is unblameable.
And hence do proceed those Confessions of Sin in the best and most holy
Believers, which they who understand not these things, do deride and scorn. By
this means therefore does the Holy Spirit help us to pray, by supplying us with
the due and proper matter of Supplications, even by acquainting us and
affecting our hearts with the Spirituality of the Command, and our coming short
thereof in our dispositions, and frequent inordinate actings of our Minds and
Affections. He who is instructed herein, will on all occasions be prepared with
a fullness of matter for Confession and Humiliation; as also, with a sense of
that Grace and Mercy, which we stand in need of with respect unto the Obedience
required of us.

Thirdly, He alone gides and directs Believers to pray, or ask for any thing in
order unto right and proper Ends. For there is nothing so excellent in it self,
so useful unto us, so acceptable unto God, as the matter of Prayer, but it may
be vitiated, corrupted, and Prayer it self be rendered vain, by an application
of it unto false or mistaken Ends. And that in this case we are relieved by the
Holy Ghost, it is plain in the Text under consideration. For helping our
infirmities, and teaching us what to pray for as we ought, he makes
Intercession for us according unto God, that is his mind or his will, v. 27.
This is well explained by Origin on the Place, Velut si magister suscipiens ad
Rudiment a Discipulum, and ignorantem penitus literas, ut eum docere possit and
instituere, necesse habet inclindre se ad Discipuli rudimenta, and ipse prius
dicere nomen literae, ut respondendo discipulus discat, and sit quodammodo
Magister incipienti Discipulo similis, ea loquens and ea meditans, quae
incipiens loqui debeat ac meditari; It a and Sanctus Spiritus, ubi
oppugnationibus carnis perturbari nostrum Spiritum viderit, and nescientem quid
orare debeat secundum quod oportet, ipse velut Magister orationem praemittit,
quam noster spiritus (si tamen Discipulus esse Sancti Spiritus desiderat)
prosequatur, ipse gemitus ossert quibus noster spiritus discat ingemiscere, ut
repropitiet sibi Deum. To the same purpose speaks Damascen, lib. 4. Chapter 3. and
Austin in sundry places collected by Beda in his Comment on this. He does it in
us, and by us, or enableth us so to do. For the Spirit himself without us, has
no Office to be performed immediately toward God, nor any Nature inferior
unto the Divine, wherein he might intercede. The whole of any such Work with
respect unto us, is incumbent on Christ, he alone in his own Person performs
what is to be done with God for us. What the Spirit does, he does in and by us.
He therefore directs and enableth us to make Supplications according to the
mind of God. And herein God is said to know the mind of the Spirit, that is,
his end and design in the matter of his requests. This God knows, that is,
approves of and accepts. So it is the Spirit of God who directs us as to the
design and end of our Prayers, that they may find Acceptance with God.

But yet there may be, and I believe there is, more in that expression; God
knows the mind of the Spirit. For he works such high, holy, spiritual
desires and designs in the minds of Believers in their Supplications, as God
alone knows and understands in their full extent and latitude. That of our
selves we are apt to fail and mistake has been declared from James 4. 3.

I shall not here insist on particulars, but only mention two general Ends of
Prayer which the Holy Spirit keeps the minds of Believers unto in all their
Requests, where he has furnished them with the matter of them according to the
mind of God. For he does not only make Intercession in them, according unto the
mind of God, with respect unto the matter of their Requests, but also with
respect unto the End which they aim at, that it may be accepted with him. He
guides them therefore to design,

(1.) That all the success of their Petitions and Prayers, may have an
immediate tendency unto the Glory of God. It is he alone who enables them to
subordinate all their desires unto Gods Glory. Without his especial Aid and
Assistance we should aim at Self only and ultimately in all we do. Our own
profit, case, satisfaction, Mercies, Peace and Deliverance would be the End
whereunto we should direct all our Supplications, whereby they would be all
vitiated and become abominable.

(2.) He keeps them unto this also, that the Issue of their Supplications may
be the improvement of Holiness in them, and thereby their conformity unto God,
with their nearer access unto him. Where these Ends are not, the matter of
Prayer may be good and according to the word of God, and yet our Prayers an
Abomination. We may pray for Mercy and Grace and the best promised Fruits of
the Love of God, and yet for want of these Ends find no acceptance in our
Supplications. To keep us unto them is his Work, because it consists in casting
out all Self Ends and aims, bringing all natural desires unto a subordination
unto God, which he works in us, if he works in us any thing at all. And
this is the first part of the Work of the Spirit toward Believers as a Spirit
of Grace and Supplication; He furnishes and fills their minds with the
matter of Prayer, teaching them thereby what to pray for as they ought. And
where this is not wrought in some measure and degree, there is no praying
according to the mind of God.

CHAP. VI.
The due manner of Prayer, wherein it does consist.

THE Holy Spirit having given the mind a due Apprehension of the things we
ought to pray for, or furnished it with the matter of Prayer, he moreover works
a due sense and valuation of them with desires after them upon the Will and
Affections, wherein the due manner of it, does consist. These things are
separable. The mind may have Light to discern the things that are to be prayed
for, and yet the Will and Affections be dead unto them, or unconcerned in them.
And there may be a Gift of Prayer founded hereon, in whose exercise the Soul
does not spiritually act toward God. For Light is the matter of all common
Gifts. And by virtue of a perishing Illumination a man may attain a Gift in
Prayer, which may be of use unto the Edification of others. For the
manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every man to profit withal. In the
mean time it is with him that so prays, not much otherwise than it was with
him of old, who prayed in an unknown Tongue; his Spirit prays, but his Heart
is unfruitful. He prays by virtue of the Light and Gift that he has
received, but his own Soul is not benefited nor improved thereby. Only
sometimes God makes use of men's own Gifts to convey Grace into their own Souls.
But Prayer properly so called, is the Obediential acting of the whole Soul
toward God.

Wherefore, where the Holy Spirit compleats his Work in us as a Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, he works on the Will and Affections to act obedientially
toward God in and about the matter of their Prayers. Thus when he is poured
out as a Spirit of Supplication, he fills them, unto whom he is communicated,
with mourning and godly sorrow to be exercised in their Prayers as the matter
does require, Zach. 12. 10. He does not only enable them to pray, but works
Affections in them suitable unto what they pray about. And in this Work of the
Spirit, lies the Fountain of that inexpressible fervency and delight, of those
enlarged Labourings of mind and desires which are in the Prayers of Believers,
especially when they are under the Power of more than ordinary influences from
him. For these things proceed from the Work of the Spirit on their Wills and
Affections, stirring them up and carrying them forth unto God in and by the
matter of their Prayers, in such a manner, as no vehement working of natural
Affections can reach unto. And therefore is the Spirit said to make
intercession for us with groaning which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26, 27.
(...). As he had before expressed his Work in general by (...), which intends
an help by working, carrying us on in our undertaking in this Duty beyond our
own strength (for he helps us on, under our infirmities, or weaknesses) so
his especial acting is here declared by (...); that is an additional
Interposition, like that of an Advocate for his Client, pleading that in his
Case which he of himself is not able to do. Once this Word is used in the
service of a contrary design. Speaking of the Prayer of Elijah, the Apostle
says, (...), How he makes intercession unto God against Israel, Romans 11. 2. as
(...), which is constantly used in the Old Testament for to declare good
tidings, Tidings of Peace, is once applied in a contrary signification unto
Tidings of Evil and destruction, 1 Samuel 4. 17. The man that brought the News of
the destruction of the Army of the Israelites and the taking of the Ark by the
Philistines is called (...). But the proper use of this Word is to intercede for
Grace and favor. And this he does (...). We our selves are said (...), to
groan, v. 23. that is, humbly, mournfully and earnestly to desire. And here the
Spirit is said, to intercede for us with Groans, which can be nothing but his
working in us, and acting by us that frame of Heart, and those fervent
laboring desires which are so expressed; and these with such depth of
intention and laboring of mind as cannot be uttered. And this he does by the
Work now mentioned.

Having truly affected the whole Soul, enlightened the mind in the perception
of the Truth, Beauty and Excellency of Spiritual things, engaged the Will in
the Choice of them, and prevalent Love unto them, excited the Affections to
delight in them, and unto desires after them, there is in the actual discharge
of this Duty of Prayer, wrought in the Soul by the Power and efficacy of his
Grace, such an inward laboring of Heart and Spirit, such an Holy Supernatural
Desire and Endeavor after an Union with the things prayed for in the enjoyment
of them, as no Words can utter or expressly declare, that is, fully and
completely; which is the sense of the place.

To avoid the force of this Testimony some (one at least) would have this
Intercession of the Spirit, to be the Intercession of the Spirit in Christ for
us now at the right Hand of God, so that no Work of the Spirit it self in
Believers is intended. Such irrational Evasions will men sometimes make use of,
to escape the convincing Power of Light and Truth. For this is such a
Description of the Intercession of Christ at the Right Hand of God, as will
scarcely be reconciled unto the Analogy of Faith. That it is not an humble,
oral Supplication, but a blessed Representation of his Oblation whereby the
efficacy of it is continued and applied unto all the particular occasions of
the Church or Believers, I have elsewhere declared, and it is the common Faith
of Christians. But here it should be reported as the laboring of the Spirit in
him with unutterable groans, the highest expression of an humble, burdened,
sollicitous Endeavor. Nothing is more unsuited unto the present Glorious
condition of the Mediator. It is true, that in the Days of his Flesh he prayed
with strong cries and tears in an humble deprecation of Evil, Heb. 5. 7. But an
humble prostration and praying with unutterable groans is altogether
inconsistent with his present state of Glory, his fullness of Power, and Right
to dispense all the Grace and Mercy of the Kingdom of God. Besides, this
Exposition is as adverse to the context as any thing could be invented. Ver.
15. It is said that we receive the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba
Father, which Spirit God sends forth into our Hearts, Gal. 4. 6. And the
blessed Work of this Spirit in us, is further described, v. 16, 17. And thereon
v. 23. having received the first fruits of this Spirit, we are said to groan
within our selves; to which it is added, that of our selves not knowing what we
ought to pray for, (...) that very Spirit so given unto us, so received by us,
so working in us, makes intercession for us with groans that cannot be uttered.
Wherefore without offering violence unto the Context, here is no place for the
Introduction of the Intercession of Christ in Heaven, especially under such an
expression as is contrary to the nature of it. It is mentioned afterward by
the Apostle in its proper place as a consequent and fruit of his Death and
Resurrection, ver. 34. And there he is said simply (...). But the Spirit here
is said (...), which implies an additional supply unto what is in our selves.

Yet to give countenance unto this uncouth Exposition, a force is put upon the
beginning of both the verses 26, 27. For whereas (...) does constantly in the
Scripture denote any kind of infirmity or weakness, spiritual or corporal, it
is said here to be taken in the latter sense for diseases with troubles and
dangers; which latter, it no where signifies. For so the meaning should be,
That in such conditions we know not what to pray for, whether wealth or health
or Peace or the like, but Christ interceeds for us. And this must be the sense
of (...), which yet in the Text does plainly denote an help and assistance
given unto our weaknesses, that is, unto us who are weak, in the discharge of
the Duty of Prayer, as both the words themselves and the ensuing reasons of
them do evince. Wherefore neither the Grammatical sense of the words, nor the
Context, nor the Analogy of Faith will admit of this new and uncouth Exposition.

In like manner if it be enquired, why it is said, that he who searches the
Heart knows the mind of the Spirit, which plainly refers to some great and
secret Work of the Spirit in the Heart of man, if the Intercession of Christ be
intended; nothing is offered but this Paraphrase, And then God that by being a
searcher of Hearts, knows our wants exactly, understands also the desire and
intention of the Spirit of Christ. But these things are (...); and have no
dependence the one on the other. Nor was there any need of the mentioning the
searching of our Hearts, to introduce the Approbation of the Intercession of
Christ. But to return:

That is wrought in the Hearts of Believers in their Duty, which is pervious to
none but him that searches the Heart. This frame in all our Supplications we
ought to aim at, especially in time of Distress, Troubles and Temptations, such
as was the season here especially intended, when commonly we are most sensible
of our own infirmities. And wherein we come short hereof in some measure, it is
from our Unbelief or carelessness and negligence, which God abhors. I do
acknowledge that there may be, that there will be more earnestness and
intention of mind and of our natural Spirit, therein, in this Duty, at one time
than another, according as outward occasions or other motives do excite them or
stir them up. So our Savior in his Agony prayed more earnestly than usual,
not with an higher exercise of Grace, which always acted it self in him in
perfection, but with a greater vehemence in the working of his natural
faculties. So it may be with us at especial seasons; But yet we are always to
endeavor after the same Aids of the Spirit, the same actings of Grace in every
particular Duty of this kind.

Thirdly, The Holy Spirit gives the Soul of a Believer a Delight in God, as the
Object of Prayer. I shall not insist on his exciting, moving and acting all
other Graces that are required in the exercise of this Duty, as Faith, Love,
Reverence, Fear, Trust, Submission, Waiting, Hope and the like. I have proved
elsewhere, that the exercise of them all in all Duties, and of all other Graces
in like manner, is from him, and shall not therefore here again confirm the
same Truth. But this Delight in God as the Object of Prayer, has a peculiar
consideration in this matter. For without it ordinarily the Duty is not
accepted with God, and is a barren burdensome task unto them by whom it is
performed. Now this Delight in God as the Object of Prayer, is for the
substance of it included in that description of Prayer given us by the Apostle,
namely, that it is crying Abba Father. Herein a Filial, Holy Delight in God is
included; such as Children have in their Parents in their most affectionate
addresses unto them, as has been declared. And we are to enquire wherein this
Delight in God as the object of Prayer does consist, or what is required
thereunto. And there is in it,

(1.) A Sight or prospect of God as on a Throne of Grace. A prospect, I say,
not by carnal Imagination, but spiritual Illumination. By Faith we see him who
is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. For it is the Evidence of things not seen, making
its proper Object evident and present unto them that do believe. Such a sight
of God on a Throne of Grace is necessary unto this Delight. Under this
consideration he is the proper object of all our Addresses unto him in our
Supplications, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in a time of need. The Duty of Prayer
is described by the subject matter of it, namely Mercy and Grace, and by the
only object of it, God on a Throne of Grace.

And this Throne of Grace is further represented unto us by the place where it
is erected or set up; and that is in the Holiest, or most Holy Place. For in
our coming unto God as on that Throne, we have boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, Heb. 10. 19. And hereby the Apostle shows, that
in the expression, he had respect, or alludes unto the Mercy-Seat upon the Ark,
covered with the Cherubims, which had a Representation of a Throne. And because
of Gods especial Manifestation of himself thereon, it was called his Throne.
And it was a Representation of Jesus Christ, as I have showed elsewhere.

God therefore on a Throne of Grace, is God, as in a readiness through Jesus
Christ to dispense Grace and Mercy to suppliant Sinners. When God comes to
execute Judgment, his Throne is otherwise represented. See Dan. 7. 9, 10. And
when Sinners take a view in their minds of God as he is in himself, and as he
will be unto all out of Christ, it ingenerates nothing but Dread and Terror in
them, with foolish Contrivances to avoid him, or his displeasure, Isa. 33. 14.
Mic. 6. 7, 8. Rev. 6. 16. All these places and others testify, that when
Sinners do engage into serious thoughts and conceptions of the Nature of God,
and what entertainment they shall meet with from him, all their Apprehensions
issue in Dread and Terror. This is not a frame wherein they can cry Abba
Father. If they are delivered from this fear and bondage, it is by that which
is worse, namely carnal boldness and presumption, whose Rise lies in the
highest Contempt of God and his Holiness. When men give up themselves to the
customary performance of this Duty, or rather saying of their Prayers, I know
not out of what Conviction that so they must do, without a due Consideration of
God, and the Regard that he has unto them, they do but provoke him to his Face
in taking his name in Vain; Nor, however they satisfy themselves in what they
do, have they any Delight in God in their approaches unto him.

Wherefore there is required hereunto, a Prospect of God by Faith as on a
Throne of Grace, as exalted in Christ to show Mercy unto Sinners. So is he
represented, Isa. 30. 18. Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be
gracious; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have Mercy. Without
this we cannot draw nigh to him or call upon him with Delight as becomes
Children, crying Abba Father. And by whom is this discovery made unto us? Is
this a fruit of our own Fancy and Imagination? So it may be with some to their
ruin. But it is the Work of the Spirit, who alone in and through Christ
reveals God unto us, and enableth us to discern him in a due manner. Hence
our Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Glory, would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in
the knowledge of him, that the Eyes of their understanding being enlightened,
they might know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the
Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Chap. 1. 17, 18. All the Acquaintance
which we have with God in a way of Grace, is from the Revelation made in us by
his Spirit. See Col. 2. 1. 2. By him does God say unto us, That, Fury is not in
him, and that if we lay hold on his Arm, that we may have peace, we shall have
peace, Isa. 29. 4, 5.

Secondly, Unto this Delight is required a sense of Gods Relation unto us as a
Father. By that name and under that Consideration has the Lord Christ taught
us to address our selves unto him in all our Supplications. And although we may
use other Titles and Appellations in our speaking to him, even such as he has
given himself in the Scripture, or those which are Analogous thereunto; yet
this Consideration principally influenceth our Souls and minds, that God is not
ashamed to be called our Father, that the Lord Almighty has said that he will
be a Father unto us, and that we shall be his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6.
Wherefore as a Father is he the ultimate object of all Evangelical Worship, of
all our Prayers. So is it expressed in that Holy and Divine Description of it
given by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 18. Through Christ we have an Access by one
Spirit unto the Father. No Tongue can express, no mind can reach the Heavenly
placidness and Soul-satisfying Delight which are intimated in these words. To
come to God as a Father, through Christ, by the help and assistance of the Holy
Spirit, revealing him as a Father unto us, and enabling us to go to him as a
Father, how full of sweetness and satisfaction is it! Without a due
Apprehension of God in this Relation, no man can pray as he ought. And hereof
we have no sense, herewith we have no Acquaintance, but by the Holy Ghost. For
we do not consider God in a general manner, as he may be said to be a Father
unto the whole Creation; but in an especial distinguishing Relation, as he
makes us his Children by Adoption. And as it is the Spirit that bears witness
with our Spirit, that we are thus the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. giving us
the highest and utmost Assurance of our Estate of Sonship in this World; so
being the Spirit of Adoption, it is by him alone that we have any Acquaintance
with our interest in that Privilege.

Some may apprehend that these things belong but little, and that very remotely
unto the Duty of Prayer, and the Assistance we receive by the Spirit therein.
But the truth is, those who are so minded, on Consideration, know neither what
it is to pray, nor what does belong thereunto. There is nothing more essential
unto this Duty, than that in the performance of it, we address our selves unto
God under the Notion of a Father, that is, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and in him our Father also. Without this we cannot have that Holy Delight in
this Duty which is required in us, and the want whereof ordinarily ruins our
design in it. And this we can have no spiritual satisfactory sense of, but what
we receive by and from the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, There belongs thereunto, that Boldness which we have in our Access
into the Holy Place, or unto the Throne of Grace. Having therefore boldness to
enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, let us draw near with a true
Heart in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 19, 22. Where there is on men a
Spirit of Fear unto Bondage, they can never have any Delight in their
Approaches unto God. And this is removed by the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication, Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again
unto fear; but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba
Father. These things are opposed, and the one is only removed and taken away by
the other. And where the Spirit of Bondage unto fear abides, there we cannot
cry Abba Father, or pray in a due manner. But where the Spirit of God is, there
is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And this, as we render the Word, consists in two
things, (1.) in orandi liberate, (2.) in exauditionis fiducia. (1.) There is
in it an Enlarged Liberty and freedom of speech in Prayer unto God. So the word
signifies. (...) is as much as (...), a Freedom to speak all that is to be
spoken, a Confidence that countenanceth men in the freedom of speech according
to the Exigency of their state, condition and cause. So the word is commonly
used, Ephesians. 6. 19. Where there is servile fear and dread, the Heart is
straightened, bound up, knows not what it may, what it may not utter, and is
pained about the Issue of all it thinks or speaks; or it cannot pray at all
beyond what is prescribed unto it, to say, as it were, whether it will or no:
But where this Spirit of Liberty and Boldness is, the Heart is enlarged with a
true genuine Openness and Readiness to express all its concerns unto God as a
Child unto its Father. I do not say that those who have this Aid of the Spirit
have always this Liberty in Exercise, or equally so. The exercise of it may be
variously impeded by Temptations, spiritual Indispositions, Desertions, and by
our own negligence in stirring up the Grace of God. But Believers have it
always in the Root and Principle, even all that have received the Spirit of
Adoption, and are ordinarily assisted in the use of it. Hereby are they enabled
to comply with the blessed advice of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful in
nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with thanksgiving let
your requests be made known unto God. The whole of our concern in this World,
is to be committed unto God in Prayer, as that we should not retain any
dividing cares in our own minds about them. And herein the Apostle would have
us to use an holy Freedom and Boldness in speaking unto God on all occasions,
as one who concerns himself in them; hide nothing from God, which we do what
lies in us, when we present it not unto him in our Prayers; but use a full
plain-hearted open Liberty with him, In every thing let your requests be made
known unto God. He is ready to hear all that you have to offer unto him, or
plead before him. And in so doing, the peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ, v. 7.
which is ordinarily the condition of those who are found in diligent obedience
unto this Command.

(2.) There is also in it a Confidence of Acceptance, or being heard in Prayer;
that is, that God is well pleased with their Duties, accepting both them and
their Persons in Jesus Christ. Without this we can have no Delight in Prayer,
or in God as the Object of it, which vitiates the whole Duty. When Adam thought
there was no Acceptance with God for him, he had no confidence of access unto
him; but as the first effect of folly that ensued on the entrance of Sin, went
to hide himself. And all those who have no Ground of spiritual Confidence for
Acceptance with Christ, do in their Prayer but endeavor to hide themselves
from God by the Duty which they perform. They cast a mist about them, to
obscure themselves from the Sight of their own Convictions, wherein alone they
suppose that God sees them also. But in such a frame there is neither Delight
nor Enlargement, nor Liberty, nor indeed Prayer it self.

Now this Confidence or Boldness which is given unto Believers in their Prayers
by the Holy Ghost, respects not the Answer of every particular Request,
especially in their own understanding of it; but it consists in an Holy
persuasion that God is well pleased with their Duties, accepts their Persons
and delights in their Approaches unto his Throne. Such Persons are not
terrified with Apprehensions that God will say unto them, What have you to do
to take my name into your mouths, or to what purpose are the multitude of your
Supplications? when you make many Prayers I will not hear. Will he, says Job,
plead with me with his great Power? no, but he will put strength in me, Chap.
23. 6. Yea they are assured that the more they are with God, the more
constantly they abide with him, the better is their Acceptance. For as they are
commanded to Pray always and not to faint, so they have a sufficient Warranty
from the Encouragement and Call of Christ to be frequent in their spiritual
Addresses to him; so he speaks to his Church, Cant. 2. 14. Oh my Dove, let me
see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy
Countenance is comely. And herein also is comprised a due Apprehension of the
Goodness and Power of God, whereby he is in all conditions ready to receive
them, and able to relieve them. The Voice of Sinners by Nature, let presumption
and superstition pretend what they please to the contrary, is, that God is
austere and not capable of Condescension or compassion. And the proper acting
of Unbelief lies in limiting the most Holy; saying, Can God do this or that
thing, which the Supplies of our necessities do call for, are they possible
with God? So long as either of these works in us with any kind of prevalency,
it is impossible we should have any Delight in calling upon God. But we are
freed from them by the Holy Ghost in the Representation he makes of the engaged
goodness and Power of God in the Promises of the Covenant, which gives us
Boldness in his presence.

Fourthly, It is the Work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer to keep the Souls of
Believers Intent upon Jesus Christ, as the only way and means of Acceptance
with God. This is the fundamental Direction for Prayer now under the Gospel. We
are now to ask in his name, which was not done expressly under the Old
Testament. Through him, we Act Faith on God in all our Supplications. By him we
have an Access unto the Father. We enter into the Holiest through the new and
living Way that he has consecrated for us. The various Respect which Faith
has unto Jesus Christ as Mediator in all our Prayers, is a matter worthy a
particular enquiry, but is not of our present consideration, wherein we declare
the Work of the Spirit alone. And this is a part of it, that he keeps our Souls
intent upon Christ according unto what is required of us; as he is the Way of
our Approach unto God, the Means of our Admittance, and the Cause of our
Acceptance with him. And where Faith is not actually exercised unto this
purpose, all Prayer is vain and unprofitable. And whether our Duty herein be
answered with a few words, wherein his name is expressed with little spiritual
regard unto him, is worth our Enquiry.

To enable us hereunto is the Work of the Holy Ghost. He it is that glorifies
Jesus Christ in the Hearts of Believers, John 16. 14. And this he does when he
enableth them to act Faith on him in a due manner. So speaks the Apostle
expressly, Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we have an access by one Spirit unto the
Father. It is through Jesus alone that we have our Access unto God, and that by
Faith in him. So we have our Access unto him for our Persons in Justification,
Romans 5. 2. By whom we have an Access by Faith unto this Grace wherein we stand.
And by him we have our actual Access unto him in our Supplications, when we
draw nigh to the Throne of Grace. But this is by the Spirit. It is he who
enables us hereunto by keeping our minds spiritually intent on him in all our
Addresses unto God. This is a genuine Effect of the Spirit as he is the Spirit
of the Son, under which Consideration in an especial manner he is bestowed on
us to enable us to pray, Gal. 4. 6. And hereof Believers have a refreshing
Experience in themselves. Nor does any thing leave a better savor or relish on
their Souls, than when they have had their Hearts and minds kept close in the
exercise of Faith on Christ the Mediator in their Prayers.

I might yet insist on more Instances in the Declaration of the Work of the
Holy Ghost in Believers as he is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication. But my
design is not to declare what may be spoken, but to speak what ought not to be
omitted. Many other things therefore might be added, but these will suffice to
give an express understanding of this Work unto them who have any spiritual
Experience of it; and those who have not, will not be satisfied with Volumes to
the same purpose.

Yet something may be here added to free our passage from any just Exceptions.
For it may be some will think, that these things are not pertinent unto our
present purpose, which is to discover the Nature of the Duty of Prayer, and the
Assistance which we receive by the Spirit of God therein. Now this is only in
the Words that we use unto God in our Prayers, and not in that Spiritual
Delight and Confidence which have been spoken unto, which with other Graces, if
they may be so esteemed, are of another Consideration. An. (1.) It may be, that
some think so, and also it may be, and is very likely that some, who will be
talking about these things, are utterly ignorant what it is to pray in the
Spirit, and the whole nature of this Duty. Not knowing therefore the thing,
they hate the very name of it; as indeed it cannot but be uncouth unto all who
are no way interessed in the Grace and privilege intended by it. The
objections of such Persons are but as the strokes of Blind-men, whatever
strength and violence be in them, they always miss the mark. Such are the
fierce arguings of the most against this Duty; they are full of Fury and
Violence, but never touch the Matter intended. (2.) My design is so to discover
the Nature of Praying in the Spirit in general, as that therewith I may declare
what is a furtherance thereunto, and what is an hindrance thereof. For if there
be any such Ways of Praying which men use or oblige themselves unto, which do
not comply with, or are not suited to promote, or are unconcerned in, or do not
express those workings of the Holy Ghost, which are so directly assigned unto
him in the Prayers of Believers, they are all nothing but means of Quenching
the Spirit, of disappointing the Work of his Grace, and rendering the Prayers
themselves so used, and as such, unacceptable with God. And apparent it is, at
least that most of the ways and modes of Prayer used in the Papacy, are
inconsistent with, and exclusive of the whole Work of the Spirit of
Supplication.

CHAP. VII.
The nature of Prayer in General, with respect unto Forms of Prayer and Vocal
Prayer. Ephesians. 6. 18. Opened and Vindicated.

THE Duty I am endeavoring to express, is that enjoined in Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying
always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance and Supplication for all Saints. Some have made bold to
advance a fond Imagination (as what will not Enmity unto the Holy ways of God
put men upon?) that praying in the Spirit intends only praying by virtue of an
extraordinary and miraculous Gift. But the use of it is here enjoined unto all
Believers, none excepted, men and Women, who yet I suppose had not all and
every one of them that extraordinary miraculous Gift which they fancy to be
intended in that Expression. And the Performance of this Duty is enjoined them
in the manner prescribed (...), always, say we, in every season, that is such
just and due seasons of Prayer, as Duty and our Occasions call for: But the
Apostle expressly confines the exercise of extraordinary Gifts unto some certain
seasons, when under some Circumstances they may be needful or useful unto
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. There is therefore a praying in the Spirit, which is
the constant Duty of all Believers, and it is a great reproach unto the
Profession of Christianity, where that name it self is a matter of Contempt. If
there be any thing in it that is Foolish, Conceited, Fanatical, the Holy
Apostle must answer for it; Yea, he by whom he was inspired. But if this be the
Expression of God himself of that Duty which he requires of us, I would not
willingly be among the number of them by whom it is derided, let their
pretenses be what they please. Besides, in the Text, all Believers are said
thus to pray in the Spirit at all seasons, (...); and (...), with all Prayer
and Supplication; that is, with all manner of Prayer according as our own
Occasions and Necessities do require. A man certainly by virtue of this Rule
can scarce judge himself obliged to confine his performance of this Duty unto a
prescript form of Words. For a Variety in our Prayers commensurate unto the
various occasions of our selves, and of the Church of God, being here enjoined
us, how we can comply therewith in the constant use of any one Form, I know
not; those who do, are left unto their Liberty. And this we are obliged unto,
(...), diligently watching unto this very end, that our Prayers may be suited
unto our Occasions. He who can divide this Text, or cut it out into a garment
to cloth set forms of Prayer with, will discover an admirable dexterity in the
using and disposal of a Text of Scripture.

But yet neither do I conclude from hence that all such forms are unlawful;
only that another way of Praying is here enjoined us, is I suppose
unquestionable unto all impartial searchers after Truth. And doubtless they are
not to be blamed who endeavor a Compliance therewith. And if Persons are able
in the daily constant reading of any Book whatever, merely of an humane
Composition, to rise up in answer to this Duty of Praying always, with all
manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, or the Exercise of the aid and
assistance received from him, and his holy acting of them as a Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, endeavoring, laboring, and watching thereunto; I shall say
no more but that they have attained, what I cannot understand.

The sole Enquiry remaining is, how they are enabled to pray, in whose minds
the Holy Ghost does thus work as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication. And I do
say in answer thereunto, that those who are thus affected by him, do never want
a gracious Ability of making their Addresses unto God in Vocal Prayer, so far
as is needful unto them in their circumstances, Callings, States and
Conditions. And this is that which is called the Gift of Prayer. I speak of
ordinary Cases; for there may be such interpositions of Temptations and
Desertions, as that the Soul being overwhelmed with them, may for the present
be able only to mourn as a Dove, or to chatter as a Crane, that is, not to
express the sense of their minds clearly and dictinctly, but only as it were to
mourn and groan before the Lord in brokenness of spirit and expressions. But
this also is sufficient for their acceptance in that Condition. And hereof
there are few Believers but at one time or other they have more or less
experience. And as for those whose Devotion discharges it self in a formal
course of the same words, as it must needs be in the Papacy, wherein for the
most part they understand not the signification of the Words which they make
use of, they are strangers unto the true Nature of Prayer, at least unto the
Work of the Spirit therein. And such Supplications as are not variously
influenced by the Variety of the Spiritual Conditions of them that make them
according to the Variety of our spiritual exercise, are like one constant Tone
or noise which has no Harmony nor Music in it.

I say therefore, (1.) That the things insisted on, are in some degree and
measure necessary unto all acceptable Prayer. The Scripture assigns them
thereunto, and Believers find them so by their own Experience. For we discourse
not about Prayer as it is the working of Nature in its straits and difficulties
toward the God of Nature, expressing thereby its dependence on him with an
acknowledgement of his Power, in which sense all Flesh in one way or other,
under one notion or other come to God; Nor yet upon those Cries which legal
Convictions will wrest from them that fall under their Power: But we treat only
of Prayer as it is required of Believers under the Gospel, as they have an
Access through Christ in one Spirit unto the Father. And, (2.) That those in
whom this Work is wrought by the Holy Spirit in any degree, do not in ordinary
Cases want an Ability to express themselves in this Duty, so far as is needful
for them. It is acknowledged that an Ability herein will be greatly increased
and improved by Exercise; and that not only because the exercise of all moral
Faculties is the genuine way of their strengthening and improvement, but
principally, because it is instituted, appointed and commanded of God unto that
end. God has designed the Exercise of Grace for the means of its growth; and
gives his blessing in answer to his institution. But the nature of the thing
it self requires a performance of the Duty suitably unto the Condition of him
that is called unto it. And if men grow not up unto further Degrees in that
Ability by Exercise in the Duty it self, by stirring up the Gifts and Grace of
God in them, it is their Sin and Folly. And hence it follows, (3.) That
although set forms of Prayer may be Lawful unto some, as is pretended, yet are
they necessary unto none; that is, unto no true Believers, as unto acceptable
Evangelical Prayer. But whoever is made Partaker of the Work of the Spirit of
God herein, which he does infallibly effect in every one who through him is
enabled to cry Abba Father, as every Child of God is, he will be able to pray
according to the mind and Will of God, if he neglect not the Aid and Assistance
offered unto him for that purpose. Wherefore to plead for the necessity of
forms of Prayer unto Believers, beyond what may be doctrinal or instructive in
them, is a fruit of inclination unto Parties, or of Ignorance, or of the want
of a due Attendance unto their own Experience.

Of what use forms of Prayer may be unto those that are not Regenerate, and
have not therefore received the Spirit of Adoption, belongs not directly unto
our disquisition. Yet I must say, that I understand not clearly the Advantage
of them unto them, unless a contrivance to relieve them in that condition,
without a due endeavor after a deliverance from it, may be so esteemed. For
these Persons are of Two sorts, (1.) Such as are openly under the Power of Sin,
their minds being not Effectually influenced by any Convictions. These seldom
pray, unless it be under Dangers, Fears, Troubles, Pains, or other Distresses.
When they are smitten, they will cry, even to the Lord they will cry, and not
else. And their Design is to treat about their especial occasions, and the
present sense which they have thereof. And how can any man conceive that they
should be supplied with forms of Prayer, expressing their Sense, Conceptions
and Affections in their particular Cases? And how ridiculously they may mistake
themselves in reading these Prayers, which are no way suited unto their
Condition, is easily supposed. A form to such Persons may prove little better
than a Charm, and their minds be diverted by it from such a performance of Duty
as the Light of Nature would direct to. Jonahs Mariners in the Storm cried
every one unto his God, and called on him also to do so too, Chap. 1. 5, 6. The
Substance of their Prayer was, that God would think upon them that they might
not perish. And men in such Conditions, if not diverted by this pretended
Relief, which indeed is none, will not want words to express their minds so far
as there is any thing of Prayer in what they do; and beyond that, whatever
words they are supplied withal, they are of no use nor advantage unto them. And
it is possible when they are left to work naturally toward God, however
unskilled and rude their Expressions may be, a deep sense may be left upon
their minds, with a Reverence of God, and Remembrance of their own Error, which
may be of use to them. But the bounding and directing of the workings of
Natural Religion by a form of words, perhaps little suited unto their
Occasions, and not at all to their Affections, tends only to stifle the
operation of an awakened Conscience, and to give them up unto their former
security.

(2.) Others, such as by Education and the Power of Convictions from the word
by one means or other, are so far brought under a sense of the Authority of
God, and their own Duty, as conscientiously according unto their Light to
attend unto Prayer, as unto other Duties also. Now the Case of these men will
be more fully determined afterward, where the whole of the use of Forms of
Prayer will be spoken unto. For the present I shall only say, that I cannot
believe, until further Conviction, that any one whose Duty it is to pray, is
not able to express his Requests and Petitions in Words so far as he is
affected with the matter of them in his mind; and what he does by any Advantage
beyond that, belongs not to Prayer. Men may by Sloth and other vicious
distempers of mind, especially of a negligence in getting their Hearts and
Consciences duly affected with the Matter and Object of Prayer, keep themselves
under a real or supposed disability in this matter. But whereas Prayer in this
sort of Persons is an effect of common Illumination and Grace, which are also
from the Spirit of God, if Persons do really and sincerely endeavor a due
sense of what they pray for and about, he will not be wanting to help them to
express themselves so far as is necessary for them, either privately or in
their Families. But those who will never enter the Water but with Flags or
Bladders under them, will scarce ever learn to swim. And it cannot be denied
but that the constant and unwearied use of set forms of Prayer may become a
great occasion of quenching the Spirit, and hindering all progress or growth in
Gifts or Graces. When every one has done what he can, it is his best, and will
be accepted of him, it being according unto what he has, before that which is
none of his.

CHAP. VIII.
The Duty of External Prayer by Virtue of ae spiritual Gift explained and
Vindicated.

WHAT we have hitherto discoursed concerning the Work of the Spirit of Grace
and Supplication enabling Believers to pray or to cry Abba Father, belongs
principally unto the internal spiritual nature of the Duty and the Exercise of
Grace therein, wherein we have occasionally only diverted unto the
Consideration of the Interest of Words; and the use of set forms, either
freely or imposed. And indeed what has been evinced from Scripture Testimony
herein, does upon the matter render all further dispute about these things
needless. For if the things mentioned be required unto all acceptable Prayer,
and if they are truly effected in the minds of all Believers by the Holy Ghost,
it is evident how little use there remains of such pretended Aids.

But moreover, Prayer falls under another Consideration, namely, as to its
external Performance, and as the Duty is discharged by any one in lesser or
greater Societies, wherein upon his words and expressions do depend their
Conjunction with him, their Communion in the Duty, and consequently their
Edification in the whole. This is the Will of God, that in Assemblies of his
Appointment, as Churches and Families, and occasional meetings of two or three
or more in the name of Christ, one should pray in the name of himself and the
rest that join with him. Thus are Ministers enabled to pray in
Church Assemblies, as other Christians in occasional meetings of the Disciples
of Christ in his name; Parents in their Families; and in Secret, every Believer
for himself.

There is a Spiritual Ability given unto men by the Holy Ghost, whereby they
are enabled to express the matter of Prayer as taught and revealed in the
manner before described, in words fitted and suited to lead on their own minds
and the minds of others unto an Holy Communion in the Duty, to the Honor of
God, and their own Edification. I do not confine the use of this Ability unto
Assemblies; every one may, and usually is to make use of it according to the
measure which he has received for himself also. For if a man have not an
Ability to pray for himself in private and alone, he can have none to pray in
public and Societies. Wherefore take Prayer as Vocal, without which Adjunct it
is not complete, and this Ability belongs to the Nature and Essence of it. And
this also is from the Spirit of God.

This is that which meets with such Contradiction and opposition from many, and
which has other things set up in Competition with it, yea to the Exclusion of
it, even from Families and Closets also. What they are, we shall afterward
examine. And judged it is by some, not only to be separable from the Work of
the Spirit of Prayer, but no way to belong thereunto. A fruit they say it is of
Wit, Fancy, Memory, Elocution, Volubility and readiness of Speech, namely, in
them in whom on other Accounts they will acknowledge none of these things to
be, at least in no considerable degree. Some while since indeed they defended
themselves against any esteem of this Ability, by crying out that all those who
thus prayed by the Spirit as they call it, did but babble and talk nonsense.
But those who have any sobriety and modesty are convinced, that the generality
of those who do pray according to the Ability received, do use words of Truth
and soberness in the exercise thereof. And it is but a sorry relief that any
can find in cavilling at some expressions, which perhaps good and wholesome in
themselves, yet suit not their Palats; or if they are such as may seem to miss
of due order and decency, yet is not their failure to be compared with the
Extravagancies, (considering the nature of the Duty) of some in supposed quaint
and elegant expressions used in this Duty. But herein they betake themselves
unto this Countenance, That this Ability is the effect of the natural
Endowments before mentioned only, which they think to be set off by a Boldness
and Confidence, but a little beneath an intolerable Impudence. Thus it seems is
it with all who desire to pray as God enables them, that is, according to his
mind and will, if any thing in the Light of Nature, the common Voice of
mankind, Examples of Scripture, express Testimonies and Commands, are able to
declare what is so. I shall therefore make way unto the declaration and
Confirmation of the Truth asserted, by the ensuing Observations.

1. Every man is to pray or call upon God according as he is able, with respect
unto his own Condition, Relations, Occasions and Duties. Certainly there is not
a man in the World who has not forfeited all his Reason and Understanding unto
Atheism, or utterly buried all their Operations under the fury of brutish
Affections, but he is convinced that it is his Duty to pray to the Deity he
owns, in words of his own, as well as he is able. For this, and none other, is
the genuine and natural notion of Prayer. This is implanted in the Heart of
Mankind, which they need not be taught, nor directed unto. The Artificial help
of constant forms is an Arbitrary Invention. And I would hope that there are
but few in the World, especially of those who are called Christians, but that
at one time or other, they do so pray. And those who for the most part do
betake themselves to other Reliefs, (as unto the reading of Prayers composed
unto some good End and Purpose, though not absolutely to their occasions, as to
the present state of their minds, and the things they would pray for, which is
absolutely impossible) cannot as I conceive but sometimes be conscious to
themselves, not only of the weakness of what they do, but of their neglect of
the Duty which they profess to perform. And as for such who by the prevalency
of Ignorance, the Power of Prejudice, and infatuation of Superstition, are
diverted from the Dictates of Nature and Light of Scripture directions, to say
a Paternoster, it may be an Ave or a Credo for their Prayer, intending it for
this or that end, the benefit it may be of this or that Person, or the
obtaining of what is no way mentioned or included in what they utter; there is
nothing of Prayer in it, but a mere taking the name of God in vain, with the
horrible Profanation of an Holy Ordinance.

Persons tied up unto such Rules and Forms never pray in their Lives, but in
their occasional Ejaculations, which break from them almost by Surprizal. And
there has not been any one more effectual means of bringing Unholiness with an
ungodly Course of Conversation into the Christian World, than this one of
teaching men to satisfy themselves in this Duty by their Saying, Reading, or
Repetition of the words of other men, which it may be they understand not, and
certainly are not in a due manner affected withal. For it is this Duty, whereby
our whole Course is principally influenced. And let men say what they will, our
Conversation in walking before God, which principally regards the frame and
disposition of our Hearts, is influenced and regulated by our Attendance unto,
and Performance of this Duty. He whose Prayers are Hypocritical is an Hypocrite
in his whole Course; and he who is but negligent in them, is equally negligent
in all other Duties. Now whereas our whole Obedience unto God ought to be our
reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. how can it be expected that it should be so,
when the foundation of it is laid in such an irrational supposition, that men
should not pray themselves what they are able, but read the Forms of others
instead thereof, which they do not understand?

2. All the Examples we have in the Scripture of the Prayers of the Holy men of
Old, either under the Old Testament or the New, were all of them the effects of
their own Ability in expressing the gracious Conceptions of their minds,
wrought in them by the Holy Ghost in the way and manner before described. I
call it their own Ability, in opposition to all outward Aids and Assistances
From others, or an antecedaneous prescription of a Form of Words unto
themselves. Not one Instance can be given to the contrary. Sometimes it is
said, they spread forth their Hands, sometimes that they listed up their
voices, sometimes that they fell upon their knees and cried; sometimes that
they poured out their Hearts when overwhelmed, all according unto present
occasions and circumstances. The Solemn Benediction of the Priests instituted
of God, like the present Forms in the Administration of the Sacraments, were of
another Consideration, as shall be showed. And as for those who by immediate
Inspiration gave out and wrote discourses in the form of Prayers, which were in
part Mystical, and in part Prophetical, we have before given an Account
concerning them. Some plead indeed, that the Church of the Jews under the
Second Temple had sundry Forms of Prayers in use among them, even at the time
when our Savior was conversant in the Temple and their Synagogues. But they
pretend and plead what they cannot prove; and I challenge any Learned man to
give but a tolerable Evidence unto the Assertion. For what is found to that
purpose among the Talmudists, is mixed with such ridiculous fables (as the
first, suiting the number of their Prayers to the number of the Bones in the
back of a man) as fully defeats its own Evidence.

(3.) The Commands which are given us to pray thus according unto our own
Abilities, are no more nor less than all the Commands we have in the Scripture
to pray at all. Not one of them has any regard or respect unto outward Forms,
Aids or helps of Prayer. And the manner of Prayer it self is so described,
limited and determined, as that no other kind of Prayer can be intended. For
whereas we are commanded to pray in the Spirit, to pray earnestly and
servently, with the mind and understanding, continually with all manner of
Prayer and Supplication, to make our Requests known unto God, so as not to take
care our selves about our present concerns, to pour out our Hearts unto God, to
cry Abba Father by the Spirit and the like; I do not understand how those
things are suited unto any kind of Prayer, but only that which is from the
Ability which men have received for the entire discharge of that Duty. For
there are evidently intimated in these Precepts and Directions, such various
Occasional Workings of our Minds and Spirits, such Actings of Gracious
Affections, as will not comply with a constant use of a prescribed Form of
Words.

(4.) When we speak of men's own Ability in this matter, we do include therein
the conscientious diligent use of all means which God has appointed for the
Communication of this Ability unto them, or to help them in the due use,
exercise and improvement of it. Such means there are, and such are they to
attend unto.

As (1.) The diligent searching of our own Hearts in their Frames,
Dispositions, Inclinations and Actings, that we may be in some measure
acquainted with their state and condition toward God. Indeed the Heart of man
is absolutely unsearchable unto any but God himself, that is, as unto a
complete and perfect knowledge of it. Hence David prays, that God would search
and try him, and lead and conduct him by his Grace according unto what he found
in him, and not leave him wholly to act or be acted according unto his own
Apprehensions of himself, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. But yet where we do in sincerity
enquire into them, by the help of that spiritual Light which we have received,
we may discern so much of them as to guide us aright in this and all other
Duties. If this be neglected, if men live in the dark unto themselves, or
satisfy themselves only with an acquaintance with those things which an
accusing Conscience will not suffer them to be utterly ignorant of, they will
never know either how to pray, or what to pray for in a due manner. And the
want of a due discharge of this Duty, which we ought continually to be
exercised in, especially on the account of that unspeakable Variety of
spiritual changes which we are subject unto, is a cause of that barrenness in
Prayer which is found among the most, as we have observed. He that would abound
in all manner of Supplication which is injoined us, who would have his Prayers
to be proper, useful, fervent, must be diligent in the search and consideration
of his own Heart, with all its dispositions and inclinations, and the secret
guilt which it does variously contract.

(2.) Constant diligent Reading of the Scriptures is another Duty that this
Ability greatly depends upon. From the Precepts of God therein may we learn our
own wants, and from his Promises the Relief which he has provided for them.
And these things (as has been showed) supply us with the matter of Prayer.
Moreover we thence learn what words and expressions are meet and proper to be
used in our Accesses unto God. No words nor expressions in themselves or their
signification are meet or acceptable herein, but from their Analogy unto those
in the Scripture which are of Gods own Teaching and Directions. And where men
are much conversant in the Word, they will be ready for and furnished with meet
Expressions of their Desires to God always. This is one means whereby they may
become so to be. And other Helps of the like nature, might be insisted on.

(5.) There is an use herein of the Natural Abilities of Invention, Memory and
Elocution. Why should not men use in the Service and Worship of God what God
has given them, that they may be able to serve and worship him? Yea, it
sets off the Use and Excellency of this Spiritual Gift, that in the Exercise
of it, we use and act our Natural Endowments and Abilities, as spiritualised by
Grace, which in the way, set up in Competition with it, cannot be done. The
more the Soul is engaged in its Faculties and Powers, the more intent it is in
and unto the Duty.

Nor do I deny but that this Gift may be varied in degrees and diverse
Circumstances according unto these Abilities, though it have a Being of its
own, distinct from them. Even in Extraordinary Gifts, as in the receiving and
giving out of immediate Revelations from God, there was a variety in outward
Modes and Circumstances which followed the diversity and variety of the Natural
Abilities and Qualifications of them who were employed in that Work. Much more
may this Difference both be, and appear, in the Exercise of ordinary Gifts,
which do not so absolutely influence and regulate the faculties of the mind, as
the other.

And this difference we find by Experience among them who are endowed with this
spiritual Ability. All men who have the Gift of Prayer, do not pray alike, as
to the matter of their Prayers or the manner of their praying; but some do
greatly excel others, some in one thing, some in another. And this does in
part, proceed from that Difference that is between them in the natural
Abilities of Invention, Judgment, Memory, Elocution, especially as they are
improved by Exercise in this Duty. But yet neither is this absolutely so, nor
does the difference in this matter, which we observe in constant Experience,
depend solely hereon. For if it did, then those, who having received this
spiritual Ability, do excel others in those natural Endowments, would also
constantly excel them in the Exercise of the Gift it self; which is not so, as
is known to all who have observed any thing in this matter. But the Exercise of
these Abilities in Prayer depends on the especial Assistance of the Spirit of
God. And for the most part the Gift, as the Scion ingrafted or inoculated,
turns the nature of those Abilities into it self, and modifieth them according
unto its own efficacy and virtue, and is not it self changed by them. Evidently
that which makes any such difference in the discharge of this Duty, as wherein
the Edification of others is concerned, is the frequent conscientious Exercise
of the Gift received, without which, into whatever stock of Natural Abilities
it may be planted, it will neither thrive nor flourish.

(6.) Spiritual Gifts are of two sorts,

(1.) Such as are distinct from all other Abilities, having their whole
Foundation, Nature and Power in themselves. Such were the extraordinary Gifts
of Miracles, Healing, Tongues, and the like. These were entire in themselves,
not built upon or adjoined unto any other Gifts or Graces whatever. (2.) Such
as were Adjuncts of, or annexed unto, any other Gifts or Graces, without which
they could have neither place nor use. As the Gift of Utterance depends on
Wisdom and knowledge. For Utterance without knowledge, or that which is any
thing but the way of expressing sound knowledge unto the Benefit of others, is
folly and babbling. And of this latter sort is the Gift of Prayer, as under our
present Consideration with respect unto the Interest of words in that Duty. And
this we affirm to be a peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, and shall now farther
prove it so to be. For,

(1.) It is an inseparable Adjunct of that Work of the Spirit, which we have
described, and is therefore from him who is the Author of it. For he who is the
Author of any thing as to its Being, is the Author of all its Inseparable
Adjuncts. That the Work of enabling us to pray, is the Work of the Spirit has
been proved; and it is an immeasurable Boldness for any to deny it, and yet
pretend themselves to be Christians. And he is not the Author of any one part
of this Work, but of the whole, all that whereby we cry Abba Father. Hereunto
the Expressions of the desires of our Souls, in Words suited unto the Acting of
our own Graces and the Edification of others, does inseparably belong. When we
are commanded to pray, if our Necessity, Condition, Edification, with the
Advantage and benefit of others, do require the use of Words in Prayer, then
are we so to pray. For Instance, When a Minister is commanded to pray in the
Church or Congregation, so as to go before the Flock in the discharge of that
Duty, he is to use words in Prayer. Yet are we not in such cases required to
pray any otherwise than as the Spirit is promised to enable us to pray, and so
as that we may still be said to pray in the Holy Ghost. So therefore to pray,
falls under the Command and Promise, and is a Gift of the Holy Spirit.

And the nature of the thing it self, that is the Duty of Prayer, does manifest
it. For all that the Spirit of God works in our Hearts with respect unto this
Duty, is in order unto the Expression of it; for what he does is to enable us
to pray. And if he gives not that Expression, all that he does besides, may be
lost as to its principal End and Use. And indeed all that he does in us, where
this is wanting, or that in fixed Meditation, which in some particular cases is
equivalent thereunto, rises not beyond that frame which David expresses by
his keeping Silence, whereby he declares an Estate of trouble, wherein yet he
was not freely brought over to deal with God about it, as he did afterward by
Prayer, and found Relief therein.

That which with any Pretense of Reason can be objected hereunto, namely, that
not any part only, but the whole Duty of Prayer as we are commanded to Pray, is
an effect in us of the Holy Spirit as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, or
that the Grace of Prayer and the Gift of Prayer as some distinguish, are
inseparable, consists in two unsound Consequents, which as is supposed, will
thence ensue. As (1.) That every one who has the Grace of Prayer, as it is
called, or in whom the Holy Spirit works the Gracious Disposition before
described, has also the Gift of Prayer, seeing these things are inseparable.
And (2.) That every one who has the Gift of Prayer, or who has an Ability to
pray with Utterance, unto the Edification of others, has also the Grace of
Prayer, or the actings of saving Grace in Prayer, which is the thing intended.
But these things it will be said, are manifestly otherwise, and contrary to all
Experience.

Ans. (1.) For the first of these Inferences, I grant it follows from the
Premises, and therefore affirm that it is most true under the ensuing
Limitations. (1.) We do not speak of what is called the Grace of Prayer in its
Habit or Principle, but in its actual Exercise. In the first respect, it is in
all that are sanctified, even in those Infants that are so from the Womb. It
does not hence follow that they must also have the Gift of Prayer, which
respects only Grace in its Exercise. And thus our meaning is, that all those in
whom the Spirit of God does graciously act Faith, Love, Delight, Desire, in a
way of Prayer unto God, have an Ability from him to express themselves in Vocal
Prayer.

(2.) It is required hereunto that such Persons be found in a way of Duty; and
so meet to receive the influential Assistance of the Holy Spirit. Whoever will
use, or have the Benefit of any Spiritual Gift, must himself in a way of Duty,
stir up by constant and frequent Exercise, the Ability wherein it does consist.
Stir up the Gift of God that is in thee, 2 Timothy 1. 6. And where this Duty is
neglected, which neglect must be accounted for, it is no wonder if any Persons
who yet may have, as they speak, the Grace of Prayer, should not yet have the
Gift or a faculty to express their Minds and Desires in Prayer by Words of
their own. Some think there is no such Ability in any, and therefore never look
after it in themselves, but despise whatever they hear spoken unto that
purpose. What Assistance such Persons may have in their Prayers from the Spirit
of Grace, I know not; but it is not likely they should have much of his Aid or
help in that wherein they despise him. And some are so accustomed unto, and so
deceived by pretended helps in Prayer, as making use of, or reading Prayers by
others composed for them, that they never attempt to pray for themselves, but
always think they cannot do, that which indeed they will not. As if a Child
being bred up among none but such impotent Persons as go on Crutches, as he
grows up, should refuse to try his own strength, and resolve himself to make
use of Crutches also. Good Instruction or some sudden Surprizal with fear,
removing his prejudice, he will cast away this needless help, and make use of
his Strength. Some Gracious Persons brought up where Forms of Prayer are in
general use, may have a Spiritual Ability of their own to Pray, but neither
know it, nor ever try it, through a Compliance with the Principles of their
Education; Yea so as to think it impossible for them to pray any otherwise. But
when Instruction frees them from this Prejudice, or some sudden surprizal with
fear or Affliction cast them into an Entrance of the Exercise of their own
Ability in this kind, their former Aids and Helps quickly grow into disuse with
them.

(3.) The Ability which we ascribe unto all who have the Gracious Assistance of
the Spirit in Prayer, is not absolute, but suited unto their Occasions,
Conditions, Duties, Callings and the like. We do not say, that every one who
has received the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, must necessarily have a
Gift, enabling him to pray as becomes a Minister in the Congregation, or any
Person on the like solemn occasion; no, nor yet it may be to pray in a Family,
or in the Company of many, if he be not in his Condition of life called
thereunto. But every one has this Ability according to his Necessity,
Condition of Life and Calling. He that is only a private Person has so, and he
who is the Ruler of the Family has so, and he that is a Minister of the
Congregation has so also. And as God enlarges men's Occasions and Calls, so he
will enlarge their Abilities, provided they do what is their Duty to that End
and Purpose; For the slothful, the negligent, the fearful, those that are under
the Power of Prejudices, will have no share in this Mercy. This therefore is
the sum of what we affirm in this particular. Every Adult Person who has
received, and is able to exercise Grace in Prayer, any saving Grace, without
which Prayer it self is an Abomination, if he neglect not the improvement of
the Spiritual Aids communicated unto him, does so far partake of this Gift of
the Holy Spirit as to enable him to pray according as his own occasions and
Duty do require. He who wants mercy for the Pardon of Sin, or Supplies of Grace
for the Sanctification of his Person, and the like; If he be sensible of his
Wants, and have gracious desires after this supply wrought in his Heart, will
be enabled to ask them of God in an acceptable manner, if he be not woefully and
sinfully wanting unto himself and his own Duty.

Secondly, As to the second Inference, namely, that if this Ability be
inseparable from the gracious assistance of the Spirit of Prayer, then
whosoever has this Gift and Ability, he has in the exercise of it that
Gracious Assistance, or he has received the Spirit of Grace, and has saving
Graces, acted in him: I answer, (1.) It does not follow on what we have
asserted. For although wherever is the Grace of Prayer, there is the Gift also
in its measure; yet it follows not, that where the Gift is, there must be the
Grace also. For the Gift is for the Graces sake, and not on the contrary. Grace
cannot be acted without the Gift, but the Gift may without Grace.

(2.) We shall assent that this Gift does grow in another soil, and has not
its root in it self. It follows on, and arises from, one distinct part of
the Work of the Holy Spirit, as a Spirit of Supplication, from which it is
inseparable. And this is his Work on the mind, in acquainting it with the
things that are to be prayed for, which he does both in the inward Convictions
of men's own Souls, and in the Declaration made thereof in the Scripture. Now
this may in some be only a common work of Illumination which the Gift of Vocal
Prayer may flow from and accompany, when the Spirit of Grace and Supplication
works no farther in them. Wherefore it is acknowledged that men in whom the
Spirit of Grace did never reside nor savingly operate, may have the Gift of
utterance in Prayer unto their own and others Edification. For they have the
Gift of Illumination, which is its foundation, and from which it is
inseparable. Where this spiritual Illumination is not granted in some measure,
no Abilities, no Industry can attain the Gift of Utterance in Prayer unto
Edification. For Spiritual Light is the matter of all spiritual Gifts, which in
all their variety, are but the various exercise of it. And to suppose a man to
have a Gift of Prayer without it, is to suppose him to have a Gift to pray for
he knows not what; which real or pretended Enthusiasms we abhor. Wherefore,
wherever is this Gift of Illumination and Conviction, there is such a
foundation of the Gift of Prayer, as that it is not ordinarily absent in some
measure, where due use and exercise are observed.

Add unto what has been spoken, That the Duty of Prayer ordinarily is not
complete, unless it be expressed in words. It is called pleading with God,
filling our mouths with Arguments, crying unto him, and causing him to hear our
voice; which things are so expressed, not that they are any way needful unto
God, but unto us. And whereas it may be said that all this may be done in
Prayer by internal meditation, where no use is made of the voice, or of words,
as it is said of Hanna that she prayed in her Heart, but her voice was not
heard, 1 Samuel 1. 13. I grant, in some cases it may be so, where the
Circumstances of the Duty do not require it should be otherwise; or where the
vehemence of Afflictions which cause men to cry out and roar, will permit it so
to be. But withal I say that in this Prayer by Meditation, the things and
matter of Prayer are to be formed in the mind into that sense and those
sentences which may be expressed; and the mind can conceive no more in this way
of Prayer than it can express. So of Hanna it is said, when she prayed in her
Heart, and as she said her self out of the abundance of her meditation, ver.
16. that her lips moved though her voice was not heard; she not only framed the
sense of her Supplications into Petitions, but tacitly expressed them to her
self. And the obligation of any Person unto prescribed Forms, is as destructive
of Prayer by inward Meditation, as it is of Prayer Conceived and Expressed; For
it takes away the Liberty, and prevents the Ability of framing Petitions or any
other parts of Prayer in the mind, according to the sense which the Party
praying has of them. Wherefore if this expression of Prayer in words do
necessarily belong unto the Duty it self, it is an effect of the holy Spirit,
or he is not the Spirit of Supplication unto us.

Secondly, Utterance is a peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost; so it is mentioned 1
Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 8. 7. Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3. And hereof there are two parts,
or there are two Duties to be discharged by virtue of it. (1.) An Ability to
speak unto men in the name of God in the preaching of the Word. (2.) An Ability
to speak unto God for our selves, or in the name and on the behalf of others.
And there is the same reason of Utterance in both these Duties. And in each of
them it is equally a peculiar Gift of the Spirit of God: See 1 Cor. 1. 5. 2
Cor. 8. 7. Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3. The word used in these places is (...)
Speech, which is well rendered, Utterance, that is (...), Facultas and Libertas
dicendi; an ability, and liberty to speak out the things we have conceived.
(...), Ephesians. 6. 19. Utterance in the opening of the mouth with Boldness, or
rather freedom of Speech. This in sacred things, in Praying and Preaching, is
the Gift of the Holy Spirit; and as such, are we enjoined to pray for it, that
it may be given unto us or others, as the Edification of the Church does
require. And although this Gift may by somebe despised, yet the whole
Edification of the Church depends upon it; yea the Foundation of the Church was
laid in it, as it was an extraordinary Gift, Acts 2. 4. and its superstructure
is carried on by it. For it is the sole means of public or solemn intercourse
between God and the Church. It is so if there be such a thing as the Holy
Ghost, if there be such things as spiritual Gifts. The matter of them is
Spiritual Light, and the manner of their Exercise is Utterance.

This Gift or Ability, as all others of the like nature, may be considered
either as to the Habit, or as to the external Exercise of it. And those who
have received it in the Habit, have yet experience of great variety in the
Exercise, which in natural and moral habits, where the same preparations
preceed, does not usually appear. For as the Spirit of Grace is free, and acts
arbitrarily, with respect unto the Persons unto whom he communicates the Gift
it self; for he divides to every man as he will; so he acts also as he
pleases in the Exercise of those Gifts and Graces which he does bestow. Hence
Believers do sometimes find a greater Evidence of his gracious working in them
in Prayer, or of his Assistance to pray, as also enlargment in Utterance, than
at other times; for in both he breaths and acts as he pleases. These
things are not their own, not absolutely in their own power, nor will either
the Habitual Grace they have received, enable them to pray Graciously, nor
their Gift of Utterance unto Edification, without his actual Excitation of that
Grace and his Assistance in the Exercise of that Gift. Both the conceiving and
utterance of our desires in an acceptable manner are from him, and so are all
spiritual enlargements in this Duty. Vocal Prayer whether private or public,
whereof we speak, is the uttering of our Desires and Requests unto God; called
The making of our Requests known unto him, Phil. 4. 6. This Utterance is a Gift
of the Holy Ghost, so also is Prayer as to the manner of the performance of it
by words in Supplication. And if any one say he cannot so pray suitable unto
his own occasions, he does only say, that he is a stranger to this Gift of the
Holy Ghost, and if any one will not, by him it is despised. And if these things
are denied by any, because they understand them not, we cannot help it.

Thirdly, It is the Holy Spirit that enables men to discharge and perform every
Duty that is required of them in a due manner, so that without his enabling of
us we can do nothing as we should. As this has been sufficiently confirmed in
other Discourses on this Subject, so we will not always contend with them by
whom such Fundamental Principles of Christianity are denied, or called into
question. And he does so, with respect unto all sorts of Duties, whether such
as are required of us by virtue of especial Office and calling, or on the more
general account of an holy conversation according to the Will of God: And Vocal
Prayer is a Duty under both these considerations.

For (1.) It is the Duty of the Ministers of the Gospel by virtue of especial
Office; Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and Giving of thanks are to be
made in the Assemblies of the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Herein it is the Office and
Duty of Ministers to go before the Congregation, and to be as the mouth of the
Church unto God. The nature of the Office and the due discharge of it, with
what is necessary unto the Religious Worship of public Assemblies, manifest it
so to be. The Apostles, as their Example, gave themselves continually unto
Prayer and the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6. 4. It is therefore the Gift of the
Holy Ghost whereby these are enabled so to do. For of themselves they are not
able to do any thing. This is one of those good Gifts, which is from above and
comes down from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17. And these Gifts do they
receive for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. Utterance therefore in Praying and
Preaching, is in them the Gift of the Holy Ghost with respect unto their
Office. And that such a Gift, as those who are utterly destitute of it, cannot
discharge their office unto the Edification of the Church.

Let men pretend what they please, if a spiritual Ability in praying and
preaching belong not necessarily unto the office of the Ministry, no man can
tell what does so, or what the office signifies in the Church. For no other
Ordinance can be administered without the Word and Prayer, nor any part of Rule
it self in a due manner. And to deny these to be Gifts of the Holy Ghost, is to
deny the Continuance of his dispensation unto and in the Church, which at once
overthrows the whole Truth of the Gospel, and the sole Foundation that the
Ministry of it is built upon.

(2.) The like may be spoken with respect unto Duties to be performed by virtue
of our general vocation. Such are the Duties of Parents and Masters of
Families. I know not how far any are gone in ways of profaneness, but hope
none are carried unto such a length, as to deny it to be the Duty of such
Persons to pray with their Families as well as for them. The Families that call
not on the name of the Lord are under his Curse. And if this be their Duty, the
performance of it must be by the Aid of the Spirit of God, by virtue of the
general rule we proceed upon.

Fourthly, The Benefit, Profit, Advantage and Edification of particular
Persons, of Families, but especially of the Church in its Assemblies in and by
the use and exercise of this Gift, are such and so great, as that it is impious
not to ascribe it to the operation of the Holy Spirit. Men are not of
themselves without his especial Aid, Authors or Causers of the principal
spiritual benefit and Advantage which the Church receives in the World. If
they are so, or may be so, what need is there of him or his Work for the
Preservation and Edification of the Church? But that it has this blessed
effect and fruit, we plead the experience of all who desire to walk before God
in sincerity, and leave the determination of the question unto the Judgment of
God himself: Nor will we at present refuse in our Plea, a consideration of the
different condition as to an holy Conversation, between them who constantly in
their life and at their death give this Testimony, and theirs by whom it is
opposed and denied. We are none of us to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
nor of any effect of his Grace. It must therefore be said that the Experience
which Believers of all sorts, have of the spiritual benefit and advantage of
this Ability, both in themselves and others, is not to be moved or shaken by
the Cavils or Reproaches of such, who dare profess themselves to be strangers
thereunto.

Fifthly, The Event of things may be pleaded in Evidence of the same truth. For
were not the Ability of praying a Gift of him, who divides to every one
according unto his own will, there would not be that difference as to the
participation of it among those, who all pretend unto the Faith of the same
Truth, as there is openly and visibly in the World. And if it were a matter
purely of men's natural Abilities, it were impossible that so many, whose
concern it is in the highest degree to be interessed in it, should be such
strangers to it, so unacquainted with it, and so unable for it. They say
indeed, it is but the mere improvement of natural Abilities with confidence and
exercise. Let it be supposed for once, that some of them at least, have
confidence competent unto such a Work, and let them try what success mere
Exercise will furnish them withal. In the mean time I deny that without that
Illumination of the mind, which is a peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, the
Ability of Prayer treated of, is attainable by any. And it will be a hard thing
to persuade Persons of any ordinary consideration, that the difference which
they do or may discover between men as to this Gift and Ability, proceeds
merely from the difference of their natural and acquired Abilities, wherein as
it is strenuously pretended, the advantage is commonly on that side which is
most defective herein.

Some perhaps may say, that they know there is nothing in this Faculty but the
exercise of natural endowments with boldness and elocution, and that because
they themselves were expert in it, and found nothing else therein, on which
ground they have left it for that which is better. But for evident reasons we
will not be bound to stand unto the Testimony of those men, although they shall
not here be pleaded. In the mean time we know that from him which has not, is
taken away that which he had. And it is no wonder if Persons endowed sometimes
with a Gift of Prayer proportionable unto their Light and Illumination,
improving neither the one nor the other, as they ought, have lost both their
Light and Gift also. And thus suitably unto my design and purpose I have given
a delineation of the Work of the Holy Ghost, as a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication, promised unto and bestowed on all Believers, enabling them to cry
Abba Father.

CHAP. IX.
Duties inferred from the preceding Discourse.

THE issue of all inquiries in these things, is, How we may improve them unto
Obedience in the Life of God. For if we know them, happy are we if we do them,
and not otherwise. And our practice herein may be reduced unto these two heads,
(1.) A due and constant returning of Glory unto God on the account of his Grace
in that free Gift of his, whose Nature we have enquired into. (2.) A constant
Attendance unto the Duty which we are graciously enabled unto thereby. And,

(1.) We ought continually to bless God and give (...)
Glory to him for this great privilege of the Spirit of Grace (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. 67. de Prec. 1.
and Supplication granted unto the Church. This is the principal means on their
part, of all holy intercourse with God, and of giving Glory unto him. How does
the World which is destitute of this fruit of divine bounty, grope in the dark
and wander after vain imaginations, whilst it knows not how to manage its
convictions, nor how at all to deal with God about its concerns? That World
which cannot receive the Spirit of Grace and Truth, can never have ought to do
with God in a due manner. There are by whom this Gift of God is despised, is
reviled, is blasphemed; and under the shades of many pretenses do they hide
themselves from the Light in their so doing. But they know not what they do,
nor by what Spirit they are acted. Our Duty it is to pray that God would pour
forth his Spirit even on them also, who will quickly cause them to look on him
whom they have pierced and mourn.

And it appears two ways how great a Mercy it is to enjoy and improve this
privilege, (1.) In that both the Psalmist and the Prophet pray directly in a
Spirit of Prophecy and without limitation, that God would pour out his fury on
the Families that call not on his name, Psalm. 79. 6. Jer. 10. 25. and (2.) In
that the whole work of Faith in Obedience is denominated from this Duty of
Prayer. For so it is said, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord,
shall be saved, Romans 10. 13. For Invocation or Prayer in the Power of the
Spirit of Grace and Supplications, is an infallible evidence and fruit of
saving Faith and Obedience; and therefore is the Promise of Salvation so
eminently annexed unto it; Or it is placed by a Synecdoche, for the whole
Worship of God and Obedience of Faith. And it were endless to declare the
benefits that the Church of God, and every one that belongs thereunto, has
thereby. No Heart can conceive that Treasury of Mercies which lie in this one
privilege, in having Liberty and Ability to approach unto God at all times
according unto his Mind and Will. This is the Relief, the Refuge, the Weapons,
and assured Refreshment of the Church in all Conditions.

(2.) It is a matter of Praise and Glory to God in an especial manner, that he
has granted an Ampliation of this Privilege under the Gospel. The Spirit is
now poured forth from above, and enlarged in his dispensation both intensively
and extensively. Those on whom he is bestowed, do receive him in a larger
measure than they did formerly under the Old Testament. Thence is that Liberty
and boldness in their access unto the Throne of Grace and their crying Abba
Father, which the Apostle reckons among the great privileges of the
Dispensation of the Spirit of Christ, which of old they were not partakers of.
If the difference between the Old Testament State and the New, lay only in the
outward letter and the Rule thereof, it would not be so easily discerned on
which side the advantage lay; especially methinks it should not be so by them,
who seem really to prefer the Pomp of Legal worship, before the plainness and
simplicity of the Gospel. But he who understands what it is, not to receive the
Spirit of Bondage to fear, but to receive the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry
Abba Father, and what it is to serve God in the newness of the Spirit and not
in the oldness of the letter, understands their difference well enough. And I
cannot but admire that some will make use of Arguments, or a pretense of them,
for such helps and Forms of Prayer as seem not compliant with the Work of the
Spirit of Supplication before described, from the Old Testament, and the
practice of the Church of the Jews before the time of our Savior, though
indeed they can prove nothing from thence. For do they not acknowledge that
there is a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit on the Church under the New
Testament than of the Old? To deny it, is to take away the principal difference
between the Law and the Gospel. And is not the performance of Duties to be
regulated according to the supplies of Grace? If we should suppose that the
People being then carnal, and obliged to the observation of carnal ordinances,
did in this particular stand in need of Forms of Prayer, which indeed they did
not, of those which were merely so, and only so; nor had, that we know of, any
use of them; does it follow, that therefore Believers under the New Testament,
who have unquestionably a larger portion of the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication poured on them, should either stand in need of them, or be obliged
unto them? And it is in vain to pretend a different dispensation of the Spirit
unto them and us, where different fruits and effects are not acknowledged. He
that has been under the Power of the Law, and has been set free by the Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, knows the difference, and will be thankful
for the Grace that is in it.

Again, it is extensively enlarged, in that it is now communicated unto
Multitudes; whereas of old it was confined unto a few. Then the dews of it only
watered the land of Canaan, and the Posterity of Abraham according to the
Flesh; now the showrs of it are poured down on all Nations, even all that in
every place call on the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours. In
every Assembly of Mount Zion, through the World, called according to the mind
of Christ, Prayers and Supplications are offered unto God, through the
effectual working of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, unless he be
despised. And this is done in the accomplishment of that great Promise, Mal. 1.
11. For from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my name shall
be great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto
my name, and a pure Offering; for my name shall be great among the Heathens,
says the Lord of hosts. Prayer and Praises in the Assemblies of the Saints, is
the pure Offering and that Sacrifice which God promises shall be offered unto
him. And this Oblation is not to be kindled without the Eternal Fire of the
Spirit of Grace. No Sacrifice was to be offered of old, but with fire taken
from the Altar. Be it what it would, if it were offered with strange fire, it
was an Abomination; Hence they were all called (...) the firings of the Lord.
And this was in a Resemblance of the Holy Ghost. Whence Christ is said to offer
himself to God, through the eternal Spirit. And so must we do our Prayers. In
the fruits and effects of his Workslyes all the Glory and Beauty of our
Assemblies and Worship. Take them away and they are contemptible, dead and
carnal. And he carries this Work into the Families of them that do believe.
Every Family apart is enabled to pray and serve God in the Spirit; and such as
are not, do live in darkness all their Days. He is the same to Believers all
the World over, in their Closets or their Prisons. They have all, where ever
they are, an Access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. And for this
enlargement of Grace, God justly expects a revenue of Glory from us.

(3.) It is assuredly our Duty to make use of the Gift of the Spirit as that
which is purchased for us by Christ, (...); Chrysostom. Hom. 67. de Prec. 1.
and is of inestimable advantage unto our Souls. There are two ways whereby men
may be guilty of the neglect of this heavenly favor; (1.) They are so when the
Gift it self is not valued nor sought after nor endeavored to be attained. And
this is done under various pretenses: some imagine that it is no Gift of the
Spirit, and so despise it; others think that either by them it is not
attainable, or that if it be attained, it will not answer their labor in it,
and diligence about it, which it does require; and therefore take up with
another way and means, which they know to be more easy, and hope to be as
useful. By many the whole Duty is despised, and consequently all Assistance in
the performance of it is so also. None of those do I speak unto at present. But
(2.) We are guilty of this neglect when we do not constantly and diligently on
all Occasions make use of it for the End for which it is given us; yea abound
in the exercise of it. Have you an Ability to pray always freely given you by
the Holy Ghost, why do you not pray always, in private, in Families, according
to all occasions and opportunities administered? Of what concernment unto the
Glory of God, and in our Life unto him, Prayer is, will be owned by all. It is
that only single Duty wherein every Grace is acted, every Sin opposed, every
good thing obtained, and the whole of our Obedience in every instance of it, is
concerned. What difficulties lie in the way of its due performance, what
discouragements rise up against it, how unable we are of our selves in a due
manner to discharge it, what Aversation there is in corrupted nature unto it,
what Distractions and Weariness are apt to befall us under it, are generally
known also unto them who are any way exercised in these things. Yet does the
Blessedness of our present and future Condition much depend thereon. To relieve
us against all these things, to help our Infirmities, to give us Freedom,
Liberty and Confidence in our Approaches to the Throne of Grace, to enable us
as Children to cry Abba Father, with Delight and Complacency, is this Gift of
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication given unto us by Jesus Christ. Who can
express how great a folly and Sin it is, not to be found in the constant
exercise of it? Can we more by any means grieve this Holy Spirit and endamage
our own Souls? Has God given unto us the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and
shall we be remiss, careless, and negligent in Prayer? Is not this the worst
way whereby we may quench the Spirit, which we are so cautioned against? Can we
go from day to day in the neglect of Opportunities, occasions and just seasons
of Prayer? How shall we answer the Contempt of this gracious Aid offered us by
Jesus Christ? Do others go from day to day in a neglect of this Duty, in their
Closets and Families? blame them not, or at least they are not worthy of so
much blame as we. They know not how to pray, they have no Ability for it. But
for those to walk in a neglect hereof, who have received this Gift of the Holy
Ghost enabling them thereunto, making it easy unto them, and pleasant unto the
inner man, how great an Aggravation is it of their Sin? Shall others at the
tinkling of a Bell, rise and run unto prayers to be said or sung, wherein they
can have no spiritual interest, only to pacify their Consciences and comply
with the prejudices of their Education? and shall we be found in the neglect of
that Spiritual Aid which is graciously afforded unto us? How will the blind
Devotion and Superstition of multitudes, with their diligence and pains
therein, rise up in Judgment against such negligent Persons? We may see in the
Papacy, how upon the ringing of a Bell, or the lifting up of any Ensign of
Superstition, they will some of them rise at Midnight; others in their Houses,
yea in the Streets, fall on their knees unto their Devotions: Having lost the
conduct of the Spirit of God, and his gracious Guidance unto the performance of
Duty in its proper seasons, they have invented ways of their own to keep up a
frequency in this Duty after their manner, which they are true and punctual
unto. And shall they who have received that Spirit which the World cannot
receive, be treacherous and disobedient unto his Motions, or what he constantly
inclines and enables them unto? Besides all other Disadvantages which will
accrue hereby unto our Souls, who can express the horrible Ingratitude of such
a Sin? I press it the more, and that unto all sorts of Prayer, in private, in
Families, in Assemblies for that end, because the Temptations and Dangers of
the days wherein we live do particularly and eminently call for it. If we
would talk less, and pray more about them, things would be better than they are
in the World; at least we should be better enabled to bear them and undergo our
portion in them with the more satisfaction. To be negligent herein, at such a
Season, is a sad token of such a security as foreruns destruction.

(4.) Have any received this Gift of the Holy Ghost, let them know that it is
their Duty to cherish it, to stir it up and improve it; it is freely bestowed,
but it is carefully to be preserved. It is a Gospel Talent given to be traded
withal, and thereby to be increased. There are various degrees and measures of
this Gift, in those that do receive it. But what ever Measure any one has,
from the greatest to the least, he is obliged to cherish, preserve and improve.
We do not assert such a Gift of Prayer, as should render our Diligence therein
unnecessary; or the Exercise of our natural Abilities useless. Yea the end of
this Gift is to enable us to the diligent exercise of the Faculties of our
Souls in Prayer in a due manner. And therefore as it is our Duty to use it, so
it is to improve it. And it is one Reason against the restraint of Forms,
because there is in them too little exercise of the Faculties of our Minds in
the worship of God. Therefore this being our Duty, it may be enquired by what
way or means we may stir up this Grace and Gift of God, so at least, as that if
through any weakness or infirmity of mind, we thrive not much in the outward
part if it; yet that we decay not, nor lose what we have received. The Gifts of
the Holy Ghost are the fire that kindles all our Sacrifices to God. Now
although that fire of old on the Altar first came down from Heaven, or forth
from the Lord, Levit. 9. 24. yet after it was once there placed, it was always
to be kept alive with care and diligence; for otherwise it would have been
extinguished as any other fire, Levit. 6. 12, 13. Hence the Apostle warns
Timothy, (...), 2 Timothy 1. 6. to excite and quicken the fire of his Gift;
blowing off the ashes and adding fuel unto it. Now there are many things that
are useful and helpful unto this end: As,

(1.) A constant Consideration and Observation of our selves, our own Hearts,
with our spiritual state and condition. Thence are the matters of our Requests
or Petitions in Prayer to be taken, Psalm. 16. 7. And as our state in general by
reason of the Depths and Deceitfulness of our Hearts, with our Darkness in
spiritual things, is such as will find us matter of continual search and
Examination all the days of our lives, as is expressed in those Prayers, Psalm.
19. 12. Psalm. 139. 23, 24. So we are subject unto various Changes and
Alterations in our spiritual frames and actings every day; as also unto
Temptations of all sorts. About these things according as our occasions and
necessities do require, are we to deal with God in our Supplications, Phil. 4.
6. How shall we be in a readiness hereunto, prepared with the proper matter of
Prayer, if we neglect a constant and diligent Observation of our selves herein,
or the state of our own Souls? This being the food of the Gift, where it is
neglected, the Gift it self will decay. If men consider only a Form of Things
in a course, they will quickly come to a Form of Words.

To assist us in this search and examination of our selves, to give Light into
our state and wants, to make us sensible thereof, is part of the Work of the
Spirit, as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication; and if we neglect our Duty
toward him herein, how can we expect that he should continue his Aid unto us,
as to the outward part of the Duty? Wherefore let a man speak in Prayer with
the Tongues of men and Angels, to the highest Satisfaction, and it may be, good
Edification of others; yet if he be negligent, if he be not wise and watchful
in this Duty of considering the state, Actings and Temptations of his own Soul,
he has but a perishing decaying outside and shell of this Gift of the Spirit.
And those by whom this self-search and judgment is attended unto, shall
ordinarily thrive in the Power and life of this Duty. By this means may we know
the beginnings and entrances of Temptation; the deceitful Actings of indwelling
Sin, the risings of particular Corruptions, with the Occasions yielding them
advantages and Power; the Supplies of Grace which we daily receive and ways of
deliverance. And as he who prays without a due consideration of these things,
prays at Random, fighting uncertainly as one beating the Air; so he whose
Heart is filled with a sense of them, will have always in a readiness the due
matter of Prayer, and will be able to fill his mouth with Pleas and Arguments
whereby the Gift it self will be cherished and strengthened.

(2.) Constant searching of the Scripture unto the same purpose is another
subservient Duty unto this of Prayer it self. That is the Glass, wherein we may
take the best view of our selves, because it at once represents both what we
are, and what we ought to be; what we are in our selves, and what we are by the
Grace of God; what are our Frames, Actions and Ways, and what is their defect
in the Sight of God. And an higher instruction what to pray for, or how to
pray, cannot be given us, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. Some imagine that to search the
Scriptures, thence to take Forms of speech, or Expressions accommodated unto
all the parts of Prayer, and to set them in order or retain them in memory, is
a great help to Prayer. Whatever it be, it is not that which I intend at
present. It is most true if a man be mighty in the Scriptures, singularly
conversant and exercised in them, abounding in their senses and expressions,
and have the help of a faithful Memory withal, it may exceedingly further and
assist him in the exercise of this Gift unto the edification of others. But
this Collection of Phrases, speeches, and expressions, where perhaps the mind
is barren in the sense of the Scripture, I know not of what use it is. That
which I press for, is a diligent search into the Scripture as to the things
revealed in them. For therein are our Wants in all their Circumstances and
Consequents discovered and represented unto us, and so are the Supplies of
Grace and Mercy which God has provided for us; the former with Authority to
make us sensible of them, and the latter with that Evidence of Grace and
faithfulness, as to encourage us to make our Requests for them. The Word is the
Instrument whereby the Holy Spirit reveals unto us our wants, when we know not
what to ask, and so enables us to make Intercessions according to the mind of
God, Romans 8. Yea who is it, who almost at any time reading the Scripture with a
due Reverence of God, and Subjection of Conscience unto him, that has not some
particular matter of Prayer or Praise effectually suggested unto him? And
Christians would find no small advantage on many accounts, not here to be
insisted upon, if they would frequently, if not constantly turn what they read
into Prayer or Praise unto God, whereby the Instructions unto Faith and
obedience would be more confirmed in their Minds, and their Hearts be more
engaged into their practice. An example hereof we have, Psalm. 119. wherein all
Considerations of Gods will and our Duty are turned into Petitions.

(3.) A due Meditation on Gods glorious Excellencies, tends greatly to the
cherishing of this gracious Gift of the Holy Spirit. There is no example that
we have of Prayer in the Scripture, but the entrance into it consists in
Expressions of the Name, and most commonly of some other glorious Titles of
God; whereunto the Remembrance of some mighty acts of his Power, is usually
added. And the nature of the thing requires it should be so. For besides that
God has revealed his Name unto us, for this very purpose that we might call
upon him by the Name which he owns and takes to himself, it is necessary we
should by some external description determine our minds unto Him, to whom we
make our Addresses, seeing we cannot conceive any Image or Idea of him therein.
Now the End hereof is twofold, (1.) To ingenerate in us that Reverence and
Godly fear, which is required of all that draw nigh to this infinitely Holy
God, Lev. 10. 3. Heb. 12. 29. The most signal encouragement unto Boldness in
Prayer and an Access to God thereby, is in Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. with Chap.
4. 16. Into the Holy place we may go with Boldness, and unto the Throne of
Grace. And it is a Throne of Grace that God in Christ is represented unto us
upon. But yet it is a Throne still, whereon Majesty and Glory do reside. And
God is always to be considered by us as on a Throne. (2.) Faith and confidence
are excited and acted unto a due Frame thereby. For Prayer is our betaking our
selves unto God as our shield, our Rock, and our Reward, Prove. 18. 10.
Wherefore a due previous consideration of those Holy properties of his Nature,
which may encourage us so to do, and assure us in our so doing, is necessary.
And this being so great a part of Prayer the great Foundation of Supplication
and Praise, frequent Meditation on these holy Excellencies of the Divine
Nature, must needs be an excellent preparation for the whole Duty, by filling
the Heart with a sense of those things, which the Mouth is to express, and
making ready those Graces for their exercise, which is required therein.

(4.) Meditation on the Mediation and Intercession of Christ, for our
Encouragement, is of the same importance and tendency. To this End spiritually
is he proposed unto us, as abiding in the discharge of his Priestly Office,
Heb. 4. 15, 16. Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. And this is not only an Encouragement
unto, and in our Supplications, but a means to increase and strengthen the
Grace and Gift of Prayer it self. For the Mind is thereby made ready to
exercise it self about the effectual Interposition of the Lord Christ at the
Throne of Grace in our behalf, which has a principal place and consideration
in the Prayers of all Believers. And hereby principally may we try our Faith of
what Race and kind it is, whether truly Evangelical or no. Some relate or talk
that the Eagle tries the Eyes of her young ones, by turning them to the Sun,
which if they cannot look steadily on, she rejects them as spurious. We may
truly try our Faith by immediate Intuitions of the Sun of Righteousness. Direct
Faith to act it self immediately and directly on the Incarnation of Christ and
his Mediation, and if it be not of the right kind and race, it will turn its
Eye aside unto any thing else. Gods essential Properties, his Precepts and
Promises it can bear a fixed consideration of; but it cannot fix it self on the
Person and Mediation of Christ with steadiness and satisfaction. There is
indeed much profession of Christ in the World, but little Faith in him.

(5.) Frequency in Exercise is the immediate way and means of the Increase of
this Gift, and its improvement. All spiritual Gifts are bestowed on men to be
employed and exercised: For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. God both requires that his Talents be
traded withal, that his Gifts be employed and exercised, and will also call us
to an account of the discharge of the trust committed unto us in them, see 1
Pet. 4. 10, 11. Wherefore the Exercise of this and of the like Gifts tends unto
their improvement on a double account. For (1.) whereas they reside in the mind
after the manner and nature of an Habit or a Faculty, it is natural that they
should be increased and strengthened by Exercise, as all Habits are by a
multiplication of Acts proceeding from them. So also by desuetude they will
weaken, decay, and in the issue be utterly lost and perish. So is it with many
as to the Gift of Prayer. They were known to have received it in some good
measure of usefulness unto their own Edification and that of others. But upon a
neglect of the Use and Exercise of it in public and private, which seldom
goes alone without some secret or open enormities, they have lost all their
Ability, and cannot open their mouths on any Occasion in Prayer, beyond what is
prescribed unto them, or composed for them. But the just hand of God is also in
this matter, depriving them of what they had, for their abominable neglect of
his Grace and Bounty therein. (2.) The Increase will be added unto by virtue of
Gods blessing on his own appointment. For having bestowed their Gifts for that
End, where Persons are faithful in the discharge of the trust committed unto
them, He will graciously add unto them in what they have. This is the eternal
Law concerning the dispensation of Evangelical Gifts, Unto every one that has
shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall
be taken away, even that which he has, Mat. 25. 29. It is not the mere having
or not having of them that is intended, but the using or not using of what we
have received; as is plain in the Context. Now I do not say that a man may or
ought to exercise himself in Prayer merely with this design, that he may
preserve and improve his Gift. It may indeed in some cases be lawful for a man
to have Respect hereunto, but not only. As where a Master of a Family has any
one in his Family who is able to discharge that Duty and can attend unto it;
yet he will find it his Wisdom not to omit his own performance of it, unless he
be contented his Gift, as to the use of his Family, should wither and decay.
But all that I plead is, that he who conscientiously, with respect unto all the
ends of Prayer, does abound in the exercise of this Gift, he shall assuredly
thrive and grow in it, or at least preserve it in answer unto the measure of
the Gift of Christ. For I do not propose these things, as though every man in
the diligent use of them, may constantly grow and thrive in that part of the
Gift which consists in Utterance and Expression. For there is a measure of the
Gift of Christ assigned unto every one whose bounds he shall not pass, Ephesians. 4.
7. But in these paths and ways, the Gift which they have received, will be
preserved, kept thrifty and flourishing; and from the least beginnings of a
Participation of it, they will be carried on unto their own proper measure,
which is sufficient for them.

(6.) Constant fervency and Intention of mind and Spirit in this Duty, works
directly toward the same End. Men may multiply Prayers as to the outward Work
in them, and yet not have the least spiritual Advantge by them. If they are
dull, dead and slothful in them, if under the Power of customariness and
formality, what issue can they expect? Fervency and Intention of mind quickneth
and enlarges the faculties, and leaves vigorous Impressions upon them of the
things treated about, in our Supplications. The whole Soul is cast into the
mould of the matter of our Prayers, and is thereby prepared and made ready for
continual fresh spiritual Engagements about them. And this fervency we intend,
consists not in the Vehemence or Loudness of words, but in the Intention of the
mind. For the earnestness or vehemence of the voice is allowable only in two
cases: (1.) When the Edification of the Congregation does require it, which
being numerous, cannot hear what is spoken unless a man lift up his voice. (2.)
When the vehemence of Affections will bear no restraint, Psalm. 20. 2. Heb. 5.
7. Now as all these are means whereby the Gift of Prayer may be cherished,
preserved and improved; so are they all of them the ways whereby Grace acts it
self in Prayer, and have therefore an equal respect unto the whole Work of the
Spirit of Supplication in us.

5. Our Duty it is to use this Gift of Prayer unto the ends for which it is
freely bestowed on us. And it is given, (1.) with respect unto themselves who
do receive it; and, (2.) with respect unto the Benefit and Advantage of others.
And with respect unto them that receive it, its End is, and it is a blessed
means and help, to stir up, excite, quicken and act all those Graces of the
Spirit whereby they have Communion with God in this Duty. Such are Faith, Love,
Delight, Joy and the like. For (1.) under the conduct of this Gift, the mind
and Soul are led into the consideration of, and are fixed on the proper objects
of those Graces, with the due occasions of their exercise. When men are bound
unto a Form, they can act Grace only by the things that are expressed therein,
which whatever any apprehend, is strait and narrow, compared with the extent of
that divine Intercourse with God, which is needful unto Believers in this Duty.
But in the Exercise of this Gift there is no concernment of Faith or Love, or
delight, but it is presented unto them, and they are excited unto a due
exercise about them. Unto this end therefore, is it to be used; namely as a
means to stir up and act those Graces and holy Affections, in whose working and
exercise the Life and efficacy of Prayer does consist. (2.) Although the
Exercise of the Gift it self, ought to be nothing but the Way of those Graces
acting themselves toward God in this Duty, (for Words are supplied only to
cloth and express gracious Desires, and when they wholly exceed them, they are
of no Advantage;) yet as by virtue of the Gift the mind is able to comprehend
and manage the things about which those Graces and gracious desires are to be
exercised; so in the use of Expressions they are quickened and engaged therein.
For as when a man has heard of a miserable object, he is moved with compassion
toward it, but when he comes to behold it, his own Eye affects his heart,
as the Prophet speaks, Lam. 3. 17. whereby his compassion is actually moved and
increased; so although a man has a comprehension in his mind of the things of
Prayer, and is affected with them, yet his own Words also will affect his
Heart, and by Reflection stir up and inflame spiritual Affections. So do many
even in private, find advantage in the use of their own Gift, beyond what they
can attain in mere Mental Prayer, which must be spoken unto afterward.

Again, this Gift respects others and is to be used unto that End. For as it
is appointed of God to be exercised in Societies, Families, Church Assemblies,
and occasionally for the good of any; so it is designed for their Edification
and profit. For there is in it an Ability of expressing the Wants, Desires and
Prayers of others also. And as this discharge of the Duty is in a peculiar
manner incumbent on Ministers of the Gospel, as also on Masters of Families and
others as they are occasionally called thereunto; so they are to attend unto a
fourfold direction therein: (1.) Unto their own experience, if such persons are
Believers themselves they have experience in their own Souls of all the general
concernments of those in the same condition. As Sin works in one, so it does
in another; as Grace is effectual in one, so it is in another; as he that
prays, longs for Mercy and Grace, so do they that join with him. Of the
same kind with his Hatred of Sin his Love to Christ, his Laboring after
Holiness and Conformity to the Will of God, are also those in other Believers.
And hence it is that Persons praying in the Spirit according to their own
experience, are oftentimes supposed by every one in the Congregation rather to
pray over their Condition than their own. And so it will be whilst the same
Corruption in kind, and the same Grace in kind, with the same kind of
Operations, are in them all. But this extends not it self unto particular Sins
and Temptations, which are left unto every one to deal about between God and
their own Souls.

(2.) Unto Scripture Light. This is that which lively expresses the spiritual
state and Condition of all sorts of Persons, namely, both of those that are
unregenerate, and of those which are converted unto God. Whatever that
expresses concerning either sort, may safely be pleaded with God in their
behalf. And hence may abundant matter of Prayer be taken for all occasions.
Especially may it be so in a peculiar manner from that holy Summary of the
Churches desires to God, given us in the Lords Prayer. All we can duly
apprehend, spiritually understand, and draw out of that Mine and Heavenly
Treasury of Prayer, may be safely used in the name and the behalf of the whole
Church of God. But without understanding of the things intended, the Use of the
words prositeth not.

(3) Unto an Observation of their ways and walking, with whatever overt
discovery they make of their Condition and Temptations. He who is constantly to
be the mouth of others to God, is not to pray at Random, as though all Persons
and Conditions were alike unto him. None prays for others constantly by
virtue of especial Duty, but he is called also to watch over them and observe
their ways. In so doing he may know That of their state, which may be a great
Direction unto his Supplications with them and for them. Yea without this no
man can ever discharge this Duty aright in the behalf of others, so as they may
find their particular concernments therein. And if a Minister be obliged to
consider the Ways, Light, Knowledge, and walking of his Flock in his preaching
unto them, that what he teaches may be suited unto their Edification; he is no
less bound unto the same consideration in his Prayers also with them and for
them, if he intends to pray unto their use and profit. The like may be said of
others in their capacity. The Wisdom and Caution which are to be used herein, I
may not here insist upon.

(4.) Unto the Account which they receive from themselves concerning their
Wants, their state and Condition. This in some cases Persons are obliged to
give unto those whose Duty it is to help them by their Prayers, James 5. 16.
And if this Duty were more attended unto, the minds of many might receive
inconceivable Relief thereby.

6. Let us take heed, (1.) That this Gift be not solitary, or alone; and (2.)
That it be not solitarily acted at any time. When it is solitary, that is,
where the Gift of Prayer is in the Mind, but no Grace to exercise in Prayer in
the Heart; it is at best but a part of that Form of Godliness which men may
have, and deny the Power thereof, and is therefore consistent with all sorts of
secret Lusts and Abominations. And it were easy to demonstrate that whatever
Advantage others may have by this Gift in them who are destitute of saving
Grace, yet themselves are many ways worsted by it. For hence are they lifted up
with spiritual pride, which is the ordinary Consequent of all unsanctified
Light; and hereby do they countenance themselves against the Reflections of
their Consciences on the guilt of other Sins, resting and pleasing themselves
in their own performances. But to the best Observation that I have been able to
make, of all spiritual Gifts which may be communicated for a time unto
Unsanctified minds, this does soonest decay and wither. Whether it be that God
takes it away Judicially from them, or that themselves are not able to bear the
Exercise of it, because it is diametrically opposite unto the lusts wherein
they indulge themselves; for the most part it quickly and visibly decaies,
especially in such as with whom the continuance of it by reason of open Sins
and Apostasy might be a matter of danger or Scandal unto others. (2.) Let it
not be acted solitarily. Persons in whom is a principle of spiritual Life and
Grace, who are endowed with those Graces of the Spirit which ought to be acted
in all our Supplications, may yet even in the use and exercise of this Gift
neglect to stir them up and act them. And there is no greater Evidence of a
weak, sickly spiritual Constitution, than often to be surprised into this
miscarriage. Now this is so* when men in their Prayers engage only their Light,
Invention, Memory and Elocution, without especial actings of Faith and delight
in God. And he who watches his Soul and its actings, may easily discern when
he is sinfully negligent in this matter, or when outward Circumstances and
Occasions have made him more to attend unto the Gift, than unto Grace in
Prayer; for which he will be humbled. And these few things I thought meet to
add concerning the due use and improvement of this Gift of the Spirit of God.

CHAP. X.
Of Mental Prayer as pretended unto by some in the Church of Rome.

HAving described or given an account of the Gift of Prayer, and the use of it
in the Church of God, and the Nature of the Work of the Spirit therein; it will
be necessary to consider briefly what is by some set up in Competition with it,
as a more Excellent way in this part of Divine Worship. And in the first place
Mental Prayer as described by some devout persons of the Church of Rome, is
preferred above it. They call it pure spiritual Prayer, or a quiet repose of
Contemplation; that which excludes all Images of the Fancy, and in time all
perceptible actuations of the Understanding, and is exercised in single
Elevations of the Will, without any force at all, yet with admirable Efficacy;
and to dispose a Soul for such Prayer there is previously required an entire
Calmness and even Death of the Passions, a perfect purity in the spiritual
affections of the will, and an entire abstraction from all Creatures, Cressy
Church Hist. Pref. parag. 42, 43.

1. The Truth is, I am so fixed in a dislike of that mere outside formal course
of reading or singing Prayers, which is in use in the Roman Church (which
though in Mr. Cressy's esteem, it have a show of a very civil Conversation with
God, yet is it indeed accompanied with the highest contempt of his infinite
purity and all Divine Excellencies) and do so much more abhor that Magical
incantation which many among them use in the Repetition of Words which they
understand not, or of applying what they repeat, to another End than what the
words signify, as saying so many Prayers for such an End or purpose, whereof
it may be there is not one word of mention in the Prayers themselves; that I
must approve of any search after a real internal intercourse of Soul with God
in this Duty. But herein men must be careful of two things: (1.) That they
assert not what they can fancy, but what indeed in some measure they have an
Experience of. For men to conjecture what others do experience (for they can do
no more) and thence to form Rules or Examples of Duty, is dangerous always, and
may be pernicious unto those who shall follow such Instructions. And herein
this Author fails, and gives nothing but his own Fancies of others pretended
Experience. (2.) That what they pretend unto an Experience of, be confirmable
by Scripture Rule or Example. For if it be not so, we are directed unto the
Conduct of all extravagant imaginations in every one who will pretend unto
spiritual Experience. Attend unto these Rules, and I will grant in Prayer all
the ways whereby the Soul or the Faculties of it, can rationally act it self
toward God in an Holy and spiritual manner. But if you extend it unto such
kind of actings as our Nature is not capable of, at least in this World, it is
the open fruit of a deceived Fancy, and makes all that is tendered from the same
hand to be justly suspected. And such is that instance of this Prayer, that it
is in the Will and its Affections without any actings of the Mind or
Understanding. For although I grant that the Adhesion of the Will and
Affections unto God by Love, Delight, Complacency, Rest and Satisfaction in
Prayer, belongs to the Improvement of this Duty; yet to imagine that they are
not guided, directed, acted by the Understanding in the contemplation of Gods
Goodness, Beauty, Grace and other Divine excellencies, is to render our Worship
and Devotion, brutish or irrational; whereas it is and ought to be our
Reasonable service.

And that this very Description here given us of Prayer, is a mere effect of
Fancy and Imagination, and not that which the Author of it was led unto by the
conduct of spiritual Light and Experience, is evident from hence, that it is
borrowed from those Contemplative Philosophers, who after preaching of the
Gospel in the World, endeavored to refine and advance Heathenism into a
Compliance with it; at least is fansied in imitation of what they ascribe unto
a perfect mind. One of them, and his expressions in one place may suffice for
an instance. Plotinus Ennead. 6. lib. 9. Cap. 10. For after many other
ascriptions unto a Soul that has attained Union with the chiefest Good, he
adds: (...). A mind thus risen up is no way moved, no anger, no desire of any
thing is in it (a perfect rest of the Affections.) Nay, neither Reason nor
Understanding (are acted) nor, if I may say so, it self; but being Ecstasied
and filled with God, it comes into a quiet, still, immovable repose and state,
no way declining (by any sensible actings) from its own Essence, nor exercising
any reflect act upon it self, is wholly at rest, as having attained a perfect
state, or to this purpose; with much more to the same. And as it is easy to
find the substance of our Authors Notion in these words, so the Reader may see
it more at large declared in that last Chapter of his Enneads. And all his
Companions in design about that time speak to the same purpose.

2. The spiritual intense fixation of the mind, by contemplation on God in
Christ, until the Soul be as it were swallowed up in admiration and delight,
and being brought unto an utter loss through the infiniteness of those
Excellencies which it does admire and adore, it returns again into its own
Abasements; out of a sense of its infinite distance from what it would
absolutely and eternally embrace, and with all the inexpressible Rest and
satisfaction which the will and Affections receive in their approaches unto the
Eternal fountain of goodness; are things to be aimed at in Prayer, and which
through the riches of Divine condescension, are frequently enjoyed. The Soul is
hereby raised and ravished, not into Ecstasies or unaccountable Raptures, not
acted into Motions above the Power of its own Understanding and Will, but in
all the Faculties and Affections of it through the effectual workings of the
Spirit of Grace, and the lively impressions of Divine Love, with intimations of
the Relations and kindness of God, is filled with Rest, in joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. And these spiritual acts of Communion with God, whereof I may
say with Bernard, Rara Hora, Brevis Mora, may be enjoyed in mental or Vocal
Prayer indifferently. But as the Description here given of Mental spiritual
Prayer, has no countenance given it from the Scriptures, yea those things are
spoken of it which are expressly contrary thereunto, as perfect purity, and the
like; and as it cannot be confirmed by the Rational Experience of any, so it no
way takes off from the Necessity and usefulness of Vocal Prayer, whereunto it
is opposed. For still the use of Words is necessary in this Duty, from the
nature of the Duty it self, the command of God, and the Edification of the
Church. And it is fallen out unhappily as to the Exaltation of the conceived
excellency of this Mental Prayer, that our Lord Jesus Christ not only
instructed his Disciples to pray by the use of Words, but did so himself, and
that constantly, so far as we know, Mat. 26. 39, 42. Yea, when he was most
intense and engaged in this Duty, instead of this pretended still Prayer of
Contemplation, he prayed (...) with a strong outcry, Heb. 5. which Psalm. 22. is
called the voice of his Roaring. And all the Reproaches which this Author casts
on servent, earnest Vocal Prayer, namely that it is a tedious, loud, impetuous
and an uncivil conversation with God, a mere artificial slight and facility,
may with equal Truth be cast on the outward manner of the praying of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which was oft-times long, sometimes loud and vehement. And unto
the Examples of their Lord and Master we may add that of the Prophets and
Apostles, who mention nothing of this pretended Elevation, but constantly made
use of, and desired God to hear their voices, their cry, their Words in their
Supplications; the words of many of them, being accordingly recorded: Wherefore
Words proper, suggested by the Spirit of God, and taken either Directly or
Analogically out of the Scripture, do help the mind and enlarge it with
Supplications. Interdum voce nos ipsos ad devotionem and acrius incitamus,
August. Epist. 121. ad Probam. The use of such Words, being first led unto by
the desires of the mind, may and does lead the mind on to express its further
desires also, and increases those which are so expressed. It is from Gods
Institution and Blessing that the Mind and Will of praying do lead unto the
Words of Prayer, and the words of Prayer do lead on the mind and will,
enlarging them in desires and Supplications. And without this Aid, many would
oftentimes be straightened in acting their Thoughts and Affections toward God, or
distracted in them, or diverted from them. And we have experience that an
obedient, sanctified persistency in the use of gracious words in Prayer, has
prevailed against violent Temptations and injections of Satan, which the mind
in its silent Contemplations was not able to grapple with; And holy Affections
are thus also excited hereby. The very words and Expressions which the Mind
chooses to declare its thoughts, conceptions and desires about Heavenly things,
do reflect upon the Affections increasing and exciting of them. Not only the
things themselves fixed on, do affect the Heart, but the Words of Wisdom and
sobriety whereby they are expressed, do so also. There is a recoiling of
Efficacy, if I may so speak, in deep impressions on the Affections, from the
words that are made use of to express those Affections by. But we treat of
Prayer principally, as it is to be performed in Families, Societies,
Assemblies, Congregations, where this Mental Prayer would do well to promote
the Edification which is attainable in the silent Meetings of the Quakers.

And because this kind of Prayer, as it is called, is not only recommended unto
us, but preferred before all other ways and methods of Prayer, and chosen as an
instance to set off the Devotion of the Church of Rome, to invite others
thereunto, I shall a little more particularly inquire into it. And I must needs
say that on the best view I can take, or Examination of it, it seems to be a
matter altogether useless, uncertain, an effect of, and Entertainment for vain
Curiosity, whereby men intrude themselves into those things which they have not
seen, being vainly puffed up by their own fleshly mind. For to call over what was
before intimated, in things that are Practical in Religion, no man can
understand any thing whereof he can have no experience. Nothing is rejected by
virtue of this Rule, whereof some men through their own default have no
Experience; but every thing is so justly, whereof no man in the discharge of
his Duty can attain any Experience. He that speaks of such things unto others,
if any such there might be, belonging unto our Condition in this World, must
needs be a Barbarian unto them, in what he speaks; and whereas also he speaks
of that wherein his own Reason and Understanding have no interest, he must be
so also unto himself. For no man can by the use of Reason however advanced by
spiritual Light, understand such actings of the Souls of other men or his own,
as wherein there is no exercise of Reason or Understanding; such as these
Raptures are pretended to consist in. So whereas one of them says, sundus
animae meae tangit fundum Essentiae Dei; it had certainly been better for him
to have kept his Apprehensions or Fancy to himself, than to express himself in
words which in their own proper sense are Blasphemous, and whose best
defensative is, that they are unintelligible. And if it be not unlawful, it is
doubtless inexpedient for any one in things of Religion, to utter what it is
impossible for any Body else to understand, with this only Plea that they do
not indeed understand it themselves; it being what they enjoyed without any
acts or actings of their own Understanding. To allow such pretenses is the
ready way to introduce Babel into the Church, and Expose Religion to scorn.
Some pretending unto such Raptures among our selves I have known, wherein for a
while they stirred up the Admiration of weak and credulous Persons; but through
a little observation of what they did, spoke, and pretended unto, with an
Examination of all by the unerring Rule, they quickly came into contempt. All I
intend at present is, that whatever be in this pretense, it is altogether
useless unto Edification, and therefore ought the declaration of it, to be of
no regard in the Church of God. If the Apostle would not allow the use of
Words, though miraculously suggested unto them that used them, without an
immediate interpretation of their signification, what would he have said of
such words and things as are capable of no interpretation, so as that any man
living should understand them? For those by whom at present they are so
extolled and commended unto us, do themselves discourse at Random, as blind men
talk of Colors, for they pretend not to have any Experience of these things
themselves. And it is somewhat an uncouth way of procedure to enhance the value
of the Communion of their Church, and to invite others unto it, by declaring
that there are some amongst them who enjoyed such spiritual Ecstasies, as could
neither by themselves, nor any others be understood. For nothing can be so,
wherein or whereabout there is no exercise of Reason or Understanding.
Wherefore the old Question cui bono, will discharge this pretense from being of
any value or esteem in Religion with considerate men.

Again, As the whole of this kind of Prayer is useless as to the Benefit and
Edification of the Church or any member of it; so it is impossible there should
ever be any certainty about the Raptures wherein it is pretended to consist,
but they must everlastingly be the subject of contention and dispute. For who
shall assure me that the Persons pretending unto these Duties or Enjoyments are
not mere pretenders? Any man that lives, if he have a mind unto it, may say
such things, or use such expressions concerning himself. If a man indeed shall
pretend and declare that he does, or enjoys such things as are expressed in
the Word of God as the Duty or privilege of any, and thereon are acknowledged
by all to be things in themselves true and real, and likewise attainable by
Believers, he is ordinarily, so far as I know, to be believed in his
Profession, unless he can be convicted of falsehood by any thing inconsistent
with such Duties or Enjoyments. Nor do I know of any great Evil in our
credulity herein, should we happen to be deceived in or by the Person so
professing, seeing he speaks of no more than all acknowledge it their Duty to
endeavor after. But when any one shall pretend unto spiritual actings or
Enjoyments which are neither prescribed nor promised in the Scripture, nor are
investigable in the Light of Reason, no man is upon this mere profession
obliged to give credit thereunto; Nor can any man tell what evil effect or
Consequences his so doing may produce. For when men are once taken off from
that sure Ground of Scripture, and their own understandings, putting themselves
afloat on the uncertain Waters of fancies or conjectures, they know not how
they may be tossed; nor whither they may be driven. If it shall be said, that
the Holiness and Honesty of the Persons by whem these especial privileges are
enjoyed, are sufficient Reason why we should believe them in what they profess;
I answer, they would so in a good measure, if they did not pretend unto things
repugnant unto Reason and unwarranted by the Scripture, which is sufficient to
crush the Reputation of any man's Integrity. Nor can their Holiness and Honesty
be proved to be such, as to render them absolutely impregnable against all
Temptations, which was the preeminence of Christ alone. Neither is there any
more strength in this Plea, but what may be reduced unto this Assertion, that
there neither are, nor ever were any Hypocrites in the World undiscoverable
unto the Eyes of men. For if such there may be, some of these pretenders may be
of their Number, notwithstanding the appearance of their Holiness and Honesty.
Besides, if the Holiness of the best of them were examined by Evangelical Light
and Rule, perhaps it would be so far from being a sufficient countenance unto
other things, as that it would not be able to defend its own Reputation.
Neither is it want of charity, which makes men doubtful and unbelieving in such
cases; but that Godly Jealousy and Christian prudence which require them to
take care that they be not deceived or deluded, do not only warrant them to
abide on that guard, but make it their necessary Duty also. For it is no new
thing that pretenses of Raptures, Ecstasies, Revelations and unaccountable
extraordinary Enjoyments of God, should be made use of unto corrupt Ends, yea
abused to the worst imaginable. The experience of the Church both under the Old
Testament and the New, witnesses hereunto as the Apostle Peter declares, 2
Pet. 2. 1. For among them of old, there were multitudes of false pretenders
unto visions, dreams, Revelations and such spiritual Ecstasies, some of whom
wore a rough Garment to deceive, which went not alone but accompanied with all
such appearing austerities, as might beget an opinion of Sanctity and Integrity
in them. And when the Body of the People were grown corrupt and superstitious,
this sort of men had credit with them above the true Prophets of God; Yet did
they for the most part show themselves to be Hypocritical Liars. And we are
abundantly warned of such Spirits under the New Testament, as we are foretold
that such there would be, by whom many should be deluded. And all such
pretenders unto extraordinary intercourse with God, we are commanded to try by
the unerring Rule of the word, and desire only Liberty so to do.

But suppose that those who assert these Devotions and Enjoyments of God in
their own Experience, are not false pretenders unto what they profess, nor
design to deceive; but are persuaded in their own minds of the reality of what
they endeavor to declare, yet neither will this give us the least security of
their Truth. For it is known that there are so many ways, partly natural,
partly Diabolical, whereby the Fancies and Imaginations of persons may be so
possessed with false images and apprehensions of things, and that with so
vehement an efficacy as to give them a confidence of the Truth and Reality,
that no assurance of them can be given by a persuasion of the sincerity of them
by whom they are pretended. And there are so many ways whereby men are
disposed unto such a frame and actings, or are disposed to be imposed on by
such delusions, especially where they are prompted by Superstition, and are
encouraged doctrinally to an Expectation of such imaginations, that it is a far
greater wonder that more have not fallen into the same Extravagancies, than
that any have so done. We find by Experience that some have had their
imaginations so fixed on things evil and noxioos by Satanical delusions, that
they have confessed against themselves, things and crimes that have rendered
them obnoxions unto Capital punishments; whereof they were never really and
actually guilty. Wherefore seeing these acts or Duties of Devotion are
pretended to be such as wherein there is no sensible actuation of the mind or
understanding, and so cannot rationally be accounted for, nor rendered
perceptible unto the understanding of others, it is not unreasonable to suppose
that they are only fond imaginations of deluded Fancies, which superstitious,
credulous Persons have gradually raised themselves unto, or such as they have
exposed themselves to be imposed on withal by Satan, through a groundless,
unwarrantable desire after them, or Expectation of them.

But what ever there may be in the height of this contemplative Prayer as it is
called, it neither is Prayer, nor can on any account be so esteemed. That we
allow of Mental Prayer and all actings of the mind in Holy Meditation, was
before declared. Nor do we deny the usefulness or necessity of those other
things of mortifying the Affections and Passions, of an entire resignation of
the whole Soul unto God with complacency in him, so far as our nature is
capable of them in this World. But it is that incomparable Excellency of it in
the silence of the Soul, and the pure adhesion of the Will without any actings
of the understanding that we enquire into. And I say whatever else there may be
herein, yet it has not the nature of Prayer, nor is to be so esteemed, though
under that name and notion it be recommended unto us. Prayer is a Natural Duty,
the notion and understanding whereof is common unto all mankind. And the
concurrent voice of Nature deceives not. Whatever therefore is not compliant
therewith, at least what is contradictory unto it, or inconsistent with it, is
not to be esteemed Prayer. Now in the common sense of mankind, this Duty is
that acting of the mind and Soul, wherein from an acknowledgement of the
Sovereign Being, self-sufficiency, Rule and Dominion of God, with his infinite
Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Righteousness and Omniscience and Omnipresence, with a
sense of their own Universal dependence on him, his will and pleasure as to
their Beings, Lives, Happiness, and all their concernments, they address their
desires with Faith and trust unto him according as their state and condition
does require; or ascribe praise and glory unto him for what he is in himself,
and what he is to them. This is the general notion of Prayer, which the Reason
of mankind centers in; neither can any man conceive of it under any other
notion whatever. The Gospel directs the performance of this Duty in an
acceptable manner with respect unto the Mediation of Christ, the Aids of the
Holy Ghost, and the Revelation of the Spiritual Mercies we all do desire; but
it changes nothing in the general nature of it. It does not introduce a Duty
of another kind, and call it by the name of that, which was known in the Light
of Nature, but is quite another thing. But this general nature of Prayer all
men universally understand well enough, in whom the first innate principles of
natural Light are not extinguished or woefully depraved. This may be done among
some by a long traditional course of an Atheistical and Brutish Conversation.
But as large and extensive as are the convictions of men concerning the Being
and Existence of God, so are their Apprehensions of the Nature of this Duty.
For the first actings of Nature toward a Divine Being, are in Invocation.
Jonahs Mariners knew how, Every one to call on his God, when they were in a
storm. And where there is not Trust or Affiance in God acted, whereby men
glorify him as God, and where Desires or praises are not offered unto him,
neither of which can be without express acts of the Mind or Understanding,
there is no Prayer, whatever else there may be. Wherefore this contemplative
Devotion, wherein as it is pretended, the Soul is ecstasied into an advance of
the Will and affections above all the actings of the mind or understanding,
has no one property of Prayer as the nature of it is manifest in the Light of
Nature and common Agreement of mankind. Prayer without an actual
Acknowledgement of God in all his Holy Excellencies, and the actings of Faith
in Fear, Love, Confidence and gratitude, is a Monster in Nature or a By-blow of
imagination, which has no Existence in rerum natura. These Persons therefore,
had best find out some other name wherewith to impose this kind of Devotion
upon our Admiration; for from the whole precincts of Prayer or invocation on
the name of God, it is utterly excluded: and what place it may have in any
other part of the worship of God, we shall immediately enquire.

But this Examination of it by the Light of Nature will be looked on as most
absurd and impertinent. For if we must try all matters of Spiritual Communion
with God, and that in those things which wholly depend on Divine supernatural
Revelation by this Rule and Standard, our measures of them will be false and
perverse. And I say, no doubt they would. Wherefore we call only that concern
of it unto a Trial hereby, whose true notion is confessedly fixed in the Light
of Nature. Without extending that line beyond its due bounds, we may by it,
take a just measure of what is Prayer, and what is not; for therein it cannot
deceive nor be deceived: And this is all which at present we engage about. And
in the pursuit of the same enquiry we may bring it also unto the Scripture,
from which we shall find it as foreign as from the Light of Nature. For as it
is described, so far as any thing intelligible may be from thence collected, it
exceeds or deviates from whatever is said in the Scripture concerning Prayer,
even in those places where the Grace and privileges of it are most
emphatically expressed; and as it is exemplified in the Prayers of the Lord
Christ himself, and all the Saints recorded therein. Wherefore the Light of
Nature, and the Scripture do by common consent exclude it from being Prayer in
any kind. Prayer in the Scripture-representation of it, is the Souls Access and
Approach unto God by Jesus Christ through the Aids of his Holy Spirit, to make
known its requests unto him with Supplication and Thanksgiving. And that
whereon it is recommended unto us are its external Adjuncts, and its internal
Grace and efficacy. Of the first sort, Earnestness, fervency, importunity,
constancy and perseverance are the principal. No man can attend unto these or
any of them in a way of Duty, but in the Exercise of his mind and
understanding. Without this, whatever looks like any of them, is brutish fury
or obstinacy.

And as unto the internal form of it, in that description which is given us of
its nature in the Scripture, it consists in the especial exercise of Faith,
Love, Delight, Fear, all the Graces of the Spirit as occasion does require. And
in that Exercise of these Graces wherein the Life and Being of Prayer does
consist, a continual regard is to be had unto the Mediation of Christ, and the
free Promises of God, through which means he exhibits himself unto us as a God
hearing Prayer. These things are both plainly and frequently mentioned in the
Scripture, as they are all of them exemplified in the Prayers of those holy
Persons which are recorded therein. But for this contemplative Prayer as it is
described by our Author and others, there is neither precept for it, nor
Direction about it, nor Motive unto it, nor Example of it in the whole
Scripture. And it cannot but seem mavelous to some at least, that whereas
this Duty and all its concernments are more insisted on therein, than any other
Christian Duty or privilege what ever, that the Height and Excellency of it,
and that in comparison whereof all other kinds of Prayer, all the actings of
the mind and Soul in them are decried, should not obtain the least intimation
therein.

For if we should take a view of all the particular places wherein the nature
and excellency of this Duty are described, with the Grace and privilege
wherewith it is accompained, such as for instance, Ephesians. 6. 18. Phil. 4. 6.
Heb. 4. 16. Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. there is nothing that is consistent with
this contemplative Prayer. Neither is there in the Prayers of our Lord Jesus
Christ, nor of his Apostles, nor of any Holy men from the beginning of the
World, either for themselves or the whole Church, any thing that gives the
least countenance unto it. Nor can any man declare, what is, or can be the Work
of the Holy Spirit therein, as he is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication; nor is
any Gift of his mentioned in the Scripture, capable of the least exercise
therein: so that in no sense it can be that praying in the Holy Ghost which is
prescribed unto us. There is therefore no Example proposed unto our imitation,
no mark set before us, nor any direction given for the attaining of this
pretended Excellency and perfection. Whatever is fancied or spoken concerning
it, it is utterly foreign to the Scripture, and must owe it self unto the
deluded imagination of some few Persons.

Besides, the Scripture does not propose unto us any other kind of Access unto
God under the New Testament, nor any nearer approaches unto him, than what we
have in and through the Mediation of Christ and by Faith in him: but in this
pretense there seems to be such an immediate Enjoyment of God in his Essence
aimed at, as is regardless of Christ, and leaves him quite behind. But God will
not be All in all immediately unto the Church, until the Lord Christ has fully
delivered up the Mediatory Kingdom unto him. And indeed the silence concerning
Christ, in the whole of what is ascribed unto this contemplative Prayer, or
rather the Exclusion of him from any concernment in it as Mediator, is
sufficient with all considerate persons, to evince that it has not the least
interest in the Duty of Prayer, name or thing.

Neither does this Imagination belong any more unto any other part or exercise
of Faith in this World; and yet here we universally walk by Faith and not by
sight. The whole of what belongs unto it may be reduced unto the two heads of
what we do toward God, and what we do enjoy of him therein. And as to the
first, all the actings of our Souls toward God belong unto our Reasonable
service, Romans 12. 1. more is not required of us in a way of Duty. But that is
no part of our Reasonable service, wherein our Minds and understandings have no
concernment. Nor is it any part of our Enjoyment of God in this life. For no
such thing is any where promised unto us, and it is by the Promises alone that
we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, or have any thing from God
communicated unto us. There seems therefore to be nothing in the Bravery of
these affected expressions, but an endeavor to fancy somewhat above the
measure of all possible seize in this life, falling unspeakably beneath
those of future Glory. A kind of Purgatory it is in Devotion, somewhat out of
this World and not in another; above the Earth, and beneath Heaven, where we
may leave it in Clouds and darkness.

CHAP. XI.
Prescribed forms of Prayer Examined.

THERE are also great Pleas for the use of prescribed limited Forms of Prayer,
in opposition to that spiritual Ability in Prayer, which we have described and
proved to be a Gift of the Holy Ghost. Where these Forms are contended for by
men, with respect unto their own use and practice only, as suitable to their
Experience, and judged by them a serving of God with the best that they have; I
shall not take the least notice of them, nor of any Dissent about them. But
whereas a persuasion not only of their lawfulness but of their necessity is
made use of unto other ends and purposes, wherein the Peace and Edification of
Believers is highly concerned, it is necessary we should make some enquiry
thereinto. I say it is only with respect unto such a sense of their nature, and
necessity of their use, as give Occasion, or a supposed Advantage, unto men, to
oppose, deny and speak evil, of that way of Prayer, with its Causes and Ends,
which we have described, that is, that any way consider these Forms of Prayer,
and their Use. For I know well enough, that I have nothing to do to Judge or
Condemn the Persons or Duties of Men in such Acts of Religious Worship, as they
choose for their best, and hope for Acceptance in, unless they are expressly
Idolatrous. For unless it be in such Cases, or the like, which are plain either
in the Light of Nature, or Scripture Revelation, it is a silly Apprehension,
and tending to Atheism, that God does not require of all Men, to regulate their
Actings toward Him, according to that Sovereign Light, which he has erected
in their own Minds.

What the Forms intended are, how composed, how used, how in some Cases
imposed, are things so known to all, that we shall not need to speak to them.
Prayer is God's Institution; and the Reading of these Forms, is that which Men
have made, and set up in the Likeness thereof, or in Compliance with it. For it
is said, That the Lord Christ having provided the Matter of Prayer, and
commanded us to pray, it is left unto us or others, to Compose Prayer, as unto
the Manner of it, as we or they shall see cause. But besides that there is no
Appearance of Truth in the Inference, the direct contrary rather ensuing on the
Proposition laid down; it is built on this Supposition, That besides the
provision of matter of Prayer, and the Command of the Duty, the Lord Christ
has not moreover promised, does not communicate unto his Church, such
Spiritual Aids and Assistances, as shall enable them, without any other outward
pretended Helps, to pray according unto the Mind of God: Which we must not
admit, if we intend to be Christians. In like manner he has provided the whole
Subject Matter of Preaching, and commanded all his Ministers to Preach: But it
does not hence follow, that they may all or any of them make one Sermon, to
constantly read in all Assemblies of Christians, without any variation; unless
we shall grant also, that he cease to Give gifts unto Men, for the Work of
the Ministry. Our Enquiry therefore will be, what Place or Use they may have
therein, or in our Duty, as performed by Virtue thereof; which may be expressed
in the ensuing Observations:

1. The Holy Ghost as a Spirit of Grace and Supplications is no where, that I
know of, promised unto any to help or assist them in composing Prayers for
others; and therefore we have no ground to pray for him or his Assistance unto
that End in particular; nor foundation to build Faith or Expectation of
receiving him, upon. Wherefore he is not in any especial or gracious manner
concerned in that Work or Endeavor. Whether this be a Duty that falls under
his care as communicating gifts in general for the Edification of the Church,
shall be afterward Examined. That which we plead at present is, that he is no
where peculiarly promised for that End, nor have we either command or direction
to ask for his Assistance therein. If any shall say that he is promised to this
purpose, where he is so, as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication; I answer,
besides what has been already pleaded at large in the Explication and
vindication of the proper sense of that Promise; that he is promised directly,
to them that are to pray, and not to them that make Prayers for others, which
themselves will not say is praying. But supposing it a Duty in general so to
compose Prayers for our own or the use of others, it is lawful and warrantable
to pray for the Aid and Guidance of the Holy Ghost therein; not as unto his
peculiar Assistances in Prayer, not as he is unto Believers a Spirit of
Supplication, but as he is our Sanctifier, the Author and efficient cause of
every gracious Work and Duty in us.

It may be, the Prayers composed by some Holy men under the Old Testament by
the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost for the use of the Church, will be
also pretended. But as the Inspiration or Assistance which they had in their
Work was a thing quite of another kind than any thing that is ordinarily
promised, or that any Persons can now pretend unto; so whether they were
dictated unto them by the Holy Ghost to be used afterward by others as mere
Forms of Prayer, may be yet farther enquired into.

The great Plea for some of these external Aids of Prayer, is by this one
Consideration utterly removed out of the way. It is said that some of these
Prayers were prepared by great and Holy men, Martyrs it may be some of them,
for the Truth of the Gospel and Testimony of Jesus. And indeed had any men in
the World a Promise of especial Assistance by the Spirit of God in such a Work,
I should not contend but the Persons intended were as likely to partake of that
Assistance, as any others in these latter Ages. Extraordinary supernatural
Inspiration they had not; And the Holy Apostles who were always under the
Influence and Conduct of it, never made use of it unto any such purpose, as to
prescribe Forms of Prayer, either for the whole Church or single Persons.
Whereas therefore, there is no such especial Promise given unto any, this Work
of composing Prayer, is foreign unto the Duty of Prayer, as unto any Interest
in the gracious Assistance which is promised thereunto, however it may be a
common Duty and fall under the help and Blessing of God in general. So some men
from their acquaintance with the matter of Prayer above others, which they
attain by spiritual Light, Knowledge and Experience, and their Comprehension of
the Arguments which the Scripture directs unto, to be used and pleaded in our
Supplications, may set down and express a Prayer, that is, the matter and
outward Form of it, that shall declare the substance of things to be prayed
for, much more accommodate to the conditions, wants and desires of Christians,
than others can who are not so clearly enlightened as they are, nor have had
the Experience which they have had For those Prayers, as they are called, which
men without such Light and Experience compose of phrases and Expressions
gathered up from others, taken out of the Scripture, or invented by themselves,
and cast into a contexture and method, such as they suppose suited unto Prayer
in general, be they never so well worded, so queint and elegant in Expressions,
are so empty and jejune, as that they can be of no manner of use unto any,
unless to keep them from praying whilst they live. And such we have Books good
store filled withal, easy enough to be composed by such as never in their lives
prayed according to the mind of God. From the former sort much may be learned,
as they Doctrinally exhibit the Matter and Arguments of Prayer. But the
Composition of them for others to be used as their Prayers, is that which no
man has any Promise of peculiar spiritual Assistance in, with respect unto
Prayer in particular.

2. No man has any Promise of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication to enable
him to compose a Form or forms of Prayer for himself. The Spirit of God helps
us to pray, not to make Prayers in that sense. Suppose men, as before, in so
doing, may have his Assistance in general, as in other Studies, and Endeavors;
yet they have not that especial Assistance which he gives as a Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, enabling us to cry Abba Father. For men do not compose Forms
of Prayer, however they may use them, by the immediate actings of Faith, Love,
and Delight in God, with those other Graces, which he Excites and Acts in those
Supplications which are according to the Divine Will. Nor is God the immediate
object of the actings of the Faculties of the Souls of men in such a Work.
Their Inventions, Memories, Judgments are immediately exercised about their
present composition, and there they rest. Wherefore whereas the exercise of
Grace immediately on God in Christ, under the Formal notion of Prayer, is no
part of men's Work or design when they compose and set down Forms for themselves
or others, if any so do, they are not under a Promise of especial Assistance
therein in the manner before declared.

3. As there is no Assistance promised unto the composition of such Forms, so
it is no institution of the Law or Gospel. Prayer it self, is a Duty of the Law
of Nature, and being of such singular and indispensible use unto all Persons,
the Commands for it are reiterated in the Scripture, beyond those concerning
any other particular Duty whatever. And if it has respect unto Jesus Christ
with sundry Ordinances of the Gospel, to be performed in his name, it falls
under a New Divine Institution. Hereon are Commands given us to pray, to pray
continually without ceasing, to pray and faint not, to pray for our selves, to
pray for one another, in our Closets, in our Families, in the Assemblies of the
Church. But as for this Work, of making or composing Forms of Prayers for our
selves to be used as Prayers, there is no Command, no Institution, no mention
in the Scriptures of the Old Testament or the New. It is a Work of Humane
Extract and Original, nor can any thing be expected from it, but what proceeds
from that fountain. A Blessing possibly there may be upon it, but not such as
issues from the especial Assistance of the Spirit of God in it, nor from any
Divine Appointment or Institution whatever. But the Reader must observe, that I
do not urge these things to prove Forms of Prayer Unlawful to be used, but only
at present declare their Nature and Original, with respect unto that Work of
the Holy Spirit, which we have described.

4. This being the Original of Forms of Prayer, the Benefit and Advantage which
is in their Use, which alone is pleadable in their behalf, comes next under
Consideration. And this may be done with respect unto two sorts of Persons:
(1.) Such as have the Gift or Ability of Free Prayer bestowed on them, or
however have attained it. (2.) Such as are mean and low in this Ability, and
therefore incompetent to perform this Duty without that Aid and Assistance of
them. And unto both sorts they are pleaded to be of Use and Advantage.

1. It is pleaded that there is so much Good and so much Advantage in the use
of them, that it is expedient that those who can pray otherwise unto their own
and others Edification, yet ought sometimes to use them. What this Benefit is,
has not been distinctly declared, nor do I know, nor can divine wherein it
should consist. Sacred things are not to be used merely to show our Liberty.
And there seems to be herein a neglect of stirring up the Gift, if not also of
the Grace of God, in those who have received them. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every one to profit withal. And to forgo its exercise on any
just occasion, seems not warrantable. We are bound at all times in the Worship
of God to serve him with the best that we have. And if we have a made in the
Flock and do sacrifice that which in comparison thereof, is a corrupt thing, we
are deceivers. Free Prayer unto them who have an Ability for it, is more suited
to the nature of the Duty in the Light of Nature it self, to Scripture-Commands
and Examples, than the use of any prescribed Forms. To omit therefore the
Exercise of a spiritual Ability therein, and voluntarily to divert unto the
other Relief; which yet, in that case at least, is no Relief; does not readily
present its advantage unto a sober Consideration. And the Reader may observe
that at present I examine not what men or Churches may agree upon by common
consent, as judging and avowing it best for their own Edification, which is a
matter of another consideration; but only of the Duty of Believers as such in
their Respective Stations and Conditions.

2. It is generally supposed that the Use of such Forms are of singular
Advantage unto them that are low and mean in their Ability to pray of
themselves. I propose it thus, because I cannot grant that any who sincerely
believes that there is a God, is sensible of his own wants, and his absolute
dependence upon him, is utterly unable to make Requests unto him for relief,
without any help, but what is suggested unto him by the working of the natural
Faculties of his own Soul. What men will wilfully neglect is one thing, and
what they cannot do, if they seriously apply themselves unto their Duty, is
another. Neither do I believe that any man who is so far instructed in the
Knowledge of Christ by the Gospel, as that he can make use of a composed Prayer
with Understanding, but also that in some measure he is able to call upon God
in the name of Christ, with respect unto what he feels in himself and is
concerned in; and farther no man's Prayers are to be extended. I speak therefore
of those who have the least measure and lowest degree of this Ability, seeing
none are absolutely uninterested therein. Unto this sort of Persons I know not
of what use these Forms are, unless it be to keep them low and mean all the
Days of their Lives. For whereas both in the state of nature and the state of
Grace, in one whereof every man is supposed to be, there are certain Heavenly
sparks suited unto each condition; the main Duty of all men, is to stir them up
and increase them. Even in the Remainders of lapsed nature, there are Coelestes
igniculi, in-notices of Good and Evil, Accusations and Apologies of Conscience.
These none will deny, but that they ought to be stirred up, and increased;
which can be no otherwise done but in their sedulous exercise. Nor is there any
such effectual way of their Exercise, as in the Souls application of it self
unto God with respect unto them, which is done in Prayer only. But as for those
whom in this matter we principally regard, that is, professed Believers in
Jesus Christ, there is none of them but have such Principles of spiritual Life,
and therein of all obedience unto God, and communion with him, as being
improved and exercised, under those continual supplies of the Spirit which they
receive from Christ their Head, will enable them to discharge every Duty, that
in every Condition or Relation is required of them, in an acceptable manner.
Among these is that of an Ability for Prayer; and to deny them to have it,
supposing them true Believers, is expressly to contradict the Apostle, affirming
that because we are Sons, God sends forth the Spirit of his Son into our
Hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father. But this Ability, as I have showed, is no
way to be improved, but in and by a constant exercise. Now whether the use of
the Forms enquired into, which certainly takes men off from the Exercise of
what Ability they have, do not tend directly to keep them still low and mean in
their Abilities, is not hard to determine.

But suppose these spoken of, are not yet real Believers, but only such as
profess the Gospel, not yet sincerely converted unto God, whose Duty also it is
to pray on all occasions: These have no such principle or Ability to improve,
and therefore this Advantage is not by them to be neglected. I answer; that the
matter of all spiritual Gifts is spiritual Light; according therefore to their
measure in the Light of the knowledge of the Gospel, such is their measure in
spiritual Gifts also. If they have no spiritual Light, no insight into the
knowledge of the Gospel, Prayers framed and composed according unto it will be
of little use unto them. If they have any such Light, it ought to be improved
by Exercise in this Duty which is of such indispensible necessity unto their
Souls.

5. But yet the Advantage which all sorts of Persons may have hereby, in having
the matter of Prayer prepared for them and suggested unto them, is also
insisted on. This they may be much to seek in, who yet have sincere desires to
pray, and whose Affections will comply with what is proposed unto them. And
this indeed would carry a great Appearance of Reason with it, but that there
are other ways appointed of God unto this End; and which are sufficient
thereunto, under the Guidance, conduct and assistance of the Blessed Spirit,
whose Work must be admitted in all parts of this Duty, unless we intend to
frame Prayers that shall be an abomination to the Lord. Such are men's diligent
and sedulous consideration of themselves, their spiritual state and condition,
their wants and desires; a diligent consideration of the Scripture, or the
Doctrine of it in the Ministry of the Word, whereby they will be both
instructed in the whole matter of Prayer, and convinced of their own
concernment therein, with all other Helps of coming to the knowledge of God and
themselves; all which they are to attend unto, who intend to pray in a due
manner. To furnish men with Prayers to be said by them, and so to satisfy their
Consciences whilst they live in the neglect of these things, is to deceive
them, and not to help or instruct them. And if they do conscientiously attend
unto these things, they will have no need of those other pretended helps. For
men to live and converse with the World, not once enquiring into their own
ways, or reflecting on their own hearts (unless under some charge of Conscience
accompanied with fear or danger,) never endeavoring to examine, try or compare
their state and condition with the Scripture, nor scarce considering either
their own wants or Gods Promises, to have a Book lie ready for them wherein
they may read a Prayer, and so suppose they have discharged their Duty in that
matter, is a course which surely they ought not to be countenanced or
encouraged in. Nor is the perpetual Rotation of the same words and Expressions,
suited to instruct or carry on men in the knowledge of any thing, but rather to
divert the mind from the due consideration of the things intended, and
therefore commonly issues in Formality. And where men have words or Expressions
prepared for them, and suggested unto them, that really signify the things
wherein they are concerned, yet if the Light and knowledge of those Principles
of Truth, whence they are derived, and whereinto they are resolved, be not in
some measure fixed and abiding in their Minds, they cannot be much benefited or
edisied by their Repetition.

6. Experience is pleaded in the same case; and this with me, where Persons are
evidently conscientious, is of more moment than an hundred notional Arguments
that cannot be brought to that Trial. Some therefore say that they have had
spiritual Advantage, the Exercise of Grace, and Holy Intercourse with God in
the use of such Forms, and have their Affections warmed and their Hearts much
bettered thereby. And this they take to be a clear Evidence and token that they
are not disapproved of God; Yea, that they are a great advantage, at least unto
many, in Prayer. Answ. Whether they are approved or disapproved of God, whether
they are Lawful or Unlawful, we do not consider; but only whether they are for
spiritual Benefit and Advantage for the good of our own Souls and the
Edification of others, as set up in competition with the Exercise of the Gift
before described. And herein I am very unwilling to oppose the Experience of
any one who seems to be under the conduct of the least beam of Gospel Light.
Only I shall desire to propose some few things to their consideration. As,

1. Whether they understand aright the difference that is between natural
Devotion occasionally excited, and the due actings of Evangelical Faith and
Love with other Graces of the Spirit in a way directed unto by Divine
Appointment? All men who acknowledge a Deity or Divine Power which they adore,
when they address themselves seriously to perform any Religious Worship
thereunto in their own way, be it what it will, will have their Affections
moved and excited suitably unto the Apprehensions they have of what they
worship; Yea though in particular it have no Existence but in their own
Imaginations. For these things ensue on the general notion of a Divine Power,
and not on the Application of them to such Idols, as indeed are nothing in the
World. There will be in such Persons, Dread, and Reverence, and Fear; as there
was in some of the Heathen unto an unspeakable Horror, when they entered into
the Temples, and merely imaginary presence of their Gods, the whole Work being
begun and finished in their Fancies. And sometimes great joys, satisfactions
and delights do ensue on what they do. For as what they so do, is suited to the
best Light they have, and men are apt to have a complacency in their own
inventions as Micah had Judge. 17. 13. and upon inveterate prejudices which are
the Guides of most men in Religion; their Consciences find Relief in the
discharge of their Duty. These things I say are found in Persons of the Highest
and most dreadful Superstitions in the World, yea heightened unto inexpressible
Agitations of Mind in Horror on the one side, and Raptures or Ecstasies on the
other. And they are all tempered and qualifyed according to the mode and way of
Worship, wherein men are engaged; but in themselves they are all of the same
nature, that is natural, or effects and impressions upon Nature. So it is with
the Mahumetans who excel in this Devotion; and so it is with Idolatrous
Christians who place the Excellency and Glory of their profession therein.
Wherefore such Devotion, such affections will be excited by Religious offices
in all that are sincere in their use, whether they be of Divine Appointment or
no. But the actings of Faith and Love on God through Christ according to the
Gospel or the Tenor of the New Covenant, with the effects produced thereby in
the Heart and Affections, are things quite of another kind and nature: and
unless men do know how really to distinguish between these things, it is to no
purpose to plead Spiritual Benefit and Advantage in the use of such Forms,
seeing possibly it may be no other, but of the same kind with what all false
Worshippers in the World have or may have Experience of.

2. Let them diligently enquire whether the effects on their Hearts which they
plead, do not proceed from a precedent preparation, a good design, and upright
Ends occasionally excited. Let it be supposed, that those who thus make use of,
and plead for Forms of Prayer especially in public, do in a due manner prepare
themselves for it by Holy Meditation, with an endeavor to bring their Souls
into an holy Frame of Fear, Delight and Reverence of God; let it also be
supposed that they have a good End and design in the Worship they address
themselves unto, namely the Glory of God, and their own spiritual Advantage;
the Prayers themselves, though they should be in some things irregular, may
give occasion to exercise those Acts of Grace which they were otherwise
prepared for. And I say yet farther,

3. That whilst these Forms of Prayer are clothed with the general notions of
Prayer, that is, are esteemed as such in the minds of them that use them, are
accompained in their use with the Motives and Ends of Prayer, express no matter
unlawful to be insisted on in Prayer, directing the Souls of men to none but
lawful Objects of Divine Worship and Prayer, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit;
and whilst men make use of them with the true design of Prayer looking after
due assistance unto Prayer, I do not judge there is any such evil in them as
that God will not communicate his Spirit to any in the use of them, so as that
they should have no holy Communion with him in and under them. Much less will I
say that God never therein regards their Persons, or rejects their praying as
unlawful. For the Persons and Duties of men may be accepted with God when they
walk and act in sincerity according to their Light, though in many things, and
those of no small importance, sundry irregularities are found both in what they
do, and in the manner of doing it. Where Persons walk before God in their
Integrity, and practice nothing contrary to their Light and conviction in his
Worship, God is merciful unto them, although they order not every thing
according to the Rule and measure of the Word. So was it with them who came to
the Passover in the Days of Hezekiah; they had not cleansed themselves, but did
eat the Passover otherwise than it was written, 2 Chorn. 30. 18. For whom the
good King made the Solemn Prayer suited to their occasion, The good Lord pardon
every one that prepares his Heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though
he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary; and the Lord
hearkened unto Hezekiah and healed the People, ver. 18, 19, 20. Here was a Duty
for the substance of it appointed of God; but in the manner of its performance
there was a failure, they did it not according to what was written, which is
the sole rule of all Religious Duties. This God was displeased withal, yet
graciously passed by the offense, and accepted them whose Hearts were upright
in what they did. In the mean time I do yet judge, that the use of them is in
it self obstructive of all the principal Ends of Prayer and sacred Worship.
Where they are alone used, they are opposite to the Edification of the Church,
and where they are imposed to the absolute exclusion of other Prayer, are
destructive of its Liberty, and render a good part of the purchase of Christ of
none effect.

Things being thus stated, it will be enquired whether the use of such Forms of
Prayer is lawful or no. To this Enquiry some thing shall be returned briefly in
way of Answer, and an End put unto this discourse. And I say,

1. To compose and write Forms of Prayer to be Directive and Doctrinal helps
unto others, as to the matter and method to be used in the right discharge of
this Duty, is lawful and may in some cases be useful. It were better, it may
be, if the same thing were done in another way suited to give direction in the
case, and not cast into the Form of a Prayer which is apt to divert the mind
from the due consideration of its proper End and use, unto that which is not
so. But this way of Instruction is not to be looked on as unlawful merely for
the Form and method whereinto it is cast, whilst its true use only is attended
unto.

2. To Read, Consider and Meditate upon such written Prayers, as to the matter
and Arguments of Prayer expressed in them, composed by Persons from their own
Experience and the Light of Scripture directions, or to make use of Expressions
set down in them where the Hearts of them that read them are really affected,
because they find their state and Condition, their wants and desires declared
in them, is not unlawful, but may be of good use unto some; though I must
acknowledge I never heard any expressing any great benefit which they had
received thereby. But it is possible that some may so do. For no such Freedom
of Prayer is asserted as should make it unlawful for men to make use of any
proper means the better to enable them to pray. Nor is any such Ability of
Prayer granted, as to supersede the Duty of using means for the Increase and
furtherance of it.

3. To set up and prescribe the use of such Forms universally in opposition and
unto the Exclusion of free Prayer by the Aid of the Spirit of Grace, is
contrary not only to many Divine precepts before insisted on, but to the Light
of nature it self requiring every man to pray, and on some occasions
necessitating them thereunto. But whatever be the practice of some men, I know
not that any such Opinion is pleaded for, and so shall not farther oppose it.

4. It is not enquired whether Forms of Prayer, especially as they may be
designed unto and used for other Ends and not to be read instead of Prayer,
have in their Composition any thing of intrinsecal evil in them; for it is
granted they have not: But the Enquiry is, whether in their use as Prayers they
are not hindrances unto the right discharge of the Duty of Prayer according to
the mind of God, and so may be unlawful in that respect. For I take it as
granted that they are no where appointed of God for such an Use, no where
commanded so to be used; whence an argument may be formed against their having
any Interest in Divine acceptable Worship, but it is not of our present
Consideration. For if on the accounts mentioned, they appear not contrary unto,
or inconsistent with, or are not used in a way exclusive of that Work of the
Holy Spirit in Prayer which we have described from the Scripture, nor are
reducible unto any Divine prohibition, whilst I may enjoy my own Liberty, I
shall not contend with any about them. Nor shall I now engage into the
Examination of the Arguments that are pleaded in their behalf, which some have
greatly multiplied, as I suppose, not much to the Advantage of their cause. For
in things of Religious Practice one Testimony of Scripture rightly explained
and applied, with the Experience of Believers thereon, is of more weight and
value than a thousand dubious Reasonings, which cannot be evidently resolved
into those Principles. Wherefore some few additional Considerations shall put
an issue unto this Discourse.

1. Some observe that there are Forms of Prayer composed and prescribed to be
used both in the Old Testament and the New. Such, they say, was the Form of
Blessing prescribed unto the Priests on solemn Occasions, Numb. 6. 24, 25, 26.
And the Psalms of David, as also the Lords Prayer in the New Testament. (1.) If
this be so, it proves that Forms of Prayer are not intrinsecally evil, which is
granted, yet may the use of them be unnecessary. (2.) The Argument will not
hold, so far as it is usually extended, at least; God himself has prescribed
some Forms of Prayer to be used by some Persons on some occasions, therefore
men may invent yea and prescribe those that shall be for common and constant
use. He who forbad all Images or all use of them in sacred things, appointed
the making of the Cherubims in the Tabernacle and Temple. (3.) The Argument
from the practice in use under the Old Testament in this matter, if any could
thence be taken, when the People were carnal, and tied up unto Carnal
Ordinances, unto the Duty and practice of Believers under the New Testament,
and a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit, has been before disproved. (4.)
The words prescribed unto the Priests were not a Prayer properly, but an
Authoritative Benediction, and an instituted sign of Gods blessing the People;
For so it is added in the Explication of that Ordinance, They shall put my name
upon the Children of Israel, and I will bless them, ver. 27. (5.) David's Psalms
were given out by immediate Inspiration, were most of them Mystical and
Prophetical, appointed to be used in the Church, as all other Scriptures, only
some of them in a certain manner, namely, of Singing; and that manner also
determined by Divine Appointment. (6.) That any Form of Prayer is appointed in
the New Testament to be used as a Form, is neither granted nor can be proved.
(7.) Give us Prayers composed by Divine inspiration with a command for their
use, with the Time, Manner and Form of their usage, which these instances prove
to be lawful, if they prove any thing in this case, and there will be no
contest about them. (8.) All and every one of the Precedents or Examples which
we have in the whole Scripture of the Prayers of any of the People of God, Men
or Women, being all accommodated to their present occasions, and uttered in the
Freedom of their own Spirits, do all give Testimony unto free Prayer, if not
against the use of Forms in that Duty.

2. Moreover, it seems that when any one prays, his Prayer is a Form unto all
that join with him, whether in Families or Church Assemblies; which some lay
great weight upon, though I am not able to discern the Force of it in this
case. For (1.) The question is solely about him that prays and his discharge
of Duty according to the mind of God, and not concerning them who join with
him. (2.) The conjunction of others with him that prays according to his
Ability, is an express command of God. (3.) Those who so join are at Liberty
when it is their Duty to pray themselves. (4.) That which is not a Form in it
self, is not a Form to any; for there is more required to make it so, than
merely that the words and Expressions are not of their own present Invention.
It is to them, the Benefit of a Gift bestowed for their Edification in its
present Exercise according to the Mind of God. That only is a Form of Prayer
unto any, which he himself uses as a Form; for its nature depends on its use.
(5.) The Argument is incogent; God has commanded some to pray according to the
Ability they have received, and others to join with them therein; therefore it
is lawful to invent Forms of Prayer for our selves or others to be used as
Prayers by them or us.

3. That which those who pretend unto moderation in this matter plead, is, that
Prayer it self is a commanded Duty; but Praying by or with a prescribed Form is
only an outward manner and Circumstance of it, which is indifferent, and may or
may not be used as we see occasion. And might a general Rule to this purpose be
duly established, it would be of huge importance. But (1.) It is an easy thing
to invent and prescribe such outward Forms and manner of outward Worship, as
shall leave nothing of the Duty prescribed but the empty name. (2.) Praying
before an image, or Worshipping God or Christ by an image is but an outward
mode of Worship, yet such as renders the whole Idolatrous. (3.) Any outward
mode of Worship, the Attendance whereunto, or the Observance whereof, is
prejudicial unto the due performance of the Duty whereunto it is annexed, is
inexpedient; and what there is hereof in the present instance, must be judged
from the preceding discourse.

FINIS.

