EXERCITATIONS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Also concerning the MESSIAH.
WHEREIN

The Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual Redeemer of Mankind, are
Explained and Vindicated.

His Coming, and Accomplishment of his Work according to the Promises, is
proved and confirmed.

The Person, or who he is, is declared.

The whole Economy of the Mosaical Law, Rites, Worship, and Sacrifices, is
explained.

AND IN ALL, The Doctrine of the Person, Office, and Work of the Messiah, is
opened; The nature and demerit of the first sin is unfolded; The Opinions and
Traditions of the Ancient and Modern Jews are examined; Their Objections
against the Lord Christ and the Gospel are answered: The time of the coming of
the Messiah is stated: And the great fundamental Truths of the Gospel
vindicated.

With an Exposition and Discourses on the Two First Chapters of the said
Epistle to the HEBREWS.

By J. Owen D.D.

LONDON, Printed, by Robert White, for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the
Peacock in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1668.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr William Morris Knight, One of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State, etc.
SIR,
THE Dedication of Books unto Persons of Worth and Honor has secured it self
from the Impeachment of Censure, by taking Sanctuary in the Usage of all Times
and Ages. Herein therefore, as none is needed, so I shall make use of no
Apology. But the consideration of some Circumstances (needless to be repeated)
seem to render an account of the reason of my particular address unto You in
this manner, necessary. This therefore I shall give, but briefly;

Ne longo sermon morer tua tempora -- That which principally in this matter I
resolved my thoughts into, was a design to answer my own inclination and
desire, in Testifying a respectful Honor to a Person who in a place of
Eminency, has given so fair an example of a singular conjunction in himself,
of Civil Prudence, and all manner of useful Literature, with their mutual
Subserviency unto each other; an endeavor whereof, the Wisdom of all Ages has
esteemed needful, though few individuals have attained unto it. For whereas a
defect in Learning, has tempted some, otherwise Prudent and Wise in the
Management of Affairs, unto a contempt of it; and skill therein, has given
unto others a mistaken confidence, that it alone is sufficient for all the ends
of Humane Life, an Industrious Attempt, for a furnishment of the Mind with a
due mixture of them both, has been greatly Neglected, to the no small
disadvantage of Humane Affairs. It cannot therefore seem strange, nor ought any
to be offended, that one who dares profess a great Honor unto, and Admiration
of both these Endowments of the mind of Man, should express them with that
respect, which alone he is capable to give, unto Him, who in a Place of Eminent
Trust and Employment, has given a singular instance of their happy
conjunction, and readiness to Coalesce in the same mind, to enable it unto a
regular and steady pursuit of their common ends. Whether I shall by this
address attain that end, or no, I know not; but this is that which principally
I aimed at therein: And to the Reason whereof I leave the Judgment of my
undertakings. But yet I may not omit, that your favor has also given me
particular grounds for this confidence; and such as have been prevalent against
those impressions of discouragements, which I am naturally very liable to admit
of, and receive. Your Candid Esteem of some former Endeavors in this kind (and
which when carried without the Verge of those Lines of Communication, within
whose compass Men and their Writings are Judged by Party and scarce otherwise,
have received a fair acceptance in the world) were no small encouragement unto
me, not to desert those wearisome Labors, which have no other Reward or End,
but the furtherance of Public Good; especially having this only way left me to
serve the Will of God, and the Interest of the Church, in my Generation. It was
also through the countenance of your Favor, that this and some other Treatises
have received Warrant to pass freely into the world; which though I am
uncertain of what advantage they may be unto any, by reason of their own
defects, and the prejudices of others; yet I want not the highest Security,
that there is nothing in them tending to the least disadvantage unto those,
whose concernment lies in Peace and Truth in these Nations.

For the Treatises themselves, which I desire herewith to represent to some of
your Leisure hours, I shall not offend against the Public Service, in
detaining you with an account of them. Their Subject Matter, as to its Weight,
Worth and Necessity, will speak for it self; the main objects of our present
Faith, and principal Foundations of our future expectations, our Pleas and
Evidences for a blessed Et^rnity, are here insisted on. And whether the
Temptations, Opinions, and bold Presumptions of many in these days, do not
call for a renewed consideration and confirmation of them, is left to the
Judgment of Persons indifferent, and unprejudiced; the manner of their
handling is submitted unto yours, which is highly and singularly esteemed, by

March 20. 1667. SIR, Your most humble and obliged Servant, JOHN OWEN.


Christian Reader.
IF thou intendest to engage any part of thy time in the perusal of the ensuing
Discourses and Exposition, it may not be amiss to take along with thee the
consideration of some things concerning the design and aim of their Author, in
the Writing and present publishing of them, which are here proposed unto thee.
It is now sundry years since I purposed in my self, if God gave life and
opportunity, to endeavor, according to the measure of the Gift received, an
Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews. A Subject this was, I then knew, and
now acknowledge, much labored in by many eminent and learned men, both of old
and of late. In particular, some entire Commentaries, composed with good
judgment, and to very good purpose, have been published in our own Language.
Yea, from him who first began a serious Exposition of this Epistle, and whom
none in all things have to this day exceeded, there have passed few ages
wherein some or other have not endeavored the Explication of it. And this also
has been done by men of all sorts and parties, of all persuasions and Opinions
in Christian Religion; an account of whose several endeavors shall elsewhere
be given. Somewhat there was of encouragement unto me in my designed
undertaking, and somewhat of quite another tendency in this consideration. The
help which I might receive from the sedulous labors of so many learned men,
and those in Times, Places, Principles, distant and distinguished from each
other; as also managing their common design with great variety as to particular
intentions; I looked on as a matter of no small advantage unto me. Some I found
had critically examined many of the Words, Phrases and Expressions of the
Writer; some compared his Quotations with the places in the Old Testament from
whence they are taken. Some had endeavored an Analysis of the several
Discourses of the Author, with the nature and force of the Arguments insisted
on by him. The labors of some were to improve the Truths contained in the
Epistle unto Practice; others have collected the difficulties which they
observed therein, and scanned them in a Scholastical way, with Objections and
Solutions after their manner. Others had an especial design unto the Places,
whose sense is controverted amongst the several Parties at variance in
Christian Religion; all in their way and manner endeavoring to give light to
the intentions of the Holy Ghost, either in particular passages, or in the
whole Epistle. The helps and advantages in the investigation of the mind of
God, which by their labors might be obtained, I looked on as a great
encouragement to undertake the same work with them, and to promote the light of
truth thereby. But on the other side, no small objection unto the whole work
and design did hence also arise. For it might seem to some altogether needless
to engage in that, which so many had already gone through with, to the great
profit and edification of the Church. And nothing can or ought more justly to
weaken and take off the resolution of any in this kind of endeavors, than that
they are needless. For what ever is so, will also thereby be useless, and
because useless, burdensome. This consideration, I confess, did for a long
time deter me from executing my purpose, of casting my Mite into this
Sanctuary. But yet after I had made a through perusal of all the Comments,
Expositions, Annotations, or Observations on the Epistle, which by any means I
could obtain, I returned again upon sundry considerations unto my former
thoughts and resolutions. For, first, I found the excellency of the Writing to
be such, the depths of the Mysteries contained in it to be so great, the
compass of the truth asserted unfolded and explained so extensive and diffused
through the whole body of Christian Religion, the usefulness of the things
delivered in it so important, and indispensibly necessary, as that I was
quickly satisfied, that the Wisdom, Grace and Truth treasured in this sacred
Storehouse, are so far from being exhausted and fully drawn forth by the
endeavors of any, or all that are gone before us, or from being all perfectly
brought forth to light by them, as that I was assured that there was ^eft a
sufficient ground and foundation, not only for renewed investigation after rich
Branches in this Mine for the present Generation, but for all them that shall
succeed unto the consummation of all things. For if we find it thus in Humane
Sciences, that no Ability, no Industry, no Combination of the most happy Wits
for their improvement in former Ages, has precluded the way unto persons of
Ingenuity and Learning, to add considerably in several kinds unto their
respective advancement; nor shall the sedulity of this present Age in the
furtherance and adorning of them, be ever able to bring them unto any such
perfection, as to condemn succeeding Generations unto the slothful and servile
drudgery of the mere perusal of their Dictates and Prescriptions, and so by the
use of their Inventions leave unto others only that of their memory? how much
more must we grant the same in things Divine, and the spiritual knowledge of
them, whose stores in this life are absolutely inexhaustible, and whose depths
are not fully to be fathomed. Again it is evident, that the principal things
asserted and taught in this Epistle, such as is the Doctrine of the Person and
the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, have received a more eager and subtle
opposition, since the labors and endeavors of the most in the Exposition of
it, than they had done before. And as this renders the vindication of the
places wherein they are taught and asserted, necessary, so it is not unknown
unto those who are conversant in these kinds of studies, what advantage may be
obtained in the investigation of truth by the opposition that is made unto it;
especially when that Opposition is managed with a curious search into every
word and syllable which may seem to give countenance unto it, as also in the
sifting of every tittle and particle that stands in its way; which course of
procedure, the enemies of the Truths mentioned, have with much art and industry
engaged themselves into. But that which most of all took off the weight of the
discouragement that arose from the multiplied endeavors of learned Men in this
kind, was an Observation, that all of them being intent on the sense of the
words, as absolutely considered, and the use of them to the present Church, had
much over-looked the direct respect and regard that the Author had in the
writing of this Epistle to the then past, present, and future condition of the
Hebrews, or Church of the Jews. Looking at these things as dead and buried, of
no use in the present state of the Church, they did either wholly neglect them,
or pass them over in a light and perfunctory manner. Nor indeed had many of
them, though otherwise excellently well qualified, a competency of skill for
the due consideration of things of that nature. But yet those that shall
seriously and with judgment consider the design of the Writer of this Epistle,
the time wherein he wrote it, the proper end for which it was composed, the
subject matter treated of in it, the principles he proceeds upon, and his
manner of arguing, will easily perceive, that without a serious consideration
of them, it is not possible to come to a right comprehension (in many things)
of the mind of the Holy Ghost therein. Many Principles of Truth he takes for
granted, as acknowledged amongst the Hebrews during their former Church state,
and makes them a foundation for his own Superstructure; many Customs, Vsages,
Ordinances, Institutions, received sense of places of Scripture amongst the
Jews, he either produces or reflects upon, and one way or other makes use of
the whole Mosaical Economy or System of Divine Worship under the Law, unto his
own purpose. The common neglect of these things, or slight transaction of them
in most Expositors, was that which principally relieved me from the
forementioned discouragement. And this also was that which at length gave rise
unto those Exercitations, which take up the greatest part of the ensuing Book.
Some of them are indeed indispensibly due to the work it self. Such are those
which concern the Canonical Authority of the Epistle, the Writer of it, the
Time of its writing, the Phraseology of the Author, with the way he proceeds in
the Quotations of Testimonies out of the Old Testament, and some other of the
same tendency; the residue of them were occasioned merely by the consideration
before insisted on. Some great Principles I observed, that the Apostle
supposed, which he built all his arguings and exhortations upon, not directly
proving or confirming the Principles themselves, but as taking them for
granted; partly from the faith of the Judaical Church, and partly from the New
Revelation of the Gospel, which those to whom he wrote did as yet admit of, and
avow. Such were these, That there was a Messiah promised from the foundation of
the world, to be a Spiritual Redeemer of Mankind. That this Messiah was come,
and had performed and accomplished the work assigned unto him for the end of
their Redemption. That Jesus of Nazareth was this Messiah. Not one line in the
whole Epistle, but is in an especial manner resolved into these Principles, and
deduced from them. These therefore I found it necessary to examine and confirm,
to unfold, vindicate, and declare, that their influence unto the Apostles
discourse might be manifest, and his arguing from them be understood. It is
true, I have so handled them, as all along to represent the Opinions of the
incredulous Apostate Jews about them, and to vindicate them from the exceptions
of their greatest Masters, of old and of late. But he that shall look on these
Considerations and Discourses as a matter only of Controversy with the Jews,
will but evidence his own weakness and Ignorance in things of this Nature. Who
knows not that they are the very fundamental Principles of our Christian
Profession; and which because of that opposition that is made unto them, ought
to be frequently inculcated and strongly confirmed. And if Learned Men find it
in this day Necessary for them to dispute for, to prove and vindicate the very
Principles of Natural Theology, the Being and Attributes of God, the truth
whereof has left indelible characters of it self upon the minds of all the
Children of Men; how much more Necessary must it needs be, to endeavor the
confirmation and re-inforcement of these grand Principles of Supernatural
Revelation, which have no contribution of evidence from the inbred inexpugnable
light of Nature, and yet are no less indispensibly Necessary unto the future
condition of the souls of Men, than those others are. I am not therefore
without hope, that the handling of them, as it was necessary unto my design, so
it will not be unacceptable unto the Candid Reader. For what is mixed in our
Discourses of them concerning Judaical Customs, Opinions, Practices,
Expositions, Interpretations of Promises, Traditions and the like, will not I
hope give distaste unto any, unless it be such as being Ignorant of them, and
unacquainted with them, will choose so to continue, rather than be instructed
by them, whom they would by no means have supposed to be in any thing more
knowing than themselves. I doubt not therefore, but our endeavors on that
subject, will be able to secure their own station, as to their usefulness, both
by the importance of the Matter treated of in them, as also from the Necessity
of laying them as a sure Foundation unto the ensuing Exposition of the Epistle
it self.

Besides these general principles, there are also sundry other things belonging
to the Mosaical order and frame of Divine Worship, which the Apostle either
directly treats of, or one way or other improves unto his own peculiar
design. This also he does sometimes directly and intentionally, and sometimes
in transitu, reflecting on them, and as it were only calling them to mind,
leaving the Hebrews to the Consideration of what concerning them, they had been
formerly instructed in. Such is the whole Matter of the Priesthood and
Sacrifices of the Law, of the Tabernacle, and Utensils of it, of the Old
Covenant, of the giving of the Law, the Commands, Precepts, and Sanctions of it
in its Promises and I breatnings, Rewards and Punishments. Hereunto also he
adds a remembrance of the Call of Abraham, with the state and condition of the
people from thence unto the giving of the Law, with sundry things of the like
nature. Without a competent comprehension of, and acquaintance with these
things, and their relation to the Will and Worship of God, it is altogether in
vain for any one to imagine, that they may arrive unto any clear understanding
of the mind of the Holy Ghost in this portion of Scripture.

Now as I had observed, that the Consideration and Explanation of them had been
too much neglected by the generality of Expositors, so I quickly found, that to
insist at large upon them, and according as their weight does deserve, in the
particular places, wherein the Mention of them does occurr, would too often,
and too much divert me from the pursuit of the especial design of the Apostle
in those places and disenable the Reader from carrying on the tendency of the
whole in the perusal of it. To prevent both which inconveniences, I fixed upon
the course the Reader will find insisted on; namely, to handle them all
severally, and apart, in previous Exercitations.

Having given this general Account of my design and purpose in the ensuing
Discourses; some few requests unto the Reader shall absolve him from farther
attendance in this entrance. First, I must beg his Candid Intepretation of the
reporting of some of those Jewish Fables and Traditions which he will meet
withal in some of the Exercitations. I could plead Necessity, and Use; and
those such as will evince themselves in the several places and passages of the
Discourses where they are reported. For they are none of them nakedly produced,
to satisfy the Curiosity of any; but either the investigation of some truth
hidden under them, and involved in them, or the discovery of their rise and
occasion, or the laying open of the folly of the pretenses of the present Jews
in their unbelief, does still accompany their recital. However, I will not
rigidly justify the production of all and every of them, but put it amongst
those things, wherein the Candor of the Reader may have an opportunity to
exercise it self. I must beg also of the Learned Reader a consideration of the
state and condition, wherein through the good Providence of God I have been,
during the greatest part of the time wherein these Exercitations were written
and Printed; and I shall pray in requital of his kindness, that he may never
know by Experience, what Impressions of failings, mistakes, and several defects
in exactness, uncertainties, s^reights and exclusion from the use of Books will
bring and leave upon endeavors of this kind. And what ever defects they may
meet withal, or complain of in these Discourses, my design was through the
blessing of God, that they should have no cause to complain of want of
diligence and industry in me. But yet I am sensible in the issue that many
things may seem to represent that carelessness of mind, or precipitancy in
writing, which is altogether unmeet to be imposed on Men in this knowing age.
But what ever other reflections I may be obnoxious unto, for the want of
Ability and Judgment, which in me are very small in reference to so great an
undertaking, I must crave of the Reader, to believe, that I would not willingly
be guilty of so much importune confidence, as to impose upon him things trite,
crude, and undigested, which either ordinary prudence might have concealed, or
ordinary diligence have amended. What ever therefore of that kind may appear
unto him, I would crave, that it may be laid upon the account of the condition
which I have intimated before.

For the Exposition of the Epistle it self, whereof I have given here a
Specimen in the two first Chapters, I confess, as was said before, that I have
had thoughts for many years to attempt something in it, and in the whole course
of my Studies have not been without some regard thereunto. But yet I must now
say, that after all searching and Reading, Prayer and Assiduous Meditation on
the Text, have been my only reserve, and for most useful means of Light and
Assistance. By these have my thoughts been freed from many and many an
entanglement, which the Writings of others on the same subject, had either cast
me into, or could not deliver me from. Careful I have been, as of my life and
soul, to bring no prejudicate sense unto the words, to impose no meaning of my
own, or other Men's upon them, nor to be imposed on by the reasonings,
pretenses, or Curiosities of any; but always went nakedly to the word it self,
to learn humbly the mind of God in it, and to express it as he should enable
me. To this end, I always in the first place considered the sense, meaning,
and importance of the words of the Text, and the consideration of their
Original Derivation, use in other Authors, especially in the LXX. of the Old
Testament, in the Books of the New, particularly, the Writings of the same
Author, was constantly made use of, to that purpose. Often times the words
expressed out of the Hebrew, or the things alluded unto amongst that people, I
found to give much light into the words of the Apostle themselves. Unto the
general rule of attending unto the design and scope of the place, subject
treated of, mediums fixed on for Arguments, Methods of Ratiocination, I still
kept in my eye the Time and Season of Writing this Epistle, the state and
condition of them to whom it was wrote, their Persuasions, Prejudices, Customs,
Light and Traditions, the Covenant and Worship of the Church of old, the
Translation of Covenant Privileges and Worship over unto the Gentiles upon a
new account, the course of Providential Dispensations that the people were
under, the near expiration of their Church and State, with the speedy
approaching of their utter abolition and destruction, with the Temptations that
befell them on all these various acc^unts; Without which, it is impossible for
any one Justly to follow the Apostle, so as to keep close to his design, or
fully to understand his mind and meaning. If any shall think, that I have
referred too many things unto the Customs and Vsages of the Jews, and looked
too much after some guidance in sundry Expressions and Discourses of the
Apostle from them; I only Answer, that as when I am convinced by particular
instances of mistakes therein, I shall willingly acknowledge them: so for the
present I am satisfied, that other Expositors have had much too little regard
thereunto. The Exposition of the Text is attended with an improvement of
Practical Observations, answering the great end for which the Epistle was
committed over to all Generations for the use of the Church. If in some of them
I shall seem to any to have been too Prolix, I must only Answer, that having no
other way to serve the Edification of the Generality of Christians, I thought
not so. Yet to prevent their farther Objections on that account, I intend, that
if ever any addition in the same work be prepared for public view, to regulate
my proceedings therein, according as I shall have account from Persons of
Learning and Godliness, concerning that course of procedure, which they esteem
to tend most to the good and edification of the Church of God, to whose
Judgment I heartily submit these and all other endeavors of the like kind,
whereunto I have been, or yet may be called.

JOHN OWEN.

ERRATA in the Exercitations.
PAge 5. lin. 2 M^^robius read Arnobius: p. 29. l. 10. a fin^, (...), r. (...):
p. 35. l. 1. (...), r. (...): p. 48 l. 9. great, r. Greek: p. 55. l. 31. Heirs,
r. Heir: p. 58. l. 36. coining, r. counting: p. 72. l. 21. r. (...), r. (...):
p. 73. l. 31, 32. (...), r. (...): l. 45. (...), r. (...): p. 81. l. 21. r.
from contriving: p. 97. l. 11. Onselor, r. Onbalos. p. 98. l. 41. (...), r.
(...): p. 99. l. 14. (...), r. (...): p. 101. l. 4. (...), r. (...): p. 103. l.
23. pliabit, r. filiabit: l. 34. Psalm. 8. r. 80. p. 106. l. 9. a fine, distino.
cholec. r. distinc. chelec. p. 123. l. 5. a fine, mere, r. more. p. 124. l. 11.
Anillus, r. Armillus: p. 126. l. 25. Abriba, r. A^iba: p. 134. l. 30. C^sars
of, r. C^sar. Os: p. 142. l. 15. (...), r. (...): p. 144. l. 4. a fine, (...),
r. (...): p. 146. l. 6. a fine, Pericus, r. Pereri^s: p. 147. l. 34. Aruth. r.
Arach. p. 151. l. 14. a fine, Drusius. Amama: p. 153. l. 15. Kelanna: l. 39.
(...), r. (...): p. 154. l. 23. (...), r. (...): p. 156. l. 12, 20, 27.
Hys^tages, r. Hyslaspes: p. 160. l. 16. time of, r. true: p. 166. l. 13. a
fine, Rambam: p. 168. l. 6. a fine, context, r. contest: p. 185. l. 25. r.
(...), and for (...), r. (...): p. 192. l. 9. r. Darianes: p. 193. l. ult.
substance, r. subsistence: p. 197: l. 29, 36. lest, r. lost: p. 200. l. 3.
commiserant: p. 202. l. 9. Vel, r. namely: l. 42. J^huda: p. 207. l. 12. Jews:
l. 31. Alshech: p. 211. l. 14. a fine, restitution, r. restriction: p. 214. l.
6. a fine, (...): p. 218. l. 4. with, r. which: p. ^20. l. 41. spiritual: p,
221. l 14. a fine, Mahei. l. 4. a fine, more, r. mere: p. 223. l. 5. (...): p.
226. l. 12. r. left hid: p. 228. clearly expressed: p. 229. l. 13.67. r. 17. p.
231. l. 15. (...): p. 232. l. 13. Rocheb. r. Rochel: p. 238. l. 19. the
Messiah: p. 239. l. 47. advice, r. adjure: p. 250. l. 29. (...): p. 251. l. 9.
now, r. never: p. 252. l. 14. Kings, r. King: p. 255. l. 18. so proved, r.
reproved: l. 30. (...), r. (...): p. 256. l. 31. large Discourses: p. 260. l.
16. also, r. after: l. 10. a fine, commission, r. omission: p. 275. l. 2. r.
Judicial: p. 276. l. 16. Sanction, r. Section: p. 290. l. 17. (...): p. 308. l.
5. who thought: l. 26. and other: p. 311. l. 17. laying, r. flaying; p. 315. l.
4. serebrito, r. seretrio.

There are sundry other mistakes, in pointings, changes and transpositions of
letters, in the Hebrew and English; which a diligent and Candid Reader will
easily observe and amend. And it is not worth the while to collect them for
those who are otherwise.

Exercitatio I.
The Canonical authority of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Notation of the word.
(...) Kaneh, a measuring reed: The beam of a balance. Thence (...) of the same
signification. Metaphorically a moral rule. Rectum and Canon, how far the same.
The Scripture a rule. Canonical. The Antiquity of that Appellation. The Canon
of the Scripture. What required to render a book Canonical. All books of the
holy Scripture equal as to their divine Original. Jews distinction of the
books of the old Testament, as to the manner of their writing, disproved. All
equally Canonical. No book Canonical of a second sort, or degree. The Epistle
to the Hebrews Canonical. Opposed by Heretics of old. Not received into the
Latin Church until the days of Hierome. Proved against Baronius. Not rejected
by any of that Church: only not publicly approved. The Church of Rome not the
sole proposer of books Canonical. Occasion of its n^n-admittance at Rome.
Boldness of some in rejecting and corrupting the Scripture. By whom this
Epistle opposed of late. The objection of the uncertainty of the Penman
Answered. Citations out of the old Testament not found therein. Answer.
Citations not to his purpose. Answer. Countenance to old Heresies. Answer.
General heads of Arguments to prove its Canonical Authority. Characters to
discover between books of divine inspiration and others. (...). The General
Arguments of books truly Canonical. Subject, Matter, Design, Style. Of the
style of the Sacred writings. Mistakes of many about it. The nature of
Eloquence. Excellency of Scripture Style, Energie, Efficacy. Tradition
concerning the Authority of this Epistle; not justly liable to any exceptions,
from the Author, Circumstances, Subject, Matter, Style. Testimonies. Conclusion.

THe Canonical Authority of the Epistle unto the Hebrews having what it is
which we intend thereby, as also the clear interest of this Epistle therein;
for this is the foundation of all those ensuing discourses from it, and that
exposition of it, which we intend.

The Greek word (...), which gives rise unto that term Canonical, Hebrew (...)
Kaneh; and this as it sometimes denotes an Aromatical cane that contained
spices in it, used in the worship of God, as Isai. 43. v. 24. (...) thou have
bought me no sweet Cane with silver (for this (...) precious Cane, growing not
in their own Country, was bought from a far off, Jer. 6.20.) so in general it
signifies any reed whatever, 1 Kings 14.15. Isai. 42.3. whence a multitude of
fierce and wicked men compared to the devouring Crocodile whose lurking place
is in the canes or reeds, are termed (...) the beast of the reed, Psalm. 68.30.
Particularly it signifies a reed made into an instrument, wherewith they
measured their buildings, containing six Cubits in length, Ezekiel. 40.7. Chap.
42.16. And hence indefinitely it is taken for a Rule or a Measure. Besides it
signifies the jugum, or scapus, or beam with the tongue of a balance keeping
the poyse of the scales equal, and discovering the rectitude or declensions
thereof, Isai. 46.6. (...) they weighed silver on the Cane; that is, says the
Targum (...) in the balance; the supporter and director of the scales, being
put for the whole. The Rabbis call it, (...) the reed of the scales; that
which tryes and weighs and gives every thing its just moment.

Greek word (...), Canon. So the Scholiast on that of Aristophanes, (...).
tells us, that (...) is (...): properly that which is over the scales bringing
them (and the things weighed in them) to equality. The very same with the
Hebrew (...) from which it is derived. Aristoph. in Ran. Ac. 3. Sc. 1.
So Varinus tells us that it is properly the tongue in the balance, and in use
(...). Thus Aristotle says, (...), by that which is right, Aristot. de A^im.
lib. 1. cap. ult.
we know its self, and that which is crooked, for the Canon is judge of both:
where he uses the word for any kind of rule or measure answering unto the
other signification of Kaneh in the Hebrew. Rectum and Canon, that which is
right, and the rule, are one and the same; the one expression denoting the
nature of any thing, the other its Use and Application.

proper importance of the word, is its metaphorical use deduced, which is most
Common; and therein it signifi^s a moral Rule, or a measure, for direction,
trial and judgment. Aristot. pol. ib. 2. cap. 8.
Hence the Philosopher calls the Law (...), the rule of the administration, or
government of the Commonwealth; that whereby all the parts of it ar^ disposed
into their proper places, whereby they are regulated, and all things done in it
are tried and judged. And in this sense it is applied by St. Paul unto divine
Revelation, Gal. 6.16. (...), as many as proceed orderly, that is, in a direct
way, (for so (...) denotes) according to this rule or Canon. And to the same
purpose he uses again the sam^ expression, Phil. 3.16. For as the words of the
Scripture are in themselves (...) words of Truth, so the writing it self is
(...) a right writing; or as the LXX. (...); that which is written in
uprightness, to be a rule, and Judge unto all. (...) is Genitivus adjuncti, not
materiae, declaring the property of the writing not the subject matter, that
is, it is Canonical; for (...) and (...) that which is right, and a rule, we
have showed to be the same. And from hence it is, that the Scripture, or
written Word of God, being in it self every way absolutely right and perfect,
and appointed by him to be the Rule or Canon of the Churches faith and
obedience, requiring, trying, regulating, judging wholly and absolutely of
them, is become (...) by way of eminency to be called Canonical, or regular; as
the Book wherein it is contained is called the Bible, though in it self that be
the Common name of all Books.

Synod of Laodicea, supposed to have praeceded the Council of Nice, Council.
Laod. Can. 59.
makes mention of it, as a thing generally admitted; for the Fathers of it
decree, (...). That no private Psalms ought to be said or read in the Church,
nor any uncanonical Books, but only the Canonical books of the new and old
Testament, whose names they subjoin in their order. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib.
7. cap. 30.
And some while before, the Bishops who joined with the Church of Antioch in
the deposition of Paulus Samosatenus charge him as (...) one that in the
introduction of his heresy departed from the Canon or rule of the Scripture.
Before them also, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 69.
it was called by Irenaeus (...). And Chrysostom calls it (...), Chrysostom. in
2 ad Cor. cap. 6. ad finem.
the sentence of the divine Laws, (...), the exact balance square or rule and
Canon of all truths and duties; wherein he has evidently respect unto the
original use and importance of the word before explained; and thereupon calls
on his hearers, that omitting the consideration of what this or that man says
or thinks, they should seek and require (...) all these things of or from the
Scriptures, which are the Canon of our faith and obedience. August. de unitat.
Eccles. cap. 16.
And Austin, demonstrent ecclesiam suam non in rumoribus Africorum, sed in
praescripto legis, in Prophetarum praedictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, hoc est in
omnibus canonicis Sanctorum librorum authoritatibus. Let them demonstrate their
Church, not by the rumors of the Africans, but by the praescription of the Law,
the praedictions of the Prophets, the Songs of the Psalms, that is by the
Canonical Authority of the holy books of the Scriptures. Lib. 2. de Bap. ad
Donat. cap. 6.
And he pursues the Metaphor of a scale and a measure in many words elsewhere.
And thus Aquinas himself confesses the Scripture is called Canonical, Aquin.
in 1 Timothy 6. lec. 1.
because it is the Rule of our understanding in the things of God; And such a
Rule it is, as has Authority over the Consciences of men, to bind them unto
faith and obedience, because of its being given of God by inspiration for that
purpose.

Moreover as the Scripture upon the accounts mentioned, is by way of eminency
Canonical, so there is also a Canon or rule determining what books in
particular do belong unto the Holy Scripture, and to be on that account
Canonical. So Athanasius tells us that by the Holy Scripture he intends, Libros
certo canone comprehensus, Athanas. in Synops.
the books contained in the assured Canon of it. And Ruffinus having reckoned
up those books, concludes, hi sunt quos patres intra Canonem concluserum,
Ruffin Exposit. symb. Apostol.
These are they which the Fathers have concluded to be in the Canon; that is,
to belong unto the Canonical books of Scripture. And Austin to the same
purpose: Non sine causa, August. ad Cresion lib. 2. cap. 31.
tam salubri vigilantia Canon Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, ad quem certi
Prophetarum and Apostolorum libri pertinerent; not without good reason is the
Ecclesiastical Canon determined by wholesome diligence, unto which, certain
books of the Prophets and Apostles should belong. About the Assignation of this
Canon of the Scripture, or what books belonged unto the Canonical Scripture,
there have been some differences in the Church, since the time of the Synod of
Carthage, confirmed by that in Trulla at Constantinople. The first Church
having agreed well enough about them, excepting the haesitation of some few
persons in reference unto one or two of them of the New Testament.

From this rise and use of the word, it is evident, what is intended by the
Canonical spring and Original of any book, which gives it Authority; and
Secondly the design and end of it which renders it Canonical. For the first, it
is required that it be (...), given by immediate inspiration from God; without
this, no book or writing can by any means, any acceptance, or approbation of
the Church, any usefulness, any similitude of style, manner of writing unto the
books that are so, any conformity in matter or doctrine to them, have an
interest in that Authority that should lay a foundation for its reception into
the Canon. It is the impress of the Authority of God himself on any writing, or
its proceeding immediately from him, that is sufficient for this purpose.
Neither yet will this alone suffice to render any Revelation or writing
absolutely Canonical in the sense explained. There may be an especial
Revelation from God, or a writing by his inspiration, like that sent by Elijah
unto Jehoram the King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 21.12, which being referred only unto
some particular occasion, and having thence Authority for some especial end and
purpose, yet being not designed for a Rule of faith and obedience unto the
Church, may not belong unto the Canon of the Scripture. But when unto the
Original of divine inspiration, this end also is added, that it is designed by
the Holy Ghost for the Catholic standing use and instruction of the Church,
Then any writing or book becomes absolutely and completely Canonical.

The Jews of latter Ages, assign some difference among the books of the old
Testament, Maimon. More; nebuch. p. 2. c. 52.
as to their spring and Original, or manner, of Revelation though they make
none as to their being all Canonical. The Book of the Law, they assign unto a
peculiar manner of Revelation which they call (...) mouth to mouth, Kimchi
praf. ^d Psalm.
or face to face, which they gather from Numbers 12.8. whereof afterward.
Others of them they affirm to proceed from (...) or the gift of Prophecy,
whereof as they make many kinds or degrees, taken from the different means used
by God in the Application of himself unto them, belonging to the (...) of
divine Revelation mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 1.1. so they divide those
books into two parts, namely the (...) or former Prophets containing most of
the historical Books after the end of the Law; and (...) the latter prophets,
wherein they comprise the most of them peculiarly so called. The Original of
the remainder of them they ascribe unto (...) or inspiration by the holy Ghost,
calling them peculiarly (...) written, by that inspiration; as though the whole
Canon and systeme of the books were not (...) the Scripture, or writing, and
(...), or divine inspiration, the only means of their writing. But they do
herein as in many other things. The distribution of the books of the old
Testament, into the Law, Psalms and Prophets, was very ancient in their Church.
We have mention of it, Luke 24.44. (...), that are written in the law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, that is, in the whole Canonical
Scripture. And evident it is that this distribution is taken from the subject
matter of those principal parts of it. This reason of that distribution which
they have by Tradition, they not knowing or neglecting, have feigned the rise
of it in a different manner of Revelation, and cast the particular books
arbitrarily under what heads they pleased; as is evident from sundry of them
which they reckon unto the (...) Cethubim, or Hagiographa, which are with them
of least esteem. But we have a more sure rule, both overthrowing that feigned
distinction, and perfectly equalizing all parts of divine Scripture as to their
spring and original, St. Peter calls the whole (...), 2 Pet. 1.19. the word of
Prophecy; and (...), v. 20. Prophecy, and therefore it belongs not unto any
peculiar part of it, to be given out by Prophecy; which is an affection of the
whole. And St. Paul also, terms the whole Scriptu^^ (...) Romans 16.26.
prophetical Scriptures, or writings of the Prophets. And when he demanded of
Agrippa whether he believed the Scriptures, he does it in the same manner,
(...) Acts 28.23. believe thou the prophets? that is, the Scriptures, written
by the spirit of Prophecy, or by the inspiration (...) 1 Pet. 1.12. of the
spirit of Christ that was in them. God of old spoke, (...) Heb. 1.1. in his
Revelation of himself unto them and in them, and equally spoke (...) Luke 1.70.
unto them, by the mouth of his holy Prophets from the beginning. And thus, not
this, or that part, but (...) 2 Timothy 3.16. all Scripture was given by
inspiration. And herein all the parts, or books of it are absolutely equal.
And in the giving out of the whole, (...) 2 Pet. 1.21. holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. So that whatever different means God at any
time might make use of in the communication of his mind and will unto any of
the Prophets or penmen of the Scripture, it was this (...), and being acted by
the holy Ghost, both as to Things and Words, that rendered them infallible
Revealers of him unto the Church. And thus the foundation of the Canonical
authority of the books of the Scripture, is absolutely the same in and unto
them all, without the least variety, either from any difference in kind or
degree.

Canonical; they are all so equally. Some of the Ancients used that term
ambiguously, and therefore sometimes call books Canonical that absolutely are
not so, as not being written by divine inspiration, nor given by the Holy Ghost
to be any part of the Rule of the Churches faith and obedience. Thus the
Constantinopolitan Council in Trulla confirms the Canons both of the Synod of
Laodicea, Council. Co^stan. in Tral. can. 2.
and the third of Carthage, which agree not in the Catalogues they give us of
books Canonical; which without a supposition of the ambiguity of the word,
could not be done, unless they would give an assent unto a plain and open
contradiction. Council. Cartha. 3. cap. 47. Cod. can. 20.
And the Council of Carthage makes evident its sense in their Appendi^e annexed
to the one and fortieth Canon, wherein they reckon up the books of the holy
Scripture. Hoc etiam (say they) fratri and consacerdoti nostro Bonifacio, vel
aliis earum partium Episcopis, pro confirmando isto Canone, innotescat, quia a
patribus ista accepimus legenda; liceat etiam legi passiones Martyrum cum
Aniversarii dies celebrantur. They speak dubiously concerning their own
determination, and intimate that they called the books they enumerated
Canonical, only as they might be read in the Church; which privilege they
grant also to the stories of the sufferings of the Martyrs which yet none
thought to be properly canonical. Epiphan. Haer, 30. ca^. 15.
The same, Epiphanius testifies of the Epistles of Clemens. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap.
26.
But as the books which that Synod added to the Canon of Laodicea, are rejected
by Melito, Origin, Athanasius, Hilarious, Gregorius Nazianzen, Cyrillus
Hierosolimitamus, Lib. 6. cap. 25. Athanas. in synops.
Epiphanius, Ruffinus; Hierome, Gregorius magnus, and others; so their reading
and Citation is generally declared by them to have been only for direction of
manners, Hilar. praesat. in Psalm.
and not for the confirmation of the faith; even as St. Paul cited an Iambick
out of M^nand^r, or rather Euripides 1 Cor. 15.33. an hemistichium out of
Aratus, Acts 17.28. Nazian. in C^m^n Cy^l. C^^ech. 4
and a whole Hexameter out of Epimenides, Tit. 1.12. non sunt canonici sed
leguntur Catechumenis (says Athanasius) They are not Canonical, but are only
read to the Cate^humeni: And Hierome, the Church reads them ad aedificationem
plebis, non ad Auth^ritatem Ecclesiasticarum dogmatum confirmandam; E^^phan.
Hae. 8. Russ. Exposit. symb.
for the edification of the people, but not for the confirmation of any points
of faith. But although some books truly Canonical were of old amongst some
(...) as Epiphanius speaks, doubted of; Hier^n. praef. Ga^eat. ad Paulin.
and some were commonly read, that are certainly (...) and rejectitious, yet
neither the mistake of the former, nor later practice, can give any countenance
to an Apprehension of a second, Hier^n. praef. in lib. Solom. Epiphan. Hae. 8.
or various sort of books properly canonical. For the interest of any book or
writing in the canon of the Scripture accrewing unto it, as has been showed,
merely from its divine inspiration, and giving by the Holy Ghost for a Rule,
measure, and standard of faith and obedience unto the Church, whatever
advantage or worth to commend it any writing may have, Yet if it have not the
properti^s mentioned of Divine inspiration and Confirmation, it differs in the
whole kind, and not in degrees only, from all those that have them; so that it
can be no part regulae regulantis, but regulatae at the best, not having (...)
or a self-credibility on its own account, or (...) a self-sufficing Authority;
but is truth only materially by virtue of its Analogy unto that which is
absolutely, universally, and perfectly, so. And this was well observed by
Lindanus, Impio (says he) sacrilegio se contaminant, Lindan. panopl. Evang.
lib. 3. cap. 4.
qui in scripturarum christianarum corpore, quosdam quasi gradus conantur
locare, quod unam eandemque spiritus sancti vocem, impio humanae stultitiae
discerniculo audent in varias impares discerpere, and disturbare Autoritatis
classes: They desile themselves with the impiety of Sacrilege, who endeavor
to bring in as it were diverse degrees into the body of the Scriptures; for by
the impious discretion of humane folly, they would cast the one voice of the
Holy Ghost into various forms of unequal Authority. As then whatever difference
there may be as to the subject matter, manner of writing, and present*
usefulness, between any of the books that being written by divine inspiration
are given out for the Churches rule, they are all equal as to their canonical
authority, being equally interested in that which is the formal reason of it;
so whatever usefulness or respect in the Church any other writing may have,
they can no way give them any interest in that, whose formal reason they are
not concerned in.

In the sense explained we affirm the Epistle to the Hebrews, to be Canonical,
that is Catholic; In the confirmation whereof, we shall first declare, by whom
it has been opposed or questioned; and then what reasons they pretend for
their so doing; which being removed out of our way, the arguments whereby the
Truth of our assertion is evinced, shall be insisted on.

We need not much insist on their madness who of old with a sacrilegious
licentiousness Ebionites not only rejected all the Epistles of Paul, but also
reviled his person as a Gre^k and an Apostate, as Irenaeus and Epiphanius
inform us. I^enaeus lib. 1. cap. 2.
Their folly and blasphemy was also imitated and followed by the Helescheitae
in Eusebius. Marcion rejected in particular this Epistle to the Hebrews, and
those also to Timothy and Titus, as Epiphanius, Epiphan. Her. 30. cap. 25.
and Hierome assure us, who adds unto him Basilides. And Theodoret as to the
Epistle unto the Hebrews, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.1.
joins unto them, some of the Arians also. Now though the folly of those
Sacrilegious persons be easy to be repelled as it is done by Petrus
Cluniacusis, Epi^han. Haer. 42. cap. 9.
yet Hierome has given us a sufficient reason why we should not spend time
therein. Si quidem (says he) redderent causas cur eas Apostoli non putant,
tentaremus aliquid respondere, Hierom. praes. in com. ad T^um.
and sorsitan satisfaciere lectori; nunc vero cum haeretica autoritate
pronunciant and dicunt, illa Epistola Pauli est, haec non est, ea autoritate
refelli se pro veritate intelligant, Theodor. praes. in Ep. ad Heb. Petrus
Clupia. Epist. ad Petrobrusia.
qua ipsi non crubescant falsa simulare. They did not so much as plead, or
pretend any cause or reason for the rejection of these Epistles, but did it
upon their own head and Authority, so they deserve neither answer nor
consideration.

It is of more importance that this Epistle was a long time, though not
rejected by, received in the Church of Rome. Eusebius informs us, Eusebius. lib.
2. cap. 24.
that Cains a Presbyter of that Church whom he much commends for his learning
and piety, admitted but of thirteen Epistles of St. Paul, rejecting that unto
the Hebrews; as Photius also affirms. Lib. 6. cap. 14. Photius Biblieth.
And the same Photius acquaints us with the same Judgment of Hippolitus
another eminent member of that Church: Cod. 48.
(...) (says he) (...). God. 120.
Among other things not exactly answering the truth, he says also, that the
Epistle to the Hebrews was not Paul's. And Eusebius adds unto his information of
the Judgment of Cains, that it was not generally received in the Church of
Rome in his time. Neither is it any way acknowledged as St. Paul's by either
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, or Macrobius. Lib. 3. cap. 3. Epist. 129. ad
Dardanum.
Yea the same Eusebius affirms that some excepted against it upon this account,
because it was opposed, as none of St. Paul's in the Roman Church. Hierome
grants that, Comment. in Isa. cap. 8. in Cap. 1. ad Eccles.
Latinorum consuetudo non recepit Epistolam ad Hebraeos inter Canonicas
Scripturas. The custom of the Latins, (that is the Roman Church) did not
receive this Epistle among the Canonical Scriptures; And speaking elsewhere of
it, he adds the same words, de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. in Cain. in Matthew. cap.
26. ^^
Licet eam latina consuetudo inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipiat. And
elsewhere also he confirms the same Assertion. It cannot then be denied but
that it was four hundred years at least after the writing of this Epistle
before it was publicly received and avowed as Canonical by the Rom^n Church.
Zecha. cap. 8. Lib. 4. de Trin. Lib. 2. de Cain.
Nor will the quotation of it by Hilary and Ambrose prove any general admission
of it as such, it being their custom not to restrain the Testimonies they made
use of unto Books absolutely Canonical.

Baronius ad An. 160, labors to take of this failure of the Latin Church. The
testimony of Eusebius he rejects, because as he says, he was Arianorum
gregalis of the Arian faction, Annal. Ecclesia. An. 61. nu. 43.
and willing to call the authority of this Epistle into Question in compliance
with them, who, some of them as we observed before, refused it: n. 42. The
Judgment of Caius he resolves into the Testimony of Eusebius, which because of
his partiality, as he pleads, is not to be admitted. And lastly opposes the
witness of Hierome, as a person who had suffered himself to be imposed on by
Eusebius, whose words in his reports of Caius, he makes use of. n. 50.
Concluding upon the whole matter, that it was a mere false calumny of Eusebius
against the Church of Rome, which Hierome, by too much facillity gave credit
unto. But I must acknowledge, that these Answers of his, which indeed are
nothing but a rejection of as good witnesses in matters of fact, as any we have
upon the Roll of Antiquity, are not unto me satisfactory, no more than the
testimony of its acceptance which he produces in the Epistle of Innocentius to
Exuperius, which is justly suspected supposititious with the Council at Rome
against Apollinaris, under Damasus, wherein no such thing appears. Though I
will not deny but that about that time it came to be publicly owned by that
Church, Exposit. sym^. Apostol.
and was reckoned unto the Canon of the Scripture by Ruffinus.

Eusebius reports the Judgment of Caius, or the Roman Church, in compliance
with the Arians; He himself evidently admits the Epistle to be Canonical, and
confirms it by the testimonies of Clemens, Origin, and others. What would it
advantage him or the cause which some pretend he favored, by reporting the
opposition of others to a part of divine writ which himself accepted! Besides
they were not the Arians of the first rank or edition, for an inclination unto
whom Eusebius is suspected, but some of their offspring which fell out into
such Sacrilegious opinions and practices as the first leaders of them owned not
that are accused in this matter; much less can he be thought to design the
reproach of the Roman Church. Nay these answers are inconsistent, as any one
may perceive. He could not at the same time design the rejecting of the Epistle
in compliance with the Arians, and the calumniating of them by whom it was
rejected, and on whose Authority his intentions must be founded. But indeed his
words plainly manifest that he gives us a naked account of matter of fact,
without either prejudice or design: It is yet more incredible, that Hierome in
this matter should suffer himself to be imposed on by Eusebius. That he was the
most eminently learned and knowing person of the Roman or Latin Church in
those days, will, I suppose, not be greatly questioned. Now to suppose that he
knew not the customs, opinions, and practice of that Church, but would suffer
himself to be imposed on by a stranger, destitute of those advantages which he
had to come unto an unquestionable certainty in it, is a very fond thing.
Besides he does not any where speak as one that reported the words and
Judgment of another, but in three or four places expressly affirms it as of his
own knowledge; when at the same time in opposition thereunto, he contends that
it was received by all other Churches in the world, and all Writers from the
days of the Apostles.

Caius, Hippolitus, Eusebius or Hierome, Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 32.
that the Latin Church did ever reject this Epistle. Yea, we shall find that
many amongst them, even in those days, reckoned it unto the Canon of the
Scripture, and owned St. Paul as the Penman of it. Eusebius himself
acknowledges that Clemens uses sundry Testimonies out of it, in his Epistle ad
Corinthios. And others also there were concurring with his judgment therein.
But these two things I allow, on the testimonies insisted on. (1.) That sundry
particular persons of note and esteem in the Roman Church owned not the
Canonical authority of this Epistle, as not esteeming it written by St. Paul:
(2.) The Church it self had not before the days of Hierome made any public
Judgment about the Author or Authority of this Epistle, nor given any
Testimony unto them. For it seems utterly impossible, that if any such
Judgment had passed, or testimony been given, that Hierome living in the midst
of that Church, should know nothing of it, but so often affirm the contrary
without haesitation. And this undenyably evinceth the injustice of some men's
pretensions, that the Roman Church is the only proposer of Canonical Scripture,
and that upon the Authority of her proposal alone it is to be received. Four
hundred years were passed before she her self publicly received this Epistle,
or read it in her Assemblies; so far was she from having proposed it unto
others. And yet all this while was it admitted and received by all other
Churches in the world, as Hierom testifies, and that from the days of the
Apostles, whose judgment the Roman Church it self at length submitted unto.

No impeachment then of the Authority of this Epistle, can be taken from this
defect and inadvertency of the Roman Church, it being convinced to be so by the
concurrent suffrage and Testimony of all other Churches in the world, from the
days of the Apostle, as we shall afterward more fully declare. Neither are
the occasions of this haesitation of the Western Church obscure; The Epistle
was written it may be in Rome, at least it was in some part of Italy, Chap.
13.24. There no doubt it was seen, and it may be Copied out before its sending,
by some who used to accompany the Apostle, as Clemens, who as we have showed
not long after mentioned diverse things contained in it. The Original was
without question speedily sent into Judea, unto the Hebrews to whom it was
written and directed, as were all others of the Epistles of the same Apostle
unto those Churches that were immediately intended and concerned in them. That
Copies of it were by them also communicated unto their Brethren in the East,
equally concerned in it with themselves, cannot be doubted, unless we will
suppose them grossly negligent in their duty toward God and man, which we have
no reason to do. But the Churches of the Hebrews living at that time, and for
some while after, if not in a separation, yet in a distinction by reason of
some peculiar observances from the Churches of the Gentiles, especially those
of the West, they were not it may be very forward in communicating this Epistle
unto them, being written, as they supposed, about an especial concernment of
their own. By this means this Epistle seems to have been kept much within the
Compass of the Churches of the Jews, until after the destruction of the
Temple; when by their dispersion, and coalescency with other Churches in the
East, it came to be generally received amongst them; and non solum ab Ecclesiis
orientis, sed ab omnibus retro Ecclesiis and Graeci sermonis Scriptoribus, as
Hierom speaks. But the Latin Church having lost that advantage of receiving it
upon its first writing, Epist. ad Dardan.
it may be also upon the consideration of the removal of its peculiar
Argument, upon the final destruction of the whole Judaical Church, and
Worship, was somewhat slow in their inquiry after it. Those that succeeded in
that Church, it is not unlikely, had their scruples increased, because they
found it not in common use amongst their Predecessors, like to the rest of St.
Paul's Epistles; not considering the occasion thereof. Add hereunto that by that
time it had gradually made its progress in its return into the West, where it
was first written, and attended with the Suffrage of all the Eastern Churches
began to evince its own Authority, sundry persons who were wrangling about
peculiar opinions and practices of their own, began to seek advantages from
some expressions in it. So did in particular the Novatians and the Donatists.
This might possibly increase the scruple amongst the Orthodox, and make them
wary in their admission of that Authority which they found pleaded against
them. And well was it for them, that their opinions about which they disagreed
with their Adversaries, were according unto truth, seeing it may justly be
feared, that some then would have made them their Rule and Standard in their
reception or rejection of this Epistle: for it was no new thing for the
Orthodox themselves to make bold sometime with the Scripture, if they supposed
it to run cross unto their conceptions. So Epiphanius informs us, in Ancorat.
(...). And also he wept; for so it is read in the uncorrected Copies of the
Gospel according to Luke: and St. Irenaeus uses this Testimony in his Book
against Heresies, for their confutation, who affirmed that Christ took flesh
only in appearance; but the Orthodox, (or Catholics) being afraid (of the
importance of that expression) took away that word out of the Copies, not
understanding its use and sense. So also Sixtus Sinensis after he has informed
us, out of Hilary, that many Orthodox persons denied the story of our Saviors
Agony, and bloody Sweat, adds of his own, Suspicor a Catholicis sublatam esse,
pio sed simplici zelo, quod favere videbatur Arianis. I suspect that the Story
was taken out of the Copies, by some Catholics, out of a godly, but simple
zeal, because it seemed to favor the Arians. So great is the power of
prejudice, and so little occasions have men taken, whom others have esteemed
Orthodox and pious, to make bold with that word, whereby both we and all our
opinions must be judged. But it being manifest at length, that no color was
given unto the unjust severities of the Novatians by any thing in this Epistle,
it was generally embraced; And by the conquest of this opposition established
its Authority for the future.

Bellarmin charge Luther, Brentius, Chemnitius and the Centuriators with the
rejection of this Epistle. De Verb. Dei lib. 1. cap. 11.
But because I know that some of them are falsely accused by him, I am apt to
suspect the same of the rest, which I have not the opportunity to consult; And
so I shall not reckon them amongst the opposers of this Epistle. The matter is
more certain concerning Cajetan and Erasmus: the former in his Preface unto,
the other in his last Annotation on this Epistle, denying it to be St. Paul's,
and questioning, yea, indeed rejecting its Canonical Authority. To them we may
add Eniedinus, proceeding upon the same principles, and making use of their
Arguments to the same purpose. These are the chief, if not absolutely all, who
have at any time made any scruple at the Authority of this Epistle. The reasons
they make use of to justify themselves in their conjectures, are amassed
together by Erasmus in his Note on the 24. Verse of the last Chapter of it: But
because he mixeth together the Arguments that he insists on to prove St. Paul
not to have been the Penman of it, and the exceptions he puts in unto its
Canonical Authority, which are things of a diverse consideration, I shall
separate them, and first take out those that seem absolutely to impeach its
Authority; leaving them that oppose its Penman, to our ensuing Discourse on
that question in particular.

uncertainty of its Author or Penman. Sola omnium Pauli nomen non praefert,
says Erasmus. How unjust and groundless this pretense is, we shall afterward
fully manifest. At present I shall only show, that it is in general of no
importance in this cause. The Author of a Writing being certainly known, may
indeed give some light unto the nature and Authority of it; When it is
confessed, that the Penman of any Book was (...) or divinely inspired, and that
by him it was written for the use of the Church, there can be no question of
its Authority. But this last of his design directed by the Holy Ghost, must be
no less known than the former. For a man may write one Book by inspiration, and
others by a fallible humane Judgment; as Solomon seems to have done his
Philosophical Discourses that are lost. Again, when the Penman of any Writing
pretending unto Divine Authority is not esteemed, nor does manifest himself in
any thing to have been (...) immediately acted by the Holy Ghost, the writing
it self must needs be liable unto just Exception. Wherefore it is confessed,
that when the Author of any Writing is certainly known, much light into its
Authority and Relation unto the Canon of the Scripture may be thence received.
But when this is doubtful, nothing can thence satisfactory on either side be
concluded. And therefore it has pleased the Holy Ghost to keep the names of
the Penmen of many parts of the Scripture, in everlasting obscurity; for he
borrows no Countenance or Authority unto any thing that proceeds by Inspiration
from himself, from the names of men. There is not then the least strength in
this exception; for be it granted, that we are altogether uncertain who was the
Penman of this Epistle, yet no impeachment of its Authority can thence be
taken, unless it can be proved, that he was not Divinely inspired. But yet to
show the insufficiency every way of this Objection, we shall abundantly evince,
that indeed the very ground and foundation of it is feeble and false; The
Penman of this Epistle being as well and certainly known, as those of any
portion of Scripture whatever that are (...), some whereof were never doubted,
nor called into question: And at least we shall so far evince St. Paul to have
been the Author of it; as although we shall not from thence take any Argument
to prove its Canonical Authority, because it has it self been called into
question; yet as to render an Objection from the uncertainty of its Author
altogether unreasonable.

particular, and direct to their purpose, by whom they are pleaded. As First,
that the Author of this Epistle cites sundry things out of the Old Testament
which are not therein contained. Such are many of the Stories related unto in
the 11. Chapter, and that in particular in Chap. 12. verse 21. where he
affirms, that Moses upon the Terror of the sight that appeared unto him, said,
I exceedingly quake and tremble. This place Erasmus supposes Hierom to have
intended, when he says that some things are mentioned in this Epistle that are
not recorded in the Old Testament. And Aquinas perplexeth himself in seeking
for a Solution unto this difficulty. For First, he would refer the place to
Moses sight of the Angel in the Bush, and not the giving of the Law, contrary
to the express Discourse of the Context. And then, he adds, dixit saltem facto;
though he said not so, yet he did so. And lastly, worst of all vel forte
Apostolus alia utitur litera quam nos non habemus: or it may be the Apostle
used another Text that we have not: But there is no need of any of these
evasions. The Author quotes no Book, nor Testimony of the Old Testament, but
only relates a matter of fact, and one circumstance of it, which doubtless he
had by Divine Revelation, whereof there is no express mention in the place
where the whole matter is Originally recorded. Thus in the beginning of the
Chronicles, sundry particular Stories, (as that about the Children of Ephraim,
Chap. 7.21.) no where before written, are reported from the same infallible
directions that others of the same time were written withal, when they were
omitted. And it is uncouth way of proving an Author not to write by Divine
inspiration, because he writes Truths that he could no otherwise be acquainted
withal. Neither is it unmeet for him that writes by Divine inspiration, to
mention things recorded in other Stories, whose Truth is unquestionable, as
those are related unto Chap. 11.

It seems to be of more importance, that if the Objectors may be believed, the
Epistle cites Testimonies out of the Old Testament, that are no ways to his
purpose, nor at all prove the matter that he produces them for; discovering at
least, that he wrote with a fallible spirit, if not also that he dealt scarcely
bona fide, in handling the cause which he undertook. Cajetan insists on that of
the first Chapter, verse 5. I will be unto him a Father, and he shall be unto
me a Son, taken from the 2 Samuel 7.14. or 1 Chronicles. 17. ^ which words, as he
supposes no way belong unto that, in whose confirmation they are produced by
the Author of this Epistle. Erasmus, upon his Testimony in Chap. 2. produced
out of Psalm 8.4, 5. which as he says, is urged to the direct contrary of the
intention of the Psalmist, and scope of the words. Eniedinus insists on the
same places and others.

Now two things must be supposed to give countenance unto this Objection.
First, That those who make it, do better understand the meaning and the
importance of the Testimonies so produced out of the Old Testament; than he did
by whom they are here alleged. This is the foundation of this Exception; which
if once admitted, it may be easily imagined, how able some men will quickly
think themselves to question other allegations in the New Testament, and
thereby render the Authority of the whole dubious. They must, I say, take upon
themselves to know the true meaning of them, and that in the uttermost extent
of signification and intention, as given out by the Holy Ghost, before they can
charge their misapplication on this Author. How vain, unjust, arrogant, and
presumptious this supposition is, needs little labor to demonstrate. The
understandings of men, are a very sorry measure of the Truth, with the whole
sense and intendment of the Holy Ghost in every place of Scripture. Nay, it may
much more rationally be supposed, that though we all know enough of the mind
and will of God in the whole Scripture, to guide and regulate our faith and
obedience, yet that we are rather ignorant of his utmost intention in every
place, than that we know it in all. There is a depth and breadth in every word
of God, because his; which we are not able to fathom and compass to the utmost:
It being enough for us that we may infallibly apprehend so much of his mind and
will, as is indispensably necessary for us to the obedience that he requires at
our hands. An humble reverential Consideration of all, indeed almost any, of
the Testimonies alleged in the New Testament out of the old, is sufficient to
evince the truth of this Consideration, We know but in part, and we prophecy
in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. Quantum est quod nescimus? how much is it, that we know
not? or as Job speaks, (...) how small is the word that we understand of God?
Chap. 26.24. One says well; est Sacra Scriptura veluti fons quidam, in bono
terrae loco scaturiens, quem quo altius foderis, eo magis exuberantem invenies;
ita quo diligentius Sacram Scripturam interpretaris, eo abundantiores aquae
vivae venas reperies. Brent. Hom. 36. in 1 Samuel 11. That Objection then, must
needs be very weak, whose fundamental strength consists in so vain a
presumption. Again, they must take it for granted, that they are aforehand
fully acquainted with the particular intention of the Author in the Assertions
which he produces these Testimonies in the Confirmation of; and with all the
ways of arguing and pressing Principles of faith, used by men writing by
Divine inspiration.

Neither is this supposition less rash, or presumptious than the former. Men,
who bring their own Hypothesis, and preconceived senses unto the Scripture,
with a desire to have them cofirmed, are apt to make such conclusions. Those
that come with humility and reverence of his Majesty with whom they have to do,
to learn from him his mind and will therein, whatever he shall thereby reveal
so to be, will have other thoughts and apprehensions. Let men but suffer the
Testimonies and Assertions, whose unsuitableness is pretended, to explain one
another, and the agreement will quickly appear. And the worst that will ensue,
will be only the emergence of a sense from them which perhaps they understood
not in either of them singly, or separately considered. Thus infirm on all
accounts is this Objection. For the instances themselves; some light will be
given unto them from what we shall afterward discourse of the Authors ways
and Principles, that he proceeds upon in his Citations of Testimonies out of
the Old Testament. And in particular in our Exposition of the places
themselves, we shall manifest that his Application of them, is every way
suitable to the very letter of the Text, and manifest intention of the Holy
Ghost: So false and unjust, as well as rash and presumptious, is this Objection.

real weight, in that which Erasmus in the next place objects; namely that
some things in it seem to give Countenance unto some exploded Opinions of
Ancient Heretics; whereof he gives us a double instance. First, Quod velum
seperans sanctum sanctorum interpretatur coelum: that he interprets the Vail
separating the Most Holy Place to be Heaven: which indeed he neither does, but
only affirms that the Most Holy Place in the Tabernacle, was a Type or Figure
of Heaven it self, nor if he should have so done, had he given the least
countenance unto the fondness of the Manichees, whom I suppose he intends;
His whole Discourse perfectly exploding their abominations. His other Instance
is in that vexed place, chap. 6.6. favoring as he pretends the Novatians,
denying recovery by repentance unto them who had fallen into sin after Baptism.
But the incompetency of this Objection, rising merely from their ignorance of
the true meaning of the Holy Ghost that made it, as for the end for which it
was used, has been demonstrated by many of old and late. And the Lord
assisting in our Exposition of that place, we shall show, that it is so far
from giving Countenance unto any error or mistake which any man may fall into,
contrary to the Gospel, that a more plain, familiar and wholesome commination
is hardly to be found in the whole Book of God. And this is the sum of what I
can meet withal, that is objected against the Canonical Authority of this
Epistle; which how little it amounts unto, beyond an evidence of men's
willingness to lay hold on slight occasions to vent their Curiosities and
Conceptions, the Reader that is godly and wise will quickly perceive.

Objections out of our way, we shall now proceed to demonstrate the Canonical
Authority of this Epistle, in the strict and proper sense, at large before
declared. Now the sum of what we shall plead in this cause amounts to this,
that whereas there are many (...) or infallible evidences of any Writings being
given by Divine inspiration, and sundry Arguments, whereby Books or Writings
ungroundedly pretending to that Original may be disproved, that of the former,
there is no one that is not Applicable unto this Epistle; nor is it obnoxious
unto any one of the latter sort. Of what nature in general that evidence is,
which is given unto the Divine Original of the Scripture by the Characters
thereof implanted in it, or other Testimony given unto it, or what is the
assurance of mind concerning it which thereupon we are furnished withal,
belongs not unto our present enquiry. That which we undertake, is only to
manifest that the interest in them of this Epistle, and its immunity from
Rational exceptions, is equal unto, and no less conspicuous, than that of any
other portion of Holy Writ whatever: So that it stands upon the same basis with
the whole, which at present we suppose firm and unmovable.

Eusebius, who after Melito, Caius, Clemens, and Origin, made a very accurate
enquiry after the Books unquestionably Canonical, gives us three notes of
distinction between them that are so and others; Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3.
c. 22.
namely, (...), the character or manner of phrase or speech. (2.) (...) the
sentence or subject matter treated of; and (3.) (...) the purpose and design of
the Writer; and they are all of great importance, and to be considered by us in
this matter. But because others of like moment may be added unto them, and are
used by others of the Ancients to the same end, we shall insist upon them all
in that order which seems most natural unto them; yet so, as that they may be
all referred unto those general heads by him proposed.

sentence of this Epistle; First, its general Argument; and Secondly, the
particular Subject Matter treated of in it. These seem to be designed thereby.
Now the general Argument of this Epistle, is the same with that of the whole
Scriptures besides. That is, a Revelation of the will of God, as to the faith
and obedience of the Church, and this holy, heavenly and divine answering the
Wisdom, Truth, and Sovereignty of him from whom it does proceed. Hence they are
called (...), the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. or the infallible Revelation of his
will; and (...) John 6.68. the words of eternal life; for That, in the name of
God they treat about. And St. Paul tells us, that the Argument of the Gospel is
Wisdom; but not the wisdom of this world, nor the Princes of it, who are
destroyed, done away, and made useless by it; that is the chief Leaders of
humane Wisdom and Science, 1 Cor. 2.6. but it is (...), etc. the mysterious
Wisdom of God that was hidden from them, v. 7. Things of his own mere
Revelation, from his Sovereign will and pleasure, with a stamp and impress of
his Goodness* and Wisdom upon them; quite of another nature, than any thing
that the choicest Wisdom of the Princes of this world can reach or attain unto.
And such is the Argument of this Epistle; It treats of things which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor have they by any natural means, ever entered into
the heart of man; and that in absolute Harmony with all other unquestionable
Revelations of the Will of God. Now if the immediate Original hereof be not
from God, that is by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; then it must be either
the invention of some man, spinning the whole Webb and frame of it out of his
own imagination, or from his diligence in framing and composing of it from a
systeme of Principles collected out of other Writings of Divine Revelation. The
First will not be pretended.

Two things absolutely free it from suffering under any such suspicion. First,
The nature of its Argument, treating as was said, of such things as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor have they entered into the heart of man. The
Deity, Offices, Sacrifice, Mediation and Grace of Jesus Christ, are not things
that can have any foundation in the invention and imagination of man; Yea,
being revealed by God, they lie in a direct contradiction unto all that
naturally is esteemed wise or perfect; 1 Cor. 1.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. They
exceed the sphere of natural comprehension, and are destructive of the
principles which it frames unto it self for the compassing of those ends
whereunto they are designed. Nor is it liable to be esteemed of the other
extract; or the diligence and wisdom of man in collecting it from other Books
of Divine Revelation, which alone with any color of reason can be pretended.
Humane diligence regulated by what is elsewhere revealed of God, is humane
still; and can never free it self from those inseparable attendances which will
manifest it so to be. For suppose a man may compose a writing, wherein every
Proposition in it self shall be true, and the whole in its contexture
materially every way answerable unto the truth, (which yet must be accidental
as to the principle of his wisdom, understanding, ability, and diligence by
whom it is composed, they being no way able to give that effect certainly and
infallibly unto it) yet there will never be wanting that in it, whereby it may
be discerned from an immediate effect and product of Divine Wisdom and
understanding. Take but the Writings of any Wise man, who from his own ability
and invention has declared any Science in them, and allow his discovery of it
to be the absolute complete rule of that Science, so that nothing beyond, or
besides what he has written about it is true or certain, nor any thing else,
but as it has conformity to, or coincidence with what he has written, and it
will be very difficult, if not impossible for any man so to treat of that
subject from his Writings, as not to leave sufficient Characters upon his own,
to difference them from his Original, and pattern; For suppose him to have in
all things attained the perfect sense of his Guide, which yet it may be, until
all words are freed from their ambiguity will be impossible for any one to do,
yet still there will remain such an impression of the Genius and fancy wherein
the Rule was first framed upon it, as the follower cannot express. And how much
more will there be so in that which both for matter and words also, proceeds
from the Sovereign Will and Wisdom of God. Can it be supposed, that any man
should collect by his own industry and diligence a Writing out of that which is
given by Him, and regulated thereby, that should absolutely express those
infinite Perfections of his nature which shine forth in that which is
immediately from himself? For that any Writing should be pretended to be
undiscernable from them given by Divine inspiration, It is not enough that the
matter of it be universally true, and that truth no other but what is contained
in other parts of Scripture, but it must also have those other (...) and
characters of a Divine Original which we shall in our progress discover in this
Epistle, as in other Books of the Holy Scripture: for it is not behind the very
choicest of them.

And the truth of this consideration, is demonstrated in the instances of every
one of those Writings which may probably be concluded to have the nearest
affinity and similitude unto those of Divine inspiration, from the greatness
and urgency of their plea to be admitted unto that series and order. These are
the Books commonly called Apochrypha; not one of them is there, wherein humane
diligence does not discover its self to be its fountain and spring. Did this
Epistle proceed from the same root and principle, whence comes it to pass, that
it no where puts it self forth unto a discovery and conviction? for that it
does not so, we shall afterward fully declare. Besides, to close this
consideration, the design of the Writer of this Epistle manifests that he
sought the Glory of God in Christ, according unto his will. With this aim and
purpose, an endeavor to impose that on the Church, as an immediate Revelation
from God, which was the product of his own pains and diligence, is utterly
inconsistent. For by no means could he more dishonor God, whose glory in
sincerity he appears to have sought, nor wrong the Church whose Good he desired
to promote, than by this imposing on him, that whereof he was not the Author,
so adding unto his words, and making himself subject to reproof as a liar,
Prove. 30.6. and proposing that unto the Church as a firm and stable rule and
object of faith, which he knew not to be so, leading her thereby into error,
uncertainty, and falsehood. For this whole Epistle is delivered as the Will and
Word of God, as coming by Revelation from him, without the least intimation of
the intervention of the Will, Wisdom or Diligence of man, any other, than is
constantly ascribed unto those that declare the will of God by inspiration. And
if it were not so, the evils mentioned cannot be avoided. And how groundless
this imputation would be, our following discourses will manifest. And I doubt
not but this whole consideration will be, and is of weight and moment with them
who have their senses exercised in the Scriptures, and are enabled by the
Spirit breathing in them, to discern between Good and Evil, Wheat and Chaff,
Jer. 23.28.

General Argument, we may add the Particular Subject Matter of this Epistle as
belonging unto the (...) of it, further confirming its Divine Original. This
for the most part consists in things of pure Revelation, and which have no
other foundation in rerum natura. Some Books, even of the Scripture it self,
are but the narrations of actions done amongst men, which for the substance of
them, might be also recorded by humane diligence. But the things treated of in
this Epistle, are purely divine, spiritual, and no ways to be known but by
Revelation. And not only so, but amongst those that are so, There are four
things eminent in the subject matter of this Epistle. First, that the principal
things treated of in it, are matters of the greatest importance in Christian
Religion, and such as concern the very foundation of faith. Such are the
Doctrines about the Person, Offices and Sacrifice of Christ, of the nature of
Gospel Worship, our Privilege therein, and Communion with God thereby. In
these things consist the very vitalls of our Profession; and they are all
opened and declared in a most excellent and heavenly manner in this Epistle;
and that, as we shall manifest, in an Absolute Consonancy unto what is taught
concerning them in other places of Scripture. Secondly, In that some things of
great moment unto the faith, obedience and consolation of the Church, that are
but obscurely or sparingly taught in any other places of Holy Writ, are here
plainly, fully and excellently taught and improved. Such in particular is the
Doctrine of the Priesthood of Christ, with the nature and excellency of his
Sacrifice, and the execution of the remaining parts and duty of that Office in
Heaven; and how the whole of it was typically represented under the Old
Testament. He that understands aright the importance of these things, their use
in the faith and consolation of the Church, their influence into our whole
course of obedience, the spiritual privilege that faith by them interests a
believing soul in, the strength and supportment, that they afford under
Temptations and Trials, will be ready to conclude that the world may as well
want the Sun in the Firmament, as the Church this Epistle. And this persuasion
we hope through Gods assistance to further in our Exposition of it. Thirdly,
Gods way in teaching the Church of the Old Testament with the use and end of
all the operous paedogogie of Moses, manifesting it to be full of Wisdom, Grace
and Love, is here fully revealed, and the whole Aaronical Priesthood with all
the duties and Offices of it translated unto the use of Believers under the
Gospel. How dark Mosaical institutions were in themselves, is evident from the
whole state of the Church in the days of Christ and his Apostles, when they
could not see unto the end of the things that were to be done away. In their
nature they were carnal, in their number many, as to their reason, hidden; in
their observation, heavy and burdensome, in their outward show, Pompous and
glorious; by all which they so possessed the minds of the Church, that very few
saw clearly into the use, intention, and end of them. But in this Epistle the
veyle is taken of from Moses, the mystery of his institutions laid open, a
perfect clew given unto Believers to pass safely through all the turnings and
windings of them, unto Rest and Truth in Jesus Christ. Those hidden things of
the Old Testament appear now unto us full of light, and instruction; but we are
beholding for all our insight into them, and benefit which we receive thereby,
unto the Exposition and Application of them made by the Holy Ghost in this
Epistle. And how great a portion of Gospel Wisdom and knowledge consists
herein, all men know, who have any spiritual acquaintance with these things.
Fourthly, the grounds, reasons, causes, and manner, of that great Alteration
which God wrought and caused in his Worship, by taking down the ancient
glorious Fabric of it, which had been set up by his own appointment, are here
laid open and manifested, and the greatest controversy that ever the Church of
God was exercised withal, is here fully determined.

There was nothing in the first Propagation of the Gospel and plantation of
Christian Churches, that did so divide and perplex the professors of the Truth,
and retard the work of promulgating the knowledge of Christ and the worship of
God in him, as the difference that was about the continuation and observation
of Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies. To such an height was this difference raised,
so zealously were the parties at variance engaged in the pursuit of their
various apprehensions of the mind of God in this matter, that the Apostles
themselves thought meet for a season rather to umpire and compose the
controversy, by leaving the Jews free to their observation, and bringing the
Gentiles unto a condescension in things of the greatest exasperation, than
absolutely and precisely to determine the whole matter between them. And
indeed, this being a difference wherein the Will, Authority, and Command of God
were pleaded on the mistaken side, they being all of them clear and full as to
the matter by them pleaded for, nothing but an immediate Declaration of the
mind of God himself, as to his removing and taking off the obligation of his
own Law, could put such an end unto it, as that the spirits of men might
acquiesce therein. Now the Will of God to this purpose before the Writing of
this Epistle, could only be collected from the nature and state of things in
the Church upon the coming of the Messiah, and conclusions from thence, which
the believing Jews were very slow in the admittance of. Add hereunto that many
Prophesies and promises of the Old Testament setting forth the Glory and beauty
of Gospel worship, under the names and condition of the Worship then in use, as
of Priests, Levites, Sacrifices, Offerings, Feast of Tabernacles, and the like,
lay directly in the letter against that cessation of Mosaical Rites, which the
Jews opposed.

Now who was fit, who was able to determine upon these different and various
Institutions of God, but God himself? To declare positively, that all
Obligation from his former commands was now ceased, that his institutions were
no more to be observed, that the Time allotted unto the Churches obedience unto
him in their observance was expired, this was no otherwise to be effected but
by an immediate Revelation from himself. And this is done in this Epistle, and
that in this only as to the Jews, whereby it became the main instrument and
means, of pulling up their old Church State, and translating it anew into the
appointments of our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither is this done by a bare
declaration of Gods Authoritative interposition, but in a way of Excellent and
singular Wisdom and condescension, (with a manifestation of Gods Love and care
unto his Church, in the institutions that were now to be removed; and the
progress of his Wisdom in their gradual instruction as they were able to bear,)
the whole nature, design and intendment of them is evidenced to be such, as
that having received their full End and accomplishment, they did of themselves
naturally expire and disappear. And hereby in that great Alteration which God
then wrought in the outward worship of his Church, there is discovered such an
oneness and unchangeableness in his love and care, such a suitableness Harmony
and Consonancy in the effects of his Will, such an Evidence of infinite Wisdom
in disposing of them into a subserviency one to another, that they should no
where in any thing cross or enterfere, and all of them to his own glory in the
promotion and furtherance of the light, faith, and obedience of his Church, as
sufficiently manifests the Original and fountain whence it does proceed. For my
part, I can truly say, that I know not any portion of Holy Writ, that will
more effectually raise up the heart of an understanding Reader, to an holy
Admiration of the Goodness, Love, and Wisdom of God, than this Epistle does.
Such, I say, is the subject matter of this Epistle, so divine, so excellent, so
singular. And in the handling hereof, have we not the least occasional mixture,
of any Matter, Words, Sentences, Stories, Arguments or Doctrines so unsuited to
the whole, as to argue the interposure of a fallible Spirit. Thus we know it
has fallen out in all the Writings of the Christians of the first Ages after
the sealing of the Canon of the Scriptures. Many things in them appear to
proceed from an holy and Heavenly Spirit breathing in their Authors, and most
of what they contain to be consonant unto the mind of God; yet have they all of
them, evident footsteps that the Authors were subject unto Errors and mistakes,
even in and about the things written by them. And the continuance of their
failings in their Writings capable of an easy conviction, is no small fruit of
the Holy Wise Providence of God, and his care over his Church, that it might
not in after Ages be imposed upon with the great and weighty pretense of
Antiquity, to admit them into a competition with those which himself gave out
to be its infallible, and therefore only Rule. That nothing of this nature,
nothing humanitus, merely after the manner of men, befell the Writer of this
Epistle in his Work, we hope through the assistance of its principal Author to
manifest in our Exposition of the several parts of it. And this subject matter
of this Epistle, thus handled, further secures us of its original.

design, aim and end of the Epistle, with the purpose and intention of its
Writer, which belongs to the (...) which the Ancients made a characterism of
Writings given by divine inspiration, are consonant unto the General Argument,
and peculiar subject matter of it. That the whole Scripture has an especial
end, which is peculiar unto it, and wherein no other writing has any share,
but only so far as it is taken from thence, and composed in obedience
thereunto, is evident unto all that do seriously consider it.

This end supremely and absolutely is the glory of that God who is the Author
of it. This is the center where all the lines of it do meet, the scope and mark
toward which all things in it are directed. It is the Revelation of himself
that is intended, of his mind and Will, that he may be glorified; wherein also,
because he is the principal fountain, and last end of all, consists the order
and perfection of all other things. Particularly the demonstration of this
glory of God, in and by Jesus Christ is aimed at. The works of Gods Power and
Providence do all of them declare his Glory; the glory of his eternal
Perfections and Excellencies, absolutely and in themselves. But the End of the
Scripture, is the glory of God in Christ, as he has revealed himself and
gathered all things to an head in him, unto the manifestation of his glory. For
this is life eternal that we know him the only true God, and whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ. The means whereby God is thus glorified in Christ, is by the
Salvation of them that do believe, which is therefore also an intermediate End
of the Scripture: These things are written, that we may believe, that Jesus is
the Son of God, and that believing, we may have life through his name, John
20.31. 1 Timothy 4.16. Moreover whereas this eternal life unto the glory of God
cannot be obtained without faith and obedience according to his will, the
Scripture is given for this purpose also, that it may instruct us in the mind
of God, and make us wise unto salvation: 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Romans 1.16. 2 Pet.
1.3. These in their mutual subserviency and dependence, complete the
characteristical End of the Scripture. I confess Plato in his Timaeus, makes it
the End of Philosophy, that we may thereby be made like unto God. But that
Philosophy of his, having its rise and spring in inbred notions of nature, and
the contemplation of the works of Gods Providence, could have no other end but
conformity unto him, as his perfections were revealed absolutely; whereunto the
Scripture adds this revelation in Christ Jesus, 1 John 1.18. which gives them,
as I said, their special and peculiar end. It makes God known, as all in all,
and man to be nothing as to goodness or blessedness, but what he is pleased to
do for him, and communicate unto him; and Jesus Christ to be the great and only
way and means, whereby he will communicate of himself, and bring us unto
himself. The more clearly any portion of Scripture discovers and makes
conspicuous this End, the more parts of the series and order of things whereby
the last and utmost End of the glory of God is produced, in their mutual
connection dependence and subserviency it manifests, the more fully does it
express this general End of the whole, and thereby evince its own interest
therein.

Now herein does this Epistle come behind no other portion of Scripture
whatever. For as the Exaltation of the glory of God, as he is the first cause,
and last end of all things, is expressly proposed in it, so the relation of the
glory of God, and of our obedience and blessedness whereby and wherein it is
declared, unto the Person, Offices, and Mediation of Jesus Christ is in an
eminent manner insisted on and unfolded in it. And whereas some parts of
Scripture do exhibit unto us, most clearly some one part of this general End of
the whole, and other portions or Books of it, some other parts, this expresses
the whole, and all the parts of it distinctly, from the very foundation of
calling men to the knowledge of God and obedience, unto the utmost end of his
glorifying himself in their salvation by Jesus Christ. Neither is there
herewithall the least alloy or mixture of any by, particular, or proper end of
the Writer; nothing of his Honor, Reputation, Advantage, Self-pleasing in any
thing; but all runs evenly and smoothly to the general End before proposed. And
this also has deservedly a place among the (...) of Writings by Divine
inspiration.

The Style also of the Sacred Scripture, or (...), as it is termed by Eusebius
Style of any Writing, we understand both the Propriety of the words, with their
Grammatical construction, and that composition of the whole which renders it
sit, d^c^rous, elegant, and every way meet to be used in the matter about which
it is used, and for the effecting of the end, which is proposed in it. I know
some bold Atheistical Spirits have despised the Style of the Holy Writers, as
simple and barbarous. Among these Angelus Politianus, is generally and
deservedly censured by all Learned men, who was imitated in his profane
contempt of it by Domitius Calderinus. Co^fess. lib. 3. cap. 5.
And of the like temper was Petrus Bembus who would scarce touch the Scripture;
when his own Epistles are not one of them free from Solaecisms in Grammar.
Austin also confesses that whilst he was yet a Manichee, he had the same
thoughts of it; Visa est mihi indigna quam Tullianae dignitati compararem. The
Scripture seemed to be unworthy to be compared with the excellency of Cicero.
But it must be acknowledged that these spoke of the Common Translations of it;
though they used that pretense to reject the study of the Books themselves.

I do confess that though some Translations may, and do render the words of the
Original more properly, and better represent and insinuate the native genius,
beauty, life, and power of the Sacred Style than some others do, yet none of
them can, or do express the whole Excellency, Elegancy, and mavelous Efficacy
of it for the conveyance of its senses to the understandings and minds of men.
Neither is this any reflection upon the Translators, their Abilities,
diligence, or faithfulness, but that which the nature of the thing it self
produces. There is in the Sacred Scripture, in the words wherein by the Holy
Ghost it was given out, a proper peculiar virtue, and secret efficacy inflaming
the minds of the Readers and Hearers, which no diligence or wisdom of man can
fully and absolutely transferr into, and impress upon any other Language. And
those who have designed to do it, by substituting the wordy Elegancies of
another tongue, to express the quickening affecting Idiotisms of them, (which
was the design of Castali^) have of all others most failed in their intentions.

Neither does this defect in Translations arise from hence, that the Original
Tongues may be more copious and emphatical than those of the Translations,
which possibly may be the condition of the Greek and Latin, as Hierom often
complains, but it is from the causes before named, and therefore is most
evident in the Translations of the Old Testament, when yet no man can imagine
the Hebrew to be more copious, (though it be more comprehensive) than the
Languages whereinto it has been translated. But it is of the Originals
themselves, and the Style of the Sacred Penmen therein, concerning which we
discourse. And herein the boldness of Hierom cannot be excused, (though he be
followed by some others of great name in latter Ages) who more than once
charge St. Paul with Solaecisms, and Barbarisms in Expression, and often
urges, (upon a mistake as we shall see) that he was imperitus Sermon,
unskilful in speech. But as neither he, nor any else, are able to give any
cogent instance to make good their charge, so it is certain that there is
nothing expressed in the whole Scripture, but in the manner and way, and by the
words wherewith it ought to be expressed, unto the ends for which it is used
and designed, as might easily be manifested both from the intent of the Holy
Ghost himself in suggesting those words unto his Penmen, and in the care of God
over the very Iota's and Titles of the words themselves. And wherever there
appears unto us an irregularity from the Arbitrary Directions, or Usages of
other men in those Languages, it does much more become us, to suspect our own
Apprehensions and Judgment; yea, or to reject those Directions and Usages from
the Sovereignty of an absolute Rule; than to reflect the least failure or
mistake on them who wrote nothing but by Divine Inspiration. The censure of
Hensius in this matter is severe, but true. Prolegom. Aristarch. Sac. Vellicare
aliquid in iliis, aut desiderare, non est eruditi sed blasphemi hominis, ac
male feriati, qui nunquam intelligit quae humana sit conditio, aut quanta
debeatur reverentia ac cultus cuncta dispensanti Deo, qui non Judicem, sed
supplicem deposcit.

Neither has their Success been much better, who have exercised their Critical
Ability, Style of the particular Writers of the Scripture, preferring one
before, and above another; whereas the Style of every one of them is best
suited to the Subject Matter whereof he treats, and the End aimed at, and the
Persons with whom he had to do. Praesat. in Isaiam and Amosum.
And herein Hierom has lead the way to others, and drawn many into a common
mistake. The Style of Isaiah he says is proper, Vrbane, high and excellent;
but that of Hosea, and especially of Amos, low, plain, improper, favoring of
the Country, and his Profession, who was a Shepherd. But those that understand
their Style and Language, will not easily give consent unto him, though the
report be commonly admitted by the most. Franciscus Picus exam. Doct.
It is true, there appears in Isaiah an excellent (...) in his Exhortations,
Expostulations and Comminations; attended with Efficacious Apostrophe's,
Prosopopaeias, Metaphors, and Allusions; a compacted fullness in his Prophesies
and Predictions, Gent. lib. 2. c. 2. Bibliander. de ratione discendi Hebr^.
a sweet Evangelical Spiritualness in his Expression of Promises, with frequent
Paronomasia's, and Elleipses which have a special Elegancy in that Language,
whence he is usually instanced in by Learned Men, as an example of the
Eloquence of the Divine Writings, Mornaeus de Veritat. Christ. Relig. cap. 26.
Rive^. Isa^og. ad Sac. Script. cap. ^8.
and his (...) preferred unto that of Aeschines, Demosthenes, or Cicero. But
the Reader must take heed that he look not for the peculiar Excellencies of
that Prophet absolutely in the words used by him, but rather in the things that
it pleased the Holy Ghost, to use him as his Instrument in the Revelation of.
But the other part of Hieroms censure is utterly devoid of any good foundation.
The Style of Amos considering the Subject Matter that he treats of, Glassius
Philol. sac. Praes. ad Rhetor.
and the persons with whom he had to do, in suiting of Words and Speech,
wherein all true solid Eloquence consists, is every way as proper, Origin.
Tom. 4. in Evang. Johan.
as Elegant, as that of Isaiah. Neither will the knowing Reader find him
wanting in any of the celebrated Styles of Writing, where occasion unto them is
administered. Thus some affirm that St. Paul used sundry Expressions, (and they
instance in 1 Cor. 4.3. Col. 2.18.) that were proper to the Cilicians his
Countrymen, Hieron. Epist. 151. ad Algas. Cornelius a Lapide praefat. in
Epist. Pauli.
and not so proper as to the purity of that Language wherein he wrote; but as
the first of the Expressions they instance in, is an Hebraism, and the latter,
purely Greek; so indeed they will discover a Tarsian defect in St. Paul,
together with the Patavinity in Livy that Pollio noted in him.

Eloquence and Propriety of Speech for the proper ends of them, are the gift of
God, Exodus 4.10, 11. And therefore unless Pregnant Instances may be given to
the contrary, it may well be thought and expected that they should not be
wanting in Books written by his own Inspiration: Nor indeed are they; only we
are not able to give a right measure of what does truly and absolutely belong
unto them. He that shall look for a flourish of painted words, artificial
Meretricious Ornaments of Speech, Discourse suited to entice, inveigle, and
work upon weak and carnal affections; or Sophistical captious ways of
reasoning to deceive; or that Suada, or (...), that smooth and harmonious
structure of periods wherein the great Roman Orator gloried, the lenocinia
verborum, the (...), and grandiloquentia of some of the Heathens, in the
Scripture, will be mistaken in his aim. Such things become not the Authority,
Majesty, Greatness and Holiness of him who speaks therein. An Earthly Monarch
that should make use of them in his Edicts, Laws, or Proclamations, would but
prostitute his Authority to contempt, and invite his Subjects to disobedience
by so doing. How much more would they unbecome the Declaration of his Mind and
Will given unto poor worms, who is the great Possessor of Heaven and Earth.

Besides, these things belong not indeed unto real Eloquence and Propriety of
Speech, but are arbitrarily invented crutches, for the relief of our lameness
and infirmity. Men despairing to affect the minds of others, with the things
themselves which they had to propose unto them, and acquainted with the baits
that are meet to take hold of their brutish affections, with the ways of
prepossessing their minds with prejudice, or casting a mist before their
understandings, that they may not discern the nature, worth, and excellency of
Truth, have invented such dispositions of words as might compass the ends they
aimed at. And great effects by this means were produced; as by him, whom men
admired, -- pleni moderantem froena Theatri.

And therefore the Apostle tells us, that the rejecting of this kind of Oratory
in his Preaching and Writing, was of indispensible necessity, that it might
appear that the effects of them were not any way influenced thereby, but were
the genuine productions of the things themselves which he delivered, 1 Cor.
2.5, 6, 7. This kind of Eloquence then the Scripture makes no use of, but
rather condemns its Application unto the great and holy things whereof it
treats, as unbecoming their Excellency and Majesty. So Origin to this
purpose, (...), Tom. 4. in Johan. If the Holy Scripture had used that Elegancy
and choice of Speech, which are admired among the Greeks, one might have
suspected that it was not Truth it self that conquered men, but that they had
been circumvented and deceived by appearing or fallacious consequences, and the
Splendour or Elegancy of Speech.

That the proper Excellency of Speech, or Style, consists in the (...), or
meet Accommodation of words unto things, with consideration of the Person that
uses them, and the End whereunto they are applied, all men that have any
acquaintance with these things will confess. (...), says Dionysius
Halicarnasseus; Nature requires that words should follow, Dyon. H^licar.
Tractat. de Isoc.
or ^e made to serve sentences or things, and not things be subservient to
words; whence the too curious Observation of Words, has been censured as an
Argument of an infirm and abject mind; however it may be pardoned in them who
placed all their Excellency in (...), and disposing persuasive alluring words;
Senec. Ep. 115.
as Isocrates spent ten years in his Panegyricks; and Plato ceased not unto the
eightieth year of his Age to adorn his Discourses; as Dionysius testifies of
them both. The Style of the Holy Scripture is every way answerable unto what
may rationally be expected from it. For,

First, It becomes the Majesty, Authority, and Holiness of Him, in whose name
it speaks. And hence it is, that by its Simplicity without Corruption, Picus
M^rand. Ep. ad Homo. Barbar.
Gravity without Affectation, Plainess without alluring Ornaments, it does not
so much entice, move, or persuade, as constrain, press, and pierce into the
mind and affections, transforming them into a likeness of the things which it
delivers unto us. And therefore though St. Paul says that he dealt not with
the Corinthians, (...), in an Excellency or sublimity of Speech, or Wisdom like
that of the Orators before described; yet he did (...), in such an evidence of
Spiritual Power, as was far more effectual and prevalent. The whole of the
Sacred Style is (...), if Truth, Gravity, Authority and Majesty can render it
so; nor can any instance be given to the contrary.

And Secondly it every where becomes the Subject Matter it treats of, which
because it is various, it is impossible that the Style wherein it is expressed
should be Uniform; when yet notwithstanding all its variety, it every where
keeps its own property, to be in Gravity and Authority still like unto its
self, and unlike to, or distinct from all other Writings whatsoever. Whence
Austin rightly of the Holy Penmen; Augustine. de Doct. Christ. lib. 4. c. 6.
Audeo dicere omnes qui recte intelligunt quod illi loquuntur, simul
intelligere non eos aliter loqui debuisse. I dare say, that whosoever
understands what they speak, will also understand that they ought not to have
spoken otherwise. And Origin of the Writings of St. Paul in particular; If any
one says he, give himself to the diligent Reading of his Epistles, (...), I
know full well, that either he will admire his great Conceptions and Sentences
under a plain and vulgar Style, or he will show himself very ridiculous. The
things treated of in the Scripture, are for the most part Heavenly, Spiritual,
Supernatural, Divine; and nothing can be more fond than to look for such things
to be expressed in a Flourish of Words, and with various Ornaments of Speech,
fit to lead away the minds of men from that which they are designed wholly to
be gathered unto the Admiration and Contemplation of. Bodies that have a native
Beauty and Harmony in the Composition of their parts, are advantaged more by
being clothed with fit Garments, than by the Ornaments of gay Attire. And the
Spiritual Native Beauty of Heavenly Truths, is better conveyed unto the minds
of men, by Words and Expressions fitted unto it, plainly, and simply, than by
any Ornaments of enticing Speech whatever; and therefore we say with Austin,
that there is not any thing delivered in the Scripture, but just as it ought to
be, and as the Matter requires.

Thirdly, The Style of the holy Penmen is in a gracious condescension suited
unto them and their capacity, whereof far the greatest part of them with whom
they had to do, consisted. This Origin at large insists upon in the beginning
of his Fifth Book against Celsus. The Philosophy and Oratory of the Heathen,
was suited principally, if not solely to their capacity that were learned; this
the Authors, and Professors of it aimed at; namely, that they might approve
their skill and ability unto those who were able to judge of them. The
Scripture was written for the good of mankind in general, Hilar. in Psalm. 126.
and without the least design of any contemporation of it self, to the Learning
and Wisdom of men. And this (...), or Condescension unto the common Reason,
Sense, Usage, and Experience of mankind in general, is very admirable in the
holy Penmen, and absolutely peculiar unto them. In this universal suitableness
unto all the concernments of it, consists that excellent simplicity of the
Scripture Style, whereby it plainly and openly without fraudulent Ornaments, in
common and usual Speech, declares things Divine, Spiritual and Heavenly, with
an holy accommodation of them to the understanding and capacities of men, in
such occasional variety as yet never diverts from those properties and
characters wherein the Uniformity of the whole does consist.

Style of Holy Writ, with others that may be added unto them, there is in it a
secret Energy, and efficacy for the subjecting of the minds of men unto its
intention in all things. Whether this pr^ceed only, and be imparted unto it,
from the matters treated of, which are holy and heavenly; or whether it be
communicated unto it immediately, by an impression of his Authority upon it, by
whom it is given out, or whether it arise from both of them, all that are
conversant in it with faith and reverence do find the Truth of our Assertion by
experience. And Origin amongst others, speaks excellently to this purpose,
(...). The holy Scripture teaches us, that what is spoken, though in it self
it be true and fit to persuade, is not able to conquer the minds of men, unless
power from God be communicated to the Speaker, and Gr^^e (from him) do flourish
in the things spoken themselves, and it is not without Divine influency, that
they speak with efficacy. Hence arises the Spiritual peculiar (...) of the
Divine ^riters, termed by St. Paul (...), the demonstration of the Spirit and
of power. And herein, as on other accounts; the Word of God is quick and
powerful and sharper than any two edged sword, Heb. 4.12. by which living
Energy and Authority it evacuated and brought to naught all the Wisdom of this
World; that is, all Philosophical Conceptions with all the Ornaments of
Eloquence and Oratory. The excellent Discourse of Austin on this Subject, de
Doctri. Christiana, lib. 4. cap. 6. is very well worthy consideration; whither
I refer the Reader, that I may not too far divert from my present particular
design.

Style of the Sacred Scripture in General, it is as applicable unto this
Epistle unto the Hebrews, as to any one portion of Holy Writ what ever. That
Simplicity, Gravity, Vnaffectedness, suitableness to its Author, Matter, and
End, which commends the whole unto us, are eminent in this part of it; that
Authority, Efficacy and Energy which are implanted on the whole by him who
supplied both sense and words unto the Penmen of it, exert themselves in this
Epistle also.

No defect in any of these can be charged on it, that should argue it of any
other extract than the whole. Nothing so far singular, as to be inconsistent
with that harmony, which in all their variety there is among the Books of the
Holy Scripture, as to the style and kind of Speech, is any where to be found in
it. If any where, as in the beginning of the first Chapter, the Style seems to
swell in its current above the ordinary banks of the Writings of the New
Testament, it is from the greatness and sublimity of the Matter treated on,
which was not capable of any other kind of Expression. Does the Penman of it,
any where use Words or Phrases, not commonly, or rarely, or perhaps no where
else used in the sense and way wherein they are by him applied? it is because
his Matter is peculiar, and not elsewhere handled; at least, not on the same
Principles, nor to the same purpose as by him: Does he oftentimes speak in an
Old Testament Dialect, pressing Words and Expressions to the service and s^nse
they were employed in under the Tabernacle and Temple, after they had been
manumitted as it were, and made free from their Typical importance in the
Service and Spiritual Sense of the Gospel? it is from the consideration of
their state and condition, with whom in an especial manner he had to do; and
this in perfect Harmony with the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost in other portions of
Scripture. So that on this account also its Station in the Holy Canon is
secured.

Peculiar Excellency which is found in the Style of the holy Scripture, either
evidencing its Divine Original, or at least manifesting that there is nothing
in it, unworthy of such an extract, the Authority of its principal Author
exerts it self in the whole of it unto the consciences of men. And herein, is
this Epistle an especial sharer also. Now this Authority as it respects the
minds of men, is in part an exurgency of the Holy Matter contained in it, and
the Heavenly Manner wherein it is declared. They have in their Conjunction, a
peculiar Character differencing their Writings from all Writing of an humane
Original, and manifesting it to be of God. Neither can it otherwise be, but
that things of Divine Revelation, expressed in words of Divine Suggestion and
determination, will appear to be of a Divine Original. And partly it consists
in an Ineffable E^anation of Divine Excellency, communicating unto his own Word
a distinguishing property from its Relation unto him. We speak not now of the
work of the Holy Ghost in our hearts by his Grace, enabling us to believe, but
of his work in the Word, rendering it credible and meet to be b^lieved; not of
the Seal and Testimony that he gives unto the hearts of individual Persons of
the Truth of the Scripture, or rather of the things contained in it, but of the
Seal and Testimony which in the Scripture he gives unto it, and by it, to be
his own Work, and Word. Such a character have the Works of other Agents,
whereby they are known and discerned to be theirs. By such properties are the
Works of men disc^rned, and oftentimes of Individuals amongst them. They bear
the likeness of their Authors, and are thereby known to be theirs. Neither is
it possible that there should be any work of God, proceeding so immediately
from him, as do Writings by Divine Inspiration, but there will be such a
communication of his Spirit and likeness unto it, such an impression of his
Greatness, Holiness, Goodness, Truth and Majesty upon it, as will manifest it
to be from him. The false Prophets of old pretended their Dreams, Visions,
Predictions and Revelations to be from him. They prefixed (...), he says, unto
all the Declarations of them, Jer. 23.31. and therefore doubtless framed them
to as great a likeness unto those that were by inspiration from him as they
were able; And yet the Lord declares that all their imaginations were as
discernable from his Word, as Chaff from Wheat; and this by that Authority and
power wherewith his Word is accompanied, whereof they were utterly destitute;
verse. 28, 29. And this Authority do all they who have their senses exercised in
it, find and acknowledge in this Epistle, wherein their minds and consciences
do acquiesce. They hear and understand the voice of God in it, and by that
Spirit which is promised unto them, discern it from the voice of a Stranger.
And when their minds are prepared and fortified against Objections by the
former considerations, this they ultimately resolve their persuasion of its
Divine Authority into. For,

From this Authority, they find a Divine Efficacy proceeding; a powerful
operation captivity unto the obedience taught therein.

This Efficacy and power is in the whole Word of God. Is not my Word as a Fire,
says the Lord, and like an Hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces, Jer.
23.29. that is, living and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb.
4.12. As it has an (...), or Authority over men, Matthew. 7.29. So it has a
(...), or powerful Efficacy in and toward them, Acts 20.32. James 1.21. yea,
it is the Power of God himself, for its proper end, Romans 1.16. and therefore
said to be accompanied with the demonstration of the Spirit and power, 1 Cor.
1.4. a Demonstration (...), Basil. in Psalm. 115.
as Basil, drawing the Soul to consent beyond the Efficacy of Rational or
Logical Arguments, or Geometrical Demonstrations, as he adds in the same place.
And this Divine Power and Efficacy of the Word, as to all the ends of it,
proceeding from the Authority of God in it, with his designation of it unto
those ends, (which is that which gives energie unto all things, enabling them
to produce their proper Effects, and setting limits and bounds to their
operation) as it is testified unto in innumerable places of the Scripture its
self, so it has and does sufficiently manifest and evidence its self, both in
the fruits and effects of it on the souls of particular persons, and in that
work which it has wrought, and does yet carry on invisibly in the world, in
despite of all the opposition that is made unto it by the power of Hell, in
conjunction with the unbelief, darkness and lusts of the minds of men, as may
elsewhere be more at large declared.

A Learned Man said well; Non monent, non persuadent Sacrae literae, sed
cogunt, Pleus Mirand* Epist. ad Hermol. Barbar.
agitant, vim inferunt; Legis rudia verba and agrestia, Sed viva, sed animata,
flammea, aculeata, ad imum spiritum penetrantia, hominem totum potestate
mirabili transformantia: expressing the sum of what we discourse. From hence
is all that supernatural Light and knowledge, that conviction and restraint,
that Conversion, Faith, Consolation and Obedience, that are found amongst any
of the Sons of men. (...) says Basil, (...). The whole Scripture is divinely
inspired and profitable; Basil. in Psalm. 1.
being written by the Holy Ghost for this purpose, that in it, as a common
healing Office for souls, all men may choose the Medicine suited to cure their
own distempers. Such is the Nature, Power, and Efficacy of this Epistle toward
them that do believe; It searches their hearts, discovers their thoughts,
principles their consciences, judges their Acts inward and outward, supports
their Spirits, comforts their souls, enlightens their minds, guides them in
their hope, confidence, and love to God, directs them in all their communion
with him, and obedience unto him, and leads them to an enjoyment of him. And
this Work of the Holy Ghost in it, and by it, seals up its Divine Authority
unto them, so that they find rest, spiritual satisfaction, and great assurance
therein. When once they have obtained this Experience of its Divine Power, it
is in vain for Men or Devils to oppose its Canonical Authority with their
frivolous Cavils and Objections. Neither is this Experience merely satisfactory
to themselves alone, as is by some pretended: It is a thing pleadable, and that
not only in their own defense to strengthen their Faith against Temptations,
but to others also; though not to Atheistical Scoffers, yet to humble
enquirers, which ought to be the frame of all men in the Investigation of
Sacred Truths.

Canonical Authority of this Epistle is confirmed unto us by Catholic
Tradition; By this Tradition I intend not the Testimony only of the present
Church that is in the world, nor Fancy a trust of a Power to declare what is so
in any Church whatever; but a general uninterrupted Fame conveyed and
confirmed by particular Instances, Records, and Testimonies in all Ages. In any
other sense how little weight there is to be laid upon Traditions, we have a
pregnant instance in him who first began to magnify them. This was Papias, a
contemporary of Policarpus in the very next Age after the Apostles. Tradition
of what was done, or said by Christ, or the Apostles, what Expositions they
gave, he professed himself to set an high value upon, equal to, if not above
the Scripture. And two things are considerable in his search after them.

Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. ult.
First, That he did not think that there was any Church appointed to be the
Preserver and Declarer of Apostolical Traditions, but made his enquiry of all
the individual ancient men that he could meet withal, who had conversed with
any of the Apostles.

Secondly, That by all his pains, he gathered together a Rhapsody of incredible
Stories, Fables, Errors and useless Curiosities; Such issue will the endeavors
of men have, who forsake the stable Word of Prophecy, to follow rumors and
reports, under the specious name of Traditions. But this Catholic Fame whereof
we speak, confirmed by particular Entrances and Records in all Ages, testifying
unto a matter of Fact, is of great importance. And how clearly this may be
pleaded in our present case, shall be manifested in our Investigation of the
Penman of this Epistle.

And thus I hope, we have made it evident, that this Epistle is not destitute
of any one of those (...), or infallible proofs and Arguments whereby any
particular Book of the Scripture evinceth its self unto the Consciences of men
to be written by Inspiration from God. It remains now to show, that it is not
liable unto any of those Exceptions, or Arguments, whereby any Book, or Writing
pretending a claim to a Divine Original, and Canonical Authority thereupon, may
be convicted, and manifested to be of another Extract; whereby its just
privilege will be on both sides secured.

Author or Penman of any such Writing. The Books of the Old Testament were all
of them written by Prophets or holy men inspired of God. Hence St. Peter calls
the whole of it, (...) Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.21. Prophecy delivered by men,
acted or moved therein by the Holy Ghost. And though there be a distribution
made of the several Books of it from the Subject Matter, into the Law, Prophets
and Psalms, Luke 24.44. and often into the Law and Prophets on the same
account, as Acts 26.2. Romans 3.22. yet their Penmen being all equally Prophets,
the whole in general is ascribed unto them and called Prophecy, Romans 1.8.
Chap. 16.26. Luke 24.25. 2 Pet. 1.19. So were the Books of the New Testament
written by Apostles, or men endowed with an Apostolical Spirit, and in their
work equally inspired by the Holy Ghost; whence the Church is said to be built
on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. If then the Author of any Writing
acknowledges himself, or may otherwise be convinced, to have been neither
Prophet nor Apostle, nor endued with the same infallible Spirit with them, his
work how excellent soever other ways it may appear, must needs be esteemed a
mere fruit of his own Skill, Diligence and Wisdom, and not any way to belong
unto the Canon of the Scripture. This is the condition, for instance, of the
second Book of Maccabees. In the close of it, the Author being doubtful what
acceptance his endeavors and manner of Writing would find amongst his Readers,
makes his excuse; and affirms, that he did his utmost to please them in his
Style and Composition of his words. So he tells us before, Chap. 2. v. 24. that
he did but Epitomize the History of Jason the Cyrenean, wherein he took great
pains and labor. The truth is, he that had before commended Judas Machabaeus
for offering Sacrifices for the dead (which indeed he did not, but for the
living) no where appointed in the Law; and affirmed, that Jeremiah hid the holy
Fire, Ark, Tabernacle and Altar of Incense in a Cave; that the same person,
Antiochus, was killed at Nanea in Persia, Chap. 1. v. 16. and dyed in the
Mountains of torments in his Bowels, as he was coming to Judea, Chap. 9. whom
the first Book affirms to have dyed of sorrow at Babylon, Chap. 6. v. 16. who
affirms Judas to have written Letters to Aristobulus in the one hundred eighty
eighth year of the Seleucian Empire, who was slain in the one hundred fifty
second year of it. Lib. 1. Chap. 1.3. that is thirty six years after his death,
with many other such mistakes and falsehoods, had no great need to inform us,
that he had no special Divine Assistance in his Writing, but leaned unto his
own Understanding; But yet this he does, as we showed, and that openly; For the
Holy Ghost will not be an Epitomator of a Profane Writing as he professes
himself to have been; nor make excuses for his weakness, nor declare his pains
and Sweat in his Work, as he does. And yet to that pass are things brought in
the World by Custom, Prejudice, love of Reputation, scorn to be esteemed
mistaken in any thing, that many earnestly contend for this Book to be written
by Divine Inspiration, when the Author of it himself openly professes it to
have been of another Extract. For although this Book, be not only rejected out
of the Canon, by the Council of Laodicea, Hierom and others of the Ancients,
Synod. Laod. cap. 59.
but by Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome himself; yet the Church of Rome would
now by force thrust it thereinto. But were the Author himself alive again,
Hieron. Cat. Viror. illust. in Joseph.
I am so well persuaded of his Ingenuity and Honesty, from the Conclusion of
his Story, that they would never be able to make him say, that he wrote by
Divine Inspiration; Gregor. Mor. lib. 19. cap. 16.
and little reason then have we to believe it. Now this Epistle is free from
this Exception. The Penman of it does no where intimate, directly or
indirectly, that he wrote in his own strength, or by his own ability; which yet
if he had done, in an Argument of that nature which he insisted on, had been
incumbent on him to have declared, that he might not lead the Church into a
pernicious error, in embracing that as given by Inspiration from God, which was
but a fruit of his Diligence and fallible Endeavors. But on the contrary, he
speaks as in the name of God, referring unto him, all that he delivers; nor can
in any Minute Instance, be convicted to have wanted his Assistance.

Circumstances of the general Argument of a Book may also convince it, of an
humane Judith. For such a Nebuchadonosor, as should reign in Ninive, Chap. 1.
v. 1. and make War with Arphaxad King of Ecbatane, ver. 13. whose Captains and
Officers should know nothing at all of the Nation of the Jews, Chap. 5. v. 3.
that waged War against them in the days of Joakim, or as other Copies Eliakim
the High Priest, Chapter 4.5. after whose Defeat, the Jews should have peace for
eighty years at the least, Chapter 16.28.30. is an imagination of that which never
had subsistence in rerum natura; or a representation of what (...) a Jewish
Woman ought, as the Author of it conceived, undertake for the good of her
Country. Setting aside the consideration of all other discoveries of the
fallibility of the whole Discourse: This alone is sufficient to impeach its
reputation. Our Epistle is no way obnoxious unto any exception of this nature.
Yea, the state of things in the Churches of God, and among the Hebrews in
particular, did at that time administer so just and full occasion unto a
Writing of this kind, as gives countenance unto its ascription unto the Wisdom
and Care of the Holy Ghost. For if the eruption of the poisonous brood of
Heretics, questioning the Deity of the Son of God in Cerinthus, gave occasion
to the Writing of the Gospel by St. John, and if the Dissentions in the Church
of Corinth, deserved two Epistles for their composition, and the lesser
Differences between Believers of the Jews and Gentiles, in and about the things
treated of in this Epistle had a remedy provided for them in the Epistles of
St. Paul unto them, is it not at least probable that the same Spirit who moved
the Penmen of those Books to Write, and directed them in their so doing, did
also provide for the removal of the Prejudices, and healing of the Distempers
of the Hebrews, which were so great, and of so great importance unto all the
Churches of God. And that there is weight in this Consideration, when we come
to declare the Time when this Epistle was written, will evidently appear.

The most manifest Eviction of any Writing pretending unto the privilege of
Divine Inspiration, may be taken from the Subject Matter of it, or the things
taught and declared therein. God himself being the first and only Essential
Truth, nothing one, every way Uniform and Consonant unto it self, there can be
no discrepancy in the branches of it, nor contrariety in the streams that flow
from that one Fountain. God is also Holy, Glorious in Holiness, and nothing
proceeds immediately from him, but it bears a stamp of his Holiness, as also of
his Greatness and Wisdom. If then any thing in the Subject Matter of any
Writing, be Untrue, Impious, Light, or any way contradictory to the Ascertained
Writings of Divine Inspiration, all Pleas and pretenses unto that privilege
must cease for ever. We need no other Proof, Testimony or Argument to evince
its Original, than what its self tenders unto us. And by this means also do the
Books commonly called Apochryphal, unto which the Romanists ascribe Canonical
Authority, destroy their own pretentions. They have all of them, on this
account, long since been cast out of the limits of any tolerable defense. Now,
that no one portion of Scripture, is less obnoxious to any exception of this
kind, from the Subject Matter treated of, and Doctrines delivered in it, then
this Epistle, we shall by Gods assistance manifest in our Exposition of the
whole, and each particular passage of it. Neither is it needful, that we should
here prolong our Discourse by anticipating any thing that must necessarily
afterward in its proper place, be insisted on. The place startled at by some
Chap. 6. about the impossibility of the recovery of Apostates, was touched on
before, and shall afterward be fully cleared. Nor do I know any other use to
be made of observing the scruple of some of Old, about the countenance given to
the Novatians by that place, but only to make a Discovery how partially men in
all Ages have been addicted unto their own apprehensions in things wherein they
differed from others; for whereas if the Opinions of the Novatians had been
confirmed in the place, as it is not, it had been their duty to have
relinquished their own Hypothesis, and gone over unto them, some of them
discovered a mind rather to have broken in upon the Authority of God himself
declared in his Word, than so to have done. And it is greatly to be feared that
the same Spirit still working in others, is as effectual in them to reject the
plain sense of the Scripture in sundry places, as it was ready to have been in
them, to reject the words of it in this.

The Style and Method of a Writing may be such, as to lay a just Prejudice
against its claim of Canonical Authority. For although the Subject Matter of a
Writing, may be good and honest in the main of it, and generally suited unto
the Analogy of faith, manner of its composure and Writing, such an Ostentation
of Wit, Fancy, Learning, or Eloquence, such an affectation of Words, Phrases,
and Expressions, such Rhetorical paintings of things small and inconsiderable,
as may sufficiently demonstrate humane Ambition, Ignorance, Pride, or Desire of
Applause, to have been mixed in the forming and producing of it. Hieron. Prae.
in Prove. Solo.
Much of this Hierom observes in particular concerning the Book entitled the
Wisdom of Solomon; Written as it is supposed by Philo an Eloquent and Learned
man; redolet Graecam Eloquentiam. This consideration is of deserved moment in
the Judgment we are to make of the spring or fountain from whence any Book
does proceed. For whereas, great variety of Style, and in manner of Writings
may be observed in the Penmen of Canonical Scripture, yet in no one of them do
the least footsteps of the failings and sinful infirmities of corrupted nature
before mentioned appear. When therefore they manifest themselves, they cast out
the Writings wherein they are from that Harmony and consent which in general
appears amongst all the Books of Divine Inspirat^on. Of the Style of this
Epistle we have spoken before: Its Gravity, Simplicity, Majesty, and absolute
suitableness unto the High, Holy, and Heavenly Mysteries treated of in it, are
as far as I can find, not only very evident; but also by all acknowledged, who
are able to judge of them.

Want of Catholic Tradition in all Ages of the Church, from the first giving
forth of Canonical Authority. And this Argument arises fatally against the
Apochryphal Books before mentioned. Some of them are expressly excluded from the
Canon by many of the ancient Churches, nor are any of them competently
testified unto.

The Suffrage of this kind given unto our Epistle, we have mentioned before.
The Doubts and Scruples of some about it, have likewise been acknowledged. That
they are of no weight to be laid in the balance against the Testimony given
unto it, might easily be demonstrated. But because they were levied all of
them, principally against its Author, and but by consequence against its
Authority, I shall consider them in a Disquisition about him, wherein we shall
give a further confirmation of the Divine Original of the Epistle, by proving
it undenyably to be Written by the Apostle St. Paul, that eminent Penman of the
Holy Ghost.

Thus clear stands the Canonical Authority of this Epistle. It is destitute of
no evidence obnoxious unto any just exception against its claim of that
privilege. And hence it is come to pass; that what ever have been the fears
doubts and scruples of some, the rash, temerarious Objections, Conjectures and
Censures of others, the Care and Providence of God over it, as a parcel of his
most holy Word, working with the prevailing evidence of its Original implanted
in it, and its Spiritual Efficacy unto all the ends of holy Scripture, has
obtained an absolute Conquest over the hearts and minds of all that believe,
and settled it in a full possession of Canonical Authority in all the Churches
of Christ throughout the world.

Exercitatio II. Of the Penman of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Knowledge of the Penman of any part of Scripture not necessary. Some of them
utterly concealed. The Word of God gives Authority unto them that deliver it,
not the contrary. Prophets in things wherein they are not actually inspired,
subject to mistake. St. Paul the Writer of this Epistle. The haesitation of
Origin. Heads of Evidence. Uncertainty of them who assign any other Author. St.
Luke not the Writer of it, Nor Barnabas. The Epistle under his name
Counterfeit. His Writing of this Epistle by sundry Reasons disproved. Not
Apollos. Nor Clemens. Nor Tertullian. Objections against St. Paul's being the
Penman. Dissimilitude of Style. Admitted by the Ancients. Answer of Origin,
rejected. Of Clemens, Hierom, etc. rejected likewise. St. Paul in what sense
(...). His Eloquence and Skill. Causes of the difference in Style, between this
and other Epistles. Coincidence of Expressions in it and them. The Epistle
(...). Answer of Hierom; Rejected. Of Theodoret. Of Chrysostom. Prejudice of
the Jews against St. Paul. Not the Cause of the Forbe^rance of his Name. The
true Reason thereof. The Hebrews Church State not Changed. Faith Evangelical
educed from Old Testament Principles and Testimonies. Th^se pressed on the
Hebrews, not mere Apostolical Authority. Haesitation of the Latin Church about
this Epistle; answered. Other Exceptions from the Epistle it self; removed.
Arguments to prove St. Paul to be the Writer of it. Testimony of St. Peter, 2
Epist. 3. v. 15, 16. Considerations upon that Testimony. The second Epistle of
St. Peter Written to the same Persons with the First. The First Written unto
the Hebrews in their Dispersion. (...) what. S. Paul wrote an Epistle unto the
same Persons to whom St. Peter wrote. That, this Epistle. Not that to the
Galathians. Not one lost. The Long-suffering of God, how declared to be
salvation in this Epistle. The Wisdom ascribed unto St. Paul in the Writing of
this Epistle wherein it appears. The (...) of it. Weight of this Testimony. The
suitableness of this Epistle unto those of the same Author. Who competent
Judges hereof. What required thereunto. Testimony of the first Churches; or
Catholic Tradition. Evidences from this Epistle its self. The general Argument
and Scope. Method. Way of Arguing. All the same with St. Paul's other Epistles.
Skill in Judaical Learning, Traditions and Customs. Proper to St. Paul. His
Bonds and Sufferings. His Companion Timothy. His Sign and Token subscribed.

SECOND DISSERTATION.
Divine Authority of the Epistle being vindicated, it is of no great Moment to
enquire scrupulously after its Penman. Writings that proceed from Divine
Inspiration, receive no addition of Authority from the Reputation or Esteem of
them by whom they were written. And this the Holy Ghost has sufficiently
manifested, by shutting up the Names of many of them from the knowledge of the
Church in all Ages. The Close of the Pentateuch has an uncertain Penman,
unless we shall suppose with some of the Jews that it was written by Moses
after his Death. Diverse of the Psalms have their Penmen concealed, as also have
the whole Books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, Ruth, Esther, Job; and the
Chronicles are but guessed at. Had any prejudice unto their Authority ensued,
this had not been. For those whose Authors are known, they were not esteemed to
be given by Prophecy, because they were Prophets; but they were known to be
Prophets by the Word which they delivered. For if the Word Delivered or Written
by any of the Prophets, was to be esteemed Sacred, or Divine, because delivered
or Written by such Persons as were known to be Prophets, then it must be
because they were some other way known so to be, and Divinely Inspired, as by
Working of Miracles, or that they were in their days received, and testified
unto as such by the Church. But neither of these can be asserted. For as it is
not known that any one Penman of the Old Testament, Moses only excepted, ever
wrought any miracles, so it is certain that the most and chiefest of them (as
the Prophets) were rejected and condemned by the Church of the days wherein
they lived. The only way therefore whereby they were proved to be Prophets was
by the Word it self which they delivered and wrote; and thereon depended the
Evidence and Certainty of their being Divinely inspired. See Amos 7.14, 15, 16.
Jer. 23.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And setting aside that actual Inspiration
by the Holy Ghost, which they had for the Declaration and Writing of that Word
of God which came unto them in particular, and the Prophets themselves were
subject to mistakes. So was Samuel when he thought Eliab should have been the
Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 16.6. and Nathan when he approved the purpose of David
to build the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 17.2. and the great Elijah, Clemens. Origin.
Eusebius. Hieronym. Theodoret. Chrysostom. Cajetan. Erasmus. Camero. Grotius,
and omnes fere Commentatores.
when he supposed none left in Israel that worshipped God aright but himself, 1
Kings 19.14, 18. It was then, as we said, the Word of Prophecy, that gave the
Writers of it the Reputation and Authority of Prophets; and their being
Prophets gave not Authority to the Word they declared or wrote as a Word of
Prophecy. Hence an anxious enquiry after the Penman of any part of the
Scripture is not necessary.

But whereas there want not Evidences sufficient to discover who was the Writer
of this Epistle, whereby also the exceptions made unto its Divine Original may
be finally obviated, they also shall be taken into Consideration. A Subject
this is, wherein many Learned Men of Old, and of Late, have exercised
themselves, Frider. Span. Fill. de Au. Epist. ad Heb.
until this single Argument is grown up into entire and large Treatises, and I
shall only take care that the Truth which has been already strenuously
asserted and vindicated, may not again by this review be rendered dubious and
questionable.

St. Paul it is by whom we affirm this Epistle to be written. It is
acknowledged that questioned of Old, that Origin after the examination of it
concludes, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 24.
(...); What is the very Truth in this matter God only knows. However he
acknowledges that (...), the Ancients, owned it to be written by Paul, and
that he says not without good Reason, whereas the ascription of it unto any
other, he assigns unto a bare report. It may not then be expected, that now
after so long a season, the Truth of our Assertion should be so manifestly
evinced, as to give absolute satisfaction unto all; (which is a vain thing for
any man to aim at in a Subject wherein men suppose that they have a liberty of
thinking what they please) yet I doubt not but that it will appear not only
highly probable, but so full of Evidence in comparison of any other Opinion
that is, or has been promoted in competition with it, as that some kind of
blameable pertinaciousness may be made to appear in its refusal. Now the whole
of what I shall offer in the proof of it may be reduced unto these six Heads.
(1.) The manifest failure of all them who have endeavored to assign it unto
any other Penman. (2.) The insufficiency of the Arguments insisted on to
disprove our Assertion. (3.) Testimony given unto it in other Scriptures. (4.)
Considerations taken from the Writing it self, compared with other acknowledged
Writings of the same Author. (5.) The general suffrage of Antiquity, or
Ecclesiastical Tradition. (6.) Reasons taken from sundry Circumstances relating
unto the Epistle its self. Now as all these Evidences are not of the same
nature, nor of equal force, so some of them will be found very cogent, and all
of them together very sufficient to free our Assertion from just Question or
Exception.

First, The Uncertainty of them who question whether Paul were the Writer of
this Epistle, and their want of probable grounds in assigning it unto any
other, has some inducement in it to leave it unto him whose of Old it was
esteemed to be. For when once men began to take to themselves a liberty of
Conjecture in this matter, they could neither make an end themselves, nor fix
any bounds unto the imagination of others. Having once lost its true Author no
other could be asserted with any such evidence, or indeed probability, but that
instantly twenty more with as good Grounds and Reasons might be entitled unto
it. Accordingly sundry Persons have been named, all upon the same account that
some thought good to name them; and why should not one man's Authority in this
matter be as good as another?

Origin in Eusebius affirms that some supposed Luke to have been the Author of
Epistle. But neither does he approve their Opinion, nor mention what Reasons
they pretend for it. He adds also that some esteemed it to be written by
Clemens of Rome. Clemens of Alexandria allows St. Paul to be the Author of it;
Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 13.
but supposes it might be Translated by Luke, because as he says, the Style
of it is not unlike that of his in the Acts of the Apostles. Grotius of late
contends for Luke to be the Author of it on the same account; ^r^t. Praefat. in
annot. ad Epist. ad Heb. Hieron. Scrip. Eccles. in Paul.
but the instances which he gives, rather argue a Coincidence of some Words and
Phrases, than a similitude of Style, which things are very different. Hierom
also tells us, that juxta quosdam videtur esse Lucae Evangelistae, by some it
was thought to be written by Luke the Evangelist, which he took from Clemens,
Origin and Eusebius; only he mentions nothing of the similitude of Style with
that of St. Luke, but afterward informs us, that in his Judgment there is a
great Conformity in Style, between this Epistle and that of Clemens Romanus.
None of them acquaint us who were the Authors or Approvers of this Conjeciure,
Scrip. Ecclesiast. in Clement.
nor do they give any credit themselves unto it. Neither is there any Reason of
this Opinion reported by them, but only that intimated by Clemens of the
Agreement of the Style with that of the Acts of the Apostles, (which yet is not
allowed by Hierom) whereon he does not ascribe the Writing, but only the
Translation of it unto Luke. Grotius alone contends for him to be the Author of
it, and that with this only Argument, that sundry words are used in the same
sense by St. Luke and the Writer of this Epistle. But that this Observation is
of no moment shall afterward be declared.

This Opinion then may be well rejected as a groundless guess of an obscure
unknown Original, and not tolerably confirmed either by Testimony or
Circumstances of things. If we will forego a Persuasion established on so many
important Considerations, as we shall manifest this of St. Paul's being the
Author of this Epistle to be, and confirmed by so many Testimonies, upon every
arbitrary ungrounded Conjeciure, we may be sure never to find rest in any thing
that we are rightly persuaded of. But I shall add one Consideration that will
cast this Opinion of Grotius quite out of the limits of probability. By general
Consent this Epistle was written whilst James was yet alive and presided in the
Church of the Hebrews at Jerusalem; and I shall afterward prove it so to have
been. What was his Authority as an Apostle, what his Reputation in that Church,
is both known in general from the nature of his Office, and in particular is
intimated in the Scripture, Acts 15.13. Gal. 2.9. These were the Hebrews whose
instruction in this Epistle is principally intended, and by their means, that
of their Brethren in the Eastern Dispersion of them. Now is it Reason to
imagine, that any one who was not an Apostle, but only a Scholar and Follower
of them, should be used to write unto that Church, wherein so great an Apostle,
a Pillar among them, had his especial Residence, and did actually Preside; and
that in an Argument of such huge importance, with Reasons against a practice
wherein they were all engaged; yea, that Apostle himself as appears, Gal. 2.12.
Were any one then alive of more esteem and Reputation in the Church than
others, certainly He was the fittest to be used in this employment; and how
well all things of this nature agree unto St. Paul we shall see afterward.

Barnabas. Clemens, Origin, Eusebius make no mention of him. Tertul. de
Pudicit. cap. 20. Hieron. Gat. Scrip. in Pau. and Barnab. Philastr.
Tertullian was the Author of this Opinion; and it is reported as his by
Hierom. Philastrius also remembers the report of it. And it is of late defended
by Camero, (as the former concerning Luke by Grotius) whose Reasons for his
conjecture are confuted with some sharpness by Spanhemius, mindful as it seems
of his Fathers Controversy with some of his Scholars. The Authority of
Tertullian is the sole foundation of this Opinion; Hae. 41. Camero Qua. in
Epist. ad Heb.
But as the Book wherein he mentions it was written in his Paroxysme, when he
uttered not that only unadvisedly, so he seems not to lay much weight on the
Epistle it self, only preferring it unto the Apochryphal Hermes; Receptior
says he, Spanh. de Auth. Epist. ad Heb. Grotius Praef. Annot. in Ep. ad Heb.
apud Ecclesias Epistola Barnabae illo Apocrypho pastore Maechorum. And we have
showed that the Latin Church was for a time somewhat unacquainted with this
Epistle, so that it is no marvel if one of them should mistake its Author.
Grotius would disprove this Opinion from the dissimilitude of its style, and
that which goes under the name of Barnabas, which is corrupt and barbarous. But
there is little weight in that Observation; Baron. An. Eccles. A. 51. N. 55.
that Epistle being certainly spurious, no way savouring the Wisdom or Spirit
of him on whom it has been vulgarly imposed. But yet that it was that Epistle
which is cited by some of the Ancients under the name of Barnabas, Hieron. de
Nomin. Heb.
and not this unto the Hebrews, is well proved by Baronius from the names that
Hierom mentions out of that Epistle, which are no where to be found in this to
the Hebrews. But that Epistle of Barnabas is an open fruit of that vanity which
prevailed in many about the third and fourth Ages of the Church, of personating
in their Writings some Apostolical Persons, wherein they seldom or never kept
any good decorum, as might easily be manifested in this particular instance. As
to our present Case, the Reason before mentioned, is of the same validity
against this, as the other Opinion concerning Luke, whereunto others of an
equal evidence may be added. Barnabas was not an Apostle, properly and strictly
so called, nor had Apostolical Mission or Authority, Epiphan Haer. lib. 1.10.
but rather seems to have been one of the LXX. Disciples, as Epiphanius
affirms. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 13.
And Eusebius a Person less credulous than he, acknowledging that a just and
true Catalogue of them could not be given, yet places Barnabas as the first of
them concerning whom all agreed. Much weight indeed I shall not lay hereon,
seeing it is evident that the Catalogues given us by the Ancients of those
Disciples, are nothing but a rude Collection of such names as they found in the
Books of the New Testament, applied without Reason or Testimony; but Apostle he
was none.

Many circumstances also concur to the removal of this conjecture. The Epistle
was written in Italy, Chap. 13.24. where it does not appear that Barnabas ever
was. The fabulous Author, I confess, of the Rhapsedy called the Recognitions of
Clemens, tells us that Barnabas went to Rome, taking along Clemens with him,
and returning into Judaea, found St. Peter at Caesarea. But St. Luke in the
Acts gives us another account, both where Barnabas was, and how he was
employed, at the time intimated by him who knew nothing of those things. For
whilst St. Peter was at Caesarea, Acts 10.1. Barnabas was at Jerusalem, Acts
9.27. being a little while after sent to Antioch by the Apostles; chap. 11.22.
Again Timothy was the Companion of the Writer of this Epistle. chap. 13.23. a
Person as far as appears unknown unto Barnabas, being taken into St. Paul's
Society after their difference and separation, Acts 15.39. chap. 16.1. He had
also been in bonds or imprisonment, chap. 10.34. whereof we cannot at that time
learn any thing concerning Barnabas, those of St. Paul being known unto all.
And lastly, not long before the Writing of this Epistle, Barnabas was so far
from that Light into, and Apprehension of the nature use and expiration of
Judaical Rites herein expressed, that he was easily mislead into a practical
miscarriage in the observation of them, Gal. 2.13. Hieron Epist. ad August. and
Com. in cap 2. Ep. ad Gal. Baron. An. Eccl. A. ^ 51. N. 39, 40, 41. M^nceius de
Vitul. Aur.
wherein although some (after Hieroms fancy, that the difference between St.
Peter and St. Paul was only in pretense) have labored to free St. Peter and
his Companions on other grounds from any sinful failing, as it should seem in a
direct opposition unto the Testimony of St. Paul affirming that (...) in that
particular he was to be blamed or condemned, v^r. 11. (not unlike him who has
written a justification of Aaron in his making the Golden Calf) yet that
Barnabas was not come up unto any constancy in his practice about Mosaical
Institutions, is evident from the Text. And shall we suppose that He who but a
little before upon the coming of some few Brethren of the Church of Jerusalem
from St. James, durst not avouch and abide by his own personal Liberty, but
deserted the use of it not without some blameable dissimulation, Gal. 2.13.
should now with so much Authority write an Epistle unto that Church with St.
James, and all the Hebrews in the world concurring with them in Judgment and
Practice, about that very thing, wherein himself out of respect unto them had
particularly miscarried? This certainly was rather the work of St. Paul, whose
Light and Constancy in the Doctrine delivered in this Epistle, with his
engagements in the defense of it, above all the rest of the Apostles, is known
from the story of the Acts, and his own other Writings.

Apollos has been thought by some to be the Penman of this Epistle; and that
because Character given of him. For it is said, that he was an Eloquent man,
Luther in Genesis cap. 48. v. 10.
mighty in the Scripture, fervent in Spirit, and one that mightily convinced
the Jews out of the Scripture it self, Acts 18.24, 28. all which things appear
throughout this whole Discourse. But this Conjecture has no Countenance from
Antiquity, no mention being made of any Epistle written by Apollos, or of any
thing else, so that he is not reckoned by Hierom amongst the Ecclesiastical
Writers, nor by those who interpolated that work with some Fragments out of
Sophronius. Nor is he reported by Clemens, Origin, or Eusebius, to have been by
any esteemed the Author of this Epistle. However I confess somewhat of moment
might have been apprehended in the Observation mentioned, if the Excellencies
ascribed unto Apollos, had been peculiar unto him; yea, had they not all of
them been found in St. Paul, and that in a manner and degree, more eminent than
in the other. But this being so, the ground of this Conjecture is taken from
under it.

Origin, Eusebius, and Hierom in the places forecited, mention a report
concerning some Epistle unto Clemens Romanus. None of them give any Countenance
unto it, or intimate any Grounds of that supposition; only Hierom affirms that
there is some Similitude between the Style of this Epistle, and that of
Clemens, which occasioned the suspicion of his Translating of it, whereof
afterward. Erasmus has since taken up that Report, and seems to give credit
unto it, Erasm. An. in cap. 13.
but has not contributed any thing of Reason or Testimony unto its
Confirmation. A Worthy Holy Man was this Clemens no doubt, and Bishop of the
Church at Rome. But none of the Ancients of any Learning or Judgment, ever
laid weight on this Conjecture. For what had he who was a Convert from among
the Gentiles to do with the Churches of the Hebrews, what Authority had he to
interpose himself in that which was their peculiar concernment? Whence may it
appear, that he had that Skill in the Nature Use and End of Mosaical Rites and
Institutions, which the Writer of this Epistle discovers in himself? Neither
does that Epistle of his to the Church of Corinth which is yet extant, though
excellent in its kind, permit us to think that he wrote by Divine Inspiration.
Besides the Author of this Epistle had a desire and purpose to go to the
Hebrews, chap. 13.22. Yea, he desires to be restored unto them as one that had
been with them before. But as it does not appear that this Clemens was ever in
Palestine, so what Reason he should have to leave his own charge now to go
thither, no man can imagine. And to end this needless Debate, in that Epistle
which was truly his own, he makes use of the Words and Authority of this, as
Eusebius long since observed.

Sixtus Sinensis affirms, that the Work whose Author we enquire after, was by
some assigned unto Tertullian. Sixtus Sinen. Biblioth. lib. 7. cap. 8.
A fond and impious imagination, and such as no man of Judgment or Sobriety
could ever fall into. This Epistle was famous in the Churches before Tertullian
was born; Tertul. praes. ad Haeres.
is ascribed by himself unto Barnabas, and some passages in it, are said by him
to be corrupted by one Theodotus long before his time.

From the Uncertainty of these Conjectures, with the Evidence of Reason and
Circumstances whereby they are disproved, two things we seem to have obtained.
First, That no Objection on their Account can arise against our Assertion. And
Secondly, that if St. Paul be not acknowledged to be the Writer of this
Epistle, the whole Church of God is, and ever was at a total loss whom to
ascribe it unto. And it may reasonably be expected that the weakness of these
Conjectures, should if not add unto, yet set of the credibility of the Reasons
and Testimonies, which shall be produced in the Assignement of it unto him.

Objections that are laid by some against our Assignation of this Epistle unto
St. Paul according unto the Order proposed, are nextly to be considered. These
I shall pass through with what briefness I can, so as not to be wanting unto
the Defensative designed.

Dissimilitude of Style, and manner of writing from that used by St. Paul in
his other Epistles, is pressed in the first place, and principally insisted on.
And indeed it is the whole of what with any color of Reason is made use of in
this Cause. This the Ancients admitted. The Elegancy, propriety of Speech, and
sometimes Loftiness, that occurr in this Epistle, Occumen. Praes. in Ep. ad
Heb. Clemens in Hypotyp.
difference it, as they say, from those of St. Paul's writings. (...), says
Oecumenius; it seems not to be St. Paul's, because of the Style or Character of
Speech. For this cause Clemens of Alexandria supposed it to be written in
Hebrew, and to be translated into Greek by St. Luke the Evangelist; the Style
of it, as he says, being like unto that which is used in the Acts of the
Apostles; and yet that is acknowledged by all to be purely Greek, whereas this
is accused to be full of Hebraisms, so little weight is to be laid on these
Critical Censures, wherein Learned men perpetually contradict one another.

Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 24.
Origin also confesses, that it has not in its Character, (...), the
Idiotism, or propriety of the Language of St. Paul, who acknowledges himself
to be (...), 2 Cor. 11.6. rude in Speech; and this Epistle is, says he, (...),
in the composition of its Speech Elegantly Greek, in comparison of his, which
if we may believe him, any one will discern who can judge between the
difference of Styles. Hieronym. Catal. Scri. in Pau.
And Hierom, Scripserat autem ad Hebraeos Hebraice, id est suo eloquio
disertissime; ut eo quae eloquuntur scripta fuerant in Hebraeo aliquatenus
verterentur in Graecum; and hanc causam esse quod a coeteris Pauli Epistolis
discrepare videatur. It seems to differ from the rest of St. Paul's Epistles,
because of its Translation out of Hebrew, wherein he speaks not with his wonted
confidence. And elsewhere he says, that the Style of this Epistle seems to be
like that of Clemens. Erasmus presses this Objection; Restat, Erasm. An. in
cap. 13. v. 24.
says he, Jam argumentum illud quo non aliud certius; stylus ipse and
orationis Character, qui nihil habet affinitatis cum Phrasi Paulina; The Style
and Character of Speech have no affinity with the Phrase of St. Paul. This
Consideration also drew Calvin into the same Opinion; and it is insisted on by
Camero and Grotius to the same purpose. The sum of this Objection is, that St.
Paul was rude in Speech which is manifest in his other Epistles, but the Style
of this is pure, elegant, florid, such as has no affinity with his, so that he
cannot be esteemed the Penman of it.

As this Objection was taken notice of by them of old, and the matter of it
admitted Paul, they gave sundry Answers unto it. Origin gives us his Judgment,
that the Sense or Subject Matter of this Epistle was from St. Paul, which are
excellent, and no way inferior to those of the same Apostle in any other
Epistles, as every one exercised in the Reading of his Epistles will grant; but
the Structure and Phrase of it, he supposes to have been the Work of some
other, who taking the Dictates of his Master, from thence composed this
Epistle. But this Answer can by no means be admitted of, nor accommodated unto
any Writing given by Divine Inspiration. For not only the Matter, but the very
Words of their Writings were suggested unto his Penmen by the Holy Ghost, (that
the whole might have no influence from humane frailty or fallibility) which
alone renders the Authority of their Writings Sacred and Divine. But this
intimation would resolve the Truth in this Epistle, into the Care and Diligence
of him that took the sense of St. Paul, and thence composed it; wherein he was
liable to mistakes, unless we shall vainly suppose, that he also was inspired.
Wherefore generally they who admitted of this Objection, gave the Answer unto
it before intimated; namely, that the Epistle was Originally written in Hebrew
by St. Paul, Theodor. A gu. in Ep. ad Heb. Chrysosl. Praes. in Ep. ad Heb.
Cathar. de Auth. Epist. ad Heb. diss.
and Translated by some other into the Greek Language. So Oecumenius; (...).
The cause of the Alteration or difference of Style in this Epistle is manifest,
for it is said to be written unto the Hebrews in their own Language, and to be
afterward Translated. Hierom and Clemens also incline to this Opinion and
Answer. And Theophylact, B^llar. ^e Verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 17. Baron. An. Eccles.
A.C. 51. N. 55.
though following Theodoret, he egregiously confutes them who deny St. Paul to
be the Author of this Epistle, from the Excellency, Efficacy, and irrefragable
Power and Authority wherewith it is accompanied, yet admits of this Objection,
and answers with others, that it was Translated by St. Luke or Clemens. Only
Chrysostom, A Lapid. Prae. in Epist.
who indeed is (...), without taking notice of the pretended dissimilitude of
Style ascribes it directly to St. Paul. But to this Answer incline generally
the Divines of the Roman Church; Can. loc. com. lib. 2. cap. 11.
as Catharinus, Bellarminus, Baronius, Cornelius a Lapide, Canus, Math^us
Galenus, Ludovicus Tena, and others without number; Galenus Praes. in Epist. ad
Heb.
though it be rejected by Estius and some others among themselves. What is to
be thought of it, we shall afterward consider in a Dessertation designed unto
that Purpose. For the present, we affirm, Ten. Praelud. 4. Estius Prolegom.
that it is no way needful as an Answer unto the Objection insisted on, as we
shall now farther particularly manifest.

The Foundation of this Objection lies in St. Paul's acknowledgement that he was
rude in Speech, 2 Cor. 11.6. This Origin presses, and Hierom takes occasion
hence to censure his skill in his Mother Tongue; for so was the Greek unto them
that were born at Tarsus in Cilicia; and this was the place of St. Paul's
nativity, though the same Hierom from I know not what Tradition, affirms that
he was born at Ghiscalis, a Town of Galile, from whence he went afterward with
his Parents to Tarsus, contrary to his own express testimony, Acts 22.23. I
verily was born in Tarsus, a City of Cilicia.

But this seems an infirm foundation of the Objection insisted on; Paul in that
place is dealing with the Corinthians about the false Teachers, who seduced
them from the Simplicity of the Gospel. The Course which they took to ensnare
them, was vain affected Eloquence, and strains of Rhetoric unbecoming the Work
they pretended to be engaged in. Puffed up with this singularity they contemned
St. Paul as a rude unskilful Person no way able to match them in their fine
Declamations. In answer hereunto, He first tells them, that it became not him
to use (...), 1 Cor. 1.17. that Wisdom of Words or Speech which Orators
flourished withal; or (...), 1 Cor. 2.13. the Words that Man's Wisdom teaches,
or an artificial composition of Words to entice thereby; which he calls (...),
Chap. 2.1. And many Reasons he gives why it became him not to make use of those
things, so as to make them his design, as the Seducers and false Apostles did.
Again he answers by Concession in this Place, (...), suppose I be, or were,
rude or unskilful in speech, does this matter depend thereon; is it not
manifest unto you that I am not so in the knowledge of the Mystery of the
Gospel? He does not confess that he is so, says Austin, but grants it for
their Conviction. And in this sense concur, Oecumenius, Aquinas, Lyra,
Catharinus, Clarius, and Capellus, with many others on the place. If then by
(...) here, that seducing en^icing Rhetoric wherewith the false Teachers
entangled the Affections of their unskilful hearers be intended, as we grant
that St. Paul it may be was unskilful in it, and are sure that he would make no
use of it, so it is denied that any footsteps of it appear in this Epistle; and
if any thing of solid, convincing, unpainted Eloquence be intended in it, it is
evident that St. Paul neither did, nor justly could confess himself
unacquainted with it, only he made a Concession of the Objection made against
him by the False Teachers to manifest how they could obtain no manner of
advantage thereby.

Epistles of St. Paul written in so low and homely a Style as is pretended.
Chrysostom. Proaem. in Ep. ad Romans
Chrysostom speaking of him tells us, (...); and that for his Eloquence he was
esteemed Mercury by the Gentiles. Somewhat has been spoken hereunto before,
whereunto I shall now only add the Words of a Person who was no incompetent
Judge in things of this nature. Beza Annot. in 2 Cor. 11.6.
Quum, says he, orationis ipsius totam indolem and (...) proprius considero,
nullam ego in ipso Platone similem grandiloquentiam, quoties illi libuit Dei
Mysteria detonare, nullam in Demosthene parum (...), comperisse me fateor,
quoties animos velmetu Divini Judicii perterrefacere, vel commonefacere, vel ad
contemplandam Dei bonitatem attrahere, vel ad pietatis and misericordiae
officia constituit adhortari, nullam denique vel in ipso Aristotele and Galeno
praestantissimis alioquin artificibus, magis exactam docendi Methodum invenio.
When I well consider the Genius and Character of the Speech and Style of this
Apostle, I confess I never found that Grandeur in Plato himself, as in him,
when he thundereth out the Mysteries of God; nor that Gravity and Vehemence in
Demosthenes as in him, when he intends to terrify the minds of men, with a
dread of the Judgments of God, or would warn them, or draw them to the
contemplation of his Goodness, or the performance of the Duties of Piety and
Mercy; Nor do I find a more exact Method of Teaching in those great and
excellent Masters, Aristotle, and Galen, than in him. So it is plainly, so the
Greek Fathers almost with one consent do testify, so do most of the Latins
also, so the best Learned of the later Critics, and so may it be defended
against any opposition. And Hierom himself, who takes most Liberty to censure
his Style, does so far in other places forget his own temerity therein, as to
cry out against those, who dreamed as he speaks, that St. Paul was not
thoroughly acquainted with all propriety of Speech. And he who was the first
that ever spoke word about any defect of this kind, though as able to judge as
any one what ever who has since passed his Censure unto the same purpose, was
in an evident mistake in the very instance which he pitched on to confirm his
Observation. This was Irenaeus, one of the first and most Learned of the Greek
Fathers; For affirming that there were many hyperbata in the Style of this
Apostle, which render it uneven and difficult, he confirms his Assertion with
an instance in 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this World, bath blinded the
minds of them which believe not: For, says he, the Words should naturally have
been thus placed; In whom God has blinded the minds of them that in this world
believe not. So to obviate a Foolish Sophism in the Valentinians, an Hyperbaton
must be supposed in the Apostles Style, when indeed there is not the least
color of it. Upon the whole matter then, I shall confidently assert, that
there is no manner of defect in any of his Writings; and that every thing,
(consider the matter and nature of it, the Person in whose name he spoke, and
those to whom he wrote) is expressed as it ought to be for the end proposed,
and not otherwise. And hence it is, that because of the variety of the Subject
Matter treated of, and difference among the persons to whom he wrote, that
there is also variety in his way and manner of expressing himself in sundry of
his Epistles: And in many of them, there is such a discovery and manifestation
of solid Eloquence, and pure Elegancy of Speech, that the Observation of them
in any Writing, is far from having any weight to prove it none of his.

granted, though it be not proved, that there is some dissimilitude of Style
between this and the rest of the Epistles of St. Paul; and the Reasons of it
are sufficiently manifest. The Argument treated of in this Epistle, is diverse
from that of most of the other; many circumstances in those to whom he wrote
singular, the spring of his reasonings, and way of his arguings, peculiarly
suited unto his Subject Matter, and the condition of those unto whom he wrote.
Besides in the Writing of this Epistle there was in him an especial Frame and
incitation of Spirit, occasioned by many Occurrences relating unto it. His
intense love, and near relation in the flesh, unto them to whom he wrote,
affectionately remembered by himself, and expressed in a manner inimitable, Romans
9.1, 2, 3. did doubtless exert it self, in his treating about their greatest
and nearest concernment. The prejudices and enmity of some of them against him,
recorded in several places of the Acts, and remembered by himself in some other
of his Epistles, lay also under his consideration. Much of the Subject that he
treated about, was matter of Controversy, which was to be debated from the
Scripture, and wherein those with whom he dealt, thought they might dissent
from him without any prejudice to their Faith or Obedience. Their condition
also must needs greatly affect him. They were now not only under present
troubles, dangers and fears, but Positi inter sacrum and saxum, at the very
door of ruin, if not delivered from the snare of obstinate adherence unto
Mosaical Institutions. Now they who know not what alterations in Style, and
manner of Writing, these things will produce, in those who have an ability to
express the Conceptions of their minds, and the Affections wherewith they are
attended, know nothing of this matter. And other differences from the rest of
Paul's Epistles, but what may evidently be seen to arise from these and the like
Causes, none have yet discovered, nor can so do. And notwithstanding the
Elegancy of the Style pretended, that it is as full of Hebraisms, as any other
Epistle of the same Author, we shall discover in our passage through it; which
certainly a Person of that Ability in the Greek Tongue, as the Writer of this
Epistle discovers himself to be, might have avoided, if he had thought meet so
to do.

Neither is it to be omitted, that there is such a Coincidence in many Phrases,
use of Epistle, and the rest of St. Paul's, as will not allow us to grant such a
Discrepancy in Style, as some imagine. They have many of them been gathered by
others; and therefore I shall only point unto the places from whence they are
taken: See Chap. 1.1. compared with 2 Cor. 13.3. Chap. 2.14. with Gal. 1.16.
Ephesians. 6.12. Chap. 2.2. with Ephesians. 5.26. Chap. 3.1. with Phil. 3.14. 2 Timothy
1.9. Chap. 3.6. with Romans 5.2. Chap. 5.14. with 1 Cor. 11.6. Phil. 3.15. Ephesians.
4.13. Chap. 5.13. with 1 Cor. 3.2. Chap. 6.2. with Col. 2.2. 1 These. 1.5. Chap.
7.18. with Romans 8.3. Gal. 4.9. Chap. 8.6, 9. with Gal. 3.19, 20. 1 Timothy 2.5.
Chap. 10.1. with Col. 2.17. Chap. 10.22. with 2 Cor. 7.1. Chap. 10.23. a phrase
peculiar to St. Paul, and common with him, Chap. 10.33. with 1 Cor. 4.9. Chap.
10.36. with Gal. 3.22. Chap. 10.39. 1 These. 5.9. 2 These. 2.14. Chap. 12.1. with
1 Cor. 9.24. Chap. 13.10. with Ephesians. 4.14. 1 Cor. 9.13. 1 Cor. 10.18. Chap.
13.15, 16. with Romans 12.1. Phil. 4.18. Chap. 13.20. with Romans 15.33. Romans
16.20. 2 Cor. 13.^^ Phil. 4.9. 1 These. 5.23. Many of which places, having
before been observed by others, they are all of them, collected in this order
by Spanhemius; and many more of the like nature mig^^ be added unto them, but
that these are sufficient to out-ballance the contrary Instances of some Words
and Expressions, no where else used by St. Paul, which perhaps may be observed
of every other Epistle in like manner. And upon all these Considerations it
appears how little force there is in this Objection.

Secondly, It is excepted, that the Epistle is (...), the name of Paul being
not Epistles written by him. And this indeed is the Womb, wherein all other
Objections have been conceived. For this being once taken notice of, and
admitted as an Objection, the rest were but fruits of men's needless diligence,
to give countenance unto it. And this exception is Ancient, and that which
alone some of old took any notice of; for it is considered by Clemens, Origin,
Eusebius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, and generally all
that have spoken any thing about the Writer of this Epistle. Nor does the
strength that it has, lie merely in this, that it is without Inscription; for
so is the Epistle of St. John, concerning which, it was never doubted but that
he was the Author of it; but in the constant usage of Paul, prefixing his name
unto all his other Epistles; so that unless a just Reason can be given, why he
should divert from that custom in the Writing of this, it may be well supposed
to be none of his.

Now by the Title which is wanting, either the mere Titular superscription, the
Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews, is intended; or the Inscription of
his name, with an Apostolical Salutation conjoined, in the Epistle it self. For
the First, it is uncertain of what Antiquity the Titular Superscriptions of any
of the Epistles are: but most certain, that they did not Originally belong unto
them, and are therefore destitute of all Authority. They are things, the
Transcribers it may be have at pleasure made bold withal, as with the
Subscription also of some of them, as to the place from whence they were sent,
and the persons by whom. Though this therefore should be wanting unto this
Epistle, as there is some variety both in ancient Copies of the Original, and
Translations about it, the most owning and retaining of it; yet it would be of
no moment, seeing we know not, whence, or from whom, any of them are. The
Objection then is taken from the want of the wonted Apostolical Salutation;
which should be in, and a part of the Epistle. And this is the substance of
what on this account is excepted against our Assertion.

Objection, some of them of no more validity, than its self. Hierom replies, it
has no man's name prefixed, therefore we may by as good Reason, Say it was
written by no man, as not by Paul; which Instance though it be approved by Beza
with other learned men, and not sufficiently answered by Erasmus with a
contrary instance, yet indeed it is of no value; for being written, it must be
written by some body, though not perhaps by St. Paul. Some have thought, that
it may be, the Inscription inquired after was at first prefixed, but by some
means or other has been lost. But as there are very many Arguments and
Evidences to evince the weakness of this imagination, so the beginning and
entrance of the Epistle is such, as is incapable of any contexture with such a
Salutation, as that used in other Epistles, as is also that of St. John, so
that this Conjecture can here have no place.

Ancients, and principally Theodoret insist upon the peculiar allotment of his
Work unto him among the Gentiles. Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, in an
especial manner; and if in Writing unto the Hebrews he had prefixed his name
unto his Epistle, he might have seemed to transgress the Line of his Allotment.
And if it be not certain that the Apostles by common consent cast their Work
into distinct portions, which they peculiarly attended unto; as the Ancients
generally concur that they did, (and there was not reason wanting why they
should do so) yet it is, that there was a special Convention and agreement
between James, Peter, and John on the one side, and Paul and Barnabas on the
other, that they should attend the Ministry of the Circumcision, and these of
the Gentiles. Hence Paul finding it necessary for him to write unto the
Hebrews, would not prefix his name with an Apostolical Salutation unto his
Epistle, that he might not seem to have invaded the Province of others, or
transgressed the Line of his Allotment. But I must acknowledge that
notwithstanding the weight laid upon it by Theodoret and some others, this
reason seems not unto me cogent unto the end for which it is produced. For (1.)
The Commission given by the Lord Christ unto his Apostles, was Catholic, and
had no bounds but that of the whole Creation of God capable of instruction,
Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15. and that Commission which was given unto them all in
general, was given unto every one in particular: and made him in solidum
possessor of all the Right and Authority conveyed by it. Neither could any
following arbitrary agreement pitched on for convenience, and the facilitating
of their Work, abridge any of them from exerting their Authority, and
exercising their Duty toward any of the Sons of Men, as occasion did require.

And hence it is, that notwithstanding the agreement mentioned, we find St.
Peter teaching of the Gentiles, and St. Paul laboring the Conversion of the
Jews. Secondly, In Writing this Epistle, on this Supposition St. Paul did
indeed, that which is pretended was not meet for him to do; namely, he entered
on that which was the Charge of another man; only he conceals his Name, that he
might not appear in doing of a thing unwarrantable and unjustifiable. And
whether it be meet to ascribe this unto the Apostle, is easy to determine. As
then it is certain that St. Paul in the Writing of this Epistle did nothing,
but what in duty he ought to do, and what the Authority given him by Christ
extended its self unto, so the concealing of his Name, lest he should be
thought to have done any thing irregularly, is a thing that without much
temerity may not be imputed unto him.

seems to be solid and satisfactory, which most of the Ancients rest in. And
it is, that St. Paul had weighty Reasons not to declare his Name at the
entrance of this Epistle to the Hebrews, taken from the prejudices that many of
them had against him. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 13.
This is insisted on by Clemens in Eusebius, He did Wisely, says he, conceal
his Name, because of the prejudicate Opinion that they had against him: Proaem.
in Ep. ad Heb.
and this is at large insisted on by Chrysostom, who is followed therein by
Theophilact, Oecumenius and others without number. The persecuting Party of the
Nation, looked on him as an Apostate, a Desertor of the Cause wherein he was
once engaged, and one that taught Apostasy from the Law of Moses; yea, as they
thought, that set the whole World against them and all that they gloried in,
Acts 21.28. and what enmity is usually stirred up on such occasions, all men
know, and his example is a sufficient instance of it. And there was added
thereunto, which Chrysostom, and that justly lays great weight upon, that he
was no ordinary Person, but a man of great and extraordinary abilities, which
mightily increased the provocation. Those among them, who with the profession
of the Gospel, had a mind, to continue themselves in, and to impose upon others
the observance of Mosaical Institutions, looked on him as the only person that
had frustrated their design, Acts 15.2. And this also is usually no small cause
of wrath and hatred. The Spirit of these men afterward possessing the
Ebonites, they despised St. Paul as a Grecian and Desertor of the Law, as
Epiphanius testifies. And even the best among them, who either in the use of
their liberty, or upon an Indulgence given them, continued in the Temple
Worship, had a jealous eye over him, lest he had not that esteem for Moses,
which they imagined became them to retain, Acts 21.21. how great a prejudice
against his Doctrine and Reasonings, these thoughts and jealousies might have
created, had he at the entrance of his dealing with them, prefixed his Name and
usi^al Salutation, is not hard to conjecture. This being the State and
Condition of things in reference unto St. Paul, and not any other known Penman
of the Holy Ghost, or eminent Disciple of Christ in those days, this defect of
Inscription, as Beza well observes, proves the Epistle rather to be his, than
any other Persons whatever. And though I know that there may be some Reply made
unto this Answer, both from the Discovery which he makes of himself in the end
of the Epistle, and from the high probability that there is, that the Hebrews
upon the first receipt of it, would diligently examine by whom it was written,
yet I judge it very sufficient to frustrate the Exception insisted on, though
perhaps not containing the true, at least the whole Cause of the Omission of an
Apostolical Salutation in the entrance of it.

If then we would know the True and Just Cause of the Omission of the Authors
Apostolical Authority in the entrance of this Epistle, we must consider what
were the Just Reasons of prefixing them unto his other Epistles; Chrysostom in
his Proem unto the Epistle to the Romans gives this as the only Reason of the
mentioning the Name of the Writer of any Epistle, in the Frontispiece of it,
otherwise than was done by Moses and the Evangelists in their Writings; namely,
because they wrote unto them that were present, and so had no cause to make
mention of their own Names, which were well enough known without the premising
of them in their Writings: whereas those who wrote Epistles, dealing with them
that were absent, were necessitated to prefix their Names unto them, that they
might know from whom they came. But yet this Reason is not absolutely
satisfactory: for as they who prefixed not their Names to their Writings,
wrote, not only for the use and Benefit of those that were present and knew
them, but of all succeeding Ages, who knew them not; so many of them who did
Preach and Write the Word of the Lord unto those that lived with them and knew
them, yet prefixed their Names unto their Writings, as did the Prophets of Old,
and some who did write Epistles to them who were absent, omitted so to do, as
St. John, and the Author of this Epistle. The real cause then of prefixing the
Names of any of the Apostles unto their Writings, was merely the Introduction
thereby of their Titles, as Apostles of Jesus Christ, and therein an Intimation
of that Authority, by, and with which they wrote. This then was the true and
only reason why the Apostle St. Paul prefixed his Name unto his Epistles;
sometimes indeed this is omitted when he wrote unto some Churches where he was
well known, and his Apostolical Power was sufficiently owned, because he joined
others with himself in his Salutation who were not Apostles, as the Epistle to
the Philippians, chap. 1. and the second of the Thessalonians: Unto all others,
he still prefixeth this Title, declaring himself thereby to be one, so
authorized to reveal the Mysteries of the Gospel, that they to whom he Wrote,
were to acquiesce in his Authority, and to resolve their faith into the
Revelation of the Will of God, made unto him, and by him, the Church being to
be built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. And hence it was, that
when something he had taught, was called in question, and opposed, Writing in
the Vindication of it, and for their establishment in the Truth, whom before he
had instructed, he does in the entrance of his Writings, singularly and
Emphatically mention this his Authority, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, neither of
man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father that raised him from
the dead: so intimating the absolute obedience that was due unto the Doctrine
by him revealed. By this Title, I say, he directs them to whom he wrote, to
resolve their assent into the Authority of Christ speaking in him, which he
tenders unto them as the proof and foundation of the Mysteries wherein they
were instructed.

In his dealing with the Hebrews the case was far otherwise; They who believed
amongst them, never changed the old foundation, or Church State, grounded on
the Scriptures, though they had a new addition of Privileges by their Faith in
Christ Jesus, as the Messiah now exhibited. And therefore he deals not with
them, as with those whose Faith was built absolutely on Apostolical Authority
and Revelation, but upon the common Principles of the Old Testament, on which
they still stood, and out of which Evangelical Faith was educed. Hence the
beginning of the Epistle, wherein he appeals to the Scripture as the
foundation, that he intended to build upon, and the Authority which he would
press them withal, supplies the Room of that intimation of his Apostolical
Authority, which in other places he makes use of. And it serves to the very
same purpose. For as in those Epistles he proposes his Apostolical Authority
as the immediate reason of their Assent and Obedience; so in this he does the
Scriptures of the Old Testament. And this is the true and proper cause, that
renders the prefixing of his Apostolical Authority, which his Name must
necessarily accompany, needless, because useless, it being that which he
intended not to engage in this business. And for himself, he sufficiently
declares in the close of his Epistle who he was; for though some may imagine
that he is not so certainly known unto us, from what he there says of himself,
yet none can be so fond to doubt whether he were not thereby known to them to
whom he wrote; so that neither has this Objection in it any thing of real
weight or moment.

Latin Church, which by some is objected, especially by Erasmus, and given the
Reasons of it, manifesting that it is of no force to weaken our Assertion; unto
which I shall now only add, that after it was received amongst them as
Canonical, it was never questioned by any Learned Man or Synod of old, whether
St. Paul was the Author of it or no, but they all with one consent ascribed it
unto him, as has been at large by others declared. The remaining Exceptions
which by some are insisted on, are taken from some passages in the Epistle it
self; that principally of Chap. 2. and the Third, where the Writer of it seems
to reckon himself, among the number, not of the Apostles, but of their
Auditors. But whereas it is certain and evident, that the Epistle was written
before the Destruction of the Temple, yea, the beginning of those Wars that
ended therein, or the death of James, whilst sundry of the Apostles were yet
alive, it cannot be, that the Penman of it should really place himself amongst
the generation that succeeded them; so that the Words must of necessity admit
of another Interpretation, as shall be manifested in its proper place; for
whereas both this and other things of the same nature, must be considered and
spoken unto, in the places where they occurr, I shall not here anticipate what
of necessity must be insisted on in its due season; especially considering of
how small importance the Objections taken from them, are. And this is the sum
of what has as yet by any been objected unto our assignation of this Epistle
unto St. Paul; by the consideration whereof the Reader will be directed into
the Judgment he is to make on the Arguments and Testimonies that we shall
produce, in the Confirmation of our Assertion, and these we now proceed unto
under the several Heads proposed in the entrance of our Discourse.

Arguments usually insisted on to prove this Epistle to have been written by
St. Paul, the Testimony given unto it by St. Peter, deserves Consideration in
the first place, and is indeed of it self sufficient to determine the Enquiry
about it. His Words to this purpose, Epist. 2. Chap. 3. v. 15, 16. are; And
account that the Long-suffering of our Lord is Salvation, even as our beloved
Brother Paul also according unto the Wisdom given unto him has written unto
you; as also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these things, in which are
some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable
wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own destruction. To
clear this Testimony, some few things must be observed in it, and concerning
it. As (1.) That St. Peter wrote this Second Epistle unto the same Persons,
that is, the same Churches and People to whom he wrote his First. This (to omit
other Evidences of it) himself testifies, Chap. 3.1. This Second Epistle,
Beloved I now write unto you; it was not only absolutely his Second Epistle,
but the Second which he wrote to the same Persons; handling in both the same
general Argument, as himself in the next words affirms. (2.) That his First
Epistle was written unto the Jews or Hebrews in the Asian Dispersion. (...),
etc. to the Elect Strangers of the Dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia, Chap. 1.1. that is the (...), as St. James styles the same
Persons, Chap. 1.1. the twelve Tribes, or Hebrews of the twelve Tribes of
Israel in their Dispersion. These (...), or (...), are those whom the Jews of
Jerusalem called the (...), John 7.35. the Dispersion, or those of their
Nation, that were dispersed among the Gentiles; Those especially they intend in
the Greek Empire. These they called (...) the dispersion or scattering of
Israel, when they were sifted amongst all Nations, like the sifting of a Sieve,
Amos 9.9. Psalm. 147.2. they are called (...), which the LXX. according to the
Phrase in their days render (...), the dispersions, or those scattered abroad
of Israel, as Isaiah calls them, (...) and (...), Chap. 27. v. 13. So that
there is no question but that these were they whom St. Peter calls the (...) of
Pontus Galatia, etc. As St. James extending his Salutation to the same people
in all places, the (...) of the Twelve Tribes.

Besides many things insisted on by St. Peter in these Epistles, were peculiar
to the Hebrews, who also were his especial Care: See 1 Epist. Chap. 1.10, 11,
12. Chap. 2.9, 21. Chap. 3.5.6. Chap. 4.7, 17. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. Chap. 2.1,
11, etc. Chap. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and many other particular places of the
same nature may be observed in them. To sum up our Evidence in this
particular; Peter being in an especial manner the Apostle of the Circumcision
or Hebrews, Gal. 2.7. having by his first Sermon converted many of these
strangers of Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Acts 2.9, 10, 41. ascribing that
Title unto them to whom he wrote, which was the usual and proper Appellation of
them in all the World, (...), James 1.1. John 7.35. treating with them for the
most part about things peculiar to them in a special manner, and that with
Arguments and from Principles peculiarly known unto them, as the places above
quoted will manifest, there remains no ground of Question, but it was those
Hebrews unto whom he wrote. Nor are the Exceptions that are made to this
Evidence of any such importance, as once to deserve a remembrance by them, who
design not a protracting of their Discourses by insisting on things unnecessary.

Now it is plain in this Testimony asserted, That St. Paul wrote a peculiar
Epistle unto Peter wrote his, that is to the Hebrews; he has written unto you,
as also in all his Epistles: that is, in all his other Epistles. Besides his
other Epistles to other Churches and Persons, he has also written one unto
you. So that if St. Peter's Testimony may be received, St. Paul undoubtedly
wrote an Epistle unto the Hebrews. But this may be, say some, another Epistle,
and not this we treat on; particularly that to the Galatians, which treats
about Judaical Customs and Worship. But this Epistle mentioned by St. Peter,
was written particularly unto the Hebrews in distinction from the Gentiles:
This to the Galatians is written peculiarly to the Gentiles in opposition to
the Jews; so that a more unhappy instance could not possibly have been fixed
upon. Besides he treats not in it of the things here mentioned by St. Peter,
which are indeed the main Subject of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

But, say others, Paul indeed might write an Epistle to the Hebrews, which may
be lost, and this that we have, might be written by some other: But whence this
Answer should proceed, but from a resolution (...), against Light and
Conviction, I know not. May we give place to such rash and presumptuous
Conjectures, we shall quickly have nothing left entire or stable. For why may
not another as well say, it is true, Moses wrote Five Books, but they are lost,
and these that we have under his Name, were written by another: It is not
surely one jot less intolerable for any one, without ground, proof, or
Testimony, to affirm that the Church has lost an Epistle written to the
Hebrews by St. Paul, and taken up one in the room thereof, written by no man
knows whom. This is not to deal with that Holy Reverence in the things of
God, which becomes us.

St. Peter declares that St. Paul in that Epistle which he wrote unto the
Hebrews, had Long-suffering of God, whereof he had minded them, to be
salvation. We must see what was this Long-suffering of God, how it was
Salvation, and how Paul had manifested it so to be. The Long-sufferance,
Patience, or Forbearance of God, is either absolute toward man in general, or
special in reference unto some sort of Men; or some kind of Sins or
Provocations that are amongst them. The first of these is not that which is
here intended; Nor was there any reason why St. Peter should direct the Jews to
the Epistles of St. Paul in particular to learn the Long-suffering of God in
General, which is so plentifully revealed in the whole Scripture, both of the
Old and New Testament, and only occasionly at any time mentioned by St. Paul.

There was therefore an Especial Long-suffering of God which at that time he
exercised toward the Jews, waiting for the Conversion, and the gathering of
his Elect unto him, before that total and final destruction, which they had
deserved, should come upon that Church and State. This he compares to the
Long-suffering of God in the days of Noah, whilst he Preached repentance unto
the world, 1 Epist. 3.20. For as those that were obedient unto his Preaching
which was only his own family, were saved in the Ark, from the general
destruction that came upon the World by Water; so also they that became
obedient upon the Preaching of the Gospel, during this new season of Gods
special Long-suffering, were to be saved by Baptism, or Separation from the
unbelieving Jews by the Profession of the Faith, from that destruction that was
to come upon them by Fire. This Long-suffering of God the unbelieving Jews, not
understanding to be particular, scoffed at, and them who threatened them with
such an issue or event of it, 2 Epist. Chap. 3. v. 4. which causes the Apostle
to declare the Nature and End of this Long-suffering which they were ignorant
of, ver. 9.

And thus (Secondly,) was this particular Long-suffering of God toward the
Jews, whilst the Gospel was Preached unto them before their final D^solation,
Salvation; in that God spared them, and allowed them to abide for a while in
the Observation of their Old Worship and Ceremonies, granting them in the mean
time blessed means of Light and Instruction to bring them to Salvation.

And (Thirdly,) This is declared by St. Paul in this Epistle; not that this is
formally and in terms the main Doctrine of the Epistle, but that really and
effectually he acquaints them with the intention of the Lord in his
Long-suffering toward them, and peculiarly serves that Long-suffering of
Christ in his Instruction of them. And therefore after he has taught them the
true Nature, Use and End of all Mosaical Institutions, which they were as yet
permitted to use in the special patience of God intimated by St. Peter, and
convinced them of the necessity of Faith in Christ, and the Profession of his
Gospel, he winds up all his reasonings, in minding them of the End which
shortly was to be put unto that Long-suffering of God which was then exercised
toward them, Chap. 12. v. 25, 26, 27, 28. So that this Note also is eminently
Characteristical of this Epistle.

Epistle mentioned by Peter, he seems to ascribe unto Paul an eminency of
Wisdom; it was written according to the Wisdom given unto him. As Paul in all
other of his Epistles did exercise that Grace of Wisdom, so also in that which
he wrote unto the Hebrews, there is no doubt but he exerted and put forth his
other Graces of Knowledge, Zeal, and Love also; but yet Peter here in a way of
Eminency marketh his Wisdom in that Epistle. It is not Paul's Spiritual Wisdom
in general in the Knowledge of the Will of God, and Mysteries of the Gospel,
which Peter here refers unto; but that special Holy Prudence which he exercised
in the composure of this Epistle, and maintaining the Truth which he dealt with
the Hebrews about. And what an eminent Character this also is of this Epistle,
we shall endeavor, God assisting to evince in our Exposition of it. His
special understanding in all the Mysteries of the Old Testament, unfolding
things hidden from the foundation of the world, his Application of them, with
various Testimonies and Arguments that wrapped up the Truth in great Darkness
and Obscurity, unto the Mystery of God manifested in the Flesh, his various
intertextures of Reasonings and Exhortations throughout his Epistle, his
Condescension to the Capacity, Prejudices and Affections of them to whom he
wrote, urging them constantly with their own Principles and Concessions, do
among many other things manifest the singular Wisdom which Peter signifies to
have been used in this Work.

6. It may also be observed, that whereas Peter affirms that among the things
about which Paul wrote, there were (...), some things hard to be understood;
That Paul in a special manner confesses that some of the things which he was
to treat of in that Epistle were (...), hard to be declared, uttered or
unfolded; and therefore certainly hard to be understood, Chap. 5.11. which in
our Progress we shall manifest to be spoken not without great and urgent Cause,
and that in many Instances, especially that directed unto by himself concerning
Melchisedeck. So that this also gives another Characteristical Note of the
Epistle Testified unto by Peter.

I have insisted the longer upon this Testimony, because in my Judgment it is
sufficient of its self to determine this Controversy; nothing of any
importance being by any that I can meet withal excepted unto it. But because
we want not other Confirmations of our Assertion, and those also every one of
them singly out-ballancing the Conjectures that are advanced against it, we
shall subjoyn them also in their Order.

Comparing of this Epistle with the others of the same Apostle gives farther
Evidence unto our Assertion. I suppose it will be confessed, that they only are
competent Judges of this Argument, who are well exercised and conversant in his
Writings. Unto their Judgment therefore alone in it do we appeal. Now the
similitude between this and other Epistles of Paul is threefold. (1.) In Words,
Phrases and manner of Expression. Of this sort many Instances may be given, and
such a coincidence of phrase manifested in them, as is not usually to be
observed between the Writings that have various or diverse Authors.

But this I shall not particularly insist upon: partly because it has already
been done by others at large; and partly because they will all of them be
observed in our Exposition its self; nor does it suit our present design to
enter into a Debate about particular Words and Expressions. Nor do I assign any
more force unto this Observation, but only that it is sufficient to manifest
the weakness of the Exceptions urged by some to prove it none of his, from the
use of some few words not elsewhere used by him, or not in that sense which
here they are applied unto. For their Instances are not in number comparable
with the other; and to evidence the Vanity of that part of their Objection
which concerns the peculiar use of some Words in this Epistle, it is enough to
observe that one word (...) being three times used in this one Epistle, it has
in each place a peculiar and diverse signification. (2.) There is also a
coincidence of Matter, or Doctrines delivered in this and other Epistles of
Paul. Neither shall I much press this Consideration. For neither was he in any
Epistle restrained unto what he had elsewhere delivered, nor bound to avoid the
mentioning of it, if occasion did require; nor were other Penmen of the Holy
Ghost limited not to treat of what he had taught, no more than the Evangelists
were from writing the same story. But yet neither is this Observation destitute
of all efficacy to contribute strength unto our Assertion, considering that
there were some Doctrines which Paul did in a peculiar manner insist upon; a
vein whereof, a diligent Observer may find running through this, and all his
other Epistles. But, (3.) That which under this Head I would press, is the
Consideration of the Spirit, Genius, (...) and manner of Writing proceeding
from them, peculiar to this Apostle in all his Epistles. Many things are
required to enable any one to judge aright of this intimation. He must as
Bernard speaks, drink of Paul's Spirit, or be made partaker of the same Spirit
with him, in his measure, who would understand his Writings. Without this
Spirit, and his saving Light, they are all obscure, intricate, sapless,
unsavory; when unto them in whom it is, they are all sweet, gracious, in some
measure open, plain and powerful. A great and constant exercise unto an
acquaintance with his frame of Spirit in Writing, is also necessary hereunto.
Unless a man have contracted as it were a familiarity, by a constant
conversation with him, no Critical skill in Words or Phrases will render him a
competent Judge in this matter. This enabled Caesar to determine aright
concerning any Writings of Cicero. And he that is so acquainted with this
Apostle, will be able to discern his Spirit, as Austin says his Mother Monica
did divine Revelations, nescio quo sapore, by an inexpressable Spiritual
savor. Experience also of the power and efficacy of his Writings, is hereunto
required. He whose heart is cast into the Mould of the Doctrine by him
delivered, will receive quick impressions from his Spirit exerting its self in
any of his Writings. He that is thus prepared, will find that Heavenliness and
perspicuity in unfolding the deepest Evangelical Mysteries, that peculiar
exaltation of Jesus Christ in his Person, Office and Work, that Spiritual
persuasiveness, that transcendent manner of Arguing and Reasoning, that wise
insinuation and pathetical pressing of well grounded Exhortations, that Love,
Tenderness, and Affection to the Souls of men, that Zeal for God, and Authority
in Teaching, which enliven and adorn all his other Epistles, to shine in this
in an eminent manner, from the beginning to the End of it. And this
Consideration what ever may be the apprehensions of others concerning it, is
that which gives me satisfaction, above all that are pleaded in this Cause in
ascribing this Epistle to Paul.

The Testimony of the first Churches, of whose Testimony any record is yet
remaining, successive Suffrage of the most Knowing Persons of following Ages,
may also be pleaded in this Cause. Setting aside that limitation of this
Testimony, which with the grounds and occasions of it as to some in the Latin
Church, we have already granted and declared, and this Witness will be
acknowledged to be Catholic as to all other Churches in the World. A Learned
Man of late has reckoned up and reported the Words of above thirty of the
Greek Fathers, and fifty of the Latin reporting this Primitive Tradition. I
shall not trouble the Reader with a Catalogue of their Names, nor the
Repetition of their Words, and that because the whole of what in general we
assert as to the Eastern Church is acknowledged. Amongst them was this Epistle
first made public, as they had far more advantages of discovering the Truth in
this Matter of Fact, than any in the Roman Church, or that elsewhere followed
them in after Ages could have. Neither had they any thing, but the Conviction
and Evidence of Truth its self to induce them to embrace this Persuasion. And
he that shall consider the Condition of the first Churches under Persecution,
and what difficulties they met withal in Communicating those Apostolical
Writings which were delivered unto any of them, with that special Obstruction
unto the spreading of this unto the Hebrews, of which we have already
discoursed, cannot rationally otherwise conceive of it, but as an eminent fruit
of the Good Providence of God, that it should so soon receive so public an
Attestation from the first Churches, as it evidently appears to have done.

Epistle it self several ways discovers its Author. Some of them we shall
briefly recount.

(1.) The General Argument and Scope of it declares it to be Paul's. Hereof
there are two parts: (1.) The Exaltation of the Person, Office, and Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Excellency of the Gospel and the Worship
therein commanded, revealed by him. (2.) A Discovery of the Nature, Use and
Expiration of Mosaical Institutions, their present Unprofitableness, and
ceasing of their obligation unto obedience. The first part, we may grant to
have been equally the design of all the Apostles, though we find it in a
peculiar way insisted on in the Writings of Paul. The latter was his special
work and business. This partly ex instituto, partly occasionally from the
opposition of the Jews, was he engaged in the promotion of, all the world over.
The Apostles of the Circumcision according to the Wisdom given them, and
suitable to the nature of their work, did more accommodate themselves to the
prejudicate Opinion of the Jewish Professors; and the rest of the Apostles had
little occasion to deal with them, or others on this subject. Paul in an
eminent manner in this work bare the burden of that day. Having well settled
all other Churches, who were troubled in this Controversy by some of the Jews,
he at last treats with themselves directly in this Epistle, giving an account
of what he had elsewhere Preached and taught to this purpose, and the grounds
that he proceeded upon; and this not without great success, as the burying of
the Judaical Controversy not long after does manifest.

(2.) The Method of his proceedure is the same with that of his other Epistles,
which also was peculiar unto him. Now this in most of them, yea in all of them
not regulated by some particular occasions, is first to lay down the Doctrinal
Mysteries of the Gospel, vindicating them from Oppositions and Exceptions, and
then to descend to Exhortations unto Obedience deduced from them, with an
enumeration of such special Moral Duties, as those unto whom he wrote, stood in
need to be minded of. This is the general Method of his Epistles, to the
Romans, Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, and the most of the rest. And this
also is observed in this Epistle. Only whereas he had a special respect unto
the Apostasy of some of the Hebrews, occasioned by the Persecution which then
began to grow high against them, what ever Argument or Testimony in his passage
gave him advantage to press an Exhortation unto constancy, and to deterr them
from backsliding, he lays hold upon it, and diverts into practical Inferences
unto that purpose, before he comes to his general Exhortations toward the end
of the Epistle. Excepting this occasional difference, the Method of this is the
same with that used in the other Epistles of Paul, and which was peculiarly his
own.

(3.) His Way of Argument in this and his other Epistles is the same. Now this
as we shall see, is Sublime and Mystical, accommodated rather to the Spiritual
Reason of Believers, than the Artificial Rules of Philosophers. That he should
more abound with Testimonies and Quotations out of the Scripture of the Old
Testament in this, than other Epistles, as he does, the Matter whereof he
treats, and the Persons to whom he wrote did necessarily require.

(4.) Many things in this Epistle evidently manifest that he who wrote it, was
not only mighty in the Scripture, but also exceedingly well versed and
skillfull in the Customs, Practices, Opinions, Traditions, Expositions and
Applications of Scripture then received in the Judaical Church, as we shall
fully manifest in our progress: Now who in those days among the Disciples of
Christ could this be but Paul? For as he was brought up under one of the Best
and Most Famous of their Masters in those days, and profited in the Knowledge
of their then present Religion above his Equals, so for want of this kind of
Learning, the Jews esteemed the chief of the other Apostles, Peter and John, to
be Idiots and Unlearned.

(5.) Sundry particulars toward and in the close of the Epistle, openly
proclaim Paul to have been the Writer of it. As, 1. The mention that he makes
of his bonds, and the Compassion that the Hebrews showed toward him in his
sufferings, and whilst he was a Prisoner, Chap. 10.34. Now as the Bonds of
Paul were afterward famous at Rome, Phil. 1.13. So there was not any thing of
greater notoriety in reference to the Church of God in those days, than those
that he suffered in Judaea; which he minds them of in this Expression. With
what earnest endeavors, what rage and tumult, the Rulers and Body of the
People sought his destruction, how publicly and with what Solemnity his Cause
was sundry times heard and debated, with the time of his imprisonment that
ensued, are all declared in the Acts at large. Now no man can imagine, but that
whilst this great Champion of their Profession, was so publicly pleading
their Cause, and exposed to so much danger and hazard thereby, but that all
the Believers of those parts were exceedingly solicitous about his condition,
(as they had been about Peter's in the like case) and gave him all the
Assistance and encouragement that they were able. This Compassion of theirs,
and his own Bonds, as an evidence of his Faith, and their Mutual Love in the
Gospel he now minds them of. Of no other Person but Paul have we any ground to
conjecture that this might be spoken: and yet the suffering and compassion here
mentioned, seem not to have been things done in a corner; So that this one
Circumstance is able of its self, to enervate all the Exceptions, that are made
use of against his being esteemed the Author of this Epistle. 2. The mention of
Paul's dear and constant Companion Timothy is of the same importance, Chap.
13.23. That Timothy was at Rome with Paul in his Bonds is expressly asserted,
Phil. 1.13, 14. That he himself was also cast into Prison with Paul is here
intimated, his release being expressed. Now surely it is scarcely credible,
that any other should in Italy where Paul then was, and newly released out of
Prison, write unto the Churches of the Hebrews, and therein make mention of his
own Bonds, and the Bonds of Timothy, a man unknown unto them but by the means
of Paul, and not once intimate any thing about his condition. The exceptions of
some, as that Paul used to call Timothy his Son, whereas the Writer of this
Epistle calls him Brother, (when indeed he never terms him Son, when he speaks
of him, but only when he wrote unto him,) or that there might be another
Timothy, (when he speaks expressly of him, who was so generally known to the
Churches of God, as one of the chiefest Evangelists) deserve not to be insisted
on. And surely, it is altogether incredible that this Timothy, the Son of Paul,
as to his begetting of him in the Faith, and continued Paternal Affection, his
known constant Associate in doing and suffering for the Gospel, his Minister in
attending of him, and constantly employed by him in the Service of Christ and
the Churches, known unto them by his means, hon^ured by him with two Epistles
written unto him, and the association of his Name with his own in the
Inscription of sundry others, should now be so absent from him as to be
adjoined unto another in his Travail and Ministry. 3. The Constant Sign and
token of Paul's Epistles which himself had publicly signified to be so, (2 Thessalonians. 3.13.) is subjoyned unto this. Grace be with you all. That Originally
this was written with Paul's own hand, there is no ground to question, and it
appears to be so, because it was written; and he affirms that it was his
Custom to subjoyn that Salutation with his own hand. Now this Writing of it
with his own hand, was an evidence unto them, unto whom the Original of the
Epistle first came; unto those who had only transcribed Copies of it, it could
not be so; the Salutation its self was their Token, being peculiar to Paul, and
among the rest annexed to this Epistle. And all these Circumstances will yet
receive some further enforcement from the Consideration of the Time wherein
this Epistle was written, whereof in the next place we shall Treat.

Exercitatio III.
The Time of the Writing of this Epistle to the Hebrews. The Use of the right
stating thereof. After his release out of Prison. Before the Death of James.
Before the Second of Peter. The Time of Paul's coming to Rome. The Condition of
the affairs of the Jews at that time. The Martyrdom of James. State of the
Churches of the Hebrews. Constant in the Observation of Mosaical Institutions.
Warned to leave Jerusalem. That Warning what, and how given. Causes of their
unwillingness so to do. The Occasion and Success of this Epistle.

Chrysostom Praesat. in Com. ad Epist. ad Romans that a due Observation of the
Time and Season wherein the Epistles of Paul were written, does give great
light unto the understanding of many passages in them. This Baronius ad A.C.
55. N. 42. well confirms by an instance of their mistake, who suppose the
Shipwreck of Paul at Mileta, Acts 27. to have been that mentioned by him, 2.
Cor. 11. when he was a night and a day in the deep; that Epistle being written
some years before his sailing toward Rome. And we may well apply this
Observation to this Epistle unto the Hebrews. A discovery of the Time and
season wherein it was written, will both free us from sundry mistakes, and also
give us some light into the occasion and design of it. This therefore we shall
now inquire into.

Epistle it self leading us toward this discovery, and somewhat may be
gathered from some other places of Scripture: for Antiquity will afford us
little or no help herein. After Paul's being brought a Prisoner to Rome, Acts
28. two full years, he continued in that condition, v. 30. at least so long he
continued under restraint, though in his own hired H^use. This time was expired
before the writing of this Epistle. For he was not only absent from ^^me in
some other part of Italy when he wrote it, Chap. 13.24. but also so far at
liberty and sui juris, as that he had entertained a Resolution of going into
the East so soon as Timothy should come unto him, Chap. 13.23. And it seems
likewise to be written before the Martyrdom of James at Jerusalem, in that he
affirms that the Church of the Hebrews had not yet resisted unto Blood, Chap.
12.4. it being very probable, that together with him many others were slain.
Many great difficulties they had been exercised withal, but as yet the Matter
was not come to blood, which shortly after it arrived unto. That is certain
also, that it was not only written, but communicated unto, and well known by
all the believing Jews, before the writing of the Second Epistle of Peter, who
therein makes mention of it, as we have declared. Much light I confess to the
precise time of its writing, is not hence to be obtained, because of the
uncertainty of the time wherein Peter wrote that Epistle. Only it appears from
what he affirms concerning the approaching of the time of his suffering, Chap.
1.13. that it was not long before his death. This as is generally agreed,
happened in the thirteenth year of Nero, when a great progress was made in that
War, which ended in the fatal and final destruction of the City and Temple.

Observations it appears, that the best guide we have to find out the certain
time o^ the Writing of this Epistle, is Paul's being sent Prisoner unto Rome.
Now this was in the first year of the Government of Festus, after he had been
two years detained in Prison at Caesarea by Felix, Acts 24.27. Chap. 25. v. 26,
27. This Felix was the Brother of Pallas who ruled all things under Claudius,
and fell into some disgrace in the very first ye^^ of Nero, as Tacitus informs
us. But yet by the countenance of Agrippina the Mother of Nero, he continued in
some regard, until the fifth or sixth year of his Reign, when together with
his Mother he destroyed many of her Friends and Favorites. During this time of
Pallas his declension in power, it is most probable that his Brother Felix was
displaced from the Rule of his Province, and Festus sent in his room. That it
was before his utter ruin in the sixth year of Nero is evident from hence,
because he made means to keep his Brother from punishment, when he was accused
for Extortion and Oppression by the Jews. Most probably then Paul was sent unto
Rome, about the fourth or fifth year of Nero, which was the fifty ninth year
from the Nativity of the Lord Jesus Christ. There he abode as we showed at the
least two years in custody, where the Story of the Acts of the Apostles ends,
in the seventh year of Nero, and sixty first of our Lord, or the beginning of
the year following. That year it is presumed, he obtained his liberty. And this
was about thirteen years after the determination of the Controversy about
Mosaical Institutions, as to their obligation on the Gentiles, made by the
Syn^d at Jerusalem, Acts 13. Presently upon his liberty, whilst he abode in
some part of Italy, expecting the coming of Timothy, before he entered upon the
journey he had promised unto the Philippians, Chap. 2. v. 24. he wrote this
Epistle. Here then we must stay a little, to consider what was the general
state and condition of the Hebrews in those days, which might give occasion
unto the writing thereof.

The time fixed on, was about the death of Festus, who dyed in the Province,
and the Albinus who was sent to succeed him. What was the state of the people
at that time, Josephus declares at large in his Second Book of their Wars. In
brief, the Governors themselves being great Oppressors, and rather mighty
Robbers amongst them, than Rulers, the whole Nation was filled with Spoil and
Violence. What through the fury and outrage of the Soldiers in the pursuit of
their insatiable Avarice; what through the Incursions of Thieves and Robbers in
Troops and Companies, wherewith the whole Land abounded, and what through the
tumults of Seditious persons daily incited and provoked by the cruelty of the
Romans, there was no peace or safety for any sober honest men, either in the
City of Jerusalem, or any where else throughout the whole Province. That the
Church had a great share of suffering, in the outrage and misery of those
days, (as in such dissolutions of Government, and License for all wickedness,
it commonly falls out) no man can question. And this is that which the Apostle
mentions, Chap. 10.31, 32, 33, 34. Ye endured a great sight of a^flictions,
partly whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and a^flictions,
and partly whilst ye became companions of them that were so used, and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods. This was the lot and portion of all honest
and sober minded men in those days, as their Historian at large declares. For
as no doubt the Christians had a principal share in all those sufferings, so
some others of the Jews also, were their Companions in them; it being not a
special persecution, but a general calamity that the Apostle speaks of.

One Joseph the Son of Caehias was in the beginning of those days High Priest,
put into Agrippa, who not long before had put him out. On the death of Festus
he thrust him out again, and placed Ananus his Son in his stead. This man, a
young rash Fellow, by Sect and Opinion a Sadduce, (who of all others were the
most violent in their hatred of the Christians, being especially engaged
therein by the peculiar Opinion of their Sect and Party, which was the denial
of the Resurrection) first began a direct Persecution of the Church. Before his
advancement to the Priesthood, their Afflictions and Calamities were for the
most part common unto them, with other peaceable men. Only the rude and impious
multitude, with other seditious persons, seem to have offered especial
violences unto their Assemblies and Meetings, which some of the more
unsteadfast and weak, began to omit on that account, Chap. 10.25. Judicial
proceeding against them as to their lives, when this Epistle was written, there
does not appear to have been any; for the Apostle tells them, as we before
observed, that as yet they had not resisted unto blood, Chap. 12. v. 4. But
this Ananus the Sadduce presently after being placed in power by Agrippa,
taking advantage at the death of Festus, and the time that passed before
Albinus his Successor was settled in the Province, convents James before himself
and his Associates. There to make short work he is condemned, and immediately
stoned. And it is not unlikely but that other private Persons suffered together
with him.

The Story (by the way) of the Martyrdom of this James is at large reported by
Eusebius out of H^gesippus, Histor. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 23. in the Relation
whereof he is followed by Hierom, and sundry others. I shall say no more of the
whole Story, but that the Consideration of it, is very sufficient to persuade
any man to use the liberty of his own Reason and Judgment in the perusal of
the Writings of the Ancients. For of the Circumstances therein reported, about
this James and his death, many of them (as his being of the Line of the
Priests, his entering at his pleasure into the Sanctum Sanctorum, his being
carried up and set by a great multitude of people on a pinnacle of the Temple)
are so palpably false, that no color of probability can be given unto them,
and most of the rest seem altogether incredible. That in general this Holy
Apostle of Jesus Christ, his kinsman according to the flesh, was stoned by
Ananus, during the Anarchie between the Governments of Festus and Albinus,
Josephus who then lived testifies, and all Ecclesiastical Historians agree.

Jerusalem and Judaea were very numerous. The Oppressors, Robbers, and
Seditious of all sorts, being wholly intent upon the pursuit of their own ends,
filling the Government of the Nation with tumults and disorders, the Disciples
of Christ, who knew that the time of their preaching the Gospel unto their
Countrymen was but short, and even now expiring, followed their work with
diligence and success, being not greatly regarded in the dust of that confusion
which was raised by the Nation's rushing in to its fatal ruin.

Gospel, addicted zealously unto the Observation of the Law of Moses. The Synod
indeed at Jerusalem had determined that the yoke of the Law, should not be put
upon the necks of the Gentile Converts; Acts 15. But eight or nine years after
that, when Paul came up unto Jerusalem again, Chap. 21. v. 20, 21, 22. James
informs him, that the many thousands of the Jews who believed, did all
zealously observe the Law of Moses; and moreover judged that all those who were
Jews by birth, ought to do so also, and on that account were like enough to
assemble in a disorderly multitude, to enquire into the practice of Paul
himself, who had been ill reported of amongst them. On this account they kept
their Assemblies distinct from those of the Gentiles all the world over; as
amongst others Hierom informs as in his Notes on the first Chapter of the
Galatians. All those Hebrews then to whom Paul wrote this Epistle, continued in
the use and practice of Mosaical Worship, as celebrated in the Temple, and
their Synagogues, with all other Legal Institutions whatever. Whether they did
this out of an unacquaintedness with their liberty in Christ, or out of a
pertinacious adh^rence unto their own prejudicate Opinions, I shall not
determine.

Body of the people of the Jews saw not a day of peace or Quietness: Tumults,
Seditions, Outrages, Robberies, Murders, increased all the Nation over. And
these things by various degrees made way for that fatal War, which beginning
about six or seven years after the Death of James, ended in the utter
desolation of the People, City, Temple, and Worship, foretold so long before by
Daniel the Prophet, and intimated by our Savior to lie at the door. This was
that day of the Lord, whose sudden approach the Apostle declares unto them,
Chap. 10.36, 37. For ye have need of Patience that after ye have done the Will
of God, ye may receive the Promise; For yet a little while, and he that shall
come will come, and will not tarry. (...) A very little while, less than you
think of, or imagine; the manner whereof he declares Chap. 12.26, 27, 28. And
by this means he effectually diverted them from a pertinacious adherence unto
those things whose dissolution from God himself, was so nigh at hand; which
Argument was also afterward pressed by Peter, 2 Epist. Chap. 3.

Jews, with the Tumults, Distresses, Persecutions and Wars which should precede
it, directing them to the exercise of patience in the discharge of their duty,
until the approach of the final Calamity, out of which he advised them to free
themselves by flight, or a timely departure out of Jerusalem and all Judaea,
Matthew. chap. 24. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. This, and no other was the
Oracle mentioned by Eusebius, whereby the Christians were warned to depart out
of Jerusalem. It was given as he says, (...), to approved men amongst them.
For although the Prophecy its self was written by the Evangelists, yet the
especial meaning of it, was not known and divulged amongst all. The Leaders of
them kept this secret for a season, least an exasperation of the people being
occasioned thereby, they should have been obstructed in the work which they had
to do before its accomplishment. And this was the Way of the Apostles also as
to other future events, which being foretold by them, might provoke either Jews
or Gentiles, if publicly divulged. 2 Thessalonians. 2.5, 6. But now when the Work of
the Church among the Jews for that season was come to its close, the Elect
being gathered out of them, and the final Desolation of the City and People
appearing to be at hand, by a concurrence of all the signs foretold by our
Savior, those entrusted with the sense of that Oracle warned their Brethren to
provide for that flight whereunto they were directed. That this flight and
departure, probably with the loss of all their Possessions was grievous unto
them may easily be conceived.

But that which seems most especially to have perplexed them, was their
relinquishment of that Worship of God whereunto they had been so zealously
addicted. That this would prove grievous unto them our Savior had before
intimated, Matthew. 24. v. 20. Hence were they so slow in their Obedience unto
that Heavenly Oracle, although excited with the remembrance of what befell Lots
Wife in the like Tergiversation. Nay, as it is likely from this Epistle, many
of them who had made Profession of the Gospel, rather than they would now
utterly forego their old Way of Worship, deserted the Faith, and cleaving to
their unbelieving Countrymen, perished in their Apostasy, whom our Apostle in
an especial manner, forewarns of their inevitable and sore destruction, by that
Fire of Gods Indignation, which was shortly to devour the Adversaries, to whom
they associated themselves, Chap. 10. v. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

This was the Time wherein this Epistle was written; This the Condition of the
Hebrews Political, and Ecclesiastical estate. Paul, who had an inexpressible
zeal, and overflowing Affection for his Countrymen, being now in Italy,
considering the present condition of their Affairs, how pertinaciously they
adhered to Mosaical Institutions, how near the approach of their utter
abolition was, how backward during that frame of Spirit they would be to save
themselves by flying from the midst of that perishing Generation, what danger
they were in to forego the profession of the Gospel, when it could not be
retained without a relinquishment of their former Divine Service and
Ceremonies, writes this Epistle unto them, wherein he strikes at the very root
of all their dangers and distresses. For whereas all the danger of their abode
in Jerusalem and Judaea, and so of falling in the destruction of the City and
People, all the Fears the Apostle had of their Apostasy into Judaism; all
their own disconsolations in reference unto their flight and departure, arose
from their adherence unto, and zeal for the Law of Moses, by declaring unto
them the Nature, Use, End and Expiration of his Ordinances and Institutions, he
utterly removes and takes away the ground and occasion of all the Evils
mentioned. This was the season wherein this Epistle was written; and these some
of the principal occasions (though it had other reasons also, as we shall see
afterward) of its Writing. And I no way doubt, (though particular events of
those days are buried in Oblivion) but that through his Grace who moved and
directed the Apostle unto, and in the Writing of it, it was made signally
effectual toward the professing Hebrews, both to free them from that yoke of
bondage wherein they had been detained, and to prepare them with cheerfulness
unto the observation of Evangelical Worship, leaving their Countrymen to
perish in their Sin and Unbelief.

Exercitatio IV.
Of the Language wherein this Epistle was Originally written. Supposed to be
the Hebrew. Grounds of that Supposition. Disproved. Not translated by Clemens.
Written in Greek. Arguments for the proof thereof. Of Citations out of the LXX.

Epistle was written to the Hebrews, most of the Ancients granted that it was
written in Hebrew. Clemens Alexandrinus was the first who asserted it; after
whom Origin gave it countenance, from whom Eusebius received it, and from him
Hierom, which is the most ordinary progression of old reports. The main Reason
which induced them to embrace this persuasion, was a desire to free the Epistle
from an exception against its being written by Paul; taken from the
dissimilitude of the Style used in it, unto that of his other Epistles. This
being once admitted, though causelessly, they could think of no better answer,
than that this supposed difference of Style, arose from the Translation of this
Epistle, which by the Apostle himself was first written in Hebrew. Clemens
Romanus is the person generally fixed on as the Author of this Translation;
though some do faintly intimate that Luke the Evangelist might possibly be the
man that did it. But this Objection from the diversity of Style, which alone
begat this persuasion, has been already removed out of the Way, so that it
cannot be allowed to be a Foundation unto any other supposition.

Apostle writing unto the Hebrews, he did it in their own Native Language,
which being also his own, it is no wonder, if he were more copious and Elegant
in it, then he was in the Greek, whereunto Originally he was a stranger,
learning it as Hierom supposes upon his Conversion. But a man may modestly say
unto all this, (...). Every thing in this pretended Reason, of that which
indeed never was, is so far from Certainty, that indeed it is beneath all
probability.

For (1.) If this Epistle was written Originally in Hebrew, whence comes it
pass, that no Copy of it in that Language, was ever read, seen, or heard of, by
the most diligent Collectors of all Fragments of Antiquity in the Primitive
times? Had ever any such thing been extant, whence came it in particular that
Origin, that prodigy of Industry and Learning, should be able to attain no
knowledge or report of it? (2.) If it were incumbent on Paul writing unto the
Hebrews, to write in their own Language, why did he not also write in Latin
unto the Romans? That he did so indeed Gratian affirms, but without pretense of
proof or witness, contrary to the Testimony of all Antiquity, the evidence of
the thing it self, and constant confession of the Roman Church: And Erasmus
says well on Romans 1.7. Coarguendus vel ridendus magis error eorum, qui putant
Paulum Romany lingua Romana scripsisle. The error of them is to be reproved,
or rather laughed at, who suppose Paul to have written unto the Romans in the
Latin Tongue. (3.) It is most unduly supposed that the Hebrew Tongue was then
the Vulgar common Language of the Jews, when it was known only to the Learned
amongst them, and a corrupt Syriack was the common Dialect of the people even
at Jerusalem. (4.) It is as unduly averred, that the Hebrew was the Mother
Tongue of Paul himself, or that he was ignorant of the Greek, seeing he was
born at Tarsus in Cilicia, where that was the Language that he was brought up
in, and unto. (5.) The Epistle was written for the Use of all the Hebrews in
their several dispersions, especially that in the East, as Peter witnesses,
they being all alike concerned in the matter of it, though not so immediately
as those in Judaea and Jerusalem. Now unto those the Greek Language from the
days of the Macedonian Empire, had been in vulgar use, and continued so to be.
(6.) The Greek Tongue was so well known and so much used in Judaea its self,
that as a Learned man has proved by sundry Testimonies out of their most
ancient writings, it was called the Vulgar amongst them.

I know among the Rabbis there is mention of a prohibition of learning the
Greek Tongue; and in the Jerusalem Talmud its self, Tit. Peah. cap. 1. they add
a reason of it; (...), it was because of Traitors, least they should betray
their Brethren, and none understand them. But as this is contrary unto what
themselves teach about the Knowledge of Tongues, required in those who were to
be chosen into the Sanhedrim, so it is sufficiently disproved by the instances
of the Translators of the Bible, Jesus Syrachides, Philo, Josephus, and others
among themselves. And though Josephus affirm, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 9. that the
Study of the Elegance of Tongues was of no great reckoning amongst them, yet he
grants that they were studied by all sorts of men. Nor does this pretended
Decree of prohibition concern our times, it being made as they say, Mishn. tit.
Sota; in the last Wars of Titus, (...) In the Wars of Titus they decreed, that
no man should teach his Son the Greek Language. For it must be distinguished
from the Decree of the Hasmonaeans long before, prohibiting the Study of the
Grecian Philosophy. So that this pretense is destitute of all color, being
made up of many vain and evidently false suppositions.

Again the Epistle is said to be translated by Clemens, but where, or when, we
are not informed. Was this done in Italy before it was sent unto the Hebrews?
to what end then was it written in Hebrew, when it was not to be used but in
Greek? was it sent in Hebrew before the supposed Translation? in what Language
was it communicated unto others by them who first received it? Clemens was
never in the East to translate it. And if all the first Copies of it were
dispersed in Hebrew, how came they to be so utterly lost, as that no Report or
Tradition of them, or any one of them did ever remain; Besides if it were
translated by Clemens in the West, and that Transla^^^n alone preserved, how
came it to pass, that it was so well known and generally received in the East,
before the Western Churches admitted of it; This Tradition therefore is also
every way groundless and improbable.

Besides there want not Evidences in the Epistle its self, proving it to be
Originally written in the Language wherein it is yet extant. I shall only point
at the Heads of them, for this matter deserves no long Discourse. (1.) The
Style of it throughout manifests it to be no Translation; at least it is
impossible it should be one exact and proper, as its own copiousness, propriety
of Phrase and Expression, with freedom from savouring of the Hebraisms of an
Original in that Language, do manifest. (2.) It abounds with Greek Elegancies
and Paranomosia's, that have no countenance given unto t^^m by any thing in the
Hebrew Tongue; such as that for instance, Chap. 5. v. 8. (...); from the like
Expressions whereunto in the story of Susanna, v. 55, 56. (...), and v. 59.
(...) It is well proved that it was w^^tten Originally in the Greek Language.
(3.) The rendering of (...) constantly by (...); of which more afterward, is of
the same importance. (4.) The Words concerning Melchisedech King of Salem,
Chap. 7.11. prove the same, (...). Had the Epistle been written in Hebrew what
need this (...). That (...) is being interpreted (...) is a strange kind of
Interpretation; and so also is it, that (...) is (...). When John reports the
Words of Mary (...), and adds of his own (...), that is to say, Master, Chap.
20. v. 16. Does any man doubt but that he wrote in Greek, and therefore so
rendered her Syriack Expression? and is not the same evident concerning our
Apostle from the interpretation that he gives of those Hebrew Words? And it is
in vain to reply, that these words were added by the Translator, seeing the
very Argument of the Author is founded in the Interpretation of those words
which he gives us. It appears then, that as the Assertion, that this Epistle
was written in Hebrew, is altogether groundless, and that it arose from many
false suppositions, which render it more incredible, than if it made use of no
pretense at all; so there want not Evidences from the Epistle its self of its
being Originally written in the Language wherein it is still extant; and those
such as few other Books of the New Testament can afford concerning themselves,
should the same Question be made about them.

Moreover, in the Confirmation of our persuasion, it is by some added, that the
Testimonies made use of in this Epistle out of the Old Testament, are taken out
of the Translation of the LXX. and that sometimes the stress of the Argument
taken from them, relies on somewhat peculiar in that Version, which was not
possible to have been done, had it been written Originally in Hebrew. But
because this Assertion contains other difficulties in it, and is built on a
supposition which deserves a farther examination, we shall refer it unto its
own place and season, which ensues.

Exercitatio V.
Testimonies cited by the Apostle out of the Old Testament. Compared with the
Original and Translations. Whence the Agreement of some of them with that of
the LXX.

Epistle that is attended with more difficulty, than the Citation of the
Testimonies out of the Old Testament that are made use of in it. Hence, some
from their unsuitableness, as they have supposed, unto the Authors purpose,
have made bold to call in question, if not to reject the Authority of the
whole. But what concerns the matter of them, and the Wisdom of the Apostle in
their Application, it must be treated on, in the respective places where they
occurr, when we shall manifest how vain and causeless are the Exceptions which
have been laid against them, and how singularly they are suited to the proof of
those Doctrines and Assertions, in the confirmation whereof, they are produced.
But the Words also wherein they are expressed, varying frequently from the
Original, yield some difficulty in their Consideration. And this concernment of
the Apostles Citations to prevent a further trouble in the Exposition its self
of the several places, may be previously considered. Not that we shall here
explain and vindicate them from the Exceptions mentioned, which must on
necessity be done afterward as occasion offers its self; but only discover in
general, what respect the Apostles Expressions have unto the Original and the
old Translations thereof, and remove some false Inferences that have been made
on the consideration of them. To this end I shall briefly pass through them
all, and compare them with the places whence they are taken.

CHAP. I.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; from Psalm 2. v. 7. The words
exactly answer the Original, with the only supply of the Verb Substantive,
whereof in the Hebrew there is almost a perpetual Elipsis. (...). And the same
are the Words in the Translation of the LXX. In the same Verse, (...). I will
be unto him a Father, and he shall be unto me a Son; from 1 Chronicles. chap. 22. v.
10. The LXX. otherwise as to the order of the Words; (...); which also is the
order of the Sentences in the Original; the Apostle using his own liberty, and
varying from them both; so that this Quotation is not directly from that
Translation.

Ver. 6. (...). And let all the Angels of God Worship him; From Psalm. 97. v. 7.
without change; only (...) Gods, is rendered by the Apostle (...), the Angels
of God; of the Reason whereof, afterward. The LXX. (...); Worship him all ye
his Angels, differing from the Apostle both in form of Speech and Words. Hence
some not understanding whence this Testimony was cited by the Apostle, have
inserted his words into the Greek Bible, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43. where there is no
color for their introduction, nor any thing in the Original to answer unto
them; whereas the Psalmist expressly treats of the same subject with the
Apostle; to the reason of which insertion into the Greek Version we shall speak
afterward.

Ver. 7. (...); who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of
fire. From Psalm. 104. v. 4. The LXX. (...), a flaming fire. Heb. (...) fire of
flame. Aquila (...), a vehement fire. Symmachus (...), a fiery flame; much
variety, with little or no difference, as it often falls out amongst good
Translators rendering peculiar Hebraisms, such as this is. The Apostles
expression is his own, not borrowed from the LXX.

Ver. 8, 9. (...). Thy Throne O God for ever and ever. (The Verb substantive is
left out by the Apostle in Answer unto the Original, (...) and (...) rendered
(...), for (...), which the Apostrophe requires) A Scepter of Vprightness is
the Scepter of thy Kingdom; thou have loved Righteousness, and thou have hated
Iniquity, wherefore God thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness
above thy fellows. The words exactly answer the Original, and they are the same
in the Translation of the LXX, and whence that coincidence was, we shall
afterward enquire. Aquila somewhat otherwise, (...); Symmachus (...) ((...)
came to be translated (...), from likeness of sound) in (...) O God, he
expresses the Apostrophe which is evident in the Context. (...) he renders by
(...) sceptrum, a Scepter, properly, as we shall see afterward, on Genesis 49. v.
10. (...), thou have hated ungodliness, impiety, (...), with the Oil of Joy;
(...). Symmachus (...), another word of the same signification, with that used
by the Apostle. From Psalm. 45.6, 7.

Ver. 10, 11, 12. (...). And thou O Lord, in the beginning have founded the
Earth, and the Heavens are the Works of thine hands; they shall perish, but
thou remainest, and they shall wax old as does a garment. And as a Vesture
shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and
thy years shall not fail; From Psalm 102. v. 26, 27, 28. And these words of the
Apostle are now exactly in the Greek Bibles. Some little difference there is in
them from the Hebrew, the Reason whereof we shall afterward give an account
of. Symmachus for (...) reads (...), and so did the Copies of the LXX of old,
the Word being yet retained in some of them, and reckoned by all amongst the
various Readings of that Translation. The word (...) O Lord, inserted by the
Apostle is also undoubtedly taken from hence into the Greek Bibles. For as the
inserting of it was necessary unto the Apostle to denote the Person treated of;
so it is not in the Original, nor will the context of the Psalm admit of it; so
that it could no otherwise come in that place, but from this of the Apostle.
Nor is it probable that the LXX would translate (...), thou shall roll up, and
immediately render (...), they shall be changed; but here also the words have
been borrowed from the Apostle, whose design was not exactly to translate, but
faithfully to apply the sense of the place unto his own purpose.

Ver. 13. (...). Sit thou at my Right hand, until I place thine enemies the
footstool of thy feet. From Psalm 110.1. (...) at my right hand, (...), in the
plural number, of the reason of which Change and Manner of Expression, we shall
treat in its proper place. And here there remains nothing of difference in any
Old Translation.

CHAP. II.
CHap. 2. v. 6, 7, 8. (...). What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
Son of man that thou visitest him? thou have made him less for a little while
than the Angels, thou have crowned him with glory and honor, and have set him
over the works of thy hands. Thou have subjected all things under his feet.
From Psalm 8. v. 5, 6, 7, 8. The words of the Apostle are the same with those
in the present Copy of the LXX. Theodotion, (...) from the ambiguous
signification of the word (...) about which great stirs have been raised,
whereof in their proper place. Chrys^stome on this Text mentions some different
Translations of the words of the Psalms. (...) says he, (...), another Book
reads, what is he according to man that thou remembrest him. (...), is not
(...) but (...), What is mortal man. Again, (...). Another instead of, thou
visitest him, that thou will visit him. Ag^in, (...), instead of less, or a
little while than Angels; Another, a little less than God; and Another, l^ss
than God. And he adds the Hebrew is (...). So different was their pronuntiation
of the Hebrew from that in use amongst us. Again, he adds, (...), thou shall
crown him with Glory and Honor; and yet, (...), thou made him to have power.
From all which variety, it is most evident, that there were various Readings of
this Context in the ancient Copies of the LXX, for no footsteps of them appear
in the remains of Aquila, Theodotion, or Symmachus, and that therefore the
Common Reading which is now fixed in the Great Bible, was translated thither,
from this place of the Apostle.

Chap. 2. v. 12. (...). I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, in the
midst of the Congregation I will sing praise unto thee. From Psalm. 22. v. 23.
The LXX. (...).

Ver. 13. (...): I will put my trust in him; From Psalm. 18.3. LXX. (...), I
will hope in him; but (...) is rightly rendered by the the Apostle, I will
trust in him. The LXX. have these words of the Apostle, Isai. 8.17. where the
words of the Original are, (...), and I will wait for him; so that their words
seem to be taken from this place of the Apostle, as apprehending his Testimony
to be cited from the Prophet, which that it is not, we shall prove evidently
afterward.

The same Verse: (...) Behold I and the children which God has given me. From
Isa. 8.17.

CHAP. III.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the day of
Provocation in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness, when your Fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my Works forty years: wherefore I was grieved
with that Generation and said, they do always err in heart, and they have not
known my ways; so I swore in my wrath they shall not enter into my rest. From
Psalm. 95. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The Translation of the LXX. agrees with the
words of the Apostle, both of them answering the Original. Only the Apostle
clearly to express the Reason of Gods Judgments on that people in the
Wilderness, distinguishes the Words somewhat otherwise than they are in the
Hebrew Text. For whereas that says, When your Fathers tempted me, proved me,
and saw my Works. Forty years long was I grieved with that Generation, The
Apostle adds that season of forty years, to the mention of their sins, and
interposing (...) wherefore, refers his Speech unto the words foregoing, as
containing the cause of the ensuing Wrath and Judgment. And although our
present Copies of the Greek Bibles distinguish the Words according to the
Hebrew Text; yet Theodoret informs us, that some Copies made the distinction
with the Apostle, and added (...) before (...), which also is observed by
Nobilius; and this could arise from no other cause, but an attempt to insert
the very words of the Apostle in that Text; as did the (...) also reckoned
amongst its various Sections, though (...) remain in the vulgar Editions.

CHAP. IV.
And God r^sted on the seventh day from all his works. From Genesis 2. v. 2. The
Apostle, adds (...) to the Text, to compl^^t his Assertion, and leaves out
(...). which he had made, as to his purpose. The LXX. (...), and otherwise also
differing from the Apostle.

CHAP. V.
VEr. 6. (...). Thou art a Priest for ever after Melchisedech. From Psalm 110.
v. 4. So also the LXX. (...) with Jod superfluous; (...) Mos. There is nothing
of Variety remaining in these words from any other Translations.

Ver. 14. (...). Blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply
thee. From Genesis 22. v. 17. The LXX. (...), I will multiply thy seed.

CHAP. VIII.
VEr. 9, 10, 11, 12. (...) ( LXX. (...)) (...) LXX. (...)) (...) ( LXX. (...))
(...) ( LXX. (...)) (...). Behold the days come, says the Lord, when I will
make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah. Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them by
the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in
my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord. For this is the Covenant
that I will make with the House of Israel after those days says the Lord, I
will put my Laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every
man his neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying know the Lord; for all
shall know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them. For I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquity will I
remember no more. From Jer. 31. v. 32, 33, 34, 35. Instead of (...), his
neighbor, ver. 11. the LXX. read (...), his fellow Citizen. But some Copies of
the LXX. read (...), and some of this Text (...), which makes it evident that
there has been tampering to bring them to Uniformity. But the greatest
difficulty of this Quotation arises from the Agreement of the Apostles words,
and the Translation of the LXX. where both of them seem to depart from the
Original. For those words in the Hebrew Text, v. 33. (...) which my Covenant
they made void, and I was an Husband unto them, or ruled over them, are
rendered by them, (...), And they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded
them not. The Reason of the Apostles Translation of those words, we shall
manifest and vindicate in our Exposition of the Context. At present the
coincidence of it with that of the LXX. and that wherein they both seem to
differ from the Original, and all Translations, besides the Syriack and the
Arabic which are made out of it, (though the Syriack follow it not in the
confused transpositions that are made of Jeremiah's Prophesies, from Chap. 25.
to Chap. 40. as the Arabic does) is only to be considered; which shall be done
so soon as we have recounted the remaining Testimonies, whereof some are
attended with the same difficulty.

CHAP. IX.
This is the blood of the Covenant, which God has enjoined unto you. From
Exodus 24.8. The sense of the Hebrew Text is alluded unto, not the words
absolutely. The LXX. (...); with much difference from the words of the Apostle.

CHAP. X.
Sacrifice and Offering thou would not have, a Body thou have prepared me.
From Psalm 40. v. 6. So also the LXX. both with great difference from the
Original. For (...), my ears have thou dug or bored, is rendered, a Body
thou have prepared me. Of the Reason of which difference and agreement, we
shall treat afterward.

Ver. 6. (...); in Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have had no
pleasure. Heb. (...), thou have not required; the Apostle expresses exactly
the sense of the Holy Ghost, but observes not the first exact signification of
the word. The LXX. (...) and in some copies (...) soughtest not.

Ver. 7. (...). Behold I come; in the Head or beginning of the Book it is
written of me, to do thy will O God. That is, Genesis 3. v. 15. Heb. (...) in the
roll of the Book. Symmachus, (...), In the Volume of thy determination. Aquila,
(...) in the Roll. (...) in the Section. LXX. (...); I was willing to do thy
will O my God.

Ver. 38. (...) ( LXX. (...)) (...). But if any draw back my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. From Habak. 2. v. 4. The words of the Prophet are transposed,
and the beginning of the last clause much altered. (...). Behold it is lifted
up, his soul is not right in him; but the sense and intendment of the Holy
Ghost is preserved as shall be manifested.

CHAP. XII.
LXX. Heb. (...) my Son) (...) ( LXX. (...) and in some Copies (...), from this
place of the Apostle) (...), My Son despise not thou chastening of the Lord,
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
and scourges every Son whom he receives. From Prove. 3. v. 12. (...) and as a
Father the Son whom he delights in. The sense is retained, but the words not
exactly repeated. Aquila (...), reject not, (...). Theodotion (...), neither
vex thy self.

CHAP. XIII.
I will not leave thee, neither will I forsake thee. From Joshuah 1. v. 5. The
LXX. in different words; (...). I will not leave thee, neither will I despise
thee. The Apostles words exactly express the Original.

Ver. 6. Is from Psalm 118. v. 6. without any difficulty attending it.

Apostle in this Epistle out of the Old Testament. Very many others there are
which he either alludes unto, or expounds, that are not of our present
consideration. Neither are these here proposed to be unfolded as to the sense
of them, or as to the removal of the difficulties that the Application of them
by him, is attended withal. This is the proper work of the Exposition of the
Epistle intended. All at present aimed at, is to present them in one view, with
their Agreement, and Differences from the Original and Translations, that we
may the better judge of his manner of proceeding in the citing of them, and
what Rule he observed therein. And what in general may be concluded from that
prospect we have taken of them, I shall offer in the ensuing Observations.

First, It is evident that they are exceedingly mistaken, who affirm that the
Apostle cites Translation of the LXX. as we intimated, that it is by some
pleaded, in the close of the preceding Discourse. The words he uses in very
few of them agree exactly with that Greek Version of the Old Testament which is
now extant; though, apparently since the writing of this Epistle it has grown
in its Verbal conformity unto the Allegations as reported in the New. And in
most of them he varieth from it, either in the use of his own Liberty, or in a
more exact rendering of the Original Text. This the first prospect of the places
and words compared will evince. Should he have had any respect unto that
Translation, it were impossible to give any tolerable account, whence he should
so much differ from it, almost in every quotation, as is plain that he does.

It is also undeniably manifest from this view of his words that the Apostle
did not scrupulously confine himself unto the precise words either of the
Original, or any Translation whatever, if any other Translation or Targum were
then extant besides that of the LXX. Observing and expressing the sense of the
Testimonies which he thought meet to produce and make use of, he used great
Liberty, as did other holy Writers of the New Testament, according to the
guidance of the Holy Ghost by whose inspiration he wrote, in expressing them by
words of his own And who shall blame him for so doing? Who should bind him to
the Rules of Quotations, which sometimes Necessity, sometimes Curiosity,
sometimes the Cavils of other men impose upon us in our Writings? Herein the
Apostle used that Liberty which the Holy Ghost gave unto him, without the least
prejudice unto Truth, or the Faith of the Church.

Whereas any of th^se Testimonies, or any part of any one of them may appear at
applied by him unsuitably unto their Original importance and intention, we
shall manifest, not only the contrary to be true, against those who have made
such Exceptions, but also that he makes use of those which were most proper and
cogent, with respect unto them with whom he had to do. For the Apostle in this
Epistle, as shall be fully evidenced, disputes upon the acknowledged Principles
and Concessions of the Hebrews. It was then incumbent on him to make use of
such Testimonies, as were granted in their Church to belong unto the ends and
purposes, for which by him they were produced. And that these are such, shall
be evinced from their own ancient Writings and Traditions.

The Principal difficulty about these Citations, lies in those wherein the
words of the Apostle are the same with those now extant in the Greek Bibles,
both evidently departing from the Original. Three places of this kind are
principally vexed by Expositors and Critics. The first in that of Psalm 40. v.
7. where the words of the Psalmist in the Hebrew, (...), my ears have thou
bored, or dug, are rendered by the Apostle according to the Translation of
the LXX. (...), but a Body have thou prepared me. That the Apostle does rightly
interpret the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Psalm, and in his Paraphrase
apply the words unto that very end for which they were intended, shall be
cleared afterward. The present difficulty concerns the Coincidence of his
words, with those of the LXX. where apparently they answer not the Original.
The next is that of the Prophet, Jer. 31.34. (...), and I was an husband unto
them; or I was a Lord unto them, or ruled over them, as the Vulgar Latin
renders the words. The Apostle with the LXX. (...), and I regarded them not, or
despised them. The third is that from Habak. 2.4. (...), behold, it is listed
up, his soul is not right in him; which words the Apostle with the LXX, render,
(...). But if any draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Concerning these, and some other places many confidently affirm, that the
Apostle Original, and reported the words from the Translation of the LXX.
Capellus with some others proceed farther, and assign the rise of this
difference unto some other Copies of the Hebrew Text used by the LXX. varying
from those which now remain. Thus in particular, in that place of Jeremy before
mentioned, he conjectures that for (...) they read (...), I despised them; as
another does that they read (...) to the same purpose; for of such conjectures
there is no end. But as (...) may well signify as the Apostle expounds it, and
in other places does so, as we shall see afterward, so this boldness in
correcting the Text, and fancying without proof, Testimony or probability of
other ancient Copies of the Scripture of the Old Testament, differing in many
things from them which alone remain, and which indeed were ever in the world,
may quickly prove pernicious to the Church of God. We must therefore look after
another expedient for the removal of this difficulty.

Apostle according to his wonted manner, which appears in almost all the
Citations used by him in this Epistle, reporting the sense and importance of
the places, in words of his own, the Christian Transcribers of the Greek Bible
inserted his expresions into the Text, either as judging them a more proper
Version of the Original, whereof they were ignorant, than that of the LXX, or
out of a preposterous zeal to take away the appearanc^ of a diversity between
the Text and the Apostles citation of it. And thus in those Testimonies where
there is a real variation from the Hebrew Original, the Apostle took not his
words from the Translation of the LXX, but his words were afterward inserted
into that Translation. And this as we have partly made to appear already in
sundry instances, so it shall now briefly be farther confirmed. For,

First, Whereas the Reasons of the Apostle for his Application of the
Testimonies used by him in his words and expressions, are evident, as shall in
particular be made to appear, so no Reason can be assigned, why the LXX. (if
any such LXX. there were) who translated the Old Testament, or any other
Translators of it, should so render the words of the Hebrew Text. Neither
Various Lections, nor ambiguity of signification in the words of the Original
can in most of them be pleaded. For instance, The Apostle in applying those
words of the Psalmist, Psalm 40. (...) unto the humane nature and body of
Christ, wherein he did the will of God, did certainly express the design and
intention of the Holy Ghost in them. But who can imagine, what should move the
LXX. to render (...) a word of a known signification and univocal, by (...),
when they had translated it an hundred and fifty times, that is constantly
elsewhere, by (...) and (...) an ear, which alone it signifies; or what should
move them to render (...) by (...), to prepare, when the word signifies to
digg, or to bore, and is always so elsewhere rendered by themselves? Neither
did any such thing come into their minds in the Translation of those places
whence this Expression seems to be borrowed, Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17. When any
man then can give a tolerable conjecture, why the LXX. should be inclined thus
to translate these words, I shall consider it. In the mean time I judge there
is much more ground to suppose, that the Apostles expressions which he had
weighty cause to use, were by some inserted into the Greek Text of the Old
Testament, than that a Translation, which those that made it, had no cause so
to do, evidently forsaking the proper meaning of very obvious words, and their
sense, known to themselves, should be taken up and used by the Apostle unto his
purpose.

Secondly, It is certain that some Words used by the Apostle have been ins^rted
into some Copies of the Greek Bibles, which being single words, and of little
importance prevailed not in them all, as may be seen in sundry of the foregoing
instances. And why may we not think that some whole sentences might on the same
account be inserted in some of them, which being of more importance found a
more general acceptance. And how also by other means that Translation was
variously changed and corrupted of old, and that before the days of Hierom,
Learned Men do know and confess.

one place (at least) in this Epistle, which it may be some could not
conjecture from whence it should be taken, yet finding it urged by the Apostle,
as a Testimony out of the Old testament, is inserted in another place of the
Text than that from which the Apostle took it, and that where there is not the
least color for its insertion. This is the Testimony out of Psalm 95. v. 7.
which the Apostle cites Chap. 1. v. 6. in words much differing from those
wherewith the Original is rendered by the LXX. This some of the Transcribers of
the Bible not knowing well where to find, have inserted in the very syllables
of the Apostles expression into Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43. where it yet abides, though
Originally it had no place there, as we shall in the Exposition of the Words
sufficiently manifest. The same and no other is the cause why (...) is rendered
(...), Genesis 49. And may we not as well think, nay is it not more likely, that
they would insert his words into the places from whence they knew his
Testimonies were taken, with a very little alteration of the ancient Reading,
than that they would wholly intrude them into the places from whence they were
not taken by him, which yet undeniably has been done, and that with success.
Nay, we find that many things out of the New Testament are translated into the
Apochryphall Books themselves. As for instance, Ecclesiasticus, chap. 24. v. 3.
we have these words in the Latin Copies, Ex ore altissimi prodii primogenita
ante omnem Creaturam; which are cited by Bellarmine and others in the
confirmation of the Deity of Christ, whereas they are taken from Col. 1.15. and
are in no Greek Copies of that Book.

Upon these Reasons then, which may yet be rendered more cogent, by many other
instances, but that we confine our selves to this Epistle, I suppose I may
conclude, that it is more probable at least, that the Apostles interpretations
of the Testimonies used by him, all agreeably unto the mind of the Holy Ghost,
were by some of old inserted into the Vulgar Copies of the Greek Translation of
the Old Testament, and therein prevailed unto common acceptance, than that he
himself followed in the Citation of them a Translation departing without Reason
from the Original Text, and diverting unto such senses, as its Authors knew not
to be contained in them, which must needs give offense unto them with whom he
had to do. It appears then, that from hence no light can be given unto our
enquiry after the Language wherein this Epistle was Originally written, though
it be clear enough upon other Considerations.

Exercitatio VI.
Oneness of the Church. Mistake of the Jews about the Nature of the Promises.
Promise of the Messiah the Foundation of the Church. But as including the
Covenant. The Church confined unto the Person, and Posterity of Abraham. His
Call and Separation for a double End. Who properly the Seed of Abraham.
Mistakes of the Jews about the Covenant. Abraham the Father of the faithful and
Heir of the world on what account. The Church still the same.

Jews at the Time of writing this Epistle (and their posterity in all
succeeding Generations, follow their Example and Tradition) were not a little
confirmed in their obstinacy and unbelief, by a misapprehension of the true
sense and nature of the Promises of the Old Testament. For whereas they found
many glorious Promises made unto the Church in the days of the Messiah,
especially concerning the great access of the Gentiles unto it, they looked
upon themselves, the posterity of Abraham on the account of their being his
children according to the flesh, as the first, proper, and indeed only subject
of them, unto whom in their accomplishment others were to be proselyted and
joined, the substance and foundation of the Church remaining still with them.
But the Event answered not their expectation. Instead of inheriting all the
Promises merely upon their carnal interest and privilege, which they looked
for, and continue so to do unto this day, they found that themselves must come
in on a new account, to be sharers in them in common with others, or be
rejected, whilst those others were admitted unto the inheritance. This filled
them with wrath and envy, which greatly added to the strengthening of their
Unbelief. They could not bear with patience an intimation of letting out the
Vineyard to other Husbandmen. With this Principle and Prejudice of theirs the
Apostle dealt directly in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 9, 10, 11.

On the same grounds he proceeds with them in this Epistle; And because his
Answer to their Objection from the Promises, lies at the foundation of many of
his reasonings with them, the nature of it must be here previously explained.
Not that I shall here enter into a consideration of the Jews Argument to prove
the Messiah not yet to be come, because the Promises in their sense of them,
are not yet accomplished, which shall be fully removed in the Close of these
Discourses, but only as I said, open the nature in general of that Answer which
our Apostle returns unto them, and builds his Reasonings with them upon.

Promise of the Messiah given unto Adam. Now though that Promise was the
supportment and encouragement of mankind to seek the Lord, a Promise absolutely
considered proceeding from mere Grace and Mercy, yet as it was the foundation
of the Church, it included in it the nature of a Covenant, vertually requiring
a re-stipulation unto obedience in them who by faith come to have an interest
therein. And this the nature of the thing its self required; for the Promise
was given unto this end and purpose, that men might have a new bottom and
Foundation of Obedience; that of the first Covenant being disannulled. Hence in
the following Explications of the Promise, this condition of Obedience is
expressly added. So upon its renewall unto Abraham, God required that he should
walk before him and be upright. This Promise then, as it has the nature of a
Covenant, including the Grace that God would show unto sinners in the Messiah,
and the Obedience that he required from them, was from the the first giving of
it, the foundation of the Church, and the whole Worship of God therein.

Unto this Church so founded and built on this Covenant, and by the means
thereof the Redeeming Mediatory Seed promised therein, were all the following
Promises, and the Privileges exhibited in them, given and annexed. Neither
has, or ever had any individual Person, any Spiritual right unto, or interest
in any of those Promises or Privileges, whatever his outward condition were,
but only by virtue of his Membership in the Church built on the Covenant,
whereunto as we said, they do all appertain. On this account the Church before
the days of Abraham, though scattered up and down in the world, and subject
unto many changes in its worship by the addition of New Revelations, was still
but one and the same; because founded in the same Covenant, and entrusted
thereby in all the Benefits or Privileges, that God had given or granted, or
would do so at any time unto his Church.

In process of time, God was pleased to confine this Church, as unto the
ordinary visible Abraham. Upon this restriction of the Church, Covenant, and
Promise, the Jews of old managed a Plea in their own Justification against the
Doctrine of the Lord Christ and his Apostles. We are the children, the seed of
Abraham, was their continual cry; on the account whereof, they presumed that
all the Promises belonged unto them, and upon the matter unto them alone. And
this their persuasion has cast them, as we shall see, upon a woeful and fatal
mistake. Two Privileges did God grant unto Abraham upon his Separation to a
special interest in the Old Promise and Covenant.

First, That according to the flesh, he should be the Father of the Messiah;
the promised seed, who was the very Life of the Covenant, the Fountain and
Cause of all the Blessings contained in it. That this Privilege was temporary,
having a limited season, time and end appointed unto it, the very nature of the
thing it self does demonstrate. For upon this actual Exhibition in the flesh,
it was to cease. In pursuit hereof, were his posterity separated from the rest
of the world, and preserved a peculiar people, that through them the promised
seed might be brought forth in the fullness of time, and be of them according
unto the flesh, Romans 9.5.

Secondly, Together with this, he had also another Privilege granted unto him,
namely that his faith whereby he was personally interested in the Covenant
should be the Pattern of the faith of the Church in all generations, and that
none should ever come to be a member of it, or a sharer in its Blessings, but
by the same faith that he had fixed on the seed that was in the Promise, to be
brought forth from him in the world. On the account of this Privilege, he
became the Father of all them that do believe; For they that are of the faith,
the same are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. Romans 4.11. as also Heirs of the
World; Romans 4.13. in that all that should believe throughout the world, bring
thereby implanted into the Covenant made with him, should become his spiritual
children.

Answerable unto this twofold end of the separation of Abraham, there was a
double seed allotted unto him. A seed according to the flesh, separated to the
bringing forth of the Messiah, according unto the flesh: and a seed according
to the Promise, that is, such as by faith should have interest in the Promise,
or all the Elect of God. Not that these two seeds were always subjectively
diverse; so that the seed separated to the bringing forth of the Messiah in the
flesh, should neither in whole or in part be also the seed according to the
promise; or on the contrary, that the seed according to the promise, should
none of it, be his seed after the flesh. Our Apostle declares the contrary in
the instances of Isaac and Jacob, with the remnant of Israel that shall be
saved, Romans Chap. 9, 10, 11. But sometimes the same seed came under diverse
considerations, being the seed of Abraham both according to the flesh and
according to the Promise; and sometimes the seed it self was diverse, those
according to the flesh being not of the Promise, and so on the contrary. Thus
Isaac and Jacob were the seed of Abraham according unto the flesh, separated
unto the bringing forth of the Messiah after the flesh, because they were his
carnal Posterity, and they were also of the seed of the Promise, because by
their own personal faith they were interested in the Covenant of Abraham their
Father. Multitudes afterward were of the carnal seed of Abraham, and of the
number of the people separated to bring forth the Messiah in the flesh, and yet
were not of the seed according to the Promise, nor interested in the spiritual
blessings of the Covenant, because they did not personally believe, as our
Apostle declares, Chap. 4. of this Epistle. And many afterward, who were not
of the carnal seed of Abraham, nor interested in the privilege of bringing
forth the Messiah in the flesh, were yet designed to be made his spiritual seed
by faith, that in them he might become heir of the world, and all Nations of
the Earth be blessed in him. Now it is evident, that it is the second
Privilege and spiritual seed, wherein the Church to whom the Promises are
made, is founded, and whereof it does consist; namely in them, who by Faith are
interested in the Covenant of Abraham, whether they be of the carnal seed or no.

Jews of old, wherein they are followed by their Posterity unto this day. They
thought no more was needful to interest them in the Covenant of Abraham, but
that they were his seed according to the flesh. And they constantly pleaded the
latter Privilege, as the ground and Reason of the former. It is true, they
were the children of Abraham according to the flesh; but on that account they
can have no other Privilege than Abraham had in the flesh himself. And this
was, as we have showed, that he should be set apart as a special channel,
through whose loins God would derive the promised seed into the world. In like
manner were they separated to be a peculiar People as his Posterity, from
amongst whom he should be so brought forth.

That this Separation and Privilege were to cease, when the end of it was
accomplished, and the Messiah exhibited, the very nature of the thing declares.
For to what purpose should it be continued, when that was fully effected
whereunto it was designed? But they would extend this Privilege, and mix it
with the other, contending that because they were the children of Abraham
according to the flesh, the whole Blessing and Covenant of Abraham belonged
unto them. But as our Savior proved that in the latter sense they were not the
children of Abraham, because they did not the works of Abraham; so as our
Apostle plainly demonstrates, Romans 4.9.10.11. Chapters. Gal. 3.4. Chap. that
those of them who had not the faith of Abraham, had no interest in his
Blessings and Covenant; Seeing therefore that their other Privilege was come
to an end with all the carnal Ordinances that attended it, by the actual coming
of the Messiah whereunto they were subservient, if they did not by faith in the
promised seed attain an interest in this of the Spiritual Blessing, it is
evident that they could on no account be considered as actual sharers in the
Covenant of God.

Abraham on the account of his faith, and not of his separation according to
the flesh, was the Father of all that believe, and Heir of the world. And in
the Covenant made with him, as to that which concerns, not the bringing forth
of the promised seed according to the flesh, but as unto faith therein; and in
the work of Redemption to be performed thereby, lies the foundation of the
Church in all Ages. Wheresoever this Covenant is, and with whomsoever it is
established, with them is the Church, unto whom all the Promises and
Privileges of the Church do belong. Hence it was, that at the coming of the
Messiah there was not one Church taken away, and another set up in the room
thereof, but the Church continued the same in those that were the children of
Abraham according to the faith. The Christian Church, is not another Church,
but the very same that was before the coming of Christ, having the same faith
with it, and interested in the same Covenant.

It is true, the former carnal Privilege of Abraham and his Posterity expiring
on the grounds before mentioned, the Ordinances of Worship which were suited
thereunto, did necessarily cease also. And this cast the Jews into great
perplexities, and proved the last trial that God made of them. For whereas
both these, namely the carnal and spiritual Privileges of Abraham's Covenant,
had been carried on together in a mixed way for many Generations, coming now to
be separated, and a trial to be made ( Mal. 3.) who of the Jews had interest
in both, who in one only, those who had only the carnal Privilege of being
Children of Abraham according to the flesh, contended for a share on that
single account in the other also, that is in all the Promises annexed unto the
Covenant. But the foundation of their Plea was taken away, and the Church unto
which the Promises belong remained with them, that were heirs of Abraham's faith
only.

Covenant, and unto which all the Promises did and do belong, abode at the
coming of Christ, and does abide ever since in and among those who are the
children of Abraham by Faith. The Old Church was not taken away, and a new one
set up, but the same Church was continued, only in those who by Faith inherited
the Promises. Great alterations indeed were then made in the outward state and
condition of the Church. As (1:) The carnal Privilege of the Jews in their
separation to bring forth the Messiah then failed, and therewith their claim on
that account to be the children of Abraham. (2.) The Ordinances of Worship
suited unto that Privilege, expired, and came to an end. (3.) New Ordinances
of Worship were appointed, suited unto the New Light and grace granted then
unto the Church. (4.) The Gentiles came in to the faith of Abraham together
with the Jews to be fellow-heirs with them in his blessing. But none of these,
nor all of them together made any such Alteration in the Church, but that it
was still one and the same. The Olive Tree was the same, only some branches
were broken of, and others planted in; the Jews fell, and the Gentiles came in
their room.

And this must and does determine the difference between the Jews and
Christians Promises of the Old Testament. They are all made unto the Church. No
individual Person has any interest in them, but by virtue of his Membership
therewith. This Church is and always was one and the same. With whomsoever it
remains, the Promises are theirs: and that not by Application or Analogy, but
directly and properly. They belong as immediately at this day either to the
Jews or Christians as they did of old to any. The Question is, with whom is
this Church founded on the promised seed in the Covenant. This is Sion,
Jerusalem, Israel, Jacob, the Temple of God. The Jews plead that it is with
them, because they are the children of Abraham according to the flesh.
Christians tell them that their Privilege on this account was of another
nature, and ended with the coming of the Messiah. That the Church unto whom all
the Promises belong, are only those who are Heirs of Abraham's faith; believing
as he did, and thereby interested in his Covenant. Not as though the Promise
made to Abraham were of none effect; for as it was made good unto his carnal
seed in the exhibition of the Messiah, so the spiritual Privileges of it
belonged only unto those of the Jews and Gentiles, in whom God had graciously
purposed to effect the faith of Abraham. Thus was, and is the Church, whereunto
all the Promises belong, still one and the same, namely Abraham's children
according to the faith; and among those Promises this is one, that God will be
a God unto them and their seed for ever.

Exercitatio VII.
Of the Judaicall distribution of the Old Testament; the Original and Nature
of their Orall Law and Traditions; the whole disproved. Agreement of the Jews
and Papists about Traditions, instanced in sundry particulars.

THE Apostle dealing with the Hebrews about the Revelation of the Will of in
the Prophets, v. 1. This speaking unto them, the present Jews affirm to consist
of two Parts; (1.) That which Moses and the following Prophets was commanded to
write for the public use of the Church: (2.) What being delivered only by word
of Mouth unto Moses, and continued by Orall Tradition until after the last
destruction of the Temple, was afterward committed unto writing. And because
those who would read our Exposition of this Epistle, or the Epistle it self
with profit, had need of some insight into the Opinions and Traditions of the
Jews about these things, I shall for the sake of them that want either Skill or
Leisure to search after them elsewhere, give a brief account of their faith,
concerning the two Heads of Revelation mentioned; and therein discover, both
the Principle, Means and Nature of their present Apostasy and Infidelity.

The Scripture of the Old Testament they call (...), and divide it into three
the Law: (2.) (...), the Prophets: (3.) (...), the Writings, by Divine
Inspiration, which are usually called the Hagiographa, or Holy Writings. And
this distribution of the Books of the Old Testament is in general intimated by
our Savior, Luke 24.24. (...). All things written in the Law, the Prophets,
and the Psalms; under which last head, all the Poetical Books of the Scripture
are contained. Thus Rabbi Bechai in Cad Hackemach, (...); the Law, (so
sometimes they call the whole Volume) is divided into three parts, the Law, the
Prophets, and the Holy Writings. All comprised generally under the Name of the
Law; for so they say in Midrash Tehillim. Psalm 78. v. 1. (...), the Psalms are
the Law, and the Prophets are the Law; that is the whole Scripture.

This distribution so far as it is intimated in the words of our Savior, does
evidently arise from the Nature and Subject Matter of the Books themselves. And
this was the received division of the Books of the Old Testament, whilst the
Judaical Church stood and Continued; But the Postalmudicall Doctors overlooking
or neglecting the true Reason of this Distribution, have fancied others, taken
from the different manners and degrees of Revelation, by which they were given
out unto the Church. Amongst these they make the Revelation to Moses the most
excellent, and are very vain in coining the Privileges and Preeminences it had
above all others, which are elsewhere examined. In the next degree they place
those which proceeded from the Spirit of Prophecy, which they distinguish from
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Yea, in the eleven degrees of Divine
Revelation assigned by Maimonides Mor. Nebu: par. 2. That by Inspiration is
cast into the last and lowest place. But this distinction is groundless and
merely fancied out of the various ways, that God was pleased to use in
representing things to the minds of the Prophets; when it was in them all, the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost alone, that enabled them infallibly to declare
the mind of God unto the Church, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Now the Books thus given by the Spirit of Prophecy they make of two sorts; 1.
(...), the former Prophets, which are all the Historical Books of the Old
Testament written before the Captivity, as Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings; Ruth
only excepted: 2. (...), which are all the Prophetical Books peculiarly so
called, Daniel only excepted; that is Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve
Minor Prophets; Of the last sort, or (...) Cethubim, Books written by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, are the Poetical Books of the Scripture; Psalms,
Job, Proverbs, Canticles, Lamentations, with Ecclesiastes, whereunto they add
Ruth, Daniel and the Historical Books written after the Captivity, as the
Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, which make up the Canon of the Old Testament;
why sundry of these Books should be cast into the last sort, as the Story of
Ruth, and the Prophecy of Daniel, they can give no tolerable account. The
other Books also written after the Captivity are plainly of the same nature
with those which they call the former Prophets; And for that of Daniel, it
contains in it almost all the eminent kinds of Revelation whereby themselves
would distinguish the Spirit of Prophecy from the Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost. Neither have they any Reason for this distribution; but finding the
general division before mentioned to have been received in the Church of old,
they have disposed of the particular Books into their orders, at their
pleasure, casting Daniel as is probable into their last order, because so many
of his Visions and Prophesies relate unto other Nations besides their own.

The Law or the Books of Moses they call (...), or the Pentateuch from the
number of the Books; or (...), the fives, or the five parts of the Law;
whereunto Hierom in his Epistle to Paulinus, wrests those words of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 14.19. I had rather speak (...), five words in the Church; as if he had
respect to the Law of Moses.

These five Books they divide into Paraschae, or Sections, whereof they read
one each Sabbath day in their Synagogues; Genesis into twelve, Exodus into
eleven, Leviticus into ten; Numbers into ten; Deuteronomy into ten; which all
make fifty-three; whereby reading one each day, and two in one day, they read
through the whole in the course of a year, beginning at the Feast of
Tabernacles. And this they did of old, as James testifies, Acts 15.21. For
Moses of Old time has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. Some of them make fifty four of these Sections,
dividing the last of Genesis into two, beginning the latter at Chap. 47. v. 18.
constituting the following Chapter in a distinct Section, though it have not
the usual note of them prefixed unto it, but only one single Samech; to note,
as they say, its being absolutely closed or shut up, on the account of the
Prophecy of the coming of the Messiah, Chap. 49. whose season is unknown to
them.

They also divide it into lesser Sections; and those of two sorts; open and
close, which Genesis 43. of the latter 48. In Exodus of the first sort 69. of the
latter 95. In Leviticus of the first sort 52. of the Latter 46. In Numbers of
the first 92. of the latter 66. Deuteronomy of the first sort 34. of the latter
379. in all 669. Besides they observe the number of the Verses at the end of
every Book: as also that (...) in (...) Levit. 11.42. is the middle letter of
the Law; (...), Lev. 10, 16. the middle word; Levit. 13.33. the middle Verse;
the number of all which through the Law is 23206.

Moreover they divide the Law, or five Books of Moses into 153. (...), Sedarim,
or Distinctions; whereof Genesis contains 42. Exodus 29. Leviticus 23. Numbers
32. Deuteronomy 27. which kind of Distinctions they also observe throughout the
Scripture, assigning unto Joshuah 14. Judges 14. Samuel 34. Kings 35. Isaiah
26. Jeremiah 31. Ezekiel 29. the Lesser Prophets 21. Psalms 19. Job. 8.
Proverbs 8. Ecclesiastes 4. Canticles and Lamentations are not divided; Daniel
7. Ester 7. Ezra and Nehemiah 10. Chronicles 25.

Besides they distribute the Prophets into Sections called Haphters, that
answer the Sections which are read every Sabbath day in their Synagogues; And
this Division of the Prophets they affirm to have been made in the days of
Antiochus Epiphanes, whom they call (...), that wicked one, when the reading of
the Law was prohibited unto them. All which things are handled at large by
others.

Having for a long season lost the Promise of the Spirit, and therewith all
saving Copies of it entire and free from corruption; For after that the Canon
of the Old Testament was completed in the days of Ezra, and Points or Vowels
added to the Letters, to preserve the Knowledge of the Tongue, and facilitate
the right Reading and Learning of it, it is incredible what industry, diligence
and curiosity they have used in and about the Letter of the whole Scripture.
The collection of their pains and Observations to this purpose is called the
Massora or Messara, consisting in Critical Observations upon the words and
letters of the Scripture, begun to be collected of old, even it may be from the
days of Ezra, and continued until the time of Composing the Talmud, with some
additional Observations since annexed unto it.

The Writers, Composers and Gatherers of this work they call (...) whose
principal Observations were gathered and published by Rabbi Jacob Chaiim, and
annexed to the Venetian Bibles; whereas before the Massora was written in other
Books innumerable. In this their Critical Doctrine, they give us the number of
the Verses of the Scripture, as also how often every Word is used in the whole,
and with what variety, as to Letters and Vowels; what is the whole number of
all the Letters in the Bible, and how often each Letter is severally used, with
innumerable other useful Observations; the sum whereof is gathered by Buxtorfe
in his excellent Treatise on that subject. And herein is the knowledge of their
Masters bounded; they go not beyond the Letter, but are more blind than Moles
in the Spiritual sense of it. And thus they continue an example of the
righteous Judgment of God, in giving them up to the Counsels of their own
hearts, and an evident instance how unable the Letter of the Scripture is to
furnish men with the saving knowledge of the Will of God, who enjoy not the
Spirit promised in the same Covenant to the Church of the Elect, Isa 59.21.

Orall Law, which they make equal unto, yea in many things prefer before, that
which is written. The Scripture becoming a lifeless Letter unto them, the true
understanding of the mind of God being utterly departed and hid from them, it
was impossible that they should rest therein, or content themselves with what
is revealed by it. For as the word whilst it is enjoyed and used according to
the mind of God, and is accompanied with that Spirit which is promised to lead
them that believe, into all Truth, is full of sweetness and life to the souls
of men, a perfect Rule of walking before God, and that which satiates them with
wisdom and knowledge; so when it is enjoyed merely on an outward account as
such a writing, without any dispensation of suitable Light and Grace, it will
yield men no satisfaction, which makes them constantly turn aside to other
means and ways of knowing and serving God. This being so eminent in the Jews,
and the Medium they have fixed on to supply that want, which they suppose to be
in the Scripture, but is indeed in themselves, proving to be the great Engine
of their hardening and obstinacy in their Infidelity; I shall first declare
what it is that they intend by the Orall Law, and then briefly show the
absurdity and falseness of their pretensions about it; though it must not be
denied that it is one of the most Ancient Fables that is credited amongst any
of the Sons of men at this day in the world.

Orall Law they affirm to be an unwritten Tradition and Exposition of the
written Law of Moses, given unto him in Mount Sinai, and committed by him to
Joshua and the Sanhedrim, to be by them delivered over by Orall Tradition unto
those who should succeed them in the Government of that Church. It does not
appear that in the days of Christ or his Apostles, whilst the Temple was
standing that there was any stated opinion amongst them about this Orall Law;
though it is evident that not long after it began to be received by the body of
the People. Nay it is evident that there was no such Law then acknowledged; For
the Sadduces who utterly reject all the main Principles of it, were then not
only tolerated, but also in chief Rule, one of them being High Priest.

That they had multiplied many superstitious Observances amongst them under the
name of Traditions, is most clear in the Gospel; and it does not appear that
then they knew whom to assign their original unto, and therefore indefinitely
called them the Traditions of the Elders, or those that lived of old before
them. After the Destruction of their Temple, when they had lost the life and
spirit of that Worship, which the Scripture revealed, betaking themselves
wholly unto their Traditional figments, they began to bethink themselves how
they might give countenance to their Apostasy from the Perfection and Doctrine
of the written Law. For this end they began to fancy that these Traditions were
no less from God, than the written Law it self. For when Moses was forty days
and forty nights in the Mountain, they say that in the day time he wrote the
Law from the mouth of God, and in the night, God instructed him in the Orall
Law, or unwritten Exposition of it, which they have received by Tradition from
him. For when he came down from the Mount, after he had read unto them the
Written Law, as they say, he repeated to Aaron and Eleazer and the Sanhedrim,
all that secret instruction which he had received in the night from God, which
it was not lawful for him to write; but in especial he committed the whole to
Joshua. Joshua did the same to Eleazer, as he did to his Son Phi^eas, after
whom they give us a Catalogue of several Prophets that lived in the ensuing
generations, all whom they employ in this service of conveying down the Orall
Law to their Successors. The High Priests also they give a place unto in this
work; of whom there were eighty three from the first Institution of that
Office, to the destruction of the Temple; Joseph. lib. 20. cap. 18. From Aaron
to the building of Solomon's Temple thirteen; from thence to the Captivity
eighteen; all the rest take up the troublesome time of the Apostasy of their
Church unto the final ruin of it; their Rulers being many because of their
wickedness, as themselves observe.

The last Person whom they would have to preserve the Orall Law absolutely
pure, was that Simeon, whom they call (...), the Just, mentioned by Jesus the
Son of Syrach, Chap. 50. And it is very observable, that the latter Jews have
left out Simeon the Son of Hillel, whom their ancient Masters placed upon the
Roll of the Preservers of this Treasure, supposing he might be that Simeon who
in his old age received our Savior in his arms, when he was presented in the
Temple, Luke 2.25. a crime sufficient among the Jews to brand him with a
perpetual ignominy: neither are they alone in turning men's glory, into reproach
and shame.

After the destruction of the Temple and City, when the evil Husbandmen were
slain, Traditions, and as I said before, began to fancy and contend that they
came from God himself; whereas their Predecessors durst not plead any thing for
them, but that they came unto them from them of old, that is some of the
Masters of preceding Generations. Hereupon a while after, (as I have elsewhere
showed at large) one of them whom they call Rabbi Jud^ Hum^si, and Hakkadosh,
the Prince, and the Holy, took upon him to gather their scattered Traditions,
and to cast them into form, order, and method, in Writing, that they might be
unto the Jews a Rule of Life and Worship for ever. The Story of his work and
undertaking is given us by Maimonides in Jad Chazacha, the Authors of Sedar
Ol^^n, Halicoth Olam, Tzemach David, and many others; and they all agree that
this their great Master lived about the times of Marcus Antoninus two hundred
years, or thereabouts after the destruction of City and Temple.

This Collection of his they call (...) or (...) Mishne, or Mishnaioth, being
as is repetition of the Law in an Exposition of it; indeed a farrago of all
sorts of Traditions, true, and false; with a monstrous mixture of Lies,
useless, foolish and wicked. The things contained in it, are by themselves
referred to five heads: 1. The Orall Law received by Moses on Mount Sinai,
preserved by the means before declared: 2. Orall Constitutions of Moses himself
after he came down from the Mount: 3. Constitutions and Orders drawn by various
ways of arguing; (13. as Rambam tells us) out of the written Law; 4. The
Answers and Decrees of the Sanhedrim; and other wise men in former Ages; 5.
Immemoriall Customs, whose original being unknown are supposed to be divine.

The Whole is divided into six parts: noted with the initial letter of the word
which z, that is (...), Zeraim, Seeds; which is divided into eleven Massicktot
or Treatises, containing all of them seventy five Chapters. The second by
(...), m, that is, (...), Moad, or appointed feasts, which is distributed into
Twelve Massicktot, containing in them eighty eight Chapters. The Third by (...)
that is (...), of Women, and is distributed in seven Treatises, containing
seventy one Chapters. The fourth by (...), that is, (...), Nezikim, about loss
and damage, and is divided into eight Massicktot, whereof the first is divided
into three parts, called (...), the first, middle, and last port or entrance,
containing in them thirty Chapters, whereunto forty four are added in the
following parts. The fifth by (...), that is (...), Kodoshim, of
Sanctifications, and is divided into eleven Books containing ninety Chapters.
The sixth with (...), that is, (...), Teharoth, of Purifications, in twelve
Books, and one hundred twenty six Chapters.

Unto this Mishnae of R. Juda they annex the (...) the Tosiphot, or additions
of Rabbi Chaiah his Scholar, expounding many passages in his Masters works; to
them a more full explanation of the same doctrine of the Mishnae, which they
call Baracetot is subjoyned, being the Collection of some Antitalmudicall
Masters. About three hundred years after the Destruction of the Temple R.
Johanan composed the Jerusalem Talmud, consisting in Expositions, Comments,
and Disputes upon the whole Mishnae, excepting the last part about
Purifications. An hundred years or thereabouts after that, Rabbi Ase, composed
the Babylonian Talmud, or Gemara; thirty two years they say he spent in this
work, yet leaving it unfinished; seventy one years after, it was completed by
his Disciples. And the whole work of both these Talmuds may be referred unto
five heads: For first, they expound the Text of the Mishnae; 2. Decide
Questions of right and fact; 3. Report the Disputations, Traditions and
Constitutions of the Doctors that lived between them and the Writing of the
Mishnae; 4. Give Allegorical monstrous Expositions of the Scripture, which they
call Midrashoth; and 5. Report Stories of the like nature.

Orall Law grown into; and in the learning and practicing of these things
consists the whole Religion and Worship of the Jews; there being not the most
absurd saying of any of their Doctors in those huge heaps of folly and vanity,
that they do not equal unto, nay that they are not ready to prefer before the
Written Word; that perfect and only Guide of their Church whilst God was
pleased with it.

In the dust of this confusion here they dwell, loving this darkness more than
light, because their deeds are evil. Having for many generations entertained a
prejudicate imagination, that these traditional Figments, amongst which their
crafty Masters have inserted many filthy and blasphemous Fables against our
Lord Christ, and his Gospel, are of Divine Authority, and having utterly lost
the spiritual sense of the written Word, they are by it sealed up in blindness
and obdurateness, and shall be so, until the vail be taken away, when the
appointed time of their deliverance shall come. A brief discovery of the
falseness of this fancy of their Orall Law, which is the foundation of all that
huge building of Lies and Vanities that their Talmuds are composed of, shall
put an end to this Discourse.

Mount Sinai, sufficiently discovers the folly of this imagination: This Orall
Law the Jews are ready on all occasions to prefer before that which is written:
and do openly profess that without it, the other is of no use unto them. I
desire then to know, whence it is that all the circumstances of the giving and
teaching of the less necessary are so exactly recorded, but not one word is
spoken of this Orall Law, either of Gods revealing of it to Moses, or of Moses
teaching of it to Joshua or any others; Strange! that so much should be
recorded of every circumstance of the less principal, lifeless Law, and not one
word of either substance or circumstance of that which is, if these men may be
believed, the very life and soul of the other. Maimonides in Jad Chazaka tells
us, there is mention made of it in Exodus 24.12. I will give ye, says the Lord
(...) a Law and Commandment; (...) says he, is the Written Law (...), the
Orall; when the next words are (...), which I have written that thou may
teach them; the Written Law being on several accounts expressed by both those
terms, and no other. How know they that any such Law was given to Moses as they
pretend? What Testimony Witness or Record of it, was had or made at the time of
its giving, or in many generations, for two thousand years afterward.

transgress this Orall Law, or did they not? If they say they did not, but kept
it, and observed it diligently, we may easily see of what importance it is,
that the most strict Obs^evation of it, would not preserve them from all manner
of wickedness, and what an hedge it is to the Written Law, when notwithstanding
the obedience yielded unto it, that was utterly despised and neglected; if they
shall say that Law also was broken by them; I desire to know whence it comes to
pass, that whereas God by his Prophets does reprove them for all their other
sins, and in particular for contempt of his Written Law, the Statutes,
Ordinances and Institutions of it, he no where once mentions this their
greater guilt of despising the Orall Law, but there is as universal a silence
concerning its transgression, as there is of its giving and institution. Can we
have any greater evidence of its being fictitious than this; that whereas it is
pretended that it is the main Rule of their Obedience to God, God did never
reprove them for the transgression of it, though whilst he owned them as his
Church and People, he suffered none of their sins to pass by unreproved,
especially not any of that importance, which this is by them pretended to be of.

3. Moses was commanded to write the whole Law that he received from God, and
did so accordingly; Exodus 24.3, 4. Chap. 34.28. Deuteronomy. 31.9, 24. Where was this
Orall Law which they say was not to be written, when Moses was commanded to
write the whole Law that he had received of God; and did accordingly. This New
Law was not then coined, being indeed nothing but the product of their Apostasy
from the Law which was written.

4. The sole ground and foundation of this Orall Law lies in the imperfection
of the Written Law. This is that which they plead, for the necessity of it; The
written Law extends not to all necessary cases that occurr in Religion; many
things are redundant, many wanting in it, and hereof they gather great heaps of
Instances; so that they will grant that if the Written Law had been perfect,
there had been no need of this Traditional one. But whom in this matter shall
we believe, a few ignorant Jews, or God himself, bearing witness that his Law
is perfect, and requiring no more in his Worship but what is in that Law
prescribed? See Psalm. 19.8. Prove. 30.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. And this perfection of
the Written Law, though it be perfectly destructive to their Tradions, not only
the Karaei among themselves do earnestly contend for, but also sundry of their
Gemarists do acknowledge, especially when they forget their own concernments
out of a desire to oppose the Gospel. And to this head belong all the Arguments
that Divines make use of to prove the perfection of the Scripture, against the
New Talmudists in Christianity.

5. God every where sends his people to the Written Law of Moses, for the Rule
of their Obedience, no where unto any Kabal, Deuteronomy. 11.32. and chap. 10.12, 13.
Chap. 28.1. Josh. 1.7, 8. Chap. 23.6. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. Isa. 8.20. If there be
such an Orall Law it is one that God would not have any man to observe; which
he calls none to the Obedience of, nor did ever reprove any man for its
Transgression.

And many more Arguments of the like nature may be added to prove the vanity of
Judaical Religion and obstinacy. When the Apostle wrote this Epistle, their
Apostasy was not yet arrived at this rock of offense; since their falling on
it, they have increased their blindness, misery, and ruin. Then they were
contented to try their cause by what God spoke to their Fathers in the
Prophets, which kept open a door of hope, and gave some advantages for their
Conversion, which are now shut up and removed, until God shall take this vail
away from their faces, that they may see to the end of the things that were to
be done away.

By this means principally have they for many generations both shut out the
secured themselves from Conviction. For what ever is taught and revealed in the
Scripture concerning the Person, Office, and Work of the Messiah, seeing they
have that which they esteem a Revelation of equal Authority herewithall,
teaching them a Doctrine quite of another nature, and more suited unto their
carnal Principles and Expectations, they will rather rest in any evasions, than
give way to the Testimony thereof. And whilst they have a firm persuasion, as
they have, received by the Tradition of many Generations, that the written Word
is imperfect, but an half Revelation of the mind of God, in its self
unintelligible, and not to be received or understood but according to the sense
of their Orall Law now recorded in their Talmuds, what can the most plain and
cogent Testimonies of it avail unto their Conviction? And this has been the
fatal way and means of the grand Apostasy of both Churches, Judaical and
Christian. How far that of the Jews was overtaken with it, in the days of our
Lords Conversation on the Earth, the Gospel does abundantly declare; and how
they have brought it unto its height, we have given now some brief account.
That of the Roman Church has been the very same, and has at length arrived
unto almost the same issue, by the same degrees. This some of them perceiving,
do not only defend the Pharisaical Opinion among the Jews, about the Orall Law
and Succession of their Traditions, as consonant to the pretensions of their
own Church, but also openly avow that a very great number of their several
respective Traditions are either the same, or that they nearly resemble one
another; as does expressly Josephus de Voysin in his Proaemium to the Pugio
fidei of Raimundus Martini. And because it is evident, that the same have been
the way and means, whereby both the Judaical and Roman Church have apostatized
and departed from the Truth, and that they are the same also whereby they
maintain and defend themselves in their Apostasy and refusal to return unto the
Truth, I shall (...), manifest their Consent and Agreement in this Principle,
about their Traditions and Authority of them, which have been the Ruin of them
both.

First, The Jews expressly contend that their Orall Law, their Mass of
Traditions was Moses on Mount Sinai, and partly added by him from Divine
Revelations which he afterward received. Hence the Authority of it with them
is no less than that of the Written Word, (which has all its Authority from
its Divine Original) and the usefulness of it is much more. For although they
cannot deny but that this and that particular Tradition, that is Practice,
Custom, or Exposition of any place of Scripture was first introduced,
expressed, and declared, at such or such seasons, by such Masters or Schools
amongst them, yet they will not grant that they were then first invented or
found out, but only that they were then first declared out of the Cabalistical
Abyss, wherein they were preserved from their first Revelation; as all of them
agree who have written any thing about the nature, propagation, and continuance
of their Orall Law.

And this is the persuasion of the Romanists about their Cabal of Traditions.
They plead them to be all of a Divine Original; partly from Christ, and partly
from his Apostles. What ever they have added unto the written Word, yea, though
it be never so contrary thereunto, still they pretend that it is part of the
Orall Law which they have received from them by living Tradition; Let one
Convention of their Doctors determine that Images are to be adored, another
that Transubstantiation is to be believed, a third add a New Creed with an
equal number of Articles unto the old, let one Doctor advance the Opinion of
Purgatory, another of Justification by Works; all is one, these things are not
then first invented, but only declared out of that unsearchable Treasure of
Traditions, which they have in their Custody. Had they not inlaid this
Persuasion in the minds of men, they know that their whole Fabric would of its
own accord have long since sunk into Confusion. But they highly contend at this
day, that they need no other Argument to prove any thing to be of an Heavenly
Extract and Divine Original, but that themselves think so, and practice
accordingly.

Secondly, This Orall Law being thus given, the Preservation of it, seeing
Moses is dead long ago, must be enquired after. Now the Jews assign a threefold
Depository of it. First, The whole Congregation; Secondly, The Sanhedrim, and
Thirdly, The High Priest. To this End they affirm, that it was three times
repeated upon the descent of Moses from Mount Sinai, as to what of it, he had
then received, and his after additions had the same promulgation. First, It was
repeated by himself unto Aaron; Secondly, By them both unto the Elders: and
Thirdly, By the Elders unto the whole Congregation; or as Maimonides in Jad
Chazakah, Moses delivered it unto Eleazar, Phineas and Joshuah after the Death
of Aaron, by whom the Consistory was instructed therein, who taught the People
as occasion did require. What the People knew of it is uncertain, but what they
did so, was quickly lost; The Consistory or great Sanhedrim (...), as they call
it, the House of Judgment, of Seventy and one, was more faithful in its
charge. Hence Rab. Moses in the same Book, Tractat, (...) of Rebels or
Transgressors, teaches us, (...), The great Consistory (or House of Judgment)
at Jerusalem was the foundation of the Orall Law; These are the Pillars of
Doctrine, from whom Statutes and Judgments went forth unto all all Israel. And
he afterward affirms, with what Truth may be easily judged (...), whilst this
great Cons^story continued, there was no dissension in Israel. For not only the
famous differences between Hillel and Shammai with their Disciples, which
involved all the Schools, Scribes and Lawyers, among them, arose and were
propagated whilst that Cons^story continued, but also the Atheistical Sect of
the Sadduces, rose unto that height and interest, as to obtain the
Presidentship in the Sanhedrim its self. But the High Priests are those whom
they fix upon as the principal Conservators of this Orall Law. To this End they
give us Catalogues of them from first to last, that by their uninterrupted
Succession, we we may be secured of the incorrupt preservation of their
Original Traditions. Only it may here be added by the way; that they bind not
themselves precisely in all their Religious Observances unto this Oral Law
whereunto they assign a Divine Original; but ascribe an Authority unto the
Sanhedrim and the High Priest, to constitute things of themselves in the
Worship of God besides and beyond the word. For whatever they pretend of their
Orall Law, when they come unto particular Instances they would fain educe the
Constitutions of it, from some Word, or Letter or manner of Interpretation of
the Scripture its self. But those Constitutions of the Consistory and Wisemen
they ascribe unto their own Authority.

Some of these are recounted by Maimonides in his Preface unto Jad Chazaka; as
the Reading of the Book or Roll of Esther with Fasting; lights on the Feast of
Dedication; The Fast on the seventh of Ab. or July; various Mixtures, and
Washings of hands; things plainly of that nature which our Lord Jesus condemned
amongst them. And it is observable how he frees them from transgressing that
Precept, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Thou shall not add unto this word, by this Constitution.
(...). For, says he, they say not that the holy blessed God has commanded
these things, that there should be such Mixtures, that the Book of Esther
should be read with fasting; for if they should say so, they should add to the
Law; but thus we speak, such and such a Prophet or the Consistory, commanded
and appointed, that the Book of Esther should be read with fasting to celebrate
the Glory of the Holy Blessed God in our Deliverance, and so of the rest. It
seems then they may add what they will of their own, so they entitle not the
Name of God to their Inventions; by which means they have set themselves at
liberty to multiply superstitious Observations at their pleasure, which they
had actually done in the days of our Savior, and thereby made the Law of God
of none effect.

In all these things are they followed and imitated by the Romanists. In the
same manner do they lay up the stock of their Traditions. In general they make
the Church the repository of them, although they do not so distinctly explain
the way and means whereby they were committed thereunto as the Jews do. Unto
the Sanhedrim, Councils are succeeded in the same Office. But their Nature,
Work, Authority, Assistance, and Use, are so variously disputed amongst them,
that nothing of certainty from them, or by them singly considered is to be
obtained. It is the High Priest, or Pope that is the Principal Conservator of
this Sacred Treasury of Traditions; Upon their Succession does the certainty of
them depend. And whilst there is a Pope at Rome, the knowledge of the new
Orall Law will not fail, as the Old one did not whilst the Jews had an High
Priest, though in the pursuit of it they Crucified the Messiah, and continue to
reject him unto this day. Besides, like the Jews, they content not themselves
with what they pretend to be of ancient Tradition, but assume a Power of making
new Constitutions in the things of God; whereby they would have us to think
they do not violate the prohibitions of adding, because they ascribe them not
unto the Word of God, but to the Authority of the present Church. Thus far
therefore they are fully agreed.

Thirdly, The Jews in favor and unto the Honor of these Traditions, affirm
that the written Word without them is imperfect, and not to be understood, but
as it is interpreted by them. This they are constant unto, and earnestly
contend for. Aben Ezra in his Preface to the Law, discourses at large of five
several ways of the Interpretation of it, but concludes at last that the whole
written Law of Moses is founded on the Orall; (...) says he, (...), and this
is a sign unto us, that the Law of Moses is founded on the Orall Law, which is
the joy of our hearts; so apt are they to rejoice in a thing of naught. To the
same purpose are the words of another Famous Master amongst them; Rabbi Bechai
in Cad. Hakkemach. (...). The Orall Law is the Foundation of the written, nor
can the Written Law be expounded but by the Oral.

By this being the Foundation of the Written Law, they intend that the sense of
it, is so enwrapped and contained therein, that without the Explications
thereof it cannot be understood. And to this End Manasse one of their late
Masters, expressly disputes that in many things it is defective, and in some
things redundant, so that it is not able to give us a full and clear direction
in the things of God, without their Traditional Explications; and in the
confirmation of his opinion, he instanceth in sundry Precepts and Prohibitions,
that he would prove so obscure, as that no Obedience can be yielded unto them
in a due manner without the help of the Cabala; which because for the most part
his Exceptions from them are Childish Cavils, and have been answered by others,
shall be here passed over. This they are arrived unto; this is the common
persuasion of them all, and we shall yet hear, what farther Progress they have
made. And herein are they imitated by their Successors. Their Orall Law also is
made by them the foundation of the Written.

As those Heretics of old, who having got some Sophistical Cavils about, Evil,
where ever they met with any one not of their mind, they presently fell upon
him with their Vnde malu^n; whence had evil its Original; so thinking to bring
them to the acknowledgement of two supreme Principles of things, a good one,
and a bad one.

Thus for the most part the first Question of a Romanist is, How do you know
the Scriptures to be the Word of God? and then the next word is, the Cabala,
the (...), Orall Law, Tradition, these are the Foundation of it; And in their
progress they fail not to assert two Principles both borrowed from the Jews.
First, That the Scripture is imperfect, and does not give us a full and
complete account of all things that are to be believed or practiced, that God
may be glorified, and our own souls saved. Secondly, That what is delivered
therein can no way be rightly and truly understood, but by the help of those
Traditions which they have in their custody. But although these are good
useful Inventions, and they are men that want not Ability to find out what is
conducing unto their own advantage, yet they cannot be allowed the Credit of
being their first Authors, seeing they are expressly borrowed of the Jews.

Fourthly, When these two Laws, the Law of God, and their own, do come in
competition, the Jews many of them do expressly prefer that of their own
invention before the other, and that both as to certainty, and use. Hence they
make it the foundation of their Church, and the only safe means to preserve the
Truth. So are we informed by Isaac Corbulensis in (...). Do not think, says
he, that the written Law is the Foundation; for the Foundation is the Orall
Law; For by that Law was the Covenant made, as it is written, according to
these words do I make a Covenant with thee. Exodus 34.27. (where he takes his
Argument from that Expression, (...), wresting foolishly, as they do all, his
Orall Law from those words, (...) which signify nothing but according to, nor
are any other words intended, but those delivered to Moses and written by him.)
And these, he adds, are the Treasures of the Holy Blessed God; For he knew that
Israel should be carried Captive among other People, and that the Nations would
transcribe their Books, and therefore would not commit their secret Law to
Writing.

It seems these things were left them in secret Tradition, because God was not
willing that any besides themselves, should know his Mind and Will; but they
have at last showed themselves more full of benignity toward mankind, than
they would allow God to be, in as much as they have committed this Secret Law
to Writing. And to this purpose is their Confession in (...); The Golden Altar;
(...); It is impossible for us to stand, or abide, upon the Foundation of our
holy Law, which is the written Law; unless it be by the Orall Law which is the
Exposition thereof. Wherein they not only declare their Judgments concerning
their Traditions, but also express the Reason of their obstinate adherence unto
them; which is that without it, they cannot maintain themselves in their
present Judaism. And so indeed is the case with them; innumerable Testimonies
of the Scriptures rising up directly against their Infidelity, they were not
able to keep their station, but by an horrible corrupting of them through their
Traditions. On this account it is a common thing with them in the advice they
give unto their Disciples, to prefer the Study of the Talmud, before the Study
of the Scripture, and the sayings of their Wise men before the sayings of the
Prophets; and plainly express an utter disregard of the Written Word, any
farther than as they suppose the sense of it explained in their Orall Law.
Neither are they here forsaken by their Associates. The principal design of all
the Books which have been lately published by the Romanists, and they have not
been a few; has been to prove the Certainty and Sufficiency of their
Traditions in matters of their Faith and Worship, above that of the Written
Word.

Fifthly, There are some few remaining among the Eastern Jews, who reject all
this Story concerning the Orall Law, and professedly adhere unto the Written
Word only. These the Masters of their present Religion and Persuasion do by
common consent brand as Heretics: calling them Scripturists, or
Scripturarians, or Biblists, the very name of reproach wherewith the Romanists
stigmatize all those who reject their Traditions. These are their (...), that
is Biblists or Scripturarians: and every where they term them (...) Heretics,
and endeavor to prove them guilty (...) of Heresy in the highest degree. Some
of them would have them to be the Offspring of the old Sadducees, to deny the
Resurrection, and the World to come, as men care not much usually what they
impute unto those whom they esteem Heretics. But the falsity hereof is
notorious, and so acknowledged by others, and confuted by the Writings of the
Karaeans themselves. Yea the Author of Cosri affirms that they are more
studious in the Law than the Rabbis; and that their Reasons were more weighty
than theirs, and lead more toward the naked sense of the Scripture. But this
is that which they charge upon them, namely that rejecting the sure Rule of
their Traditions, they run into singular, Expositions of the Law, and so
divided it, and made many Laws of it, having no certain means of Agreement
among themselves. So says Rabbi Jehuda Levita the Author of the forementioned
Cosri, (...). The Karaeans multiply Laws according to their own Opinion, which
he inveighs against them for, after he had commended them. And the same is
objected against them by Maimonides on Pirke Aboth. As though it were not
known, that the greatest part of their Talmud, the Sacred Treasury of their
Orall Law, is taken up with differences and Disputes of their Masters among
themselves, with a multitude of various Opinions, and contradictory conceptions
about their Traditions. Thus deal the Romanists also which their Adversaries,
this they charge them withal; They are Heretics, Biblists, and by adhering to
the Scripture alone, have no certainty among themselves, but run into
diversities of Opinions, as having deserted the unerring Rule of their Cabala;
when the world is filled with the noise of their own conflicts, notwithstanding
the pretended relief which they have thereby.

It remains that we consider how these Traditions come to be communicated unto
others, out of the secret Storehouse wherein Originally they were deposited.
This as I have elsewhere, and partly before declared, was by their being
committed unto writing by Rabbi Juda Hakkadosh, whose collections, with their
Expositions in their Talmud, do give us a perfect account, if we may believe
them, of that secret Law which came down unto them by Orall Tradition from
Moses. And something like hereunto is by the Romanists pretended. Many of their
Traditions they say, are recorded in the Rescripts of Popes, Decrees of
Councils, and Constitutions of the Canon Law, and the like sacred means of the
declaration of the Orall Instructions of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

But herein the Jews deal with us far more ingeniously than they. They tell us
plainly, that now their whole Orall Law is written, and that they have no
reserve of authentic Traditions not yet declared. Aust. lib. 2. Con. adver.
Leg. and Prophet. cap. 1.
So that where Austin says of his Adversaries Nescit habere praeter Scripturas
Legitimas and Propheticas, Judaeos quasdam traditiones suas quas non Scriptas
habent, sed memoriter tenent, and alter in alterum loquendo transfundit, quam
deuterosin vocant; either he knew not of the Mishnae, that was then written, or
this opinion of Secret Traditions, was continued, until the finishing and
promulgation of the Babilonical Talmud, which was sundry years after his Death.
But here the Romanists fail us; for although they have given us heaps upon
heaps of their Traditions, by the means before mentioned, yet they plead that
they have still an inexhaustible Treasure of them, laid up in their Church
stores, and Breast of their Holy Father, to be drawn forth at all times as
occasion shall require.

And thus have we taken a brief Prospect of the Consent of both the Apostatical
Churches, in that Principle which has been the means of their Apostasy, and
is the great Engine whereby they are rendered incurable therein.

Exercitatio VIII. The First Dissertation concerning the Messiah, proving him
to be promised of Old.
Principles presupposed in the Apostles Discourse in his Epistle to the
Hebrews. First, A Messiah promised from the Foundation of the World. Of the
Evil that is in the World. Of Sin and Punishment. Original and Entrance of
them. Ignorance of Mankind about them. The Sin and Fall of Adam. Their
Consequents. Jews Opinion about the Sin of Adam. Also of the Curse, and
corruption of Nature. Their sense of both at large evinced. God not unjust if
all mankind had perished in this condition. Instance of the Sin and Punishment
of Angels. Differences between the Sin of Angels and Man. Angels lost, Mankind
relieved. Evidences of that Deliverance. How attainable. Not by Men themselves.
Not by Angels. Nor the Law. That proved against the Jews. Their Fable of the
Law made before the World, with the occasion of it. The Patriarchs saved before
the giving of the Law. Observation of the Moral Precepts of the Law no means of
Relief, nor the Sacrifices of it. The New Covenant. God the Author of it. How
to be accomplished. The first Promise of it, Genesis 3.16. discussed. Sense of the
Jews upon it; manifested: Examined. Promise of a Deliverer, the Foundation of
all Religion in the World. The Promise renewed unto Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3.
Nature of it as given unto him. Testified unto and confirmed, Genesis 49.10. Numb.
24.17, 19. Job 19.25. Opened; with sundry other Places. End of the Separation
of the Posterity of Abraham unto ^ peculiar People and Church. This Deliverer
the MESSIAH. Denotation of the Word. The Person who.

WE proceed now unto our Principal intendment in all these Discourses; which
is the Consideration and Discussion of those great Principles, as of all
Religion in general, so of the Christian in particular, which the Ap^stle
supposes as the Foundation of his whole Treaty with the Hebrews, and which
Basis that he stands upon, in the management of his whole Design. For in all
Discourses that are Paraenetical, as this Epistle for the most part is, there
are always some Principles taken for granted, which give Life and Efficacy
unto the Exhortations in them, and whereinto they are resolved. For as to
persuade men unto particul^rs in Faith, Opinion or Practice, without a previous
conviction of such general Principles of Truth, as from which the Persuasions
used do naturally flow and arise, is a thing weak and inefficacious; so to be
exercised in the Demonstration of the Principles themselves, when the especial
End aimed, is to persuade, would bring confusion into all Discourse.

Wherefore although our Apostle do assert and confirm those dogmata and
Articles of Truth, which he dealt with the Hebrews in a way of Persuasion to
embrace; yet he supposes and takes for granted those more general (...), or
first Maxims, which are the Foundation both of the Doctrines and Exhortations
insisted on; as all skill in teaching does require. And these are those which
now we aim to draw forth and consider; being these that follow.

First, That there was a Messiah, or Savior of mankind from Sin and
Punishment, promised upon and from the first entrance of Sin into the World, in
whom all acceptable Worship of God was founded, and in whom all the Religion of
the Sons of men was to center.

Secondly, That this Messiah long before Promised, was now actually exhibited
in the world, and had finished the work committed unto him, when the Apostle
wrote this Epistle.

Thirdly, That Jesus of Nazareth was this Messiah, and that what he had done
and suffered, was the work and duty promised of old concerning him.

There is not a Line in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that does not virtually
begin and end in these Principles; not an Assertion, not a Doctrine, not an
Exhortation, that is not built on this Triple Foundation. They are also the
great Verities (...), of the Christian Profession or Religion. A sincere
endeavor therefore in their Explanation and Vindication, especially in these
days, wherein as on the one hand, there are various thoughts of heart, about
the Jews, their present condition and expectation, so on the other, there are
many who are ready with a presumptuous boldness (...), and to call in question
the fundamentals of all Religion, may not be unacceptable. Now the first of
these Principles, is at this day by several vain imaginations obscured by the
Jews, to their utter loss of all benefit by it, and has been so for many
Generations, although it were the Life and Soul of the Religion of their
forefathers, as shall be demonstrated; and the two latter are by them expressly
denied, and maliciously contended against. Here then we shall fix; and confirm
these Principles in the order wherein we have laid them down; declaring on
every one of them, the Conceptions and Persuasions of the Jews concerning the
promised Messiah, removing in the Close their Objections against the Faith of
Christians in this matter, in a peculiar Exercitation to that Purpose. And the
Confirmation, and Vindication of the first of these Principles, is that which
our present Discourse is designed unto.

Besides the Testimony of God himself in his Word, we have a concurrent
suffrage whole Creation, that man in the Beginning was formed, as in the Image,
so in the Favor of God, and unto his Glory. And as he was not liable unto any
evil which is the effect of Gods displeasure, nor defective in any Good,
necessary to preserve him in the condition wherein he was made, so he was
destitute of nothing that was any way requisite to carry him on unto that
farther enjoyment of God whereunto he was designed. Genesis 1. v. 26, 31.
Ecclesiast. 7. v. 29. For God being infinitely Good, Wise, Righteous, and
Powerful, creating man to know, love, honor, and enjoy him, and thereby to
glorify those Holy Properties of his nature, which exerted themselves in his
creation, (which that he did, the nature of those intellectual Perfections
wherewith He endowed him, does undeniably evince) it was utterly impossible
that either He should not delight in the work of his own hands, the effect of
his own Wisdom and Power, or not furnish him with those Faculties and Abilities
by which he might answer the Ends of his Creation. To suppose a Failure in any
of these, is contrary to the prime Dictates of Reason. For Infinite Wisdom can
do nothing in vain, nothing not perfectly suited unto the End whereunto it is
designed; Neither can Infinite Goodness allow of any defect in ought that
proceeds from it. Genesis 1. v. 31. God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very Good. Hence many Philosophers saw and granted, that the
First Cause in the Production of all things, did (...) proceed by such a
certain Reason and Way, as that every thing might both in its self and with
reference unto its own especial End, and also in Relation unto the Universe,
have its proper Rectitude and Goodness, sufficient unto its Station and
Condition. This (...) the Scripture calls, (...), Ephesians. 1. v. 11. The Counsel
of the Will of God; expressing a contemporation of absolute Sovereignty, and
Infinite Wisdom. And these uncontrollable Notions of Nature or Reason, cast men
of old into their entanglements about the Original of Evil. For this they
plainly saw, that it must be accidental and occasional, but where to fix that
Occasion they knew not. Those who to extricate themselves out of this
difficulty, fancied two Supreme Principles, or Causes, the one Author of all
Good, the other of all Evil, were ever exploded as Persons bidding defiance
unto all Principles of Reason whereby we are distinguished from the Beasts that
perish. This I say men generally discerned, that Evil, wherein it now lies,
could not have entered into the world, without a disturbance of that Harmony,
wherein all things at the beginning were constituted by Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, and some interruption of that dependence on God, from whence it did
proceed.

The very first Apprehensions of the Nature of God, and the Condition of the
Universe declare, that man was formed free from sin, which is his voluntary
subduction of himself from under the Government of his Maker, and free from
Trouble, which is the effect of his displeasure on that Subduction or
Deviation, in which two, the whole nature of Evil consists; so that it must
have some other Original.

Furthermore, In this first Effort of immense Power did God glorify himself,
as in the Righteousness whereby as the Supreme Rector and Governor of All, he
allotted unto his Rational Creatures, the Law of their Obedience, annexing a
Reward thereunto in a mixture of Justice and Bounty. For, that Obedience should
be rewarded is of Justice, but that such a Reward should be proposed unto the
temporary Obedience of a creature, as is the eternal enjoyment of God, was of
mere Grace and Bounty. And that things should have continued in the state and
condition wherein they were created, I mean as unto mankind, supposing an
accomplishment of the Obedience prescribed unto them, is manifest from the very
first notions we have of the nature of God; for we do no sooner conceive that
he is, but withal we assent that he is the Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, Heb. 11.6. which is essential unto him, and inseparable from his
Nature as the Sovereign Ruler of the works of his hands. And thus was the
continuance, of this Blessed State of the Creation of all things provided for;
and laid in a tendency unto farther Glory; being absolutely exclusive of any
distance between God and man, besides that which is natural, necessary, and
infinite, from their Beings. There was no sin on the one side, nor dissavour on
the other. And this secured the Order of the Universe. For what should cause
any confusion there, whilst the Law, of its Creation was observed, which could
not be transgressed by Brute and inanimate Creatures.

Reason it self with prudent Observation will discover, it has done so, unto
many contemplative men of old. The whole Creation groans out this complaint, as
the Apostle witnesses. Romans 8. v. 20, 21. and God makes it manifest in his
Judgments every day; Chap. 1. v. 18. That things were not made at first in
that state and condition wherein now they are, that they came not thus
immediately from the hand of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, is easily
discernable. God made not man to be at a perpetual quarrel with him, nor to
fill the world with tokens of his displeasure because of sin. This men saw of
old by the light of Nature; but what it should be that opened the Floodgates
unto all that Evil and Sin which they saw and observed in the world, they could
not tell. The springs of it indeed they searched after, but with more vanity
and disappointment, than those who sought for the Heads of Nilus. The Evils
they saw were Catholic and unlimited; and therefore not to be assigned unto
Particular Causes, and of any general one, proportioned unto their Production,
they were utterly ignorant. And this ignorance filled all their Wisdom and
Science with fatal mistakes; and rendered the best of their Discoveries, but
mere uncertain conjectures. Yea, the Poets who followed the confused Rumors of
Old Traditions, about things whose Original was Occasional and Accidental, give
us a better shadow of Truth, than the Philosophers, who would reduce them unto
general Rules of Reason, which they would no way answer* Post ignem aetherea
domo
Subductum, Macies and nova febrium
Terris incubuit Cohors:
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Lethi corripuit Gradum:
Horat. Car. lib. 1. Od. 3. is a better Allusion to the Original of Sin and
Punishment, than all the Disputations of the Philosophers will afford us.

attain unto, and which because they could not attain unto, they wandered in
all their Apprehensions about God and themselves, without Certainty or
Consistency, we are clearly acquainted withal by Divine Revelation. The sum
of it is briefly proposed by the Apostle; Romans 5. v. 12. By one man sin entered
into the World, and Death by Sin. Sin and Death are comprehensive of all that
is Evil in any kind in the world. All that is morally so, is sin; all that is
poenally so, is Death. The entrance of both into the World, was by the sin of
one man, that is Adam the common Father of us all. This the Philosophers knew
not, and therefore knew nothing clearly of the Condition of Mankind in relation
unto God. But two things does the Scripture teach us concerning this entrance
of Evil into the world.

First, The Punishment that was threatened unto, and inflicted on the
disobedience of Adam. Whatever there is of Disorder, Darkness or Confusion in
the nature of things here below, whatever is uncertain, irregular, horrid,
unequal, destructive in the Universe, what ever is poenal unto man, or may be
so in this Life, or unto Eternity, what ever the Wrath of the Holy Righteous
God revealing its self from Heaven, has brought, or shall ever bring on the
Works of his hands, are to be referred unto this head. Other Original of them
can no man assign.

Secondly, The moral corruption of the Nature of man, the Spring of all sin,
the other head of Evil proceeded Hence also. For by this means, that which
before was good and upright, is become an inexhaustible Treasure of Sin: And
this was the state of things in the World, immediately upon the Fall and Sin of
Adam.

Now the work which we assign unto the Messiah, is the Deliverance of Mankind
from this State and condition. Upon the Supposition and Revelation of this
Entran^e of Sin, and the Evil that ensued thereon, is the whole Doctrine of his
Office founded, as shall afterward more largely be declared. And because we
contend against the Jews, that he wa^ promised and exhibited for a Relief in
the Wisdom, Grace, and Righteousness of God against this sin and misery of
mankind, as our Apostle also expressly proves, Chap. 2. of his Epistle unto
them, this being denied by them, as that which would overthrow all their fond
imaginations about his Person and Office, we must consider what is their Sense
and Apprehension about these things, with what may be thence educed for their
own Conviction, and then confirm the Truth of our Assertion from those
Testimonies of Scripture which themselves own and receive.

The first effect and consequent of the sin of Adam was the punishment
wherewith it Jews neither can, nor do deny. Death was in the commination given
to deter him from his Transgression. (...), Genesis 2.17. Dying thou shall dye.
Neither can it be reasonably pretended to be singly Death unto his own Person
which is intended in that expression. The Event sufficiently evinceth the
contrary. What ever is, or might be Evil unto himself and his whole Posterity,
with the residue of the Creation, so far as he, or they might be any way
concerned therein, has grown out of this commination. And this is sufficiently
manifested in the first Execution of it, Genesis 3.16, 17, 18, 19. The Malediction
was but the Execution of the Commination. It was not consistent with the
Justice of God to increase the Penalty, after the sin was committed. The
threatening therefore was the Rule and measure of the Curse. But this is here
extended by God himself, not only to all the miseries of Man, ( Adam and his
whole Posterity) in this Life, in labor, disappointment, sweat and sorrow,
with Death under, and by virtue of the Curse, but to the whole Earth also, and
consequently unto those superior Regions and Orbs of Heaven, by whose
influence, the Earth is as it were governed and disposed unto the Use of Man.
Hos. 2. v. 21, 22. It may be yet farther enquired, what was to be the duration
and continuance of the Punishment to be inflicted in the pursuit of this
Commination and Malediction. Now there is not any thing in the least to
intimate that it should have a term prefixed unto it, wherein it should expire;
or that it should not be commensurate unto the existence or being of the
sinner. God lays the Curse on man, and there he leaves him, and that for ever*
A miserable life he was to spend, and then to dye under the Curse of God,
without hopes of emerging into a better condition. About his subsistence after
this Life, we have no controversy with the Jews. They all acknowledge the
immortality of the Soul; for the Sect of the Sadducees is long since extinct;
neither are they followed by the Karaeans in their Atheistical Opinions, as
has been declared. Some of them indeed incline unto the Pythagorean
Metempsuchosis, but all acknowledge the Souls Perpetuity.

Supposing then Adam to dye poenally under the Curse of God, as without
extraordinary Relief he must have done, the Righteousness and Truth of God
being engaged for the Execution of the Threatening against him, I desire to know
what should have been the State and condition of his Soul? Does either
Revelation or Reason intimate that he should not have continued for ever under
the same Penalty and Curse, in a state of Death, or Separation from God? And if
he should have done so, then was Death eternal in the Commination. This is that
which with respect unto the present effects in this life, and the punishment
due to sin, is termed by our Apostle, (...), 1 Thessalonians. 1. v. 10. the Wrath to
come, from whence the Messiah is the Deliverer.

Nor will the Jews themselves contend that the guilt of any sin respects only
temporal punishment. The Event of Sin unto themselves they take to be that
only, imagining their Observation of the Law of Moses, such as it is, to be a
sufficient Expiation of Punishment eternal. But unto all strangers from the
Law, all that have not a Relief provided, they make every sin mortal; and Adam,
as I suppose had not the Privilege of the Present Jews to observe Moses Law.
Wherefore they all agree, that by his Repentance he delivered himself from
Death eternal, which if it were not due unto his Sin he could not do; for no
man can by any means escape that, whereof he is in no danger. And this
Repentance of his, they affirm to have been attended with severe Discipline and
self maceration, intimating the greatness of his sin, and the difficulty of his
escape from the punishment due thereunto. So Rabbi Eliezer in Pirke Aboth. cap.
20. (...); On the first day of the Week Adam entered into the Waters of the
upper Gihon, until the Waters came unto his neck; and he afflicted himself
seven Weeks, until his Body became like a Sieve; And Adam said before the Holy
Blessed God, Lord of the whole World, let my sins I pray thee be done away from
me, and accept of my Repentance, that all Ages may know that there is
Repentance, and that thou will receive them that Repent and turn unto thee.
Hence also they tell us, that upon the Pardon of his sin, he sang a Song of
Praise unto the Lord on the Sabbath Day, which is mentioned in the Targum on
the Song of Solomon, chap. 1. v. 1. as one of the Songs in reference whereunto
that of Solomon is called, (...), the Song of Songs, or the most excellent of
them. And although indeed that expression, (...), dying thou shall dye,
according to the propriety of the Hebrew Tongue, denotes only the Certainty and
Vehemence of the Death threatened, in which case it uses reduplications; yet
some of them have not been averse to apprehend, a twofold death, of the Body,
and of the Soul, to be intimated in that expression; as Fagius on the place
well observes. Body and Soul they say both sinned, and therefore both were to
be punished. (...); If the flesh s^n without the spirit, why is the soul
punished? Is it one thing that sins, and another that is punished? or rather is
it not thus, that both sin together; and so both are justly punished together.

first Parents themselves, acknowledged by them. And the same is that of their
Posterity. What was threatened unto, what was inflicted upon those who first
sinned, they are all liable and obnoxious unto. Are they not all as subject
unto Death, as was Adam himself? Are the miseries of man in his labor, or the
sorrows of Women in Childbearing taken away? Is the Earth its self freed from
the Effects of the Curse? Do they not dye who never sinned after the similitude
of Adams Transgression? The Jews themselves grant that all death is poenal.
(...); There is no Death without Sin; no Punishment or Correction without
iniquity: It is the saying of R. Ame in the Talmud, Tractat. Sabbat. cited in
Sepher Ikharim, lib. 4. cap. 13. And this Principle M^imonides carries so high,
as to deny all (...), Correction of Love, affirming none to be of that mind,
but some Gaeonims deceived by the Sect of Muatzali. More Nebuch. p. 3. cap. 17.
And they who dye poenally under the Curse, abide in no other estate than that
mentioned. They acknowledge also the remainder of the Curse on the Earth its
self on the same account. (...). The whole World, says one of their Masters,
was not created but for man; and therefore after man sinned, it came short of
its first perfection. But these things being of some use for their Conviction,
as also to discover the perverse obstinacy of some of their later Masters, we
may a little more particularly take them along with us.

Adam was a common Head unto all mankind. So says Manasse Ben. Israel from
their Principles. Cum itaque esset Adam futurus caput and principium humanae
naturae, necesse erat illi a Deo conferri omnem perfectionem and scientiam: De
Fragilitate; page 34. Whereas Adam was to be the Head and Principle of humane
nature, it was necessary that God should endow him with all perfection and
knowledge. And this Perfection of his knowledge Aben Ezra on Genesis 12. proves
from Gods bringing all Creatures unto him to, give them Names according to
their Nature. And the same Author again in his Discourse de Termino Vitae. Aben
Ezra inquit nominibus propriis in Sacra Scriptura non praefigi (...), He
demonstrativum, quod tamen in voce Adam fit, Genesis 3.22. ratio est quia in Adamo
notantur omnes ejus posteri, and universa species humana designatur. Aben Ezra
says, that He Hajedia is not prefixed unto proper names in the Scripture; only
it is so unto the Word Adam, Genesis 3. v. 22. and the Reason is, because in Adam
all his Posterity, the whole Race of Mankind is denoted and signified. Now this
could not be, but by virtue of some Divine Constitution. For, naturally Adam
could have no other Relation to his Posterity than every other man has unto
his own. And this was no other but that Covenant which God made with all
mankind in him; whose Promises and Threatenings, Rewards and Punishments, must
therefore equally respect them with him.

Wherefore, Secondly, they grant that on this account, his Sin was imputed unto
all his Posterity. That is some of them do so, and those the most sober of
them. So Rabbi Menahem Rakanatensis in sec. Bereshith. etc. (...); It is no
wonder why the Sin of Adam and Eve was engraven and sealed with the Signet of
the King to be propagated unto all following Generations; For in the day that
Adam was created all things were finished, so that he was the Perfection and
Complement of the whole workmanship of this world. Therefore when he sinned the
whole world sinned, whose Sin we hear and suffer, which is not so in the Sin of
his Posterity. To be sealed with the Signet of the King, is their Expression of
Gods Constitution.

And these words are very consonant to those of our Apostle, Romans 5.12. As by
one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, so Death passed upon all
men, for that, or because in him all have sinned. To the same purpose speaks
the Targum on Eccles. 7. v. 29. in the Copies followed by the Jayan and London
Bibles; (for so the words are not in those of Buxtorf, nor the Biblia Regia)
God made the First man upright and innocent before him, but the Serpent and Eve
seduced him, (...), and gave cause why the day of Death should come on him and
all the Inhabitants of the Earth. And we can have no more Authentic Testimony
of the Apprehensions of their ancient Doctors, than what their Targums afford
us. And therefore Joseph Albo in Scher Itharim expressly concludes lib. 1. chap.
11. that all the punishments relating unto Adam and Eve for their first Sin
belong unto all mankind. And whereas they fancy that some Persons spent their
days without actual sin; at least any such as should deserve Death, they
charge their Death on the guilt of the sin of Adam. So the Targum on the last
Chapter of Ruth; And Hobed begat Jesse, who was called Nachash, and there was
no iniquity, or corruption in him for which he should be delivered into the
h^nd of the Angel of Death to take his soul from him; and he lived man^ days,
until the Counsel that the Serpent gave to Eve, abode before the Lord; and
upon that Couns^ll were all the inhabitants of the Earth made guilty of death,
and upon the a^^^unt of that sin dyed Jesse the Righteous. Lud. Capellus in his
Annotations on John 3. has an observation on this passage in the Targum, not
unworthy consideration. The J^ws call Jesus (...) without (...): which differs
little from (...); and so he may be here intended; for he may be called (...)
both because he was prefigured by the Brazen Serpent, and because the Names of
(...) and (...) are the same by Gematry, or in their Numeral Letters; a great
occasion amongst them to change the Names of Persons and things. And this they
might have from some Tradition which they understood not. The like Testimony we
have in Siphre; (...), Rabbi Jose the Galilean said, go forth and learn the
Merit of Messiah the King, and the reward of that Righteous One above the first
Adam, who had only Negative Precepts given unto him which he transgressed;
behold how many deaths befell him and his Generations, and the Generations of
his Generations, unto the End of all Generations. Answerable unto that of the
Apostle, Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men unto condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men unto the justification of Life.

And this Punishment of the Sin of Adam and Eve they grant to have been so
terrible, that they say, that in the day they were cast out of Paradise God
lamented over them. (...). Even as Adam and Eve when they were judged and cast
out of the Garden of Eden, and the Lord of the world lamented over them.
Targum, on Lamenta, chap. 1. v. 1. And to show also that the whole creation was
made subject unto Vanity upon the Sin of our first Parents, M^ses H^dd^rshan in
Bereschit Rabba on Genesis 3. v. 6. informs us, that Eve gave of the fruit of the
Tree which she took unto all the Beasts of the field, and Birds of the air,
(...) only, (which they interpret the Phaenix) excepted. The Truth indeed in
these Expressions is clouded with Fables and trifles; but they who are offended
at them may do w^ll to direct us unto Judaical Writers that are free from such
follies; and yet on th^se things do innumerable poor souls venture their
Eternal Condition, in an opposition to the blessed Gospel of the glorious God,

The later Masters I acknowledge are in this whole matter lubricous and
uncertain; satisfaction to be made by the sufferings of the Messiah from the
Doctrine of the Fall and Sin of Man. Hence Abarbinel in his Commentary on Isa.
53. expressly argues against those sufferings of the Messiah, from the
non-necessity of them with reference unto the Sin of Adam. They contend also
some of them that it was not so sorely revenged, as we plead it to have been.
Ask an Heretic (a Christian) says Lipman in his Nizzachon, how it can enter
into their hearts to think that God should use so great severity against the
Sin of Adam, that he should hold him bound for so small a matter, namely, for
the eating of an Apple, that he should destroy him in this world, and that to
come, and that not him only but all his Posterity.

But the blind Pharisee disputes not so much against us as against God himself.
Who was it that denounced death in case he so transgressed? Who was it that
pronounc^d him miserable, and the world accursed on the account thereof? Are we
to blame if the Jews are not pleased with the ways of God? Besides although to
eat an Apple be in its self but a small thing, yet to disobey the command of
the great God, is no such small matter as the Jew supposes; especially that
command which set boundaries unto that excellent condition, wherein Adam in the
right of all his Posterity was placed. But these Exceptions owe their Original
unto a discovery of the Tendency of that Truth, which otherwise as we have
showed they are convinced of; and which we have sufficiently cleared from the
Scripture.

Moral corrupti^n of Nature, the spring of all that evil of actual sin that is
in the world. And herein we have ^ full consent from the Jews, delivered after
their manner, both in the Tar^ums, Talmuds, and private Writings of their
principal Masters. For an Evil Concupiscence i^ the heart of man from his very
conception they generally acknowledge.

The name they give unto it, is (...) figmentum malum; the evil figment of the
Heart; properly enough, from Genesis 6. v. 5. And God saw that the wickedness of
man was great in the earth; (...), and th^^ (...) whole figment of the
thoughts, or computation of his heart, was only evil, eve^^ (...). Hence have
they taken their (...), a more proper name than that used by Christian Divines
of Originale Peccatum. And it is a ludicrous ignorance in some of the late
Rabbis, who profess themselves to deny Original Sin, as does the Author of the
Questions and Objections, published by Brenius, and others of them, and yet in
the mean time grant this Evil figment in all mankind, which was not in Ad^m in
his innocence. And hereunto they oppose that (...), that Good Concupis^ence,
which they fancy to come on every one at the Age of thirteen years, when he
becomes ^i^^us Praecepti, or liable unto the commands of God. The ^argumis^s
term it in the Cha^d^e Tongue, (...) to the same Purpose. And it is mentioned
by them, Psalm. 13.5. That (...), the Evil figment say not I have ruled over
him; instead of the Enem^; for it is the chief enemy of men. Twice also it is
mentioned in the Targum of Ps^^m 50. v. 14. (...) restrain the Evil figment,
and it shall ^e acc^unted b^f^re God as a Sacrifice. Doubtless none more
acceptable; and to the same purpose the words are also v. 23. And in Psalm
91.12. that thy foot stumble not at the evil figment which is like a stone.
That is, that it seduce thee not, that it cause thee not to offend, to stumble
and fall into sin. See James 1.14. And Psalm 119. v. 70. they call it
absolutely (...) the figment, or evil fomes, of the heart. (...); the figment
of their heart is made thick or hard as with fatness; an expression not unusual
in the Scripture to set out impenitency and security in sinning: Isa. 6.10. And
in Isa. 62. v. 10. they mention (...), the thought of lust, or of the figment;
which is that conceiving of it, mentioned by James, Chap. 1.14* For (...) is
the inward evil thoughts of the heart, or the first motion of sin. Moreover
they do not unfitly describe it by other property; as Eccles. 9.14. (...); The
evil figment or concupiscence which is like unto a great King; namely because
of its power; on which account in the New Testament it is said (...), to reign
as a King, because of the subjection unto it, (...), in the Lusts or
Concupiscence of the heart, Romans 6.12. and (...), or to have Dominion. v. 14.
which is to the same purpose with that of the Targumist; evil concupiscence is
like a great King. And this Testimony we have given unto this Moral corruption
of nature in the Targums, the most ancient Records of the Judaical
Apprehensions about these things, that are now extant, or have been so for many
Ages.

Talmudists have expressed the same thoughts about this inbred and indwelling
sin; and to set forth their conceptions about it, they have given it several
names not unsuited unto those descriptions of it, which are given us by the
Holy Ghost in the New Testament. As,

First, They call it (...), that is, malum Evil; a Name as they say given by
God himself; Genesis 8.21. Hence is that Observation of R. Moses Haddarshan, from
R. Jose in Bereshith Rabba; (...), Sad, or dark is that Mass against which he
that made it gives Testimony that it is Evil; and our Masters affirm that
naught is that plant, which he that planted it witnesses to be Evil. And in
answer hereunto it is termed in the New Testament, (...), that sin, that Evil
thing that dwells in us: Romans 7.

Secondly, They say, that Moses calls it, (...), praeputium, or
uncircumcision, Deuteronomy. 10.16. And therefore in Tract. Sand. cap. 11. to the
Question, when an Infant may be made partaker of the World to come, Ka. Nachman
the Son of Isaac answers, (...), presently after he is circumcised;
Circumcision being admitted of old, as the sign of the taking away by Grace of
the natural evil figment of the heart. And in Answer hereunto, it is called by
our Apostle (...), or Uncircumcision; Col. 2.13.

Thirdly, They say, David calls it (...) an Unclean thing. This they draw from
Psalm 51. v. 12. by the Rule of Contraries, a great Guide in their Expositions.
Create in me a Clean Heart O God; whence it appears that the Heart of its self
is unclean. And the Apostle gives it us under the same Name and Notion, 1 These.
4. v. 7. 1 Cor. 7. v. 14.

Fourthly, Solomon as they suppose calls it (...) an Enemy or Hater, Prove. 25.
v. 21. How properly they gather this name from that place, ipsi viderint; This
I know that to the same purpose it is called in the New Testament, (...),
Enmity, or Hatred; Romans 8.7. and all the Effects of Enmity, or actings of an
Enemy, (...), are ascribed unto it, 1 Pet. 2.11.

Fifthly, Isaiah calls it (...), the offense, or stumbling block, Isa. 57.17.
(...), Romans 5.18. See James Chap. 1. v. 14, 15. The cause of our stumbling and
falling.

Sixthly, Ezekiel calls it, (...), a stone, chap. 36. v. 26. The Reason of this
Appellation is commonly known; neither does any Allusion better set out the
nature of it from its Effects. (...), an hard and impenitent heart, Romans 2. v.
5.

Seventhly, Joel calls it, as they say, (...), that hidden thing, chap. 2.20.
for so they interpret (...) in that place; whereby they seem to intend that
Darkness and Deceitfulness, which are often ascribed unto it, in the New
Testament. And these names they largely Comment upon. Now though I shall not
justify their deduction of them, from the places mentioned, which yet some of
them are proper enough unto their purpose; yet, as was said, the Names
themselves seem not unsuitable unto that description of it which we have in the
New Testament. Besides they speak elsewhere to the same purpose. In Neve Shalom
lib. 10. cap. 9. They term it (...), the defilement of the Serpent; See 2 Cor.
11.3. and (...), from Eccles. 4. v. 13. An old and foolish King; So is that
place interpreted in Midrash Coheleth. And this as we observed before answers
what we are taught in the New Testament, concerning the Reign and Dominion of
Sin; as also the Name given it by the Apostle, of (...), the Old Man; both
being comprised in that expression, an old and foolish King, though the Text be
wrested by them in their usual manner. And they give a tolerable Reason in the
same place, of this Appellation of the Old Man; because say they, it is joined
unto a man in his infancy, continuing with him unto his Old Age; but the (...),
that is, the New man, or Good concupiscence comes not on our nature until the
Age of thirteen years; so the Midrash, feeling in the dark after that supply of
of Grace, which is so clearly revealed in the Gospel. And in Tractat. Sandrim.
fol. 91. they ask this Question; (...), from what time does the Evil
Concupiscence bear rule in a man? from the Time of his birth, or from the time
of his forming in the Womb? Rabbi answered from the time of his conception and
forming in the Womb. And this Kimchi, on Psalm 51. illustrates by a similitude,
not altogether impertinent. As, says he, He that sows a bitter Berry, that
bitterness becomes natural unto the Tree and Fruit that grows thereon. And
this Concupiscence which is in the heart of man from his Conception, they
acknowledge to have proceeded Originally from the Sin of our first Parents, for
if it were implanted in him at his Creation, it cannot be avoided but that God
himself must be assigned as the Principal efficient Cause of all Moral Evil.

Unto this purpose speaks their late Master in his Preface to his Book de
Fragilitate. Haec vitiositas, says he, ex primorum Parentum profecta crimine
contagioque, invasit utramque animae rationalis facultatem, mentem, qua
apprehendimus, and voluntatem qua appetimus; This vitiosity and contagion
proceeding from the Sin of our First Parents, has invaded both the faculties
of our Rational Souls, both the Understanding and the Will. And for the
continuance of this Evil, or its abode in us, they express it in Bereshith
Rabba; (...), so long as the Righteous live they wage War with their
concupiscence. And they variously set forth the growth of it, where it is not
corrected by Grace. At first they say, it is like a Spiders thread, but at last
like a Cartrope; from Isa. 59. v. 5. and Chap. 5. v. 18. And again, in the
beginning it is like a stranger, then as a Ghest, but lastly as the Master of
the House; see James 1.14, 15. And according to their wonted manner on Genesis 4.
v. 7. where (...) of the Masculine Gender is joined with (...) of the
Foeminine, they observe: in Bereshith Rabba: sec. 22. (...), at first it is
like a woman, but afterward it waxes strong like a man.

Testimonies of this nature, from the Writings that are of Authority amongst
them, might be produced, but that these are sufficient unto our Purpose. That
we aim at, is to evidence their Conviction of that manifold misery which came
upon mankind, on the Entrance of Sin into the world. And two things we have
produced their Suffrage and Consent unto.

First, The Change of the Primitive Condition of Man, by his Defection from the
Law of his Creation. This made him obnoxious in his whole Person and all his
Concernments to the displeasure and Curse of God, to all the Evil which in this
world he feels, or fears in another; to Death Temporal and Eternal. And hence
did all the disorder which is in the Universe arise. All this we have found
them freely testifying unto. And this must be acknowledged by all men, who will
not brutishly deny what their own Consciences dictate unto them, and which the
condition of the whole lower world proclaims, or irrationally ascribe such
things unto God, as are utterly inconsistent with his Wisdom, Goodness,
Righteousness, and Holiness. And,

Secondly, We have manifested their acknowledgement, that a Principle of Sin,
or Moral Evil, has invaded the nature of man; or that from the sin of our
first Parents, there is an Evil Concupiscence in the heart of every man,
continually and incessantly inclining the Soul unto Operations suitable unto
it; that is unto all Moral Evil whatever. From both these it unavoidably
follows, on the first Notions of the Righteousness, Holiness, Veracity, and
Faithfulness of God, that mankind in this estate and condition, can justly
expect nothing, but a confluence of Evil in this world, and at the close of
their Pilgrimage, to perish with a Ruin Commensurate unto their Existence. For
God having in Wisdom and Righteousness, as the Sovereign Lord of his Creature,
given them a Law, good, just, and equal, and having appointed the Penalty of
Death and his everlasting displeasure therein unto the Transgression thereof;
and withal having sufficiently promulgated both Law and Penalty, (all which
things we have before demonstrated) the Transgression prohibited actually
ensuing, God himself being Judge, it remains that all this Constitution of a
Law, and threatening of a penalty was vain and ludricous, as Satan in the
Serpent pretended, or that mankind is rendered absolutely miserable and cursed,
and that for ever. Now which of these is to be concluded, Divine Revelation in
the Scripture, Reason, and the Event of things, will readily determine.

remediless in this Condition, is manifest, both from what has been discoursed
concerning the means whereby they were brought into it, and his dealing with
Angels on the like occasion. The condition wherein man was created, was morally
good and upright; the state wherein he was placed outwardly happy and blessed;
the Law given unto him, just and equal, the Reward proposed unto him, glorious
and sure, and his Defection from this condition voluntary. What shall we say
then, is God unjust who inflicteth Vengeance? God forbid. The Execution of a
Righteous Sentence, upon the voluntary Transgression of a Law just and equal,
has no unrighteousness in it. And this was the sum of what God did in this
matter, as to the misery that came on mankind. And who should judge Him, if he
left him for ever to eat of the fruit of his own ways, and to be filled with
his own devices? He had before, as expressed his Power and Wisdom, so satisfied
his Goodness and Bounty in his Creation, with his endowments, and enjoyments
according unto the Law thereof; and what could man look for farther at his
hands?

Hence Adam when his eyes were opened to see the nature of Evil in that actual
sense which he had in his Conscience of the guilt that he had contracted, had
not the least Expectation of Relief or Mercy. And the folly of the course which
he took in hiding himself, argues sufficiently both his present Amazement, and
that he knew of nothing better to betake himself unto. Therefore does he give
that account of the Result of his thoughts, as unto the Relation that was
between God and him, and what only he now looked for from him, I heard thy
voice, and was afraid. Neither would any Revelation that God had then made of
himself, either by the Works of his Power and Wisdom, or by any inbred
impressions on the souls of men concreated with them, give encouragement unto
them that had sinned against him to expect Relief. Besides He had dealt thus
with Angels. Upon their first Sin, he spared them not, but at once without hope
of Recovery cast them under the Chains of Darkness to be kept unto the final
Judgment of the last day. This our Apostle discourses unto the Hebrews; chap.
2. Now God dealt not unsuitably unto any of the Excellencies of his Nature,
when he left the Apostatizing Angels to perish without Remedy unto Eternity.
Had he dealt so also with Apostatizing Mankind, who were drawn into a
conspiracy against him by the Head of the Defection, his ways had been Holy
and Righteous.

Yet does not this great Instance of Gods dealing with Angels absolutely
conclude his justly do so, but thence it does not follow that necessarily he
must so do. And although the chief, and indeed only Reason of his extending
Grace and Mercy unto Men, and not unto Angels, was his own Sovereign Will and
Pleasure, concerning which who can say unto him, What do thou? yet there was
such a difference between these two sorts of Original Transgresso^s, as may
manifest a Condecency or suitableness unto his Righteousness and Goodness in
his various proceeding with them. For there are sundry things that put an
Aggravation on the Rebellion of Angels above that of man; and some that render
their ruin less destructive unto the Glory of the Universe, than that of
mankind would have been. For,

First, The Angels were created in an estate and condition, much superior
unto, and more excellent than that of Man; and so likewise were their present
or actual enjoyments far above his, though they also were admirable and
blessed. The place of their first Habitation which they left, Jude 6. was the
Highest Heavens, the most glorious receptacle of created Beings; in opposition
whereunto they are said to be cast into the lowest Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. Whereas
Man was placed in the Earth, which although then beautiful and excellently
suited to his condition; yet was every way inferior unto the glory and luster
of the other, which God so had Garnished by his Spirit, Job 26.13. and which
for its curious Excellency is called the Work of his Fingers, Psalm 8.3. And in
these different places of their Habitation,

Secondly, Their several Employments also did greatly differ; The work of
Angels was immediately to attend the Throne of God, to minister before him, and
to give glory unto him, and to execute the Commands of his Providence in the
Government of the works of his hands; Psalm. 68. v. 17. Dan. 7. v. 10. Ezekiel.
1.5, 6, 7. Heb. 1.14. Revel. 5.11. the highest pitch of Honor that a mere
creature can be exalted unto. Man during his natural life was to be employed in
tilling and dressing of the Ground, Genesis 2.16. a labor that would have been
easy, useful, and suitable unto his condition, but yet in honor, advantage,
and satisfaction, unspeakably beneath the Duty of the Others.

Thirdly, Their Enjoyments also greatly differed. For the Angels enjoyed the
immediate glorious Presence of God, without any external created resemblances
of it; when man was kept at a greater Distance, and not admitted unto such
immediate communion with God, or enjoyment of his Glorious Presence. Now all
these, and the like Considerations, although on the one side they do not in the
least extenuate or excuse the sin and crime of Man in his Apostasy, yet they
greatly aggravate the Wickedness, Ingratitude and Pride of the Angels.

Moreover, they differed in their Intellectual Perfections, whereby they were
enabled to discern the Excellencies, and to know the mind of God. For although
man had all that Light, Knowledge and Wisdom concreated with him, and so
natural unto him, which were any way needful to enable him unto a right and
due performance of the Obedience required of him, in the Observance whereof he
should have been brought unto the Enjoyment of God; yet it came far short of
that Excellency of Understanding, and that piercing Wisdom which was in those
Spiritual Beings, which they were endowed withal to fit them for that near
contemplation of the glory of God whereunto they were admitted, and that ready
Apprehension of his mind which they were to observe. And as these were in
themselves, and ought to have been improved by themselves, as blessed means of
preserving them in their Obedience, so being despised and neglected they were a
great Aggravation of the Wickedness of their Apostasy.

There was likewise (Fifthly) a difference in the manner of their Defection.
Man was circumvented by the Craft and Policy of the Angels, who were made
before him, and sinned before him. And this, although He was furnished with an
Ability and Power to have rejected and overcome, yet it had that influence into
his Sin and Fall, that the Holy Ghost affirms that our first Parents were
SEDUCED, or deceived, 1 Timothy 2.14. 2 Cor. 11.3. and therefore calls Satan
their Murderer, John 8.34. But the Angels had nothing without them to excite,
provoke, or lay snares for them; but of their own Voluntary Choice, and mere
motion of their own mind, in the Exercise of that Freedom of their Wills which
was bestowed on them for their own honor and advantage in their Obedience,
left their stations, and set up themselves in a way of Opposition unto their
Creator, who had exalted them above their companions, newly brought out of the
same Nothing with themselves, into a condition of the highest created Glory
imaginable.

Again (Sixthly) although the condition of mankind being to be propagated by
natural Generation from one common Stock, made it necessary that our First
Parents should have a greater Trust reposed in them, by Reason of their
Representation of their whole Posterity in that Covenant wherein they stood
before God, than any Angel could have, seeing they stood every one, only in his
own name, and for himself; yet they were but two persons that actually sinned
at first, and those one after another, one seduced by another; whereas the
Angels in multitudes inconceivable, by a joint conspiracy at the same instant
combined together against the Authority and Law of their Creator; and as it
should seem appointed one among themselves for the Head of their Apostasy. Now
although, as was said, none of those things can, or do in the least extenuate
the sin of man, which was the product of inconceivable infidelity and
ingratitude, yet they contain such Aggravations of the Sin of Angels, as may
evidence a condecency unto Divine Wisdom and Goodness, in passing them by in
their sin and misery unto Eternity, and yet giving Relief unto mankind.

Lastly, We may add unto what has been spoken the concernment of the glory of
God in the Universe. For if man had been left for ever without Relief, the
whole race or kind of Creatures, partakers of Humane Nature, had been utterly
lost; nothing of that kind could ever have come unto the Enjoyment of God, nor
could God have ever been glorified by them in a way of Thankfulness and Praise,
which yet was the End why he made that sort of Creatures. For the whole race of
them as to the Event would have been mere Objects of Wrath and Displeasure. But
in the Fall of Angels, they were only a certain number of individuals, that
sinned, the whole kind was not lost as to the first End of their Creation.
Angelical Nature was preserved in its orderly dependence on God, in those
millions that kept their Obedience, and Primitive condition thereon, which is
continued unto them with a superaddition of Glory and Honor, as shall be
elsewhere declared. God then having made himself two Families unto his Praise,
amongst whom he would dwell, that above of Angels, and this below of mankind,
had sinning Man, which was the whole Creation participating in Humane Nature,
been utterly cast off, one Family had been lost for ever, though so great a
Remnant of the other was preserved. Wherefore, as we shall afterward see, it
seemed good unto his Infinite Wisdom, as to preserve that Portion of his
Superior Family which sinned not, so to recover a portion of that below, and
to make them up into one Family in one New Head, his Son Jesus Christ, in whom
he has now actually gathered into One, all things that are in Heaven and Earth
unto his Praise and Glory, Ephesians. 1.10. It appears then that no certain
conclusion can hence be drawn, that man is left remediless in his Sin and
Misery, because Angels are so; seeing that although the whole Cause of the
difference made is to be referred unto the Sovereign Will, Wisdom and Pleasure
of God, yet there is that appearing unto Reason, which manifests a suitableness
unto his Excellencies in the distinction to be put between them.

Necessary Reason inducing us to believe, that God has left all mankind to
perish in their sin and misery under the Curse without any provision of a
Remedy; yea, there are on the other side Evidences many and certain, that there
is a Way provided for their Recovery. For,

First, The Glorious Properties of the Nature of God whose Manifestation and
Exaltation in all the works that outwardly are of him, he designeth, do require
that there should be Salvation for Sinners. Even this matter of the Salvation
of Sinners conduces, yea is necessary unto the manifestation of some of those
Divine Excellencies, wherein no small part of the glory of God does consist.
God had in the Creation of all things glorified his Greatness, Power, Wisdom
and Goodness. His Sovereignty, Righteousness, and Holiness, he had in like
manner revealed in that Holy Law which he had prescribed unto Angels and Men
for the Rule of their Obedience, and in the Assignation of their Reward. Upon
the Sin of Angels and Men, he had made known his Severity and Vindictive
Justice, in the Curse and Punishment inflicted on them. But there were yet
remaining undiscovered in the Abyss of his Eternal Essence, Grace, and
Pardoning Mercy, which in none of his Works had as yet exerted themselves, or
manifested their Glory. And in case no Remedy be provided for mankind under the
Evils mentioned, and their utter ruin, as they must have perished accordingly,
so those glorious Properties of the nature of God, all ways of exerting their
proper and peculiar Acts being secluded, all objects of them removed, could not
have been equally glorified with his other Holy Attributes. The creatures know
nothing in God, but as it manifested in its Effects. His Essence in its self
dwells in Light inaccessible. Had never any stood in need of Grace or Mercy, or
doing so, had never been made partakers of them, it could not have been known
that there was that kind of Goodness in his Nature, which yet it is his design
principally to glorify himself in. The necessity therefore of the
Manifestation of these Properties of God, his Goodness, Grace, Mercy, and
Readiness to Forgive, which can only be exercised about sinners, and that in
their Relief and Salvation from Sin and Misery do require that the Deliverance
enquired after be admitted and justly expected. And this Expectation is so much
the more just and firmly grounded in that there is nothing in himself which the
Lord more requires our Conformity unto himself in, than in this Condescension,
Goodness, Grace, and Readiness to forgive, which manifests how dear the glory
of them is unto him.

Secondly, To what End shall we conceive the Providence and Patience of God to
be exercised toward the Race of Mankind, for so long a season in the Earth? We
see what is the general Issue and Event of the continuance of Mankind in the
world; God saw it and complained of it long ago, Genesis 6. v. 5, 6. Shall we now
think that God has no other Design in his Patience toward mankind for so many
Generations, but merely to suffer them All, and Every one without exception, to
sin against him, dishonor him, provoke him, that so He may at length
everlastingly destroy them? That this indeed is the Event with many, with the
most, through their own perverse wickedness, blindness, and love of the
pleasures of sin, cannot be denied. But to suppose that God has no other
design at all, but merely by his Patience to forbear them awhile in their
folly, and then to avenge himself upon them, is unsuitable unto his Wisdom and
Goodness. It cannot be then, but that he would long since have cut off the
whole Race, if there were no way for them to be delivered out of this perishing
condition. And although this way what ever it be, is not Effectual toward All,
yet for their sakes toward whom, through the grace of God it is, and shall be
so, is the Patience of God exercised toward the whole Race of Mankind, and
their Being is continued in this world. Other Reason of this Dispensation of
Divine Wisdom and Goodness can none be assigned.

Thirdly, That there is a way of Diliverance for Mankind, the Event has
manifested in two remarkable and undeniable Instances.

First, In that sundry Persons who were as others by nature children of Wrath,
and under the Curse, have obtained an undoubted and infallible interest in the
love and favor of God, and this Testimony that they pleased him. What were the
Assurances they had hereof, I shall not now debate. But I take it now for
granted, which may be farther confirmed as occasion shall require, that some
Persons in all Generations, have enjoyed the Friendship, Love and Favor of
God; which they could never have done, unless there had been some way for their
Deliverance out of the state of Sin and Misery before described. For therein
every man upon a just account will find himself in the state of Adam, who when
he heard the voice of God was afraid.

Secondly, God has been pleased to require from men a Revenue of Glory by a
way of Worship prescribed unto them after the Entrance of sin. This he has not
done unto the Angels that sinned; nor could it have been done in a consistency
with Righteousness unto men without a Supposition of a Possibility of
Deliverance from under his Wrath. For in every Prescription of Duty, God
proposes himself as a Rewarder, which he is only unto them that please him;
and to please God without the Deliverance enquired after is impossible. Besides
that God is actually glorified in the world, by the Way of Worship required on
this supposition, shall be elsewhere declared, and Arguments added in full
measure to confirm our Assertion. Deliverance then from this condition may on
just grounds be expected; and how it might be effected, is our next Enquiry.

men themselves, or by some other for them. What they can do themselves herein
we may be quickly satisfied about. The nature of the Evils under which they
suffer, and the Event of things in the world sufficiently discover the
disability of men to be their own Deliverers. Besides, who should contrive the
way of it, for them? One Single Person, More, or All? How easily the
impossibility of it might be demonstrated on any of these suppositions, is too
manifest to be insisted on. The Evils suffered under, are of two sorts, both
Universal and Eternal. The first is that of Punishment, inflicted from the
Righteousness of God.

There are but two ways possible (setting aside the Consideration of what
shall be afterward fixed on) whereby mankind, or any individual Person amongst
them, may obtain deliverance from this Evil: And the first is, that God without
any further consideration should remit it, and exempt the Creation from under
it. But although this way may seem possible unto some, it is indeed utterly
otherwise. Did not the sentence of it proceed from his Righteousness, and the
Essential Rectitude of his Nature* Did he not engage his Truth and
faithfulness, that it should be inflicted? and does not his Holiness and
Justice require that so it should be? What should become o^ his glory, what
would he do unto his great name, if now without any Cause or Reason he should
contrary unto all these engagements of his Holy Perfections, wholly ren^^ and
take it off? Nay, this would plainly justify the Se^pent in his Calumny, that
what ever he pretended, yet indeed that no Execution of his Threatening would
ever ens^^. How also can it be supposed that any of his future C^mminations
should have a just weight upon the souls of men; if that first great and
fundamental one should be frustrated and evacuated? or what Authority would be
left unto his Law, when he himself should dissolve the Sanction of it? Besides
if God should do thus, which Reason, Revelation, and the Event of things do
manifest that he neither would nor c^u^d, (for he cannot deny himself) this
would have been his work, and not an acquisition of men themselves, which we
are now enquiring, after. So that this way of deliverance, as it is but
imaginary, so it is here of no consideration.

There is no other way then for man, if he will not perish eternally under the
punishment due unto his Apostasy and Rebellion, but secondly to find out some
way of Commutation, or making a Recompense for the Evil of sin unto the Law and
Righteousness of God. But herein his utter insufficiency quickly manifests it
self. What ever he is, or has, or can pretend any Interest in, lies no less
under the Curse than he does himself. And that which is under the Curse can
contribute nothing unto its removal. That which is in its whole Being
obnoxious unto the greatest Punishment, can have nothing wherewithal to make
Commutation for it. For that must first be accepted in, and for its self, which
can either make Atonement, or be received for any other in Exchange. And this
is the condition of man, and of every individual of mankind, and will be so to
Eternity, unless Relief arise from another place. It is farther also evident,
that all the endeavors of men must needs be unspeakably disproportionate unto
the Effect and End aimed at, from the concernment of the other parts of the
Creation in the Curse against sin. What can they do to restore the Universe
unto its first Glory and Beauty? How can they reduce the Creation unto its
Original Harmony? Wherewith shall they recompense the Great God for the
defacing of so great a portion of that impress of his Glory and Goodness that
he had enstamped on it? In a word, they who from their first date unto their
utmost Period are always under the Punishment, can do nothing for the total
removal of it. The Experience also of five thousand years has sufficiently
evinced, how insufficient man is to be a Savior unto himself. All the various
and uncertain motions of Adam's Posterity in Religion, from the Extremity of
Atheism unto that of Sacrificing themselves and one another have been destined
in vain, toward this End. Neither can any of them to this day, find out a
better, or more likely way for them to thrive in, than those wherewith their
Progenitors deluded themselves. And in the Issue of all we see, that as to what
man has been able of himself to do toward his own Deliverance, both himself
and the whole world, are continued in the same state wherein they were upon the
first Entrance of Sin cumulated as it were with another world of Confusion,
Disorder, Mischief and Misery. There is also another head of the Misery of man,
and that is the corrupt spring of Moral Evil that is in his nature. This also
is Universal and Endless. It mixeth its self with all, and every thing, that
man does, or can do, as a Moral Agent, and that always, and for ever, Genesis 6.
v. 5. It is then impossible that it should have an end, unless it do either
destroy, or spend its self. But seeing it will do neither of these, ever
sinning; which man cannot but be, is not the way to disentangle himself from
sin.

If then any Deliverance be ever obtained for mankind, it must be by some other
involved in the same misery with themselves. This must either be God himself or
good Angels. Other Rational Agents there are none. If we look to the latter, we
must suppose them to undertake this work either by the Appointment of God, or
upon their own Accord, without his previous Command or Direction. The latter
cannot be supposed. They knew too much of the Majesty, Holiness, and Terror of
the great God to venture on an interposition of themselves upon his Counsels
and Ways, uncommanded. To do so would have been a sinful dissolution of the
Law of their Creation. So much also they might discern of the work its self, as
to stifle unto Eternity, every thought of engaging themselves into it. Besides
they knew the Will of God, by what they saw come to pass. They saw his Justice
and Holiness glorified in the Evils which he had brought upon the world. That
He would not for ever satisfy himself in that Glory, they knew not. And what
was man unto them, that they should busy themselves to retrive him from that
condition whereinto he had cast himself by sin, finding Him glorified therein,
in conformity unto whose will their Happiness and Perfection does consist? As
remote as men are from thoughts of recovering Fallen Angels, so far were they
contriving the Recovery of Man.

But it may be said, the God himself might design them to work out the
Salvation and deliverance enquired after, as was before supposed. But this
makes God, and not them to be the Savior, and them only the Instruments in the
Accomplishment of his work. Neither yet has he done so, nor were they meet so
to be employed. What ever is purely poenall in the misery of man is an Effect
of the Righteous Judgment of God. This, as we have manifested could be no
otherwise diverted from him, but by the undergoing of it, by some other in his
stead. And two things are required in him, or them that should so undergo it.
First, That they were not themselves obnoxious unto it, either Personally, or
upon the first common account: Should they be so, they ought to look to their
own concernment in the first place. Secondly, that they were such, as that the
Benefit of their Undergoing that Penalty, might according to the Rules of
Justice redound unto them, for whom, and in whose stead they underwent it;
otherwise they would suffer in vain. Now although the Angels might answer the
first of these in their Personal immunity from obnoxiousness unto the Curse,
yet the latter they were unsuited for. They had no Relation unto mankind, but
only that they were the Workmanship of the same Creator. But this is not
sufficient to warrant such a substitution. Had Angels been to be delivered,
their Redemption must have been wrought in the Angelical Nature, as the Apostle
declares, Heb. 2. v. 16. But what Justice is it that Man should sin, and Angels
suffer? or from whence should it arise that from their suffering it should be
Righteous, that he should go free? By what notions of God could we have been
instructed in the Wisdom and Righteousness of such a Proceeding? Add hereunto,
that this God has not done, and we may safely conclude, that it became him not
so to do.

But what need all this Enquiry? The Jews with whom we principally have to do
Delivery out of this condition. And this is, by the observation of Moses's Law.
By this they say, they are justified in the sight of God, and have Deliverance
from all wrath due unto sin. This they trusted in of old; Romans 9. v. 32. this
they continue to make their Refuge at this day. Spiritualis liberatio solummodo
dependet ab Observatione legis quam Deus in monte Sinai promulgavit. Spiritual
Deliverance depends solely on the Observation of the Law which God
promulgated on Mount Sinai, says the Author of the Answers unto certain
Questions proposed to the Jews, Quest. 5. published by Brenius, who in his
reply has betrayed unto them the most important Doctrines of the Christian
Religion. But this is their Persuasion. The giving of this Law unto them, they
suppose to have freed them utterly from every thing in the condition before
described, so far as they will acknowledge it to concern any of the Posterity
of Adam. And whereas they cannot deny but that they sometimes sin against the
Moral Precepts of this Law, and so stand in need of Help against their Helper,
they fix in this case upon a double relief. The first is of their own Personal
Repentance; and the other the Sacrifices that are appointed in the Law.

But whereas they now are, and have been for many Generations, deprived of the
Privilege as they esteem it of offering Sacrifices according to the Law, they
hope that their own Repentance with their death, which they pray that it may be
expiatory, will be sufficient to obtain for them the forgiveness of sin. Only
they say this might better and more easy be effected, if they might enjoy the
Benefit of Sacrifices. So says the forementioned Jew, whose Discourse is
published by Brenius. Quamvis jam nulla sint Sacrificia, quae media erant ad
tanto facilius impetrandam remissionem peccatorum, eadem tamen per poenitentiam
and resipiscentiam impetratur: And again, Hodie victimas offere non possumus
destituti mediis ad hoc necessariis, quae quando obtinebimus, tum remissio illa
tanto facilior reddetur. Respon. ad Quaest. Septim. If they cannot obtain the
use of Sacrifices, yet the matter may be effected by their Repentance; only it
were much easier to do it by Sacrifices. And they seem to long for them
principally on this account, that by them they may free themselves from
somewhat of Discipline and Penance which now their consciences enforce them
unto: But this, as all other Articles of their Creed which are properly
Judaical, is feigned by them to suit their present condition and Interest. For
where do they find that their Sacrifices, especially that which they most trust
in, namely, that on the Feast of Expiation, Lev. 16. was ever designed for this
End, to enable them the more easily to obtain the Remission of sins by another
means which they use? For it is said directly, that the Sacrifice on that day
did expiate their sin, and make Atonement for it, that they might not dye; and
not that it did help them in procuring pardon another way. But this is now
taken from them, and what shall they do? Why rather than they will look or come
to him, who was represented in that Sacrifice, and on whose account alone it
had all its efficacy, they will find out a new way of doing that which their
Sacrifices were appointed unto; and this they must do, or openly acknowledge
that they all perish eternally. I shall not insist long on the casting down of
this Imagination, all the Foundations of it being long ago demolished by our
Apostle in his Epistles, especially those to the Romans, Galatians, and the
Hebrews themselves. And this he has not done merely by a new Revelation of the
Mind and Will of God, but upon the Principles, and by the Testimonies of the
Old Testament its self; as will afterward more fully appear. Only because it
is here set up in competition with that blessed and All-sufficient Remedy
against Sin and the Curse, which God indeed has provided: I shall briefly
remove it out of our Way, and that by manifesting that it is neither in its
self suited unto that End, nor was ever of God designed thereunto.

mankind was cast into the condition we have described by and upon the the sin
of Adam, we have before sufficiently confirmed. Other just Reason, or Occasion
of it, no man can assign. It has been also evinced that God would, and
consequently did prepare a Remedy for them, or a Way of Deliverance to be
proposed unto them. If this were only the Law of Moses and the Observance
thereof, as the Jews pretend, I desire to know what became of them, what was
their Estate and Condition who lived and dyed before the giving of that Law?
Not only the Patriarchs before the Flood, who some of them had this Testimony,
that they pleased God, and one of whom was taken alive into Heaven, but Abraham
also himself who received the Promises, must on this Supposition be excluded
from a participation in the Deliverance enquired after. For they observed not
the Law of Moses. What they dream about the making of their Law before the
Foundation of the World, and the study of God therein, and that night and day,
by day in the Written Law, and by night in the Oral Cabal, is not to be
mentioned where matters of importance unto the souls of men are under
consideration.

But yet I may add by the way, that neither this, nor the like monstrous
figments are invented or broached by them, without some especial design, In the
Eighth Chapter of the Proverbs, there is mention of the Wisdom of God, and such
a description given of it, as allows not an Essential Property of his nature to
be thereby intended. This is there said to be with God before the foundation of
the world his delight and companion. Whence it appears that nothing but the
Eternal Word, Wisdom and Son of God can possibly be intended thereby. To avoid
this Testimony given unto his Eternal subsistence, the Jews first invented this
Fable, that the Law was created before the world, and that the Wisdom of it,
was that which God conversed with, and delighted in. And I have often wondered
at the Censure of a learned Christian Annotator upon the place; Haec, says he,
de ea sapientia quae in Lege apparet exponunt Hebraei; and sane ei, si non soli
at praecipue haec attributa convenient, contrary to the Faith of the Church in
all Ages. It is true on v. 22. and those that follow, He affirms they may be
expounded by that of Philo de Coloniis. (...). But whether this Platonical
Declaration of the Nature, and Work of the Word of God, employed by him as an
Instrument in the Making and Government of the World, would have been accepted
in the Primitive Church, when this Place was vexed by the Arians, and
studiously vindicated by the Orthodox Fathers, I much question. But to return;
If the Law and the observance of it, be the only Remedy provided of God against
the sin and misery of man, the only means of Reconciliation with him, all that
dyed before the giving of it, must perish, and that eternally. But the contrary
appears from this very consideration, and is undeniably proved by our Apostle
in the Instance of Abraham, Gal. 3. v. 17. For he received the Promise, and was
taken into Covenant with God four hundred and thirty years before the giving of
the Law. And that Covenant conveyed unto him the Love and Favor of God, with
Deliverance from Sin and the Curse, as themselves will not deny.

There was therefore a Remedy in this case provided long before the giving of
the Law on Mount Sinai; and therefore the Law was not given unto that purpose,
but for other Ends at large declared by our Apostle. Either then they must
grant that all the Patriarchs, and he in especial of whom they boast perished
eternally, or else that there was a means of Deliverance provided before the
giving of the Law, and consequently that the Law was not given for that End.
The first they will not do, nor can without an absolute Renunciation of their
own Sacred Writings, wherein none have obtained a larger Testimony that they
pleased God than they. The latter therefore follows undeniably. If they shall
say they had a way of Deliverance, but God provided another afterward, as this
would be spoken without Warrant or Authority from the Scripture, so I desire to
know both what that way was, and why it was rejected. Of Gods appointment it
was, and effectual it was unto them that embraced it, and why it should be laid
aside who can declare?

Again, as was before observed, there are two parts of the Law; The Moral
Precepts Worship appointed in it. Unto this latter part do the Sacrifices of it
belong. But neither of these are sufficient unto the End proposed, nor jointly
can they attain it. Two things are evidently necessary from what has been
discoursed, unto the Deliverance enquired after. First, That Man be reconciled
unto God, by the removal of the Curse, and the Wrath due unto him for his
Apostasy. Secondly, That his Nature be freed from that Principle of Sin and
enmity against God, (the evil figment) that it is tainted, yea, possessed
withal. And neither of these can be effected by the Law, or either part of it.
For,

First, The Moral Precepts of it are the same with those that were written in
the heart of man by Nature, or the Law of his Creation which he transgressed in
his first Rebellion. And he must be delivered from that guilt before any new
Obedience can be accepted of him. His old debt must be satisfied for, before he
can treat for a new Reward, which inseparably follows all acceptable Obedience.
But this the Precepts of the Law take no notice of, nor direct unto any way for
its removal; only supposing the doing of it by some other means, it requires
exact Obedience in them that come to God thereby. Hence our Apostle concludes,
that it could not give life, but was weak and insufficient in its self unto any
such purpose.

Besides secondly, it could not absolutely preserve men in its own Observation;
for it required that Obedience which never any sinner did or could in all
things perform; as the Scriptures of the Old Testament abundantly manifest. For
they tell us, there is is no man that sins not, 1 Kings 8. v. 46. 2 Chronicles.
6. v. 36. That, if the Lord should mark iniquity no man could stand, Psalm. 130.
v. 3. And that, if he enter into Judgment (according to the Law) no man living
can be justified in his sight, Psalm. 143. v. 2. To this Purpose see the
excellent Discourse, and invincible Reasonings of our Apostle, Romans chap. 3.
and 4. This the Holy Men of Old confessed, this the Scripture bears testimony
unto, and this Experience confirms, seeing every sin, and transgression of
that Law was put under a Curse, Deuteronomy. 27. v. 26. Where then, there is no man
that sins not, and every sin is put under the curse, the Law in the
Preceptive part of it can be no means of delivery from the one or other, but is
rather a certain means of increasing and aggravating of them both. Neither is
there any Testimony given concerning any one under the Old Testament that he
was any other way justified before God, but by Faith and the Pardon of Sins,
which are not of the Works of the Law. See Genesis 15. v. 6. Psalm. 32. v. 1, 2. Of
Noah indeed it is said, that he was upright, and perfect in his Generation;
that is sincere in his Obedience, and free from the open wickedness of the Age
wherein he lived. But as this was before the giving of the Law by Moses, so the
Ground of his Freedom and Deliverance is added to be the Gracious Love and
Favor of God. This the Jews themselves confess in Bereshith Rabba: Sect. 29.
(...). Even Noah himself who was left of them was not every way as he should
be, but that he found Grace or Favor in the eyes of the Lord. And to the same
purpose they speak concerning Abraham himself elsewhere. (...), Thou find
that Abraham our Father inherited not this world and the world to come any
otherwise than by Faith; as it is said he believed God. This part therefore of
the Law, is plainly convinced to be insufficient to deliver sinners from an
Antecedent guilt, and Curse due thereunto.

Sacrifices of the Law must yield the Relief enquired after, or we are still at
a loss in this matter. And these the Jews would willingly place their chief
confidence in; they did so of old. Since indeed they have been driven from
their Observation; they have betaken themselves unto other Helps, that they
might not appear to be utterly hopeless. But they sufficiently manifest their
great reserve against the Accusation of their Consciences to be in them, by the
ludicrous ways of representing, or rather counterfeiting of them that they
have invented. (...) signifies a man; and among the Rabbis a Cock also. Hence
Ben Vzziel renders (...) Ezion Geber. The name of a City, Deuteronomy. 2.8. (...), the
City of a Cock. And Isa. 22. v. 17. (...) is rendered by Hierom, Gallus
Gallinaceus. Granting therefore that the Punishment of Geber is required unto
Atonement and Reconciliation, and that some such thing was signified in their
Sacrifices, they do each one for himself, torture, slay, and offer a Cock on
the day of Expiation to make atonement for their sins, and that unto the
Devil. The Rites of that Diabolical Solemnity are declared at large by
Buxtorfius in his Synagog. Judaic. cap. 20. But yet as this folly manifests
that they can find no rest in their consciences without their Sacrifices, so it
gives them not at all what they seek after. And therefore being driven from all
other hopes they trust at length unto their own Death, for in Life they have no
hope; making this one of their constant Prayers, Let my Death be the Expiation
of all Sins. But this is the curse, and so no means to avoid it. Omitting
therefore these horrid follies of men under despair, an effect of that wrath
which is come upon them unto the uttermost, the thing its self may be
considered.

That the Sacrifices of Moses's Law in and by themselves, should be a means to
deliver men from the guilt of sin, and to reconcile them unto God, is contrary
to the Light of Nature, their own proper use, and express Testimonies of the
Old Testament. For First, Can any man think it reasonable that the blood of
Bulls and Goats should of its self make an Expiation of the sin of the souls of
men, reconcile them to God the Judge of all, and impart unto them an
Everlasting Righteousness? Our Apostle declares the manifest impossibility
hereof, Heb. 10. v. 4. They must have very mean and low thoughts of God, his
Holiness, Justice, Truth, of the Demerit of Sin, of Heaven and Hell, who think
them all to depend on the blood of a Calf or a Goat. The Sacrifices of them
indeed might by Gods appointment represent that to the minds of men which is
effectual unto the whole End of appeasing Gods Justice, and of obtaining his
Favor; but that they should themselves effect it, is unsuitable unto all the
Apprehensions which are imbred in the heart of man, either concerning the
nature of God, or the Guilt of Sin. Secondly, Their Primitive and proper use,
does manifest the same. For they were to be frequently repeated, and in all the
Repetitions of them, there was still new mention made of sin. They could not
therefore by themselves take it away; for if they could, they would not have
been reiterated. It is apparent therefore that their use was to represent and
bring to remembrance that which did perfectly take away sin. For a perfect work
may be often remembered, but it need not, it cannot be often done. For being
done for such an End, and that End being obtained it cannot be done again. The
Sacrifices therefore were never appointed, never used to take away sin, which
they did not, but to represent that which did so effectually.

Besides, there were some sins that men may be guilty of whom God will not
utterly reject, for which there was no Sacrifice appointed in the Law of Moses:
as was the case with David, Psalm. 51. v. 16. which makes it undeniable that
there was some other way of Atonement besides them and beyond them, as our
Apostle declares, Acts 13. v. 38, 39. Thirdly, The Scripture expressly rejects
all the Sacrifices of the Law, when they are trusted in for any such End and
Purpose, which sufficiently demonstrates that they were never appointed
thereunto. See Psalm. 40 v. 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 50. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Isa. 1.
v. 11, 12, 13. Chap. 66. v. 3. Amos. 5.21, 22. Micha 6. v. 6, 7, 8. and other
places innumerable.

Add unto what has been spoken, that during the Observation of the whole Law
Moses, whilst it was in force by the Appointment of God himself, He still
directed those who sought for Acceptance with him, unto a New Covenant of
Grace, whole Benefits by faith they were then made partakers of, and whole
nature was afterward more fully to be declared. See Jerem. 31. v. 31, 32, 33,
34. with the inferences of our Apostle thereon, Heb. 8.12, 13. And this plainly
everts the whole Foundation of the Jews Expectation of Justification before God
on the account of the Law of Moses given on Mount Sinai. For to what purpose
should God call them from resting on the Covenant thereof, to look for Mercy
and Grace in and by another, if that had been able to give them the help
desired?

In brief then, the Jews fixing on the Law of Moses, as the only means of
delivery from sin and death, as they do thereby exclude all mankind besides
themselves from any interest in the Love, Favor, or Grace of God, which they
greatly design and desire, so they cast themselves also into a miserable
restless self-condemned condition in this world, by trusting to that which will
not relieve them, and into Endless misery hereafter, by refusing that which
effectually would make them Heirs of Salvation. For whilst they perish in
their sin, another, better, more glorious and sure Remedy against all the Evils
that are come upon mankind, or are justly feared to be coming by any of them,
is provided in the Grace, Wisdom, and Love of God, as shall now farther be
demonstrated.

The first intimation that God gave of this work of his Grace in Redeeming
mankind Promise subjoyned unto the Curse denounced against our first Parents,
and their Posterity in them, Genesis 3. v. 15. The seed of the Woman shall bruise
the Heaa of the Serpent, and the Serpent shall bruise his Heel. Two things
there are contained in these words, A Promise of Relief from the misery brought
on mankind by the Temptation of Satan; and an intimation of the Means or Way,
whereby it should be brought about. That the first is included in these words
is evident; For,

First, If there be not a Promise of Deliverance expressed in these words,
whence is it, that the execution of the sentence of Death against sin, is
suspended? Unless we will allow an Intervention satisfactory to the
Righteousness and Truth of God to be expressed in these words, there would have
been a truth in the suggestion of the Serpent, namely, that whatever God had
said, yet indeed they were not to dye. The Jews in the Midrash Tehillim, as
Kimchi informs us on Psalm. 92. whose Title is, a Psalm for the Sabbath Day,
which they generally assign unto Adam, say that Adam was cast out of the Garden
of Eden, on the Evening of the sixth day; after which God came to execute the
Sentence of Death upon him; but the Sabbath being come on, the Punishment was
deferred, whereon Adam made that Psalm for the Sabbath Day. Without an
interposition of some external Cause and Reason they acknowledge that Death
ought immediately to have been inflicted; and other besides what is mentioned
in these words, there was none.

Secondly, The whole Evil of sin and Curse that mankind then did, or was to
suffer under, proceeded from the friendship contracted between the Woman and
the Serpent, and her fixing faith in him. God here declares that he will break
that League, and put Enmity between them. Being now both of them under the same
condition of sin and Curse, this could not be without a change of Condition in
one of them. Satan is not divided from himself; nor is at Enmity with them that
are left wholly in his Estate. A change of Condition therefore on the part of
the Woman and her Seed, is plainly promised; that is, by a Deliverance from the
state of sin and misery wherein they were. Without this the Enmity mentioned
could not have ensued.

Thirdly, In pursuit of this Enmity the seed of the woman was to bruise the
Head of the Serpent. The Head is the seat of his Power and Craft. Without the
destruction of the Evil and pernicious effects which by his Counsel he had
brought about, his Head cannot be bruised. By his Head he had contrived the
Ruin of mankind; and without the Destruction of his Works, and a Recovery from
that Ruin, he is not conquered, nor his Head bruised. And as these things
though they may now seem somewhat obscurely expressed in these words, are yet
made plain unto us in the Gospel; so the importance of them was evident unto
our first Parents of old, being expounded by all the Circumstances wherewith
the matter of fact was attended.

Again, there is an intimation of the manner how this work shall be performed.
This First, God takes upon himself; I will do it; I will put Enmity: It is an
issue of his Sovereign Wisdom and Grace. But Secondly, He will do it in and by
the nature of man; the seed of the Woman. And two things must concur to the
effecting of it. First, That this seed of the Woman must conquer Satan; bruise
his Head, destroy his Works, and procure Deliverance for mankind thereby.
Secondly, That he must suffer from, and by the means of Satan in his so doing;
the Serpent must bruise his Heel. This is the Remedy and Relief, that God has
provided for mankind. And this is the MESSIAH; or God joining with the Nature
of man, to Deliver mankind from sin and Eternal misery.

seed of the Woman, is as the first, so the only intimation that God gave unto
our first Parents, of a way of Deliverance from that condition whereinto they
and the whole Creation were brought by the Entrance of Evil or Sin. It was
likewise the first Discovery that there was in him, (...) Benignity, Grace,
Kindness, or Mercy, Compassion, Pardon. Hereby he declared himself to be,
(...), Neh. 9. v. 17. A God of Pardons, Gracious, and tenderly merciful. As
also Psalm 86. v. 5. (...), Good and pardoning and much in mercy. And if this
be not acknowledged, it must be confessed that all the world, at least unto the
Flood, if not unto the days of Abraham, in which space of Time we have
Testimony concerning some, that they walked with God and pleased him, were left
without any certain ground of Faith, or hope of Acceptance with him. For
without some knowledge of this Mercy, and the Provision of a way for its
exercise, they could have no such Persuasion. This then we have obtained, that
God presently upon the Entrance of sin into the World, and the breach of its
public Peace thereby, promised a Reparation of that Evil in the whole Extent
of it, to be wrought in and b^ the seed of the Woman; That is the MESSIAH.

Jews in this matter, expressed after their manner.

For the Serpent that tempted Eve, who is here threatened as the Head of all the
Evil that ensued thereon, they confess that Satan accompanied him, and was
principally intended in the Curse denounced against him. So the Targum of Ben
Vzziel; When the Serpent came to tempt Eve, she saw (...), Samael the Angel of
Death upon him. And Maimonides gives a large account of the Doctrine of their
Wisemen in this matter. More Nebuch. page 2. cap. 20. At neque hoc
praetereundum quod in Midrash adducunt Sapientes nostri, Serpentem equitatum
fuisse, quantitatem ejus instar Cameli, and sessorem ejus fuisse illum qui
decepit Evam, huncque Sessorem fuisse Samaelem, quod nomen absolute usurpant de
Sathana. Invenies enim quod in multis locis dicunt Sathanam voluisse impedire
Abrahamum ne ligaret Isaacum, sic voluisse impedire Isaacum ne obsequeretur,
voluntati patris sui; alibi vero in hoc eodem negotio dicunt, venit Samael ad
Abrahamum; sic itaque apparet quod Samael sit ipse Satan. To omit their
Fables, this in evident, that they acknowledge it was Satan who deceived Eve.
And in Bereshith Rabba, sect. 10. They give an account why God expostulated
with Adam and Eve before he pronounced Sentence against them, but without any
Word or Question proceeded immediately unto the Doom of the Serpent; For say
they, the Holy Blessed God said, (...); This Serpent is wicked, and a cunning
disputer, and if I speak unto him, he will strait way say, thou gave them a
Commandment, and I gave them a Commandment; why did they leave thy Commandment,
and follow my Commandment; and therefore he presently pronounced sentence
against him; And the same words are repeated in Midrash Vaiikra ad cap. 13. v.
2. which things can be understood of Satan only. I know some of the later
Masters have other thoughts of these things, because they discover what use may
be made of the Truth, and the Faith of their forefathers in this matter.

Aben Ezra in his Commentary on this place disputes the Opinions of their
Doctors; and although he acknowledge that Rabbi Saadias Haggaon, and Rabbi
Samuel Ben Hophni, with others, (that is indeed their Targums, and Talmuds, and
all their ancient Writers) affirm Satan to be intended, yet he contends for the
Serpent only, on the weak pretenses that Satan goes not on his Belly, nor
eats Dust, which things in the letter are confessed to belong unto the
Instrument that he used. And hereon they would have it that the Serpent was
deprived of voice and understanding which before he had, so making him a
rational subsistence, who is expressly reckoned amongst the Beasts of the Field.

The Root of all Evil also they would have to lie in the matter whereof we were
originally made; an impossible figment, invented to reflect the guilt of all
sin on Him that made us. Thus every thing seems right to men that will serve
the present turns, whilst they shut their Eyes against the Truth. But we have
the consent of the Antientest, Best, and Wisest of them in this matter; as also
unto the Deliverance here promised. The two Targums, of Vzzielides and that
called Jerusalem, both agree, that these words contain a Remedy of the Effects
of Satan's Temptation, and that to be wrought by the Messiah, or as they speak
in his days. And hence they have a common saying, that in the last days,
(which is the Old Testament Periphrasis of the Days of the Messiah) all things
shall be healed but the Serpent and the Gibeonites; by whom they understand all
Hypocrites and Unbelievers. Satan therefore is to be conquered by the bruising
of his Head; and conquered he is not, nor can be, unless his work be destroyed.
In the destruction of his work, consists the Delivery of mankind from the
twofold evil mentioned. And this is to be effected by the seed of the Woman, to
be brought forth into the world unto that end and purpose. For when the
Production of this Seed is restrained unto the Family and Posterity of Abraham,
it is said expressly, that in, or by it, all the Kindreds of the earth should be
blessed, which they could not be, without a removal and taking away of the
Curse.

We may now therefore take the sum of this Discourse, and of the whole matter
Entrance of sin into the world, and the Remedy provided in the Grace and Wisdom
of God against it. It appears upon our Enquiry; First, That the Sin of our
First Parents, was the Occasion and Cause of all that Evil which is in the
world, of all that is felt or justly feared by mankind. For as those who knew
not, or received not the Revelation of the Truth in these things made unto us
in the Scripture, could never assign any other cause of it, that might be
satisfactory unto an ordinary rational Enquiry, so the Testimonies of the
Scripture make it most evident, and especially that insisted on. Secondly, It
has been evinced, tha^ mankind could not recover, or deliver themselves from
under the power of their own innate corruption and disorder, nor from the
effects of the Curse and Wrath of God that came upon them. Neither is there any
ground of Expectation of Relief from any other part of Gods Creation. But yet
that God for the praise of the glory of his Grace, Mercy and Goodness, would
effect it and bring it about. Thirdly, That this Relief and Deliverance is
first intimated and declared, in those words of God unto the Serpent; I will
put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Which appears,

First, Because in and with the Serpent, Satan who was the Head of all
Apostasy from God, and by whom our first Parents were beguiled, is intended in
these words. This we have made evident from the Confession of the Jews with
whom in this matter principally we have to do. And to what has been already
observed unto that purpose, we may add the Testimonies of some other of them to
the same Purpose, Rabbi Bechai, he whom they call (...), Bechai the Elder, in
his Comment on the Law unto these words, Genesis 3. v. 15. speaks to this purpose.
We have no more enmity with the Serpent than with other creeping things.
Wherefore the Scripture Mystically signifies him who was hid in the Serpent.
For the body of the crafty Serpent was a fit instrument for that force, or
virtue, that joined its self therewithal. That was it which made Eve to sin,
whence death came on all her Posterity. And this is the Enmity between the
Serpent and the seed of the Woman. And this is the Mystery of the Holy Tongue,
that the Serpent is sometimes called Saraph, according to the name of an Angel,
who is also called Saraph. And now thou know that the Serpent is Satan, and
the evil Figment, and the Angel of Death. And Rabbi Judah; in (...). Many
Interpreters say, that the Evil Figment has all its force from the Old
Serpent; or Satan. To the same purpose, the Author of (...), Caphtor Vapaerach;
The Devil and the Serpent are called by one name. And many other Testimonies of
the like importance might be collected out of them.

We have also asurer word for our own satisfaction, in the Application of this
place unto Satan in the Divine Writings of the New Testament: as 2 Cor. 11.3. 2 Timothy 2.14. Romans 5.11, 12, 13, 15. Heb. 2.14, 15. 1 John 3.8. Revel. 12.9. and
Chap. 20. v. 2, 3. but we forbear to press them on the Jews.

Besides, it is most evident from the thing it self. For (1.) Who can be so
sottish as to imagine, that this great Alteration which ensued on the works of
God, that which caused him to pronounce them accursed, and to inflict so sore a
Punishment on Adam and all his Posterity, should arise from the Actings of a
Brute Creature. Where is the glory of this dispensation? How can we attribute
it unto the Wisdom and Greatness of God? What is there in it suitable unto his
Righteousness and Holiness? Whereas supposing this to be the work of him who
was in himself the beginning of all Apostasy, and who first brake the Law of
his Creation, all things answer the Excellency of the Divine Perfections.
Moreover is it imaginable that the nature of man then flourishing in the vigor
of all its intellectual Abilities, Reason, Wisdom, Knowledge; in that Order and
Rectitude of them which was his Grace, should be surprised, seduced and brought
into subjection, unto the Craft and Machinations of an inferior Creature, a
Beast of the Field, and that unto its own Ruin Temporal and Eternal? The whole
nature of the inferior creatures, James tells us, is tamed by the nature of
Man, Chap. 3. v. 7. and that now in his lessened and depraved condition; and
shall we think that this Excellent Nature, in the blossom of its strength, and
right unto Rule over all, should be tamed, corrupted, subdued, by the nature of
a Beast or a Serpent. And yet again, whereas in the whole action of the
Serpent, there is an open design against the glory and honor of God, with the
welfare and happiness of mankind, and that managed with Craft, Subtilty, and
Forecast, how can we imagine that such a contrivance should befall a brute
Worm, incapable of Moral Evil, and newly framed out of the dust by the power of
its Creator? Hitherto it had continued under the Law and Order of its Creation;
and shall we now think that suddenly on an instant, it should engage thus
desperately against God and man? And further the actings of the Serpent were by
Reason and with Speech. And does not a supposal that he was endowed with them
plainly exempt him from that Order and kind of Creatures whereof he was, and
place him among the number of the intellectual and rational parts of the
Creation? And is not this contrary to the Analogy of the Scripture, and the
open truth of the thing its self, he being cursed among the Beasts of the
Field? To say, as Aben Ezra seems to do, that God gave him Reason and Speech
for that occasion, is blasphemously to make God the sole-Author of that
Temptation which he so much abhorred. Lastly, Considering the Punishment
denounced against mankind, of Death Temporal and Eternal, that which is
threatened unto the Serpent bears no proportion unto it, if it concern only the
Serpent its self. And what Rule of Justice will admit, that the Accessory
should be punished with greater Sufferings than the Principal? Neither does
this Punishment as to the Principal part of it, the bruising of the Head,
befall all Serpents, yea, but few of them in comparison, doubtless not one of a
Million, whereas all mankind none excepted were liable unto the Penalty
denounced against them. Were no more men intended herein than are bitten on the
heel by Serpents, the matter were otherwise; but death is passed upon all, in
as much as all have sinned. Satan then it was, who was the Principal in this
Seduction, the Author of all Apostasy from God, who using the Serpent its
instrument, involved that also so far in the Curse, as to render it of all
Creatures the most abhorred of mankind.

Seducer it is denounced, that his Head should be bruised. The Head of Satan,
is his Craft and Power. From these issued all that Evil whereinto mankind was
fallen. In the bruising therefore of his Head, the defeat of his Counsel, the
destruction of his Work, and the Deliverance of Mankind is contained, as our
Apostle most excellently declares, Heb. 2. Death must be removed, and
Righteousness brought in, and acceptance with God procured, or the Head of
Satan is not bruised. This therefore is openly and plainly a promise of the
Deliverance enquired after.

Moreover, There is a Declaration made, how this Victory shall be obtained, and
this Deliverance wrought, and that is by the Seed of the Woman. This seed is
twice repeated in the words; once expressly, and her seed; and Secondly it is
included in the Pronoun (...), it. And as by seed in the first place the
Posterity of the Woman, some to be born of her race, partakers of humane nature
may be intended, as the subjects of the Enmity mentioned, so in the latter some
single person, some one of her Posterity or seed, that should obtain the
Victory, is expressly denoted. For as all her seed in common, do never go about
this work, the greatest part of them continuing in a willing Subjection unto
Satan; so if all of them should combine to attempt it, they would never be able
to accomplish it, as we have before proved at large. Some one therefore to come
of Her, with whom God would be present in an especial and extraordinary
manner, is here expressly promised. And this is the Messiah.

God having in infinite Wisdom and Grace, provided this way of Relief, and
given Revelation became the Foundation and Center of all the Religion that
ensued in the world. For as those who received it by Faith, and adhered unto
it, continued in the Worship of the true God, expressing their Faith in the
Sacrifices that he had appointed typically to represent and exemplify before
their eyes the work its self which by the promised seed was to be accomplished;
so also all that false Worship which the generality of mankind apostatized
into, was laid in a general persuasion, that there was a way for the Recovery
of the favor of God; but what that was they knew not, and therefore wandered
in woeful uncertainties.

Some suppose that our great Mother Eve in those words, Genes. 4. ver. 1.
(...), expressed an Apprehension that she had bore him who was Man-God, the Man
the Lord, the Promised Seed. And they do not only contend for this meaning of
the words, but also reproach them who are otherwise minded; as may be seen in
the Writings of Hunnius and Helvicus, against Calvin, Junius, Paraeus, and
Piscator. That she together with Adam believed the Promise, had the
consolation* and served God in the Faith of it, I no way doubt. But that she
had an Apprehension that the Promised Seed should be so soon exhibited, and
knew that he should be the Lord, or Jehovah, and yet knew not, that he was to
be born of a Virgin, and not after the ordinary way of mankind, I see no cogent
Reason to evince. Nor do the words mentioned necessarily prove any such
apprehension in her. The whole weight of that supposition, lies on the
Construction of the words from the interposition of the Particle (...) ^enoting
as they say after Verbs active always an Accusative Case. But instances may be
given to the contrary; whence our Translation reads the words, I have gotten a
man from the Lord, without the least intimation of any other sense in the
Original. And Drusius is bold to affirm, that it is want of solid skill in the
Sacred Tongue, that was the cause of that conception. Besides, if she had such
thoughts, she was manifoldly mistaken; and to what end that mistake of hers
should be here expressed, I know not. And yet notwithstanding all this, I will
not deny but that the expression is unusual and extraordinary, if the sense of
our Translation be intended, and not that by some contended for, I have gotten
or obtained the Man the Lord. And this, it is possible caused Jonathan Ben
Vzziel to give us that gloss on the words in his Targum. (...). And Adam knew
his Wife Eve, who desired the Angel: and she conceived and bare Cain, and said,
I have obtained the man (or a man) the Angel of the Lord. That is, him who was
promised afterward, under the name of the Angel of the Lord, or the Angel of
the Covenant, which the Jews may do well to consider.

But we have farther Expositions of this first Promise, and farther
Confirmations of Scripture its self. For in Process of time it was renewed unto
Abraham, and the Accomplishment of it confined unto his Family. For his
gratuitous Call from Superstition and Idolatry, with the Separation of him and
his Posterity from all the Families of the Earth, was subservient only unto the
fulfilling of the Promise before treated of. The first mention of it, we have
Genesis 12. v. 1, 2, 3. Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, unto a Land that I
will show thee. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy Name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them
that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee, and in thee shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed. And this is again expressed, Chap. 18. v. 18.
All the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him. And Chap. 22.18. And in
thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. And when he doubted of
the accomplishment of this Promise, because he was Childless, and said, Behold
unto me thou have given no seed, as knowing that therein lay the Promise, Chap.
15. v. 3. God tells him, that he who should come forth of his own Bowels should
be his Heir, ver. 4. which was afterward restrained unto Isaac. chap. 17.21.
Thus he is called and separated, as from his own family and kindred, so from
all other Nations, and a peculiar portion of the earth assigned unto him and
his, for their habitation. Now the especial End of this Divine dispensation, of
this Call and Separation of Abraham, was to be a means of accomplishing the
Former Promise, or the bringing forth of him, who was to be the Deliverer of
mankind from the Curse that was come upon them for their sin. For,

First, It is said that Abraham hereupon should be a blessing. (...). And thou
shall be a Blessing: not only blessed thy self, which is expressed in the
former words, I will bless thee; but the means of conveying Blessings, the
great Blessing unto others; And how was this done in and by Abraham? In his own
Person he conversed but with few of them, unto some whereof through their own
sins he was an occasion of Punishment; as to the Egyptians, Chap. 12. v. 17.
and to the Philistines, Chap. 20. v. 4, 7. Some he destroyed with the sword,
Chap. 14.15. and was not in any thing signally a blessing unto any of them. So
his Posterity extirpated sundry Nations from the face of the Earth, were a
scourge unto others, and occasioned the Ruin of many more. He must needs then
be made a Blessing unto the world on some other Account. And this can be
nothing, but that he was separated to be the peculiar channel, by which the
promised blessing Seed, should be brought forth into the world.

Secondly, It is said, that all the Families of the Earth should be blessed in
him, Chap. 12. v. 3. that is, not in his Person, but in his seed as it is
expounded, Chap. 22. v. 18. that is in the Promised Seed that should come of
him, Chap. 12.3. (...), shall be blessed in the passive Conjugation of Niphal;
referring solely unto the Grace and Favor of God in giving the Seed, Chap. 22.
v. 18. (...), in Hithpael, so blessed in the Seed when exhibited, as that they
shall come for the blessing by faith, and so in him obtaining it, bless
themselves. And this is spoken of all Nations, all Families, the Posterity of
Adam in general. They were all cursed in Adam as has been declared; and God
here promises, that they shall be blessed in the seed of Abraham; and by him,
the seed of the Woman. And this blessing must enwrap in it all the good things
whereof by the Curse they were deprived, or it will be of no use or benefit
unto them; a Blessing indeed, it will not be. For a while he intended to leave
mankind to walk in their own ways; partly, that he might show his Severity
against sin; partly, that he might evidence the Sovereignty and undeserved
Freedom of that Grace wherein he had provided a Deliverer; and partly, that
they might try and experiment their own Wisdom and Strength in searching after
a way of Deliverance. But in this Promise was the Ore laid up, which after many
Generations was brought forth and stamped with the Image of God.

Thirdly, The Curse unto Satan is here again renewed, I will bless them that
bless thee, and I will Curse HIM that curses thee. The Blessing is to many;
but the Curse respects one principally, that is Satan, as the Scripture
generally expresses the opposite Apostate Power under that name. Neither is
there any just cause of the variation of the number, unless we look on the
words as a pursuit of the first Promise, which was accompanied with an especial
Malediction on Satan, and who acts his enmity in all obloquie, and cursing
against the blessed Seed, and those that are blessed therein. And this change
of the number in these words is observed by Aben Ezra; (...), They that bless
thee, many; He that curses, one; as though many should bless, and few curse,
the contrary whereof is true. And Baal Hatturim (...); they that bless thee in
the plural Number; he that curses thee in the singular; and an interpretation
is given of the last word, becoming those Annotations which are immeasurably
Judaical, that is sottish and superstitious. (...); He that curses thee, I
will Curse; that is, by Gematry, Balaam that comes to curse thy Sons; The
Numeral Letters of each making up 422. of which fantastical work amongst some
of them, there is no end. But one Single Person, in which way Satan is usually
spoken of, they saw to be intended; which is passed over, as far as I have
observed by Christian Expositors.

Abraham, in and by whom the Nations of the Earth should be saved, that is
delivered from sin and Curse and made eternally happy. Abraham died himself
without one foot of an Inheritance in this world, nor did he concern himself
personally in the Nations of the Earth beyond his own Family. Another therefore
is to be looked after in whom they may be blessed. And this we must further
demonstrate, to evince the perverseness of the Jews who exclude all others
besides themselves from an interest in these Promises made to Abraham, at least
unless they will come into subjection unto them, and dependence upon them. So
high conceits have they yet of themselves in their low and miserable condition.
The next time therefore that he is mentioned in the Scripture, it is said
(...), to him shall be, the gathering of the Peoples. Genesis 49.10. concerning
which place we must treat afterward at large. The People of the world,
distinct from Judah shall gather themselves unto him; that is, for safety and
deliverance, or to be made partakers of the Promised Blessing.

Hence Balaam among the Gentiles Prophesied of him, Number. 24. v. 17, 19. And Job
among the children of the East that were not of the Posterity of Isaac,
professed his faith in him; Chap. 19. v. 25. (...). And I know that my Redeemer
lives, or is living, and afterward, he shall stand on the earth, or rise on
the Dust. He believed that there was a (...) a Redeemer promised, one that
should free him from sin and misery. Aben Ezra by my Redeemer understands a
man that would assist him, or judge more favorably of his Cause than his
friends at that time did; (...). And his Comment on (...) and (...), is very
fond; (...), He is at present Living, or he shall be born hereafter. But is
this (...) a living Redeemer, (...), the living one, is a Property of God; He
is (...), the living God, 1 Timothy 4. v. 10. (...), 1 Timothy 6.16. who alone has
immortality. A mortal man is not rightly called a living Redeemer one that has
life in his power. Besides, Job met with no such Redeemer out of his troubles;
and therefore R. Levi Ben. Gershom confesses that it is God who is intended;
(...), who is the Living One and lives to Eternity. Of this Redeemer, Job
says, he shall stand on the Earth, or arise on the dust; if the words be taken
in the former sense (as they will bear either) his Incarnation and coming into
the world, if in the latter his Resurrection out of the dust, is intended. The
former seems most probable, and the Earth is expressed by (...), the dust, to
denote the infinite condescension of this Redeemer in coming to converse on
this dust that we live in and upon. And this he shall do (...). The word is
used to express the Eternity of God. (...), Isa. 44. v. 6. I am the first, and
I am the last; so Chap. 48.11. Whence Ralbag before mentioned, interprets this
expression, with respect to the works that God shall do in the earth in the
latter days. And in this respect our Goel is said to be Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last, the beginning and the ending. He that abides thus the same
after all, shall stand on the Earth. But the word also is often joined with
(...), a Generation, a time, a season: Psalm 48.4, 6, 14. Psalm 102. v. 19. and
denotes the futurition of it; that it is to come, and shall come. So also with
(...), a day; as Isa. 30. v. 8. pointing out some signal latter day. And here
it is used absolutely for (...), in the latter days, which is the ordinary
description and designation of the Days of the Messiah in the Old Testament.
This is that which Job expected, which he believed. Though he was among the
Gentiles, yet he believed the Promise, and expected his own Personal Redemption
by the blessed seed. And thus although God confined the Posterity of Abraham
after the flesh unto the Land of Canaan, yet because in the Promised Seed he
was to be Heir of the World, he gives unto the Messiah, the Heathen to be his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession, Psalm. 2. v.
8. And upon the accomplishment of the work assigned unto him, he promises,
that all the Ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord, and all
the Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him, Psalm 22. v. 27. a plain
declaration of the Gentiles coming in for their share and interest in the
Redemption wrought by him. See Psalm. 45. v. 16. For these Rebellious ones was
he to receive gifts that the Lord God might dwell among them, Psalm 68. v. 18.
So that by him Egypt and Aethiopia were to stretch forth their hands unto God,
v. 31. Yea, all Kings were to bow down to him, and all Nations to serve him,
Psalm 72. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

These poor Gentiles were the little Sister of the Judaical Church which were
to Cant. 8. v. 8, 9. For in the last days, the days of the Messiah, many
People; yea, all Nations, are to be brought unto the house of the Lord, and to
worship him acceptably, Isa. 2. v. 2, 3, 4. And expressly, Chap. 11. v. 10. The
Root of Jesse which the Jews grant to be the Messiah, is to stand for an Ensign
unto the People, and to it shall the Gentiles seek; even for that Salvation and
Deliverance which he had wrought; and they are preferred therein before Israel
and Juda, v. 12. Egypt and Assyria, that is, the other Nations of the world,
are to be brought into the same Covenant of the Messiah with Israel, Chap. 19.
v. 25. For all flesh, was to see the glory of God, and not the Jews only; Chap.
40. v. 5. And the Isles, or utmost parts of the Earth, were to wait for the Law
of the Promised Messiah, Chap. 42. v. 4. And the whole of what we assert is
summed up, Chap. 49. v. 6. where God speaks unto the Promised Seed, and says,
It is a light thing that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a
Light unto the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the Ends of the
Earth; Where he is as fully promised unto the Gentiles to be their Salvation,
as ever he was unto Abraham or his Posterity. See Chap. 51. v. 5. Chap. 53.12.
And on this account does God call unto men in general to come into his
Covenant; promising unto them an interest in the mercies of David, and that
because he has given this seed as a witness unto them, as a Leader and
Commander, or the Captain of their Salvation, Chap. 55. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. The
effect of which call in the Faith of the Gentiles, and their gathering unto the
Promised Seed is expressed, v. 5. The like Prophecies and Predictions of the
Gentiles partaking in the Redemption to be wrought occur in all the Prophets,
especially Ezechiel, Micah, Zech^ri^h, and Malachie, but the instances already
produced are sufficient unto our purpose.

Ephesians. 3. v. 5, 6. God by Revelation made known unto me the myster^e which in
other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of m^n, as it is now revealed unto
his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit; that the Gentiles should be
fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ by
the Gospel. The Apostle seems to deny that this mystery of the participation
of the Gentiles in the Blessing by the promised seed was revealed or made
known, before the time of its discovery in and by the Gospel, and therefore
could not be so declared by the Prophets under the Old Testament, as we have
evinced. But indeed he does not absolutely deny what is asserted, only he
prefers the Excellency of the Revelation then made, above all the discoveries
that were before made of the same thing. The mystery of it was intimated in
many Prophecies and Praedictions, though before their accomplishment they were
attended with great obscurity, which now is wholly taken away. In former Ages,
(...), it was not, says he, fully, clearly, manifestly known, (...) to the
Sons of men, in common and promiscuously, though it were intimated unto the
Prophets, and by them obscurely represented unto the Church; but it was not
made known (...), with that clearness, evidence, and perspicuity, as it is now
by the Apostles and Preached unto all. It is only then the degrees of the
manifestation of this mystery, as to openness, plainness, and evidence, that
are asserted by the Apostle, above all which of the same kind went before; but
the discovery of it absolutely is not denied. And thus much was necessary in
our passage to secure our own interest in the mercy treated about.

Abraham. In the pursuit hereof his Posterity was separated, to be a peculiar
people unto God. Their Church State, the whole Constitution of their Worship,
their Temple, and Sacrifices, were all of them assigned and appointed unto to
the confirmation of the Promise, and to the explanation of the way whereby the
blessed seed should be brought forth, and the work that he should perform for
the removal of sin and the Curse, and the bringing in of everlasting
Righteousness, as shall elsewhere be manifested. Moreover unto this Deliverer
and Deliverance to be wrought by him, with the nature of it, and the means of
its accomplishment, by what he was to do and suffer do all the Prophets bear
witness. The full manifestation hereof, seeing it requires an explication of
the whole Doctrine of the Messiah, concerning his Person, Grace, and Mediation,
his Offices, Life, Death, and Intercession, the Justification of sinners
through his Blood, and Sanctification by his Spirit, with all other Articles of
our Christian Faith, all which are taught and revealed, though obscurely, in
the Old Testament, would take up an entire Volumn, and be unsuitable unto our
present design. But three things in general the Prophets give Testimony unto
him by. First, By preferring the promised relief and remedy above all the
present Glory and Worship of the Church; directing it to look above all its
enjoyments unto that which in all things was to have the pre-eminence. Se^ Isa.
2. v. 2. Chap. 4. v. 2, 3, 4, 5. Chap. 7. v. 13, 14, 15. Chap. 9. v. 6, 7.
Chap. 11. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, etc. Chap. 32. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 35. v. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Chap. 40. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 42. v. 1,
2, 3, 4. Chap. 49. v. 18, 19. Chap. 51. v. 4, 5, 6, 7. Chap. 59.20, 21. Chap.
60. Chap. 61. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. Chap. 65. v. 17, 18. Jeremiah 23. v. 5, 6. Chap.
30. v. 9. Chap. 31. v. 31, 32, 33, 34. Chap. 32. v. 40, 41, 42. Ezekiel. 40. etc.
Dan. 7.27. Chap. 9. v. 24. Chap. 12. v. 1, 2. Hos. 3. v. 5. Joel 3. v. 18. Amos
9. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Obad. v. 21. Micah 4. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 5. v. 1,
2, 3, 4. Habbuk. 2. v. 14. Hagg. 2. v. 6, 7, 8, 9. Zechar. 2. v. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. Chap. 3. v. 8, 9, 10. Chap. 6. v. 1^, 13. Chap. 9. v. 9, 10, 11. Chap. 14.
v. 3, 4, 20. Malach. 1. v. 11. Chap. 3.1, 2, 3. Chap. 4. v. 2. Which places
although but a few of those that occur in the Prophets, are yet too many to be
particularly insisted on. But this they all teach with one consent, that there
was in the Promise which they assert and confirm an Excellency of Blessings,
far exceeding in Glory and Worth, and in advantage unto Believers, all that
which they outwardly enjoyed, in their Peace, Prosperity, Kingdom and
Temple-Worship. Now this can be nothing but the Spiritual and Eternal
Deliverance of their Persons, from sin, Curse, and Misery, with the enjoyment
of the Favor of God in this Life, and Blessedness hereafter in his Presence
for evermore. And this in particular is expressed and declared in many of the
Promises directed unto, especially those which concern the making and
establishing of the New Covenant, which is that we are in the demonstration of.

Secondly, They do the same in the Description they give of the Person that was
to be this Remedy or Relief, and of the work that he had to accomplish for that
End and Purpose. For the former, they declare that he was to be the Son of God,
God and Man in one Person, Psalm 2. v. 7. Psalm 110. v. 1. Isa. 9. v. 6, 7.
Jer. 23. v. 5, 6. Zech. 2.8, 9, 10. and in sundry other places is the same
mystery intimated, whereby the Church was farther instructed how God would
join with the nature of man in the seed of the Woman, for the Conquest of the
Old Serpent, and the destruction of his works. And for the latter, as they
declare his sufferings in an especial manner, even what and how he was to
suffer in the bruising of his heel, or bearing the effect of and Punishment due
to sin, Psalm 22. Isaiah 53. Dan. 9. v. 24, 25. so his teaching, ruling, and
governing of his people, in their Obedience unto God by him, until they are
saved unto the uttermost, as the great Prophet, and King of his Church, is by
them fully manifested, Psalm 2. Psalm 22. v. 25. Psalm 45. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm 68. v. 17, 18. Psalm 72. Psalm 89.
v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Psalm 96. Psalm 97. Psalm 98. Psalm 99. Psalm 110. Isaiah
11. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chap. 9.6, 7. Chap. 32. v. 1, 2. Chap. 35. Chap. 40.11,
12. Chap. 42. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 45. v. 22, 23, 24, 25. Chap. 49. v. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Chap. 50. v. 4. Chap. 59. v. 16, 17. Chap. 61. v.
1, 2, 3. Chap. 63. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Jerem. 23. v. 5, 6. Micah 4. v. 2, 3.
Chap. 5. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Zechary, Chap. 2. v. 8. Mal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. as in sundry
other places. Yea, herein all the Prophets greatly abound, it being the
principal work that God raised them up for, and inspired them by his Holy
Spirit in their several Generations, as Peter declared; 1 Epist. 1. v. 10, 11,
12.

Thirdly, They did also by taking off the Expectations of men from looking
after relief and deliverance by any other way or means whatsoever; Psalm 40. v.
8, 9. Add hereunto, that the whole Fabric of the Tabernacle and
Temple-Worship, was contrived, appointed and designed in Infinite Wisdom, unto
no other End, but to instruct and direct the Church unto this Promised
Deliverer, and the Salvation to be wrought by him, as shall God assisting,
abundantly be manifested in our Exposition of the Epistle unto the Hebrews.

Thus do both the Law and Prophets bear witness unto this Promised Deliverer,
and the Deliverance to be wrought by him. And this is He whom the Jews and
Christians call the Messiah. (...) is from (...), to anoint with oil. Those
who were peculiarly of old consecrated unto God in the great Offices of Kings,
Priests, and Prophets, were by his Appointment so to be anointed; at least
some of them on especial Occasions were so. Thence were they called (...)
Anointed Ones. And because this Anointing with Oil was not appointed for its
own sake, but for somewhat signified thereby, those who received the thing so
signified, although not actually anointed with corporeal Oil are called
Anointed ones also, Psalm 105. v. 15. Now this Promised Seed, this Savior or
Deliverer, being appointed of God to perform his Work in the discharge of a
Triple Office, of King, Priest, and Prophet unto his Sacred People, and being
furnished with those Gifts and Endowments which were signified by the
Anointing Oil, is by an Antanomasia called the Messiah. Or (...) Messiah the
King. Dan. 9.25. (...), Messiah the Prince, Ruler, or Leader; and v. 26. (...),
Messiah absolutely. The Greeks render this name (...), which twice occurs in
the New Testament, where Persons of the Jewish Faith and Church, are
introduced, expressing the Savior they looked for, John 1. v. 41. Chap. 4. v.
25. Otherwise the Holy Penmen constantly call the same Person by another name
of the same signification in the Language wherein they wrote, with (...) in the
Hebrew, (...) the Anointed One, Christ. The Greek (...) and the Latin Messiah
seem rather to be taken immediately from the Chaldee (...) Messicha than from
the Hebrew (...) Messiach, and to come nearer unto it in sound and
Pronunciation. It is true, that the name is sometimes applied unto profane and
wicked men with respect unto the Office or Work whereunto they were of God
designed; as to Saul, 1 Samuel 24. v. 7. and to Cyrus, Isaiah 45. v. 1. And the
Jews call the Priest who was to sound the Trumpet when the People went forth to
Battle, Deuteronomy. 20. v. 8. (...), the anointed unto the War. But as was said, it
is applied by the way of Eminency unto the Promised Seed, unto others by way of
Allusion, and with respect unto their Office and present Work.

Exercitatio IX.
The First Promise explained in the subsequent. The Name Messiah seldom used in
the Original; frequently in the Targums. Places applied unto him therein. Genesis
3.15. Use of their Testimony against the present Jews. Genesis 35.21. Occasion of
the mention of the Messiah in that place, from Micah 4.8. Genesis 49.1. (...)
first mentioned. V. 10. Until Shilo come. Agreement of Targums. Exodus 12. v.
42. Christ typified by the Paschal Lamb. Exodus 40.9. (...) who: Dan. 9.25.
Numb. 11.26. Tradition about the Prophesying of Eldad and Medad. Numb. 23.21.
Chap. 24.7, 17, 20* 24. Consent of Targums; Talmudists, Cabalists, Deuteronomy. 18.15,
16, 17, 18, 19. The Prophet promised who. 1 Samuel 2.10. Hannas Prophecy of
Christ. 2 Samuel 23.3. David's in his lasts words. (...), 1 Kings 4.33. Solomon's
Prophecy. Light of the Church increased by David. Psalm. 2. Vindicated. Psalm.
18. v. 32. Psalm. 21.3, 4. Psalm. 45. Psalm. 68. Psalm. 69. Psalm. 72. Targum,
Midrash; Commentators. Vulgar Latin corrupted: and the LXX. (...) and (...)
What. Psalm. 80. v. 16, 18. (...) how to be rendered. (...) who. Psalm. 110.
Prophecy of the Messiah. Confession of the Jews. Of the Targum in Solomon's
Song. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. Chap. 4. v. 2. Vindicated. Chap. 9. v. 6. Sense of the
Targum on the place. Vulgar Latin noted. Intanglements of the Jews from this
Testimony. Four things promised, not agreeing to Hezekia. Answer of Jarchi.
Kimchi. Aben Ezra. The Name mentioned whose. (...) who. Answer of Abarbinel. Of
the increase of his Government. Chap. 10. v. 27. Chap. 11.1. Abarbinels
Prediction of the ruin of the Christians* Isaiah 16. v. 1. Chap. 28. v. 5.
Chap. 42. v. 1. Jeremiah 23. v. 5. Corruption of Old Translations. Purity of
the Original. Messiah, Jehovah our Righteousness. Ezekiel. 37. v. 24. Jerem.
30.21. Jerem. 33.15, 16, Hos. 3.5. Hos. 14.8. Micha 5.2. Vindicated. Kimchi's
Blasphemy. Zech. 3.8. Chap. 4.7. Chap. 6.12. Chap. 10.4. Chap. 9.9. Chap.
11.12, 13. Chap. 12.10. Conclusion.

HAving considered the first great Promise concerning the Messiah, and evinced
Testimony is given unto him throughout the Old Testament, and whence his Name
is derived; we shall now moreover enquire in particular into those places where
he is expressly foretold, promised, or prophesied of, that we may thence gather
what farther Light concerning his Person, and Natures, with his employment was
granted unto the Church of old, which the present Jews wilfully reject. And
herein, as I aim not to collect all the Prophecies and Promises which God gave
concerning him, by the mouth of his holy Prophets from the foundation of the
World, but only to single out some of the most eminent that give us a direct
description of his Person or his Grace, in answer unto, or the confirmation of
what has been already discoursed about them; so I shall have an especial
respect unto them, which the Jews themselves do acknowledge to belong unto him.
There is a Book written by Abarbinel which he calls (...), wherein he
undertakes to explain all those Texts of Scripture, or Prophecies, which cannot
be understood either Spiritually, or of the Second Temple, but of their
Redemption by the Messiah. This at present, among others, I am forbidden the
use of, which might have been of Advantage in the present design. I shall
therefore principally insist on those places, which are applied unto him in the
Targums, the most Authentic Writings amongst them, whereunto some others shall
be added, which I have observed to be interpreted unto the same purpose, in the
best of their Commentators.

The name of Messiah is but twice or thrice at most used in the Old Testament,
directly Dan. 9. v. 25. and v. 26. whereunto Psalm 2. v. 2. may be added. But
this Name, on the Reasons before given, prevailing in the Judaical Church, it
is frequently made use of, and inserted in the Targums, where he is treated of,
although he be not expressly named in the Original. Elias in his Methurgamim
reckons up fifty of those places, whereunto one and twenty more are added by
Buxtorfius. The Principal of these deserve our Consideration, considering that
some of the most eminent of them, are denied by the latter Jews, to belong unto
him, those especially which give Testimony unto that part of the faith of
Christians concerning him, his Person and Office, which by them is opposed or
denied. And this consent of the Targums is of great weight against them, as
containing an Evidence of what Persuasion prevailed amongst them, before such
time as they suited all their Expositions of Scripture, unto their own
infidelity in opposition to the Gospel and Doctrine thereof. And unto these, as
was said, such others shall be added, as their Chiefest Masters do yet
acknowledge directly to intend him.

First Promise before insisted on and vindicated; Genesis 3.15. It, (the seed of
the Woman) shall bruise thy Head, the Head of the Serpent. Mention is made here
expressly of the Messiah in the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem; and this
Promise applied unto him after their manner. The seed of the Woman shall bruise
the head of the Serpent, and they shall obtain, (...), healing, or a Plaster
for the Heel (the hurt received by the Serpent) in the days of Messiah the
King; so Jonathan; and Targ. Hierusal. uses words to the same Purpose. Both of
them expressly refer the Promise to the days of the Messiah; that is, to
himself, or the work that he was to do, whence they insert his name into the
Text. And this is perfectly destructive unto the present pretensions of the
Jews. The work here assigned unto him, of recovering the Evil of sin and misery
brought on the world through the Temptation of the Serpent, is that wherewith
they would have him to have nothing to do.

Besides his suffering is intimated in the foregoing Expression, that the
Serpent should bruise his heel, which they much desire to free their Messiah
from. But that which principally lies against them in this Testimony is, that
whereas they appropriate the Promise of the Messiah unto themselves, and make
the Doctrine concerning him to belong unto the Law of Moses, whereof say some,
(those that follow Maimonides) it is one of the Fundamentals, others (as
Josephus Albo) that it is a branch of the Fundamental concerning Rewards and
Punishments, it is here given out by the Testimony of their Targums, unto the
P^^terity of Adam indefinitely, two thousand years before the Call and
Separation of Abraham, from whom they pretend to derive their Privilege, and
much longer before the giving of their Law, whereof they would have it to be a
part; which is diligently to be heeded against them.

Abraham we have spoken before; the next mention in the Targum of the Messiah
is on Gen 35. v. 21. where occasion is taken to bring him into the Text. For
unto those words, and Israel journyed and spread his Tent, (...), unto, or
beyond the Tower of Edar, Jonathan adds, (...) Which is the place from whence
the King Messiah shall be revealed in the end of the days. And this Tradition
is taken from Micah 4. v. 8. (...), And thou Tower of Edar, or of the flock,
unto thee shall it come, the first Dominion. Now this Tower of Edar was a place
in, or near to Bethlehem, as is manifest from the place in Genesis; For whereas
Jacob is said to stay at Ephrah that is Bethlehem, where he set up a Pillar on
the Grave of Rachel, v. 19, 20. upon his next removal, he spread his Tent
beyond the Tower of Edar; which must therefore needs be a place near unto
Bethlehem; and the Prophet assigning the rise of the Kingdom of the Messiah
unto that Place, because he was to be born at Bethlehem, the Paraphrast took
occasion to make mention of him here, where that place is first spoken of,
declaring their expectation of his being born there, which accordingly was long
before come to pass.

And Jacob called unto his Sons, and said, Gather your selves together, that I
may tell you what shall befall you. (...), in the latter days, or the last
days, or end of the Days. Jonathan Paraphraseth on these words; after that, or
although the Glory of the Divine Majesty was revealed unto him, (...), the
time, (that is the express time) wherein the King Messiah was to come, was hid
from him, and therefore he said, come and I will declare unto you what shall
befall you in the End of the days. This expression of (...), the End or last
of the days, is an usual Periphrasis of the days of the Messiah in the Old
Testament. To that purpose it is used, Numb. 24. v. 14. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 30. Isa. 2.
v. 2. Hos. 3. v. 5. Micah. 4.1. and our Apostle expressly refers unto it, Heb.
1.1. Now whereas this Expression denotes no certain season of time, but only
indefinitely directs to the last days of the Posterity of Jacob continuing a
distinct Church and people for those Ends for which they were originally
separated from all others, and this being the first place wherein it is used,
and which all the rest refer unto, the Paraphrast here took occasion both to
mention the Messiah of whose time of coming this was to be the constant
description, as also to intimate the Reason of the frequent use of this
Expression; which was because the precise time of his coming was hidden even
from the best of the Prophets, unto whom the Glory of the Divine Majesty was in
other things revealed. Besides the ensuing Predictions in the Chapter do
sufficiently secure his application of the days mentioned, unto the time of
the Messiah.

Genesis 49. v. 10. (...), until Shiloh come. All the three Targums agree in
Onfelos; (...), until Messiah comes. Jonathan and Jerusalem use the same
words; (...) unto the time wherein the King Messiah shall come. An illustrious
Prophecy this is concerning him; the first that limits the time of his coming,
with an express circumstance, and which must therefore afterward be at large
insisted on. At present it may suffice to remark the suffrage of these Targums
against the perverseness of their later Masters, who contend by all Artifices
imaginable, to pervert this Text unto other purposes; who are therefore to be
pressed with the Authority of the Targumists, which with none of their
cavilling exceptions they can evade. The following words also v. 11, 12. are
applied by Jonathan unto the Messiah in the pursuit of the former Prediction,
and that not unfitly, as has been showed by others already. See Aynsw^rth on
the pl^ce.

Exodus 12. v. 42. It is a night much to be observed. Hierusal. Targ. This is
the fourth night, (it had mentioned three before) when the End of this present
world shall be accomplish^d to be diss^lved, and the Cords of impiety shall be
wasted, and the Iron Yoke shall be broken; that is, the people of God shall be
delivered; whereunto is added; (...), M^s^s shall come forth from the midd^^t
of the Wilderness, and the King Messiah from the midst of Rome. That of the
Messiah coming out of Rome is Talmudical, depending on a Fable which we shall
afterward give an account of. And we may here, once for all observe, that
although they believe that their Messiah is to be a me^r man, born after the
manner of all other men, yet they never speak of his Birth or Nati^ity, as a
thing that they looked for; only they speak of his coming, but most commonly of
his being revealed, and their great expectation is, when he shall be discovered
and revealed. And this proceeds out of a secret self-conviction, that he was
born long since, even at the time promised and appointed; only that he is
hidden from them, as indeed he is, though not in the sense by them imagined.
But what makes the Application of the night of the Passover to the coming of
the Messiah? They cannot imagine that he shall come unto them whilst they are
celebrating that Ordinance; for that is not lawful for them, unless they were
at Jerusalem, whither they believe they shall never return until he come and
go before them. It is then from some Tradition amongst them, that their
Deliverance out of Egypt was a Type of the Deliverance by the Messiah, whose
Sacrifice and suffering was represented in the Paschal Lamb, which gave
occasion unto this Gloss.

Exodus 40. v. 9. Targum of Jonathan; Thou shall sanctify it for the Crown of
the Kingdom Judah; (...), and the King Messiah who shall deliver Israel in the
End of the Days. The end of the Unction there mentioned in the Text, is that
the things anointed might be (...), holiness of holin^sses, unto the Lord. Now
it was the Messiah alone who truly and really was this most Holy One, Dan. 9.
v. 24. (...), to anoint, or to make Messiah, of the Holiness of Holinesses,
the most Holy One, as he is called in the New Testament, (...) the Holy One
(...), Acts 3.14. Chap. 4. v. 30. 1 John 2.20. Revel. 3. v. 7. And hence, as it
should seem, is this place applied unto him by the Targumist; and an intimation
given, that in all their Holy things, their Tabernacle, Sanctuary and Altar, he
was represented; for as he was the most holy, and his body the Temple wherein
the fullness of the Godhead dwelt, Col. 2. v. 9. so (...), he Tabernacled
amongst us; John 1. v. 14. And is our Altar, Heb. 13. v. 10.

Numb. 11. v. 26. But there remained two of the men in the Camp, the name of
the one was Eldad, and the name of the other was Medad, and the Spirit rested
upon them (and they were of the men that were written, but went not out unto
the Tabernacle) and they Prophesied in the Camp. Here seems not to be any
thing immediately relating unto the Messiah, yet two of the Targums have
brought him into this place, but attended with such a story, as I should not
mention were it not to give a signal instance in it, how they raise their
Traditions. Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp, as the Text assures us.
What, or whereabout they prophesied is not declared. This the Targumists
pretend to acquaint us withal. Eldad they say prophesied of the Death of
Moses, the Succession of Joshua, and their entrance into Canaan under his
conduct. This caused One to run and inform Moses, which gave occasion to those
words of his v. 29. Enviest thou for my sake; for what if he do prophecy, that
I shall dye; and thereon he would not rebuke them. Medad prophesied of the
coming of the Quails to feed them; but both of them prophesied and said, (...)
In the latter days Gog and Magog shall ascend with their Host against
Jerusalem, and they shall fall by the hand of the Messiah; whereon in Jonathan
there follows a story of the delicious fare and dainties, which they fancy
unto themselves in those days. But what is the Reason that Eldad and M^dad
must be thought to prophecy thus concerning Gog? Ezekiel. 38. v. 17. we have
these words; Thus says the Lord God, (unto Gog) art not thou he of whom I have
spoken in old time by my servants the Prophets of Israel which prohesied in
those days and years, that I would bring thee against them? Not finding any
express prophecy in the Scripture, as they suppose concerning Gog, because
that name is not elsewhere used, they could not fasten these words any where
better than on Eldad and Medad, concerning whom it is said that they
Prophesied, but nothing is recorded of what is spoken by them, whereon they
think they may assign unto them what they please; although there is not the
least reason to suppose that their Prophesying consisted in Predictions of
things to come. Speaking of the things of God, and praising him in an
extraordinary manner, is called Prophesying in the Scripture. So those words of
the Children of the Prophets who came down from the High Place with Psalteries
and Harps, (...), 1 Samuel 10. v. 5. and they are Prophesying, is rendered in the
Targum, (...), and they are praising, or singing Praises unto God; which both
their company and their* instruments declare to have been their Employment. But
such occasions as these, do they lay hold of, for the raising of their Figments
which in process of time grow to be Traditions.

Targum agree that the Messiah is intended in these Prophesies of Baalam.
Especially on those words, Chap. 24. v. 17. There shall come a Star out of
Jacob, and a Scepter out of Israel; A King, say they jointly, shall arise out
of Jacob, (...), and the Messiah shall be anointed And an illustrious
Prophecy it is no doubt, concerning his Coming and Dominion* who is the Root
and the Offspring of David, the bright and Morning Star. Rashi interprets the
place of David, who smote the Corners of Moab, as he was in many things a Type
of Christ. Aben Ezra confesses that many interpret the words concerning the
Messiah; And Maimonides distribut^s the Prophecy between David and the
Messiah, assigning some things unto one, some to another; Tractat. de Regib. in
(...) also they grant it to be the Prophecy of the Messiah. And there is no
doubt of the sense of their ancient Masters from the story of Bar Coziba, whom
after they had accepted of for their Messiah from this place they called Bar
Chocheba; Akiba applying this Prediction of (...), or the Star unto him. And
Fagius on the Targum in this place, observes that in the name (...) Chochab
applied unto the Messiah, the Cabbalists observe two things; First, That the
two first Letters signify the same number with the Letters of (...) the Name
of God, that is twenty six; and the two latter twenty two, the number of the
Letters of the Law. The observation is sufficiently Talmudical; but the
intendment of it, that the Messiah has in him the Name of God, and shall
fulfill the whole Law, is a blessed Truth. This Fagius, and Munster before him
observed out of (...) (a Bundle of Myrrh;) a Cahalistical Comment on the
Pentateuch, by R. Abraham. But they all contend against the Application of this
Prediction unto our Lord Jesus Christ: for when say they did he smite the
Corners of Moab; when did he destroy all the Children of Seth? and how were
those words, v. 18. (...) (which they interpret, and Israel shall gather
wealth, or substance) fulfilled? But we have sufficiently proved the Messiah to
be a Spiritual Redeemer; and therefore however his Kingdom may be expressed in
words signifying literally outward and temporal things, yet things spiritual
and eternal are to be understood, as figuratively set out by the other.
Neither can these words be absolutely understood according to the Letter; For
whereas Seth was the Son given unto Adam in the room of Abel, and all the
Posterity of Cain wa^ cut off at the Flood, if the Messiah destroy literally
all the children of Seth, he must not leave any one man alive in the world,
which certainly is not the work he was promised for.

Besides the Lord Christ, has partly already, and in due time will utterly
destroy all the stubborn Enemies of his Kingdom. Neither can the Jews press the
instance of Moab literally, seeing themselves by Edom do constantly understand
Rome, or the Roman Empire.

Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. This place is an eminent Prophecy concerning
the Messiah and his Prophetical Office, not before any where mentioned. But the
Law being now given, which was to continue inviolably unto his coming, Mal.
4.4. when it was to be changed, removed, and taken away, this part of his work,
that he was to make the last, full, perfect Declaration of the will of God, is
now declared.

The Targums are here silent of him, for they principally attend unto those
places which make mention of his Kingdom. Rashi refers the words unto the
series of Prophets, which were afterward raised up; Aben Ezra to Joshua;
others to Jeremiah upon the rejection of whose warnings, the people were
carried into captivity, which they collect from v. 19. Whatever now they
pretend, of old they looked for some one signal Prophet from this place, which
should immediately come before the Messiah himself; Thence was that Question in
their Examination of John Baptist; Art thou that Prophet, John 1.21. namely
whom they looked for from this Prediction of Moses. But it is the Messiah
himself and none other that is intended. For First, None other ever arose like
unto Moses. This is twice repeated; in the words of Moses unto the people; v.
15. God will raise thee up a Prophet, (...), like unto me; and in the words of
God to Moses; v. 18. I will raise them up a Prophet (...) like unto thee, as
thou art. Lipman a blasphemous Jew in his Nizzachon contends that Jesus cannot
be intended; because he was not like Moses; for Moses was a man only, Jesus
declared himself to be God; Moses had Father and Mother, Jesus had not as we
say; But the comparison intended, does not at all respect their Persons, or
their Natures, but their Office. It was in the Prophetical Office that the
Prophet foretold, was to be like unto Moses: It is a Lawgiver, one that should
institute New Ordinances of Worship by the Authority of God for the use and
Observance of the whole Church, as Moses did; one that should reveal the whole
will of God, as Moses did, as to that season wherein God employed him. That
this could not be Joshua, nor any of the Prophets that ensued, is evident from
that Testimony of the Holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 34. v. 10. There arose not since a
Prophet in Israel like unto Moses. This must therefore be referred unto some
singular Prophet who was then to come, or there is an express contradiction in
the Text. And this is none other but the Messiah, concerning whom they
acknowledge that he shall be a Prophet above Moses. Secondly, the extermination
threatened unto the people, upon their disobedience unto this Prophet, here
promised, v. 19. never befell them, until they had rejected the Lord Jesus,
the true and only Messiah. Wherefore this place is rightly applied unto him in
the New Testament, Acts 3.22, 23. Chap. 7.37. And we have hence a farther
discovery of the Nature of the Deliverer, and Deliverance promised of old, and
therein of the Faith of the Ancient Church; He was to be a blessed Prophet to
reveal the mind and will of God; which also he has done unto the utmost. And
from this place it is that the Jews themselves in Midrash Coheleth, cap. 1.
say, (...); The latter Redeemer is to be like the former.

Deuteronomy. 25. v. 19. Thou shall blot out the Remembrance of Amaleck from under
Heaven, thou shall not forget it. Jonathan; Targum, (...), And also in the
days of the Messiah the King, thou shall not forget it. But as this savours
too much of those revengefull thoughts which they frequently discover
themselves to be filled withal; so all these apprehensions proceed from the
Old Tradition that by the Messiah we should be delivered from the hands of all
our Enemies, which they being carnal and earthly, do wrest to give countenance
unto their own desires and imaginations.

Deuteronomy. 30. v. 4. If any of thine be driven out unto the utmost parts of heaven,
from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch
thee. Jonath* Targum; (...); from thence will the word of the Lord gather thee
by the hand of Elijah the great Priest, and from thence will he bring thee by
the hand of Messiah the King. The place is not amiss applied unto the
Deliverance which they shall one day have by the Messiah, for it is to happen
after the whole Curse of the Law is come upon them for their disobedience, and
that they shall turn again unto the Lord by Repentance, v. 1, 2. And whereas
the words are doubled, they suppose them to intimate a-double work of
Deliverance; one whereof they have committed to Elias from Mal. 4. v. 5. who
was to be, and was the forerunner of the Messiah.

And these are places in the Books of Moses wherein they acknowledge that
mention is made of the Messiah; For that way whereby the Church of old was
principally instructed in his work and office, namely in the Sacrifices and
Ceremonies of the Law, they know nothing of it; nor shall it here be insisted
on, seeing it must have so large a place in the Exposition of the Epistle its
self.

He shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed.
Targ. (...), and he shall exalt the Kingdom of his Messiah. In Midrash Tillim
also on Psalm 75. they ascribe this place unto the Messiah, and reckon his Horn
as the tenth horn of strength granted unto Israel. R. Levi Ben Gershom
understands, by the King in the first place, He shall give strength unto his
King; Saul, and by Messiah in the close of the words, David, who was to be
anointed by Samuel the Son of Hanna whose words these are; Kimchi applies the
words to the M^ssiah, whom as he says, she intended by the Spirit of
Prophecy; or spoke of from Tradition. And indeed the words seem directly to
intend him. For by him alone does the Lord judge the Ends of the Earth, and he
was the Anointed whose Power he would signally exalt. And I mention this place
only as an instance of the Faith of the Church of old, who in all their
mercies, still had a regard unto the Great Promise of the Messiah, which was
the Fountain of them all. And therefore Hanna here closes her Prophetical
Eulogie with her acknowledgement thereof, and faith therein.

He that Rules in man, just, Ruler, in or of, the fear of the Lord: Targ.
(...); He said he would appoint unto me a King, which is the Messiah, who shall
arise and Rule in the fear of the Lord. And it refers th^s whole last Prophecy
of David, or his last words, that he spoke by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, unto the days of the Messiah; whence it gives this Preface unto them;
These are the words of the Prophecy of David, which he proph^sied concerning
the End of the world, or for the end of the world, (...), and the days of
Consolation that were to come. Rab. Isaiah, and Rashi, interpret the words of
David himself; and Kimchi also, but he mentions the application of it unto the
Messiah, who was to come of David, whom God would raise up unto him, which he
approves of. Christian Expositors who follow the Jews, interpret those words
(...) the rock of Israel spoke to me, by (...), or (...) spoke concerning me;
that is by Samuel who anointed me to be King. Some, he spoke unto me by Nathan.

Our Translators keep to the Letter; he spoke unto me. And that alone answers
unto the words of the Verse foregoing; The Spirit of the Lord, (...) spoke in
me, or to me; so are the Revelations of God expressed; See Zech. 4. v. 1, 4.
and it expresses the Communication of the mind of God, unto the Prophet,
(...), and not his speaking by him unto others; And from these very words,
(...) the spirit of the Lord spoke in me, do the Jews take occasion to cast the
writings of David, amongst those which they assign unto that kind of Revelation
which they call (...), or (...), Books written by inspiration of the Holy
Ghost. The other words also (...), his word was in my tongue, manifest that it
is David himself that is spoken unto, and not of, in the third Verse; and
therefore it is some other who is Prophesied of by him, namely the Messiah.

And this the words whereby he is described do also manifest; (...); Ruling in
man; that is, says Jarchi, (...): over Israel who is called man; as it is
said, and ye the flock of my pasture are men; (...). you are man. Ezekiel. 34.1.
But where the word Adam is used with this praefix (...) as here, it no where
signifies Israel; but is expressly used in a contradistinction from them; as
Jerem. 32.20. which have set Signs and Wonders in the Land of Egypt, even unto
this day; (...), and in Israel and in Adam, that is as we render it, amongst
other men that are not Israel. So that if any especial sort of men are intended
in this Expression, it is not Israel, but other men. And indeed this word is
commonly used to denote mankind in general; as Genesis 6. v. 3. Chap. 9. v. 6.
Exodus 8.18. Chap. 9.10. Chap. 13.2. and universally, where ever it is used, it
signifies either all mankind, or humane nature. So that (...) is he who is the
Ruler over all mankind, which is the Messiah alone. Unless we shall inte^pret
this Expression by that of Psalm. 68. v. 19. Thou have ascended on high, thou
have lead captivity captive (...), accepisti dona in homine; and thou have
received gifts in man, that is, in the humane nature exalted, whereof the
Psalmist treats in that place. For whereas the Apostle Eph^s. 4. v. 8. renders
these words, (...), he gave gifts unto men, it is manifest that he expresses
the End and Effect of that which is spoken in the Psalm; for the Lord Christ
received gifts in his own humane nature, that he might give and bestow them on
others, as Peter declares, Acts 2. v. 33. The remainder also of the words
contain a description of the Messiah; He is (...), the just and Righteous One,
Acts 3.14. And He alone is (...); he that rules in the things that concern the
fear and Worship of God. Isa. 11. v. 2, 3. So that this place does indeed
belong unto the faith of the Ancient Church concerning the Messiah.

1 Kings 4. v. 33. In stead of those words concerning Solomon, He spoke of
Trees from the Cedar Tree that is in Lebanon, unto the Hyssop that springs
out of the Wall; The Targum reads, (...) And be Prophesied of the Kings of the
house of David in this world, (the duration of time and state of things under
the Old Testament) and of the Messiah in the world to come; so they call the
days of the Messiah. I know of none who have considered what occasion the
Targumists could take from the words of the Text, to mention this matter, in
this place. I will not say, that he does not intend, the Book of Canticles,
wherein under an Allegory of Trees, Herbs, and Spices, Solomon Prophesies of,
and sets forth the Grace and Love of Christ toward his Church, and wherein
many things are by the latter Targumist applied unto the Messiah also, as we
shall see.

There is mention likewise made of the Messiah in the Targum, by an addition
unto It was said in the Prophecy, that six Righteous Persons should come of
Ruth, David, and Daniel with his Companions, and the King M^ssiah. The general
End of the writing of this Book of Ruth, was to declare the Providence of God
about the Genealogy of the Messiah. And this seems to have been kept in
Tradition amongst them. And for this Cause does Matthew expressly mention her
name in his Rehearsal of the Genealogy of Christ, M^t. 1. v. 5. For it being a
Tradition amongst the Jews, that this was the end of the writing of her Story,
whereon they add that consideration unto the Text in their Targum, it was
remembered by the Evangelist, in a compliance therewithal.

The place of Job wherein he expresses his faith in him, and expectation of
Redemption Psalms next occur. In David the Light and Faith of the Church began
to be greatly enlarged. The Renovation of the Promise unto him, the
confirmation of it by an Oath, the Confinement of the Promised Seed unto his
Posterity, the establishment of his Throne and Kingdom, as a Type of the
Dominion and Rule of the Messiah, with the especial Revelations made unto him,
as one that signally longed for his coming, and rejoiced in the prospect which
he had of it, in the Spirit of Prophecy, did greatly further the Faith and
Knowledge of the whole Church. Hence forward therefore the mention of him is
multiplied, so that it would be impossible to insist on all the particular
instances of it; I shall therefore only call over some of the most eminent,
with an especial respect unto the concurrence of the Persuasion and Expectation
of the Jews.

Psalm. 2. v. 2. The Rulers take counsel together against the Lord and against
his Anointed; Targum; (...) against his Messiah. The Talmudists in several
places acknowledge this Psalm to be a Prophecy of the Messiah, and apply
sundry Passages thereof unto him. And those words, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, are not amiss expounded by them in Tract. Succah. cap. 5.
(...), I will this day reveal unto men that thou art my Son; for so are they
applied by our Apostle dealing with the Jews, Acts 13. v. 33. Heb. 1. v. 5.
namely, unto his Resurrection from the Dead, whereby he was declared to be the
Son of God with Power; Romans 1. v. 4. All the principal Expositors amongst them,
as Rashi, Kimchi, Aben Ezra, Bartenora, or Rab. Obodia, acknowledge that their
ancient Doctors and Masters expounded this Psalm concerning the Messiah.
Themselves, some of them apply it unto David; and say it was composed by some
of the singers concerning him, when he was anointed King, which the Philistines
hearing of, prepared to war against him, 2 Samuel 5.17. This is the conceit of
Rashi; who therein is followed by sundry Christian Expositors, with no
advantage to the Faith. And I presume they observed not the Reason he gives for
his Exposition; Our Masters, says he, of blessed memory, interpret this Psalm
of the King Messiah; (...), but as the words sound, and to answer the
Heretics, it is meet, or right to expound it of David. Those words (...), and
that we may answer the Heretics, or Christians, are left out in the Venice and
Basil Editions of his Comments, but were in the old Copies of them. And this is
the plain Reason why they would apply this Psalm to David, of whom not one
Verse of it can be truly and rightly expounded, as shall be manifested
elsewhere; And it is a wise answer which they give in Midrash Tehillim unto
that Testimony of v. 7. where Gods calls the Messiah his Son, to prove him to
be the natural Son of God. (...); And hence we may have an Answer for the
Heretics, who say that the holy blessed God has a Son. But do thou answer, he
says not thou art a Son to me; but thou art my Son. As though (...), thou art
my Son, did not more directly express the Filiation of the Person spoken of,
than (...) would do. (...) is more emphatically expressive of a natural
Relation, then (...), my Son, than a Son to me; See Genesis 27.21. And in this
Psalm we have a good part of the Creed of the Ancient Church concerning the
Messiah, as may be learned from the Exposition of it.

Targum; Because of the Miracles and Redemption which thou shall work for thy
Messiah. I mention this place only, that it may appear, that the Jews had a
Tradition amongst them, that David in this Psalm bare the person of the
Messiah, and was considered as his Type. And hence our Apostle applies those
words, v. 3. (...), I will put my trust in him, unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
Heb. 2. v. 13. See also Psalm 20. v. 7.

The King shall joy in thy strength O Lord. Targum, (...), the King Messiah
shall rejoice. v. 7. For the King trusts in the Lord. Targum; Messiah the
King. And in Midrash Tehillim those words of v. 3. Thou set a Crown of pure
Gold on his head, are also applied unto him. There is no mention of him in the
Targum on Psalm 22. nor in the Midrash; but we shall afterward prove at large,
that whole Psalm to belong unto him, and to have been so acknowledged by some
of their ancient Masters, against the Oppositions and Cavils of their latter
Seducers.

Targum has given an especial Title unto this Psalm, (...), A Psalm of Praise
for the Elders (Assessors) of the Sanhedrim of Moses: intimating that something
eminent is contained in it. And those words, v. 2. Thou art fairer than the
children of men; are rendered in it (...); Thy Beauty O King Messiah is more
excellent than that of the Sons of Men; And Grace, in the next words is
interpreted by (...) the Spirit of Prophecy; not amiss; And those words v. 7.
Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, are retained with little alteration.
(...), The Seat of thy Glory O God, remains for ever and ever: applying it
unto the Messiah; which illustrious Testimony given unto his Deity, shall be
vindicated in our Exposition of the words, as cited by our Apostle; Heb. 8.
Kimchi expounds this Psalm of the Messiah. Aben Ezra says, it is spoken of
David, (...) or concerning Messiah his Son, who is likewise called David; as
David my Servant shall be their Prince for ever. Ezekiel. 37. v. 25.

Psalm 68. and 69. are illustrious Prophecies of the Messiah, though the Jews
take little notice of them; and that because they treat of two things which
they will not acknowledge concerning him; The former expresses him to be God,
v. 17, 18. and the other his sufferings from God and men, v. 26. both which
they deny and oppose. But in Shemoth Rabba, Sect. 35. they say of the (...), v.
32. The Princes that shall come out of Egypt, (...); All Nations shall bring
gifts to the King Messiah, referring the Psalm to his days and work. The same
Exposition is given of the place in Midrash, Esther, cap. 1. v. 1. and by R.
Obodia Haggaon on the Place.

Give the King thy Judgments O God; Targ. (...) Give the sentence of thy
Judgment unto the King Messiah. And herein they generally agree. Midrash on
the Title; (...); This is the King Messiah, as it is said, a Rod shall come
forth from the stemm of Jesse, Isa. 11. v. 1. And Aben Ezra on the same Title;
(...); A Prophecy of David, or of one of the Singers, concerning Solomon, or
concerning the M^ssiah. And Kim^hi acknowledges that this Psalm is expounded
by many of them concerning the Messiah. Rashi applies it unto Solomon, as a
Prayer of David for him; whereof he gives this as the occasion: (...); He
Prayed this Prayer for his Son Solomon, because he saw by the Holy Ghost that
he would ask of God an heart to understand, and keep, or do Judgment. And
although he endeavors vainly to apply v. 5. unto his days, They shall fear
thee as long as the Sun and Moon endure; and v. 7. In his days shall the
Righteous flourish, and abundance of Peace, (...), until there be no Moon; yet
when he comes unto those words, v. 16. (...), there shall* be an handful of
Corn in the Earth, he adds, Our Masters interpret this of the Cates or Dainties
in the Days of the M^ssi^h, and expound the whole Psalm concerning Messiah the
King; And this he was enforced unto, lest he should appear too openly to
contradict the Talmudists, who frequently apply this Psalm unto him, and have
long Discourses about some passages in it, especially this (...), v. 16. and
(...), v. 17. which are much insisted on by Martinus Raymundus, Petrus
Galatinus, and others.

The vulgar Latin for (...), reads erit Firmamentum; in terra, which I should
suppose to be corrupted from frum^ntum; but that the LXX. who are followed also
by other Translations, as the Arabic and Aethiopick, read (...), firmamentum.
And this some think to be corrupted from (...), an handful of Corn, which is
very probable. Neither is the word (...) any where else used in the Scripture,
and may as well have something foreign in it, as come from (...). So also v.
17. (...) is no where else used for sobolescet, or pliabit, as it is here
rendered; from (...) a Son, which is but thrice used in that signification;
Genesis 21. v. 23. by a Philistin; and Job 18. v. 19. by an Arabian; and Isa. 14.
v. 22. concerning a Son among the Chaldaeans; which argue it to be a foreign
word; being properly used in a Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles; as
this is; so in the same subject it is said (...) Chasmannim shall come to the
Messiah, Psalm. 68.32. which we render Princes, and it may be such were
intended; but the word seems to be Egyptian for Hebrew it is not, though
afterward used among the Jews, whence the family of Mattathias were called
Hasmoneans. But to return; it is evident that in this Psalm much light was
communicated unto the Church of old, into the Office, Work, Grace, Compassion
and rule of the Messiah, with the Calling, and glorious access of the Gentiles
unto him.

There is mention likewise made of him in the Targum on Psalm 8. v. 16. The
vineyard which thy right hand has planted; (...) and on the branch thou have
made strong for thy self, so our Translation; but all Old Translations, as the
LXX, vulgar Latin, Syriac^, interpret (...) not in Analogy unto the preceding
Allegory of the Vine, but from (...) v. 18. and render it, (...); Super filium
hominis, and upon the Son of man, whom thou made strong for thy self. Targum,
(...), and for the King Messiah whom thou have strengthened or fortified, for
thy self. And we know how signally in the Gospel he calls himself the Son of
man; and among other names ascribed unto him the Talmudists say, he is called
jinn^n, from (...) a Son. And v. 18. he is expressly called (...), the Son of
man, whom thou made strong for thy self; And hereunto does Aben Ezra refer
the (...) in the foregoing Verse. And for that expression, (...), let thy hand
be upon the man of thy Right hand; he observes, (...), when ever Jad the hand,
that is the hand of God, has Beth following it, it is for reproach or
punishment, unto them whom it respects; as Exodus 9. v. 3. (...), Behold the
hand of the Lord is upon thy Cattle, that is, for their destruction. And (...),
if Beth follow not, it is for praise, or help; as Psalm 119. v. 173. (...), let
thine hand help me, or be for my help. So that the words are a prayer for the
Son of man, And as our Lord Christ was the Son of man; so he was the true Vine,
whereof the Father is the Husbandman, and his Disciples the branches, John 15.
v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And he himself also was called out of Egypt, Matthew. 2. v.
15. as was the Vine spoken of in this Psalm; so that, he who is afflicted in
all the afflictions of his People, is principally intended in this Prophetical
Psalm. Aben Ezra would have the Son of man, to be Israel; but not seeing how
well it can be accommodated unto them, he adds, the words may respect Messiah
Ben Ephraim an Idol of their own setting up. But the Targum acknowledges the
true Messiah here; For whose sake the Church is blessed, and by whom it is
delivered.

The 110th Psalm is a signal Prophecy of him; describing his Person, Kingdom,
Priesthood, and the work of Redemption, wrought by him. But whereas sundry
things in this Psalm, are interpreted and applied unto the Lord Christ by our
Apostle in his Epistle unto the Hebrews, where they fall directly under our
consideration, I shall here only briefly reflect on some of their own
confessions, although it be a signal declaration of the faith of the Church of
old, scarcely to be paralleled in any other place. The later Masters indeed
observing how directly and openly this Psalm is applied unto the Lord Christ in
the New Testament, and how plainly all the Passages of it are accommodated unto
the Faith of Christians concerning the Messiah, his Office and Work, do
endeavor their utmost to wrest it unto any other, as shall elsewhere be
manifested. Yea, the Targum its self is here silent of the Messiah, for the
very same Reason, and perverts the whole Psalm to apply it unto David; and yet
is forced on v. 4. to refer the things spoken of unto the World to come, or
Days of the Messiah. And the most of their Masters when they mention this
Psalm occasionally, and mind not the Controversy they have about it with
Christians, do apply it unto him. So does the Midrash Tehillim on Psalm 2. v.
7. and also on this Psalm, v. 1. though there be an endeavor therein foolishly
to wrest it unto Abraham. Ra. Saadias Gaon, on Dan. 7. v. 13. whose words are
reported by Solomon Jarchi on Genesis 35. v. 8. Ra. Arama on Genesis 15. as he is at
large cited by Munster on this Psalm. Moses Haddarshan on Genesis 18. v. 1. Ra.
Obediah, on the place; All whose words it would be tedious here to report. It
is sufficiently manifest that they have an open conviction, that this Psalm
contains a Prophecy concerning the Messiah; and what excellent things are
revealed therein touching his Person, and Offices, we shall have occasion to
declare in the Exposition of the Epistle its self, wherein the most material
passages of it, are applied unto our Lord Jesus Christ.

Targum on the Canticles there is frequent mention also of the M^ssiah; as
Chap. 1. v. 8. Chap. 4. v. 5. Chap. 7. v. 14. Chap. 8. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. But
because the Jews are utterly ignorant of the true Spiritual sense of that
Divine Song, and the Targum of it, is a confused Miscellany of things
sufficiently heterogeneous, being a much later endeavor than the most of those
on the other Books, I shall not particularly insist on the places cited, but
content my self with directing the Reader unto them. The like also may be said
of Eccles. Chap. 1. v. 11. Chap. 7. v. 25. where without any occasion from the
Text, the mention of him is importunely inculcated by the Targumists.

Prophets, the Principal Work of some whereof, was to testify before hand the
sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that was to follow, 1 Pet. 1. v. 11. And
therefore I do not at all design to gather up in our passage all that is
foretold, promised, declared and taught concerning him in them, (a work right
worthy of more peace, leisure and ability than what in any kind I am entrusted
withal) but only to report some of the most eminent places, concerning which we
have the common suffrage of the Jews in their general Application unto the
Messiah. Among these, that of Isaiah, Chap. 2. v. 2, 3, 4. occurreth in the
first place. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of
the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and
shall be exalted in the top of the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it:
and many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his Ways,
and we will walk in his Paths: For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations, and
shall rebuke many people, and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares.

The same Prophecy is given out by Micah, in the same words, Chap. 4. v. 1, 2,
3. And by the common consent of the Jews, the Messiah is here intended,
although he be not mentioned in the Targum. The Talmudical Fable also of the
lifting up of Jerusalem three Leagues high, and the setting of Mount Moriah on
the top of Sinai, Carmel, and Tabor which shall be brought together unto that
purpose, mentioned in Midrash Tehellim, and in Baba Bathra; distinc. Hammocher,
is wrested from these words. But those also of them who pretend to more
sobriety, do generally apply them to the promised Messiah. Kimchi gives it for
a Rule, that that expression, (...) in the latter days, does still denote the
times of the Messiah, which I suppose is not liable unto any exception. And as
he gives a tolerable Exposition of the establishing of the Mountain of the
Lord, on the top of the Mountains, assigning it to the Glory of the Worship of
God, above all the False and Idolatrous Worship of the Gentiles, which they
observed on Mountains and High Places, so concerning those words, v. 4. (...),
he shall judge among the Nations, he says (...), This Judge; or He that
judges is the King Messiah. The like also says Aben Ezra on the same place,
and Jarchi on the same words in the Prophecy of Micah. And as this is true, so
whereas Jehovah alone is mentioned in the foregoing Verses, unto whom and no
other this expression can relate, how it is possible for them to deny that the
Messiah is the Lord, the God of Jacob also; for undeniably it is he, concerning
whom it is said, that he shall judge among the Nations; And by their confession
that it is the Messiah who is the Shophet the Judge here intended, they are
plainly convinced out of their own mouths, and their infidelity condemned by
themselves.

Abarbinel seems to have been aware of this entanglement, and therefore as he
wrests the Prophecy, (by his own confession contrary to the sense of all other
Expositors) unto the times of the building of the Second Temple; so because he
could not avoid the conviction of one that should judge among the Nations, he
makes it to be the House it self, wherein as he says, Thrones for Judgment
were to be erected; the vanity of which figment secures it from any further
confutation. We have then evidently in these words three Articles of the Faith
of the Ancient Church concerning the Messiah; as First, That as to his Person,
he should be God and man; the God of Jacob, who should in a bodily presence
judge the People, and send forth the Law among the Nations, v. 4. Secondly,
That the Gentiles should be called unto faith in him, and the Obedience of his
Law, v. 3. Thirdly, That the Worship of the Lord in the days of the Messiah
should be far more glorious than at any time whilst the first Temple was
standing, for so it is foretold, v. 2. and so our Apostle proves it to be, in
his Epistle to the Hebrews. And this whole Prophecy is not a little perverted
by them, who apply it to the defeat of Resin and Pekah when they came against
Jerusalem, and who in their Annotations on the Scripture, whereby they have won
to themselves a great Reputation in the world, seldom depart from the sense of
the Jews, unless it be where they are in the Right.

Isa. 4. v. 2. In that day shall the branch of the Lord be Beauty and Glory.
Targ. at that time shall the Messiah of the Lord be for Joy and Honor. And
this Prophecy also is by the most learned of the Rabbis applied unto the
Messiah. Kimchi interprets (...), the branch, by that of Jerem. 23. v. 5. I
will raise up unto David a Righteous Branch, a King shall reign and prosper.
Aben Ezra enclines unto them who would have Hezekiah to be intended; a
Christian Expositor refers the words to Ezra and Nehemiah, upon the return from
the Captivity, on what grounds he does not declare. Abarbinel having, as is his
manner always, repeated the various Expositions and Opinions of others, adds
at last, (...); others expound the words of the Messiah our Righteousness; let
him be speedily revealed. But they may also do well to consider, that the
Person here promised to be the Beauty and Glory of the Church, by whom the
Remnant of Israel, which are written in the Book of Life shall be saved, is the
BRANCH of the Lord, and the Fruit of the Earth; which better expresses his two
Natures in one Person, than that he should be for a while a barren Branch, and
afterward bear fruit in the destruction of Gog and Magog, which is their gloss
on the words.

The illustrious Prophesies concerning the name of the Messiah, Immanuel, and
his being born of a Virgin, Chap. 7. and 8. must be handled apart afterward
and vindicated from the exceptions of the Jews, and are therefore here omitted.

Isaiah 9. v. 6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Targ. (...), And his
Name is called of old, (...) is the same with (...); Micah 5. v. 2. Targ.
(...); that is, as in the next words, from everlasting, from the days of
Eternity. For although (...), be frequently used for (...) from before the face
or sight, as the words of the Targumist are here vulgarly translated, (as in
the Translation in the Polyglott Bibles) a facie admirabilis Consilii Deus,
which is blamed by Cartwright in his Mellificium, for not putting Deus in the
Genitive Case, as well as admirabilis, (which indeed were rational, if (...)
were necessarily a facie,) but it is also used absolutely with reference unto
time, and so there is no need that the following words should be regulated
thereby. So is it twice used, as Prove. 8. v. 22. (...), and before his works,
that were wrought; that is from Eternity. And v. 23. (...); and before the
World. And in that sense is (...) always used; as Isaiah 23. v. 7. Psalm 78.
v. 2. Isa. 46. v. 10. And thus the words will yield a better sense than a facie
admirabilis Consilii Deus; or that which they are cast into by Seb. Munster;
mirificantis consilium Deo fortissimo qui manet in secula. For there is no need
a we have seen that the words should be cast into the Genitive Case by (...).
And although the Targumist renders (...) the Participle, Counselor, by the
Substantive (...) Counsel, yet this hinders not, but that it may express one
of his Names: Wonderful, Counsel, God; or mirificans consilium Deus; or, the
God of Wonderful counsel. One, from some of the Jews, takes another way to
pervert these words. Consiliarius, Deus fortis, imo says he, Consultator Dei
fortis; i. Qui in omnibus negotiis consilia a Deo poscet, per Prophetas
scilicet; whereby this clear and honorable Testimony given unto the Deity of
our Lord Jesus Christ, is weakened and impaired.

Again the Targumist renders (...) be called, by (...) in a Passive Sense;
which obviates the principal exception of the Modern Jews, who interpret it
Actively, that it may be referred to God the Wonderful Counselor, who shall
call him the Prince of Peace. But as this is contrary to the Targum, so also to
the use of the word in like cases. For this Declaration of the Name of the
Child promised, answers the Proclamation made of the Name of God, Exodus 34. v.
6. where (...) is well rendered by Ours, and proclaimed, or, and there was
proclaimed; the name following sounded in his ears. Where the Vulgar Latin
translating the word Actively, and applying it unto Moses; Stetit Moses cum eo
invocans nomen Domini, quo transcunte coram eo ait, Dominator Domine Deus;
Moses stood with him calling on the Name of the Lord, who passing by he said, O
mighty Ruler, Lord God; both corrupts the proper sense of the words, and gives
us that which is directly untrue: For not Moses, but God himself gave out and
proclaimed that Name as it is said expressly that he would do, Chap. 33. v. 19.
and as Moses himself afterward pleaded that he had done, Numb. 14. v. 17, 18.
But this by the way, to obviate the Judaical Sophism mentioned, that would make
all the names in the Text, unless it be the Prince of Peace, to precede the
Verb, and that to be actively understood.

Targum; (...); The words are variously rendered; some refer (...) to (...)
that goes before; so expressing them by, Deus Fortis, or Fortissimus; the
mighty God. Others as the Translation in the Biblia Regia, and Londin. refer to
the words following, (...), and render it by Vir, the man; vir permanens in
aeternum; the man abiding for ever; but it does not seem that this sense will
hold; for although (...) do signify a man; the same with the Hebrew (...), yet
(...) is not so used, but only for Fortis or Fortissimus, (...) the word used
in the Original is applied to God and men; but here it seems to be joined with
(...), and to signify as by us translated the mighty God; which the Targumist
endeavored also to express; and so by (...) permanens in secula, abideing for
ever, he rendereth (...) the Father of Eternity, significantly enough. Also
(...) is joined by some with (...); and rendered Messia Pacis, for (...) the
Prince of Peace; but this connection of the words those that follow will not
well bear; wherefore, they place the name Messiah absolutely, and render the
following words, whose Peace shall be multiplied unto us in his Days.

Targum, the present Jews are much to be pressed withal; and there are not many
from which they feel their entanglements more urgent upon them. And it would at
the same time, move compassion at their blindness, and indignation against
their obstinacy, for any one seriously to consider how woefully they wrest the
words up and down to make a tolerable application of them unto Hezekiah, whom
they would fix this Prophecy upon; and on the occasion given us by the Targum,
I shall take a little view of their sentiments on this place of the Prophet.
That of old they esteemed a Prophecy of the Messiah, not only the Targum as we
have seen, but the Talmud also does acknowledge. Besides also they manifest the
same conviction in their futilous Traditions. In Tractat. Saned. Distino.
Cholech; They have a Tradition that God thought to have made Hezekiah to be the
Messiah, and Senacherib to have been Gog and Magog; but (...), the Property of
Judgment interposed, and asked why David rather was not made the Messiah, who
had made so many Songs to the praise of God. And Rabbi Hillel, as we shall see
afterward, contended, that Israel was not any more to look for a Messiah,
seeing they enjoyed him in Hezekiah. Now these vain Traditions arose merely
from the concessions of their old Masters, granting the Messiah to be here
spoken of, and the craft of their later ones, wresting the words unto Hezekiah,
so casting them into confusion, that they knew not what to say, nor believe;
But let us see how they acquit themselves at last in this matter.

Four things are here promised concerning this Child, or Son that should be
given Government should be on his shoulder. (2.) That his name should be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace. (3.) That of the increase of his Government there should be no end. (4.)
That he should sit on the Throne of David to order it for ever. And we may see
how well they accommodate these things unto Hezekiah, their endeavors being
evidently against the Faith of the ancient Church, the Traditions of their
Fathers, and it may be doubted their own light and conviction.

First, The Government shall be on his shoulder, says Sol. Jarchi; Because the
Rule and yoke of God shall be upon him in the study of the Law; This pleases
not Kimchi (as it is indeed ridiculous) and therefore he observes that mention
is not made of the Shoulder, but with reference unto Burden and weight; whence
he gives this interpretation of the words. (...); Because Ahaz served the King
of Assyria, and his burden was on his shoulder, he says of this Child, he
shall not be a servant with his shoulder, but the Government shall be on him.
And this it seems is all that is here promised; and this is all the concernment
of the Church in this Promise; Hezekiah shall not serve the King of Assyria.
Neither is it true, that Ahaz served the King of Assyria under tribute; and it
may seem rather that Hezekiah did so for a season, seeing it is expressly said,
that he rebelled against him, and served him no more: 2 Chronicles. 18. v. 7. Yea,
plainly he did so, and paid him by way of tribute, three hundred Talents of
Silver, and thirty talents of Gold, 2 Kings 18. v. 14. So He. Aben Ezra passes
over this expression without taking notice of it.

Secondly, As to the name ascribed unto him, they are for the most part agreed,
and one evasion which they have fixed on, will relieve them, they are utterly
silent; Now this is, as was before declared, that the words are to be read, The
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, shall call his
Name the Prince of Peace; so that the Prince of Peace only is the name of the
promised Child, all the rest are the Name of God. But (1.) If words may be so
transposed, and shufled together, as they are to produce this sense, there will
nothing be left certain in the Scripture; nor can they give any one instance of
such a disposal of words, as they fancy in this place. (2.) The very reading of
the words rejects this Gloss, He shall call his Name Wonderful; (3.) It is the
name of the Child, and not of God that gives him, which is expressed for the
comfort of the Church: (4.) What tolerable Reason can be given for such an
accumulation of Names unto God in this place? (5.) There is nothing in the
l^ast, not any distinctive accent, to separate between the Prince of Peace, and
the expressions foregoing; but the same Person is intended by them all; so that
it was not Hezekiah, but the mighty God himself, who in the Person of the Son
was to be incarnate, that is here spoken of.

Besides, on what account should Hezekiah so eminently be called The Prince of
Peace? Prince, is never used in the Scripture with reference unto any thing,
but he that is so called, has chief Power and Authority over that whereof he
is the (...) Prince, Chief, or Captain; as (...) is the General, or Chief
Commander of the Army, under whose Command, and at whose disposal it is. By the
Greeks it is rendered (...) and (...); as the Apostle calls our Lord Jesus
Christ (...), Acts 13.15. the Prince of Life; and (...), Heb. 2. v. 10. The
Prince or Captain of Salvation. Nor is the word once in the Old Testament
applied unto any one, but he that had Power and Authority over that which he
was the (...), or Prince of, to give, grant, or dispose of it, as he thought
meet; And in what sense then can Hezekiah be called the Prince of Peace? Had he
the Power of Peace of any sort in his hand? Was he the Lord of it? Was it at
his disposal? The most of his reign he spent in War; first with his Neighbors
the Philistines, 2 Kings 18. v. 8. And afterward with the King of Assyria; who
took all the Cities of Juda, one or two only excepted, 2 Kings 18. v. 13. And
in what sense shall he be called the Prince of Peace? The Rabbis, after their
wonted manner to fetch any thing out of a word whether it be ought to their
Purpose or no, answer, that it was because of that saying, Isa. 39. v. 8. For
there shall be Peace and Truth in my days. But this being spoken with respect
unto the very latter part of his Reign, and that only with reference unto the
Babylonian Captivity which was afterward to ensue, is a sorry foundation to
entitle him unto this illustrious Name, the Captain, Prince, or Lord of Peace;
which bespeaks one that had all Peace, (and that in the Scripture Language, is
all that is Good or prosperous both temporal and spiritual, in reference unto
God and man) in his power and disposal. And yet this is the utmost that any of
them pretend to give countenance unto this Appellation.

Abarbinel, who heaps together the Interpretations, Conjectures and Traditions
of most that went before him, seems to agree with Kimchi in that, of the
Government being upon his Shoulder, because his Father Ahaz sent (...), a
Present unto the King of Assyria, but he did not; whereas it is expressly said,
that he paid him Tribute of three hundred Talents of Silver and thirty Talents
of Gold, for the raising whereof, he emptied his own Treasures, and the
Treasures of the House of God, yea, and cut off the Gold from the Doors and
Pillars of the Temple, 2 Kings 18. v. 15, 16. yet he mentions that other fancy
of Rashi about the study of the Law, and so leaves it. But in this of the Name
ascribed unto him he would take another course; For finding Hezekiah in their
Talmud. Tract. Saned. Pereck Chelek, called by his Masters, (...), He who had
eight names, as Senacherib is also childishly there said to have had, he would
in the first place, ascribe all these names unto Hezekiah, giving withal such
Reasons of them, as I dare not be so importune on the Readers patience, as to
transcribe; and himself after he had ascribed this Opinion to Jonathan the
Targumist, and Rashi, embraces the other of Kimchi before confuted. And yet
knows not how to abide by that neither.

Hezekiah, that of the increase of his Government there should be no end;
seeing he lived but four and fifty years, and reigned but twenty five, And his
own Son Manasseh who succeeded him, was carried captive into Babyl^n. But as
unto this Question, and that which follows, about his sitting upon the Throne
of David for ever, after they have puzzled themselves with the great Mystery of
Mem Clausum in (...), they would have us to suppose that these words concerned
only the life of Hezekiah, though it be not possible that any other word should
be used more significantly expressing Perpetuity.

Of the increase of his Government, (...) no end, it shall be endless; and he
shall rule (...), from hence, or now, and, unto for ever, for evermore.

And thus by the Vindication of this Place from the Rabbinical Exceptions, we
have not only obtained our principal intention, about the promise of a
Deliverer, but also showed, who and what manner of Person he was to be, even a
Child that was to be born, who should also be, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, whose Rule and Dominion was to endure for ever.

The yoke shall be destroyed because of the Anointing. Targum; (...); and the
People shall be broken before the Messiah. And it may be some respect may be
had in these words unto the Promised Seed, upon whose account the yoke of the
oppressors of the Church shall be broken; but the words are variously
interpreted, and I shall not contend.

And there shall come forth a rod out of the stemm of Jesse, and a branch shall
grow out of his Roots. Targum. (...); And a King shall come forth from the Sons
of Jesse, and Messiah shall be anointed from the Sons of his Sons; his
Posterity.

Ver. 6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb: Targum (...), In the days of the
Messiah of Israel peace shall be multiplied in the earth, -- and the Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb. That this Chapter contains a Prophecy of the Messiah and
his Kingdom, and that immediately and directly, all the Jews confess; Hence is
that part of their usual Song in the Evening of the Sabbath.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Shake thy self from dust, arise
My People clothed in glorious guise,
For from Bethlehem Jesse's Son
Brings to my soul Redemption.
They call him the Son of Jesse from this place; which makes it somewhat
observable that some Christians, as Grotius, should apply it unto Hezekiah,
Judaizing in their interpretations beyond the Jews. Only the Jews are not well
agreed in what sense those words, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc. are to be understood. Some would have
it, that the nature of the brute Beasts shall be changed in the days of the
Messiah; but this is rejected by the wisest of them, as Maimonides, Kimchi,
Aben Ezra and others; and these interpret the words (...), allegorically,
applying them unto that Universal Peace which shall be in the world in the
days of the Messiah. But the Peace they fancy, is far from answering the words
of the Prophecy, which express a change in the nature of the worst of men, by
virtue of the Rule and Grace of the Messiah. I cannot but add that Abarbinel
writing his Commentaries about the time that the Europaean Christian Nations
were fighting with the Saracens for the Land of Palestine, or the Holy Land, he
interprets the latter end of the tenth Chapter, to the destruction of them on
both sides by God, whereon their Messiah should be revealed, as is promised in
this, which he expresses in the close of his Exposition of the first Verse of
Chap. 11. (...); And there shall prevail great War between the Nations of the
world, one against another, on, or for the Holy Land, and strong Nations shall
fall in it by the sword of one another, and therefore it is said, behold the
Lord, the Lord of Host shall lop. Chap. 10. v. 33. And a little after, he adds,
(...); in the midst of that War shall Messiah the King be revealed; For those
Nations he would have had to be Gog and Magog; and in many places does he
express his hopes of the ruin of the Christians by that War; but the issue
has disappointed his hopes and desires.

Ise. 16. v. 1. Send ye the Lamb to the Ruler of the Land. Targum, (...); They
shall bring their Tribute unto the Messiah of Israel. O^serving as it should
seem, that the Moabites unto whom these words are spoken, were never after this
time tributary to Judah, and withal considering the Prophecy of v. 5. which
he applies also (and that properly) unto the Messiah, the Targumist conceived
him to be the (...), or Ruler here mentioned, unto whom the Moabites are
invited to yield obedience; and I conceive it will not be very easy to fix
upon a more genuine sense of the words. So also ver. 5. Then shall the Throne
of the Messiah of Israel be prepared in Goodness. Doubtless with more Truth
than those Christians make use of, who wrest these words also to Hezekiah.

Isa. 28.5. In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a Crown of Glory;
Targum; the Messiah of the Lord of Hosts: the Lord of Hosts, in and with the
Messiah, who is the Crown of Glory, and Diadem of Beauty in his Kingly Office
and Rule unto the Remnant of his People that shall be saved by him.

Isa. 42. v. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold; my Elect. Targum, (...),
Behold my servant the Messiah. How much better than the Translation of the LXX.
(...); applying the words to the whole People of Israel, whereas they are
expressly referred to the Lord Christ, Mat. 12. v. 17, 18. And Kimchi on this
place, (...), behold my servant; that is Messiah the King; And Abarbinel
confutes both R. Saadias, and Aben Ezra with sharpness, who were otherwise
minded. How much better than he of late, who interprets these words of Isaiah
himself, unto whom not one letter of the Prophecy can receive any tolerable
accommodation. It is the Messiah then, by their own confession, who is intended
in this Prophecy; who is described not on horseback in his harness as a great
Warrior, such as they expect him, but one filled with the Spirit of the Lord,
endowed with meekness, suffering opposition and persecution, bringing forth
righteousness and truth unto the Gentiles, who shall wait for his Law, and
receive it, when it is rejected by the Jews, as the event has manifested, Isa.
43. v. 10. My servant whom I have chosen; Targum. My servant Messiah in whom I
rest.

Isa. 52.13. Behold my servant shall prosper. Targum, (...); Behold my servant
the Messiah shall prosper; In these words begins that Prophecy which takes up
the remainder of this Chapter, and that whole Chapter that follows; in the
tenth Verse whereof there is mention made again of the Messiah. And this is an
evidence to me that the Jews however bold and desperate in corrupting the sense
of the Scripture, to countenance their infidelity, yet have not dared to
intermeddle with the letter its self, no not in the Targums, which are not so
sacred with them as the Text. For whereas the application of this Prophecy
unto the Messiah is perfectly destructive to their whole present Persuasion and
Religion, with all the hopes they have in this world, or for another, yet they
never durst attempt the corrupting of the Targum where it is done, so plainly;
which yet for many Generations they had in their own power, scarce any notice
being taken of it by any Christians in the world. But concerning this place we
must deal with them afterward at large.

And I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch. Targum: (...); and I will
raise up unto David Messiah the Righteous. This is he who in the next Verse is
called (...) Jehovah our Righteousness. The Jews generally agree that it is the
Messiah who is here intended; and whereas a late Christian Expositor would have
Zerubbabel to be designed in these words, Abarbinel himself, gives many reasons
why it cannot be applied unto any one under the Second Temple. For says he,
during that space, no one reigned as King of the house of David, nor did Judah
and Israel dwell then in safety and security, they being continually oppressed,
first by the Persians, then by the Graecians, and lastly, by the Romans. So He
and truly; and I see no Reason, why one should pervert the Promises concerning
the Messiah, when they cannot tolerably accommodate them unto any other.

For the Preservation of the name of this Righteous Branch, (...), Jehovah our
Righteousness; we may bless God for the Original; For the Old Translations are
either mistaken, or corrupt, or perverted in this place. The Vulgar Latin is
the best of them which reads, Dominus justus noster; our Righteous Lord; which
yet corrupts the sense; and gives us an expression, that may be assigned unto
any Righteous King.

The LXX. far worse; (...); And this is the name that the Lord shall call him
Josedec. A corrupt word formed out of the two Hebrew words in the Original,
signifying nothing, but perverted as it were on purpose to despoil the Messiah
of his glorious name, the evidence of his eternal Deity. Symmachus (...); Lord
justify us; He seems as one observes to have read (...) in Pihel; but yet this
also obscures the Text.

The Chaldee according unto its usual manner, when any thing occurs which its
Author understood not, gives us a gloss of its own sufficiently perverting the
sense of the place. (...) let righteousness come forth to us from before the
Lord in his days. Let them consider this instance, which is but one of many
that may be given, who are ready to despise the Original Text, to prefer
Translations before it, and to cherish suspicions of its being corrupted by the
Jews, or of their arbitrary inventions of its Points or Vowells, whereby the
sense of the words is fixed and limited. Can there be any clearer acquitment of
them in this matter, than this certain Observation; that every place almost
which bears Testimony unto any thing concerning the Messiah which is denied by
them, is far more clear in the Original, than in any old Translation what ever.
And hereof we have an eminent instance in this place, where this name denoting
undeniably the Divine Nature of the Messiah, is preserved entire only on the
Original, and that as it is pointed, as some fancy by some Jewish Masarites who
lived they know not where, nor when. And those amongst our selves who are ready
to give countenance unto such Opinions, or to admire the promoters of them, may
do well to consider what reflection they cast thereby on that Translation which
is of use among us, by the Command of Authority, than which there is no one
extant in the world, that is more Religiously observant of the Hebrew Text, and
that as pointed in their Bibles; nor has it any regard unto any, or all
Translations, where they differ from the Original, as may be seen with especial
respect unto that of the LXX. the stream that feeds most of the rest, in above
a thousand places. But this by the way.

One of late has applied this name unto the People of Israel; and interprets
the words, Deus nobis been fecit; God has done well unto us. But we have had
too much of such bold and groundless conjectures about the fundamentalls of our
Faith and Worship. The Jews seek to evade this Testimony, by instances of the
Applications of this name to other things; as the Altar built by Moses, the
Ark, and the City of Jerusalem. But it is one thing to have the name of God
called on a place or thing to bring the occasion of it unto remembrance;
another to say that this is the name of such a Person, Jehovah our
Righteousness. And whereas the Holy Ghost says expressly that this is his name,
the Jews must give us leave to call him so, and to believe him so; which is all
we contend for. Of the same importance with this Prophecy is that of Ezekiel. 37.
v. 24.

Jerem. 30.21. Their Nobles shall be of themselves and their Governor shall
proceed from the midst of them. Targum; Their King shall be anointed from
amongst them; and their Messiah shall be revealed unto them. And upon his
account it is that God enters into a new Covenant with his People: v. 22.

Jerem. 33. v. 13, 15. For those words, Flocks shall pass again under the hand
of him that tells them, the Targum reads, (...), and the People shall be yet
gathered by the Messiah; and a Prophecy of him it is no doubt, as the
fifteenth Verse makes it evident, where all the Jews acknowledge him to be
intended by the Branch of Righteousness which shall spring up unto David; who
also is promised in the sixth Verse, as the Abundance, or Crown of Truth and
Peace; yet one of late has wrested this place also to Zerubbabel.

Hos. 3.5. Seek the Lord their God and David their King. Targum, (...); and
shall obey the Messiah the Son of David their King; The Rabbis are divided
about this place; some of them acknowledging the Messiah to be intended, others
referring the Prophecy unto the Temple, or House of the Sanctuary built by the
Son of David. But the words themselves, with the denotation of the time for the
accomplishment of this Prophecy in the end of the Verse, will allow of no
application unto any other; and plainly discovers his mistake who would wrest
this Text also to Zerubbabel.

Hos. 14.8 Targum, They shall sit under the shadow of Messiah: See Cant. 2.3.

Micah. 4. v. 8. And thou Tower of the flock, etc. (...); And thou Messiah of
Israel, who art hid because of the sins of the Congregation of Zion, to thee
the Kingdom shall come. This gloss I confess draws upon the Lees of Talmudical
Rabbinism; for they fancy that their Messiah was long since born, even at the
appointed time, but is kept hid, they know not where, because of the sins of
Israel.

Micah 5. v. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me the Ruler over
Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. Targ.
(...); out of thee shall the Messiah come forth before me to exercise Rule over
Israel. This Prophecy was famous among the Jews of old, as designing the place
where the M^ssiah was to be born, which alone is done here; and its signal
accomplishment is recorded, Matthew. 2.1, 5, 6. Luke 2.6, 7. And unto this day
they generally acknowledge that it is the Messiah alone who is intended. And
yet this consent of all the Jews, Ancient and Modern, with the application of
it unto the true Messiah in the Gospel, manifesting the Catholic consent of
both Churches Judaical and Christian about the sense of this place, hinder not
one from interpreting this place of Zerubbabel, whose goings forth as he
supposes, are said to be of old, from everlasting, because he came of the
ancient Kingly House of David, whereas not one word of the Prophecy ever had
any tolerable appearance of accomplishment in him. For neither was he born at
Bethlehem, nor was he the Ruler over the Israel of God; much less had he the
least share or interest in those eternal Goings forth which are expressed in
the close of the Verse. The words are an express description of the Person of
the Messiah, who though he was to be born in the fullness of time at Bethlehem,
yet the existence of his Divine Nature was from of old, from Everlasting. And
the Jews know not how to evade this Testimony. Rashi adds in the interpretation
of the words, only that of Psalm 72. v. 17. (...), which we have rendered, his
name shall be continued as long as the Sun; not reaching the sense of the
place. (...) is rendered by the Targum (...); and before the Sun was, an
expression of Eternity. As Prove. 8. v. 23. Kimchi and Aben Ezra would have the
words respect that long season that was to be between David and the Messiah.
Bethlehem, says Kimchi that is David who was born there, and (...), there is a
long time between David and the Messiah; But this Gloss is forced, and has
nothing in the words to give countenance unto it. It is the Messiah that is
said to be born at Bethlehem, and not David, as shall afterward be evinced;
And (...), denotes some Acts, or actings of him that is spoken of and not his
Relation unto another not spoken of at all. Neither do those words (...) denote
a long time, but directly that which is before all times; See. Prove. 8.22. He
yet proceeds to answer them who say the Messiah is God from this place, because
of this description of him. And first rejects the Lord Christ from being here
intended, as supposing an Objection to be made with reference unto him, though
he express it not; for says he (...) this is an answer unto them, (...). He
ruled not over Israel but they ruled over him. Where it is evident that some
sentence written by him is left out of the Copies Printed among Christians. But
poor, blind, blasphemous wretch; this boast has cost him and his associates in
infidelity full dear. It is true, their Progenitors did unto him what ever the
Counsel of God had determined; But notwithstanding all their rage, he was
exalted by the right hand of God, and made a Prince and a Savior, having ruled
ever since over the whole Israel of God, by his Word and Spirit, and over them,
his stubborn Enemies with a Rod of Iron. He adds that it is false that these
words are applicable unto the Eternity of God, for says he (...), God was
before the days of everlasting; as though in the same sense God were not
expressly said to be (...) as here; see Habbak. 1.11. and to be from
everlasting. And this place is well expounded by Prove. 8. v. 21, 22, 23. as
some of the Rabbis acknowledge; so that we have in it, an eminent Testimony
given unto the Person of the Messiah, as well as unto the place of his
Nativity. Of which we shall treat afterward.

For behold I will bring forth my servant the Branch. Targum. (...), Behold I
bring forth my servant the Messiah who shall be revealed. This Revelation of
the Messiah relates unto their apprehension of his being born long since, but
to lie hid because of their sins, as was before intimated. And in like manner
is he three times more mentioned by the Targumist in this Prophecy, Chap. 4.
v. 7. Chap. 6. v. 12. Chap. 10. v. 4. In all which places he is certainly
designed by the Holy Ghost. There are also many of them, who acknowledge him to
be intended, Chap. 9. v. 9. Chap. 11. v. 12, 13. Chap. 12. v. 10. where he is
not mentioned in the Targum. I have not insisted on these Places, as though
they were all the Testimonies that to the same purpose might be taken out of
the Prophets, seeing they are a very small portion of the Praedictions
concerning the Person, Grace and Kingdom of the Messiah, and not all those
which are most eminent in that kind; but because they are such as wherein we
have either the consent of all the Jews with us in their application, from
whence some advantage may be taken for their conviction, or we have the
suffrage of the more ancient and authentic Masters to reprove the Perverseness
of the Modern Rabbis withal.

He whom we enquire after. One who was promised from the Foundation of the
world, to relieve mankind from under that state of Sin and Misery whereinto
they were cast by their Apostasy from God. This is he who from the first
Promise of him, or intimation of Relief by him, was the Hope, Desire, Comfort,
and Expectation of all that aimed at Reconciliation and Peace with God; Upon
whom all their Religion, Faith and Worship was founded, and in whom it
centered. He, for whose sake, or for the bringing of whom into the world,
Abraham and the Hebrews his Posterity were separated to be a peculiar people
distinct from all the Nations of the Earth; In the faith of whom, the whole
Church in, and from the Days of Adam, that of the Jews in especial, celebrated
its Mystical Worship, endured Persecution and Martyrdom, waiting and praying
continually for his Appearance; He whom all the Prophets taught, Preached,
Promised, and raised up the Hearts of Believers unto a desire and expectation
of, describing before hand his sufferings, with the Glory that was to ensue. He
of whose coming a Catholic Tradition was spread over the world, which the old
Serpent, with all his subtility, was never able to obliterate.

Exercitatio X.
Ends of the Promises and Prophesies concerning the Messiah. Other ways of his
Revelation. Of his Oblation by Sacrifices. Of his Divine Person by Visions.
What meant in the Targums by (...), the Word of God. The Expression first used,
Genesis 3.8. (...), what or who. (...). Apprehensions of the Ancient Jews about
the Word of God. Of the Philosophers. Application of the Expression, (...), to
the Son by John. Expressions of Philo. Among the Mahumetans, Christ called the
Word of God. Intention of the Targumists vindicated. How the Voice walked. Aben
Ezra refuted; and R. Jona. The appearance of the second Person unto our first
Parents. Genesis 18.1, 2, 3. Gods appearance (...). Suddenness of it. Who
appeared. The occasion of it. Reflection of Aben Ezra on some Christian
Expositors: retorted. A Trinity of Persons not proved from this place. Distinct
Persons proved. No created Angel representing the Person of God called Jehovah.
Chap. 19.24. from the Lord. Exceptions of Aben Ezra and Jarchi removed.
Appearance of the second Person. Genesis 32.24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Occasion of
this Vision. The Person; in appearance a man: in Office, an Angel: in nature
God. Genesis 48.16. Hos. 12.3, 4, 5. (...) what. Who it was that appeared. Exodus
3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 14. God that appeared. Exodus 19.20, 21, 22. Who gave the Law.
Not a created Angel. The Ministry of Angels how used therein. Exodus 23.20, 21,
22, 23. Chap. 33.2, 3, 4, 13, 14. Different Angels promised. The Angel of Gods
presence who. Josh. 5.13, 14, 15. Captain of the Lords h^st described. Sense of
the Ancient Church concerning th^se Appearances. Of the Jews. Opinion of
Nachmanides. Tanchuma. Talmud. Fiction of the Angel rejected by Moses,
accepted by Joshua. Sense of it. Metatron. Wh^. Derivation of the Name.

WE have seen how plentifully God instructed the Church of old, by his
Messiah. And this He did, partly, that nothing might be wanting unto the Faith
and Consolation of Believers, in a suitableness and proportion unto that
condition of Light and Grace, wherein it was his good pleasure to keep them
before his actual coming; and partly, that his Righteous Judgments in the
rejection and ruin of those who obstinately refused him, might from the means
of their conviction be justified and rendered glorious. Neither were these
Promises and Predictions alone the means whereby God would manifest and reveal
him unto their faith.

There are two things concerning the Messiah, which are the Pillars and
Foundation of the Church. The One is his Divine Nature; and the other his Work
of Mediation in the Att^nement for sin, which he was to make by his suffering,
or the Sacrifice of himself. For the Declaration of these, unto them who
according unto the Promise looked for his coming, there were two especial ways
or means graciously designed of God. The latter of these ways, was that
Worship which he instituted, and the various Sacrifices which he appointed to
be observed in the Church, as Types and Representations of that one Perfect
Oblation which he was to offer in the Fullness of time. The unfolding and
particular application of this way of Instruction, is the principal design and
scope of the Apostle in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. Whereas therefore that
must be at large insisted on in our Exposition of that Epistle, I shall not
anticipate what is to be spoken concerning it in these previous Discourses,
which are all intended in a subserviency thereunto. The other way which
concerns his Divine Person, was by those Visions and Appearances of the Son of
God as the Head of the Church, which were granted unto the Fathers under the
Old Testament. And these as they are directly suited unto our Purpose, in our
enquiry after the Pro^nosti^^s of the Advent of the Messiah, so are they
eminently useful for the conviction of the Jews. For in them, we shall
manifest that a Revelation was made of a di^tinct Person in the Deity, who in a
peculiar manner did manage all the concernments of the Church after the
entrance of sin. And herein also according unto our proposed Method, we shall
enquire what Light concerning this Truth has been received by any of the
Jewish Masters; as also manifest, what confusions they are driven unto, when
they seek to evade the Evidence that is in the Testimonies to this Purpose.

Targumists of (...), The Word of the Lord. And it first occurs in them, on the
first appearance of a Divine Person, after the Sin and Fall of Adam. Genesis 3. v.
8. The words of the Original Text are; (...); and they heard the voice of the
Lord God walking in the Garden. The Participle (...) walking, may be as well
referred unto (...) the voice, as unto (...), the Lord God; vocem Domini Dei
ambula^tem. And although (...) most commonly signify (...), or verbum
pr^l^tum, the outward voice, and sound thereof, yet when applied unto God, it
frequently denotes (...), his Almighty Power whereby he effects what ever he
pleases. So Psalm. 29. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. those things are ascribed (...)
to this voice of the Lord, which elsewhere are assigned (...), Heb. 1. v. 3. to
the word of his Power, which the Syriack renders by the Power of his Word,
intending the same thing. Now all these mighty works of Creation or Providence
which are assigned (...), to this voice of the Lord, or (...), to the word of
his Power, or his powerful Word, are immediately wrought per (...) or (...),
by the essential Word of God, John 1. v. 3. Col. 1. v. 16. which was with God
in the Beginning, or at the Creation of all things, John 1. v. 1, 2. as his
eternal Wisdom, Prove. 8. v. 22, 23, 24, 25. and Power. This expression
therefore of (...) may also denote (...), the Word of God, that is God, the
Essential Word of God, the Person of the Son. For here our first Parents heard
this Word walking in the Garden, before they heard the outward sound of any
Voice or Words whatever. For God spoke not unto them until after this, v. 9.
The Lord God called unto Adam, and said unt^ him.

And this change of the appearance of God, some of the Jews take notice of; so
the Author of Tseror Hamm^r, Sect. Bereshith, (...), Before they sinned they
saw the Glory of the blessed God speaking with him, but after their sin, they
only heard his voice walking. God dealt now otherwise with them than he did
before. And the Chaldee Paraphrast observing that some especial presence of God
is expressed in the words, renders them, (...); And they heard the voice of the
Word of the Lord God walking in the Garden. So all the Targums; and that of
Jerusalem begins the next Verse accordingly, (...); And the Word of the Lord
God called unto Adam. And this expression they afterward make use of, in
places innumerable, and that in such a way, as plainly to denote a distinct
Person in the Deity. That this also was their intendment in it, is hence
manifest, because about the time of the writing of the first of those Targums,
which gave normam loquendi, the Rule of speaking unto them that followed, it
was usual amongst them to ^xpress their conc^ptions of the Son of God, by the
name of (...), or the Word of God, the same with (...).

So does Philo express their sense, de Confusione Linguarum, (...). If any be
not yet worthy to be called the Son of God, yet endeavor thou to be conformed
unto his first begotten Word; the m^st ancient Angel, the Archangel with many
names; for he is called the Beginning, the name of God, the man according to
the image of God, the S^er of Israel. How suitably these things are spoken unto
the Mysteries revealed in the Gospel shall elsewhere be declared. Here I only
observe how he calls that Angel which appeared unto the Fathers, and that
sometimes in humane shape, the Word, the FIRST BEGOTTEN WORD. And he expresses
himself again to the same purpose. (...). For if we are not yet meet to be
called the Sons of God, let us be so of his eternal image, the most Sacred
Word, for that most ancient Word is the image of God. How these things answer
the Discourses of our Apostle about Jesus Christ, Col. 1. v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Heb. 1. v. 3. is easily discerned. And this conception of theirs, was so far
approved by the Holy Ghost, as suitable unto the mind of God, that John in the
Beginning of his Gospel declaring the Eternal Deity of Christ does it under
this name of (...), the Word, that is (...); the Word of God; the Word that was
with God, and that was God, John 1.1. For as he alludeth therein to the story
of the first Creation, wherein God is described as making all things by his
word, for he said of every thing, let it be, and it was made, as the Psalmist
expresses it, He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fa^t, Psalm.
33. v. 9. which he fully declares, v. 6. By the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the breath of his Mouth; in answer
whereunto, he teaches that all things were made by this Word of God, whereof
he speaks, v. 3. which in the Chaldee is elsewhere also assigned unto this
Word, where mention is not made of it in the Original; as Isa. 45. v. 12. and
Chap. 48. v. 13. whence it is in like manner expressed by Peter, 2 Ep. 3. v. 5.
So he might have respect unto that ascription of the Work of the Redemption of
the Church to this Word of the Lord which was admitted in the Church of the
Jews. That place amongst others is express to this purpose, Hos. 1. v. 7. where
the words of the Prophet, I will save them by the Lord their God, are rendered
by the Targumist, (...), I will save, (or redeem) them, by the Word of the Lord
their God. The Word, the Redeemer. And it is not unworthy consideration, that
as the Wisest and most contemplative of the Philosophers of old, had many
notions about the (...), the eternal Word, which was unto them (...), the
formative or creative Power of the Universe, to which purpose many sayings have
been observed, and might be reported out of Plato, with his followers, Amelius,
Chalcidius, Proclus, Plotinus and others, whose expressions are imitated by our
own Writers, as Justin Martyr, Clemens, Athenagoras, Tatianus, and many more,
so among the Mahumetans themselves, this is the the name that in their Alcoran
they give unto Jesus, (...), the Word of God; So prevalent has this notion of
the Son of God, been in the World. And as those words, Ezekiel. 1. v. 24. I heard
the voice of their wings, (...), as the Voice of the Almighty, are rendered by
the Targumist, (...), as the Voice from the face of the Almighty, which what it
is, shall be afterward shown, so some Copies of the LXX. read them by (...),
the Voice of the WORD, that is of God, who was represented in that Vision, as
shall be manifested.

Some would put another sense on that Expression of the Targumists, as though
it intended nothing but God himself; and instances of the use of it in that
sense have been observed. As Eccles. 8. v. 17. If a wise man say (...) in his
word, that is, say in himself; Genesis 6. v. 6. It repented the Lord (...) in his
word; Also Ruth 3. v. 8. is urged to give countenance unto this suspicion; As
did Paltiel the Son of Laish, who placed his sword (...); between his Word and
Michal the daughter of Saul the Wife of David. But (1.) The former places use
not the word (...) which is peculiar unto the sense contended for; (2.) The
Targums on the Hagiographa are a late Postalmudical endeavor, made in
imitation of those of Onkelos and Ben Vzziel, when the Jews had lost both all
sense of their old Traditions, and use of the Chaldee Language, any other than
what they learned from those former Paraphrases. Nothing therefore can hence be
concluded as to the intention of the Targumists in these words. And they can
have no other sense in that of Psalm 110. v. 1. (...); The Lord said in, or to
his word; for, to my Lord, as in the Original.

The Jews discern that (...) walking, relates in this place immediately to
(...), the voice, and not unto (...), the Lord God, and therefore endeavor to
render a Reason of that kind of Expression. So Aben Ezra on the place gives
instances where a voice or sound in its Progress is said to walk. As Exodus 19.
v. 19. (...); the voice of the Trumpet went and waxed strong; and Jer. 46. v.
22. (...); the voice thereof shall go like a Serpent. But these Examples reach
not that under consideration. For although (...) may express sometimes the
Progression or increase of a Voice, yet it does not so, but where it is
intimated to be begun before; but here was nothing spoken by God, until after
that Adam had heard this Word of God walking. And therefore R. Jona cited by
Aben Ezra would apply (...) walking, unto Adam; He heard the voice of God, as
he was himself walking in the Garden, the absurdity of which Fiction the Words
of the Text and Context sufficiently evince. For not (...) but (...) would
answer unto (...) in the beginning of the Verse. It is therefore most probable
that in the great alteration which was now coming upon the whole Creation of
God, mankind being to be cast out of Covenant, the Serpent and the Earth being
to be Cursed, and a way of Recovery for the Elect of God to be revealed, that
He, by whom all things were made, and by whom all were to be renewed that were
to be brought again unto God, did in an especial and glorious manner appear
unto our first Parents, as he in whom this whole dispensation centered, and
unto whom it was committed. And as after the Promise given He appeared (...),
in an humane shape, to instruct the Church in the Mystery of his future
Incarnation, and under the Name of Angel, to shadow out his Office as sent
unto it, and employed in it by the Father, so here before the Promise, he
discovered his distinct glorious Person, as the eternal Voice or Word of the
Father.

And the Lord appeared unto him (Abraham) in the Plains of Mamre, and he sat
in the Tent door in the heat of the Day; and he lift up his Eyes and looked,
and lo, three men stood by him; and when he saw them, he came to meet them from
the Tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground; and said, my Lord if I have
now found favor in thy sight, etc. The Jews in Bereshith Ketanna say, that
this Appearance of God unto Abraham, was three days after his circumcision,
from the sore whereof being not recovered, he sat in the door of his Tent, and
that God came to visit him in his sickness. But the Reason of his sitting in
the door of the Tent is given in the Text, namely, because it was (...), as in,
or about the heat of the Day, as the day grew hot: in an opposition unto the
time of Gods appearance unto Adam, which was (...) in the cool air of the day.
For as when God comes to curse, nothing shall refresh the creature, though in
its own nature suited thereunto, it shall wither in the cool of the day, so
when he comes to bless, nothing shall hinder the influence of it upon his
creatures, however any thing in its self may like the heat of the day be
troublesome or perplexing.

behold three men stood by him; The Title is (...); The Lord appeared unto him;
and the Narrative is, lo, three men stood by him; The Lord therefore was
amongst them. And it seems to be a sudden appearance that was made to him; he
saw them on a sudden standing by him; he looked up and saw them; and this
satisfied him that it was an heavenly Apparition.

Abraham at this time was to renew unto him the Promise of the Blessing Seed,
and to confine it unto his Posterity by Sarah, now when he was utterly hopeless
thereof, and began to desire that Ishmael might be the Heir thereof. Unto this
signal work of mercy, was adjoined the intimation of an eminent effect of
Vindictive Justice, wherein God would set forth an Example of it unto all
ensuing Generations, in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. And both these
were the proper works of him, on whom the Care of the Church was in an especial
manner incumbent, all whose blessedness depended on that Promise: and to whom
the Rule of the World, the present and future Judgment thereof is committed;
that is the Person of the Son. And hence in the overthrow of those Cities, He
is said to set forth an ensample of his future dealing with ungodly men, who is
to be their Judge, 2 Pet. 2.6.

Aben Ezra reflects with scorn on the Christians, who from this Place, because
three men are said to appear unto Abraham, and he calls them My Lord, would
prove the Tri-personality of the Deity. (...), Because of the appearance of
three men, God is three, and he is one, and they are not separated or divided.
How then does he* answer what they say? (...); Behold they forget that there
came two Angels unto Sodom. That is, that two of those who appeared were Angels
and no more. But if any Christians have taken these three Persons to have been
the three Persons of the Trinity, it were an easy thing to out-ballance their
mistake, with instances of his own and companions pernicious Curiosities and
Errors. It is true, a Trinity of Persons in the Deity cannot be proved from
this place, seeing one of them is expressly called Jehovah, and the other two in
distinction from him are said to be Angels; so, and no more; Chap. 19.1. But
yet a distinction of Persons in the Deity, although not the precise number of
them is hence demonstrable. For it is evident that he of the three that spoke
unto Abraham, and to whom he made his supplication for the sparing of Sodom was
Jehovah the Judge of all the world, v. 22, 25. And yet all the three were sent
upon the work, that one being the Prince and Head of the Embassy; as he who is
Jehovah, is said to be sent by Jehovah, Zech. 2. v. 8, 9. Neither is there any
ground for the late Exposition of this and the like places, namely, that a
created Angel representing the Person of God, does both speak and act in his
name, and is called Jehovah; an invention to evade the Appearances of the Son
of God under the Old Testament, contrary to the sense of all Antiquity; nor is
any reason or instance produced to make it good. The Jews indeed say, that they
were three Angels, because of the threefold work they were employed in, for
they say, no more than one Angel is at any time sent about the same work. So
one of these was to renew the Promise unto Abraham; another to deliver Lot; and
the third to destroy Sodom. But besides that this is a rule of their own
making, and evidently false, as may be seen, Genesis 32. v. 1, 2. 2 Kings 6. v.
17. so in the story its self, it is manifest that they were all employed in the
same work; one as Lord and Prince, the other two as his ministering servants.

And this is further cleared in that expression of Moses. Chap. 19. v. 24. The
Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord in Heaven.
Targum. (...) from before the Lord, or the face of the Lord. Aben Ezra answers,
(...), that this is the Elegancy of the Tongue, and the sense of it is, from
himself; and this gloss some of our late Critics embrace. And there are
instances collected by Solomon Jarchi to confirm this sense. Namely, the words
of L^mech, Genesis 4. v. 23. Hear my voice ye Wives of Lamech; not my Wives. And
of David, 1 Kings 1. v. 33. Take with you the servants of your Lord; not my
servants; And of Ahasuerus unto Mordecai, Esther 4. v. 8. Write you for the
Jews in the Kings name; not in my name. But the difference of these, from the
words under consideration is wide and evident. In all these places, the Persons
are introduced speaking of themselves; and describe themselves, either by their
Names or Offices, suitably unto the occasion and subject spoken of. But in this
place, it is Moses that speaks of the Lord, and had no occasion to repeat
(...), were it not to intimate the distinct Persons unto whom that name
denoting the nature and self-existence of God was proper; one whereof then
appeared on the Earth, the other manifesting his glorious presence in Heaven.
Wherefore Rashi observing somewhat more in this expression, contents not
himself with his supposed Parallel Places; but adds, that the (...), is to be
understood; and gives this as a Rule, (...); every place where it is said,
(...), and the Lord, He and his House of Judgment are intended; as if God had
a Sanhedrim in Heaven; a fancy which they have invented to avoid the
expressions which testify unto a Plurality of Persons in the Deity. There is
therefore in this place an Appearance of God in an humane shape; and that of
one distinct Person in the Godhead; who now represented himself unto Abraham,
in the form and shape wherein he would dwell amongst men, when of his seed he
would be made flesh. This was one signal means whereby Abraham saw his day and
rejoiced, which himself lays upon his Prae-existence unto his Incarnation, and
not upon the Promise of his coming. John 8. v. 56, 58. A Solemn Praeludium it
was unto his taking of flesh, a Revelation of his Divine Nature and Person, and
a pledge of his coming in humane nature to converse with men.

Genesis 32. v. 24. And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the ascending of the morning; v. 26. And he said, let me go, for the day
ascends; and he said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. v. 27. And
he said unto him, what is thy name, and he said Jacob. v. 28. And he said, thy
name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a Prince have thou Power
with God and men, and have prevailed. v. 29. And Jacob asked him and said, Tell
me I pray thee thy name; and he said, wherefore do thou ask after my name?
and he blessed him there. v. 30. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel,
for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. This Story is twice
reflected upon in the Scripture afterward. Once by Jacob himself, Genesis 48. v.
15, 16. And he blessed Joseph and said, God before whom my Fathers Abraham and
Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel
which redeemed me from all evil bless the Lads. And once by the Prophet Hosea,
Chap. 12. v. 3, 4. By his strength he had power with God; yea, he had power
over the Angel and prevailed; he wept and made supplication unto him, he found
him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us, v. 5. Even the Lord God of Hosts the
Lord is his memorial. In the first place he is called a man; there appeared a
man, v. 24. In the second Jacob calls him an Angel, the Angel that redeemed me;
v. 16. And in the third he is expressly said to be God, the Lord of Hosts, v. 3,
5.

Jacob was now passing with his whole Family into the Land of Canaan to take
Esau, who coming against him with a Power which he was no way able to
withstand, he feared that he would utterly destroy both his Person and his
Posterity, v. 11. In the Promise about which their contest was, the blessed
seed, with the whole Church State and Worship of the Old Testament was
included; so that it was the greatest Controversy, and had the greatest weight
depending on it, of any that ever was amongst the Sons of men. Wherefore to
settle Jacob's right, to preserve him with his Title and Interest, He who was
principally concerned in the whole matter, does here appear unto him; some
especial particulars of which manifestation of himself, may be remarked.

form of a man, (...), A man wrestled with him. A man he is called from his
shape, and his actions; he wrestled, (...) that is, says R. Menachem in Rashi,
(...) he dusted; this says he, is the sense of (...), for, (...), they stirred
up the dust with their feet, as men do in earnest wrestling; or as himself
would have it, in allusion to another word, and to signify the closing with
their arms to cast one another down, as is the manner of Wrestlers. A great
contention is denoted, and an appearance in the form of a man; further
manifested by his touching the hollow of Jacob's thigh:

Angel by Jacob himself Genesis 48 16. The Angel that delivered me. This was the
greatest danger that ever Jacob was in, and this he remembers in his blessing
of Joseph's children, praying that they may have the presence of this Angel with
them, who preserved him all his life, and delivered him from that eminent
danger from his Brother Esau. And he calls him, (...); The Angel the Redeemer,
which is the name of the promised Messiah, as the Jews grant, Isa. 59. v. 20.
(...); And the Goel, the Redeemer shall come to Zion. And he is expressly called
the Angel, Hos. 12.14.

God over all blessed for ever. For in the first place, Jacob prays solemnly
unto him for his blessing, Genesis 32.26. and refuses to let him go, or to cease
his supplications until he had blessed him. 2. He does so, he blesses him,
and gives him a double pledge or token of it in the touch of his thigh, and
change of his name; giving him a name to denote his prevalency with God, that
is with himself. 3. From hence Jacob concludes that he had seen God; and calls
the name of the place, the Face of God In the second place, Genesis 48.16. Besides
that he invocates this Angel for his Presence with, and blessing on the
children of Joseph, which cannot regard any but God himself without gross
Idolatry, it is evident that the Angel who redeemed him, v. 16. is the same
with the God who fed him, that is the God of his Fathers.

And this is yet more evident in the Prophet. For with regard unto this story
of his power over the Angel, he says, he had power with God; and proves it,
because he had power over the Angel and prevailed. And he shows whereby he thus
prevailed, it was by weeping and making supplications unto him, which he
neither did, nor lawfully might do unto a created Angel; and therefore some of
the Jews apply those words, he wept and made supplications unto the Angels
desire to Jacob to let him go; foolishly enough; and yet are they therein
followed by some late Critics, who too often please themselves in their
curiosities. Again this Angel was he whom he found, or who found him in Bethel,
an account whereof we have Genesis 28. v. 20, 21, 22. and Chap. 35. v. 1. Now this
was no other but he unto whom Jacob made his Vow, and entered into solemn
Covenant withal that he should be his God. And therefore the Prophet adds
expressly in the last place, v. 5. that it was the Lord God of Hosts, whom he
intended.

Jacob, with whom he earnestly wrestled by Tears and Supplications was God, and
because he was sent as the Angel of God, it must be some distinct Person in the
Deity, condescending unto that Office; and appearing in the form of a man, he
represented his future Assumption of our humane nature. And by all this did God
instruct the Church in the mystery of the Person of the Messiah, and who it
was that they were to look for in the blessing of the Promised Seed.

And Moses came to the Mountain of God to Horeb. And the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he
looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And Moses said, I will turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush is not
burned. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him
out of the midst of the bush, and said Moses, Moses, and he said here am I.
And he said, draw not nigh hither; put off thy shoes from thy feet for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of
thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and
Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God. And herein also have we
expressed another glorious appearance of the Son of God. He who is here
revealed, is called Jehovah, v. 4. And he affirms of himself, that he is the
God of Abraham, v. 6. who also describes himself by the glorious Name of I AM,
that I AM; v. 14. in whose Name and Authority Moses dealt with Pharaoh in the
deliverance of the People, and whom they were to serve on that Mountain upon
their coming out of Egypt. He whose (...), or merciful good will, Moses
prays for, Deuteronomy. 33. v. 16. And yet he is expressly called an Angel, v. 2.
namely, the Angel of the Covenant, the great Angel of the Presence of God, in
whom was the Name and Nature of God; and he thus appeared, that the Church
might know and consider who it was, that was to work out their spiritual and
eternal salvation, whereof that deliverance which then he would affect was a
Type and Pledge. Aben Ezra would have the Angel mentioned, v. 2. to be another
from him who is called the Lord God, v. 6. But the Text will not give
countenance unto any such distinction, but speaks of one and the same person
throughout without any alteration; and this was no other but the Son of God.

Exodus 19. v. 18, 19, 20. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke; because
the Lord descended upon it in Fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. And when the voice of the
Trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God
answered him by a voice: And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, on the top of
the Mount. The Jews well interpret those words concerning the descent of God,
to be by way of the manifestation of his Glory, not change of place. And thence
Aben Ezra interprets that expression, Chap. 20. v. 22. Ye have seen that I have
talked with you from Heaven; God was still in Heaven, when his Glory was on the
Mount. Yet those words (...), do rather refer to his descent before described,
then denote the place where he spoke. For in giving the Law God spoke on Earth,
Heb, 12.25. That God in this glorious manifestation of his presence on Mount
Sinai, made use of the ministry of Angels, both the nature of the thing
declares, and the Scripture testifies, Psalm 68.17. The voices, fire, trembling
of the Mountain, smoke and noise of the Trumpet, were all effected by them. And
so also was the forming of the words of the Law conveyed unto the ears of Moses
and the People. Hence the Law is not only said to be received by them, (...),
Acts 7. v. 53. by the disposition, or orderly ministries of the Angels, and to
be disposed by them into the hand of Moses, Gal. 3. v. 19. but is also called,
(...), Heb. 2. v. 2. the word spoken or pronounced by Angels, that is outwardly
and audibly. As to him that presided and ruled the whole action, some
Christians think it was a created Angel, representing God, and speaking in his
name. But if this be so, we have no certainty of any thing that is affirmed in
the Scripture, that it may be referred directly and immediately unto God; but
we may when we please substitute a delegated Angel in his room. For in no
place, not in that concerning the Creation of the world is God himself more
expressly spoken of. Besides, the Psalmist in the place mentioned, affirms that
when those Chariots of God were on Mount Sinai, Jehovah himself was in the
midst of them. And this Presence of God, the Hebrews call (...) and (...) and
(...), whereby they now understand a Majestaticall and Sanctifying Presence;
indeed it intends him who is the Brightness of the Fathers glory, and the
express image of his Person, who was delegated unto this work as the great
Angel of the Covenant, giving the Law in the strength of the Lord, in the
Majesty of the name of the Lord his God.

Exodus 23. v. 20, 21, 22. Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in
the way, and to bring thee into the place that I have prepared. Beware of him,
and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions, for my name is in him. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice,
and do all that I speak, then will I be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an
adversary unto thine advers^ries. The Angel here promised, is he that went in
the midst of the People in the Wilderness, whose Glory appeared and was
manifested among them. And moreover another Angel is promised unto them, v. 23.
For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee into the Amorites, and I
will cut them off; It is a ministering Angel to execute the Judgments and
vengeance of God upon the enemies of his people. And that this Angel of v. 23.
is another from that of v. 20. appears from Chap. 33. v. 2, 3. compared with v.
13, 14, 15, 16. of the same Chapter, v. 2. I will send an Angel before thee,
and I will drive out the Canaanite and the Amorite; which is the Promise; and
the Angel of Chap. 23. v. 23. But says he, v. 3. I will not go up in the
midst of thee; which he had promised to do in and by the Angel of v. 20, 21.
in whom his name was. This the people esteemed evil tidings, and mourned
because of it, v. 4. Now God had not promised to go in the midst of them any
otherwise than by the Angel mentioned; which both Moses and the People were
abundantly satisfied withal. But whereas he here renews his Promise of the
Ministry and Assistance of the Angel of v. 23. yet he denies them his own
presence, in the Angel of v. 20. For which Moses renews his request, v. 13.
whereunto God replies, My presence shall go with thee, v. 14. concerning which
Presence or Face of God, or which Angel of his Presence, we must a little more
particularly enquire.

beware of him, or rather take heed to thy self before him; before his Face, in
his Presence, v. 21. (...) in Niphal, is sibi cavit; cave tibi. And this is the
caution that is usually given the People, requiring that Reverence and awe,
which is due unto the Holiness of the Presence of God. 2. (...); and obey his
voice. This is the great Precept which is solemnly given, and so often
reiterated in the Law with reference unto God himself. 3. (...) provoke him
not; or rebel not against him. This is the usual word whereby God expresses
the Transgression of his Covenant; a rebellion that can be committed against
God alone. 4. Of these Precepts a twofold Reason is given, whereof the first is
taken from the Sovereign Authority of this Angel; for he will not pardon your
transgressions; that is as Joshua afterward tells the same people, he is an
holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions, nor
your s^ns; Joshua Chap. 24. v. 19. Namely sins of rebellion that break and
disannul his Covenant. And who can forgive sins but God. To suppose here a
created Angel, is to open a door unto Idolatry; for he in whose power it is
absolutely to pardon and punish sin, may certainly be worshipped with Religious
Adoration. The second Reason is taken from his Name; for my Name is in him. A
more excellent Name, than any of the Angels do enjoy. Heb. 1. v. 4. He is God,
Jehovah, that is his Name, and his nature answers thereunto. Hence v. 22. it
is added, if indeed thou obey his v^ice, and do all that I speak. His voice is
the voice of God; in his speaking does God speak; and upon the Peoples
obedience thereunto, depends the accomplishment of the Promise. Moreover, Chap.
33. v. 14, 15. God says concerning this Angel, (...) my presence, my Face
shall go with thee; which Presence Moses calls his Glory, v. 18. his essential
Glory, which was manifested unto him, Chap. 34. v. 6. though but obscurely in
comparison of what it was unto them, who in his humane nature, wherein dwelt
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. v. 9. beh^ld his Glory, the Glory as
of the only begotten of the Father. John 1. v. 14. For this Face of God is he,
whom who so sees, he sees the Father, John 14. v. 19. because he is the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his Person, Heb. 1. v. 3. who
accompanied the people in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. v. 4. and whose Merciful
Good Pleasure toward them Moses prayed for, Deuteronomy. 33.16. that is the Father of
Lights from whom descends every good and perfect Gift, James 1. v. 17. These
things evidently express God and none other; and yet he is said to be an Angel
sent of God in his Name and unto his Work; So that he can be no other but a
certain Person of the Deity, who accepted of this Delegation, and was therein
revealed unto the Church, as he who was to take upon him the seed of Abraham,
and to be their eternal Redeemer.

And it came to pass whilst Joshua was by Jericho, that he lift up his eyes
and looked, and behold there stood a man over against him, with his sword drawn
in his hand, and Joshuah went unto him, and said unto him, art thou for us, or
for our adversaries? and he said Nay; but as Prince of the Host of the Lord am
I now come. And Joshuah fell on his face to the earth and did worship, and said
unto him, what says my Lord unto his servant. And the Prince of the Lords Host
said unto Joshuah loose thy shoe from of thy foot, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy. The appearance here is of a Man, v. 13. A man of War, as God
is called, Exodus 15. v. 3. armed with his sword drawn in his hand, as a token
of the business he came about. At first sight Joshuah apprehends him to be a
Man only, which occasioned his enquiry, art thou for us or for our adversaries;
which discovers his courage and undaunted magnanimity, for doubtless the
appearance was august and glorious. But he answers unto his whole question,
(...), I am not; that is a man either of your party, or of the enemies, but
quite another Person (...), the Prince of the Host of the Lord. And this was
another illustrious manifestation of the Son of God unto the Church of old,
accompanied with many instructive circumstances. As (1.) From the shape wherein
he appeared namely of a man, as a pledge of his future incarnation. (2.) The
Title that he assumes to himself, the Captain of the Lords Host, he unto whom
the guidance and conduct of them unto rest, not only temporal, but eternal was
committed; whence the Apostle in Allusion unto this Place and Title, calls him
the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2. v. 10. and (3.) The Person unto whom he
spoke when he gave himself this Title was the Captain of the People at that
time, teaching both him and them that there was another supreme Captain of
their eternal deliverance. (4.) From the time and place of his appearance,
which was upon the first entrance of the people into Canaan, and the first
opposition, which therein they met withal; so engaging his Presence with his
Church in all things which oppose them in their way unto eternal Rest. (5.)
From the Adoration and Worship which Joshuah gave unto him, which he accepted
of, contrary to the duty and practice of created Angels, Rev. 19. v. 10. Chap.
22. v. 8, 9. (6.) From the Prescription of the Ceremonies expressing Religious
Reverence, put off thy shoo's, with the reason annexed, for the place whereon
thou stand (...), it is holiness, made so by the Presence of God, the like
Precept whereunto was given to Moses, by the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Exodus 3. v. 5. By all these things was the Church instructed in the Person,
Nature, and Office of the Son of God; even in the Mystery of his eternal
distinct subsistence in the Deity, his future Incarnation and condescension
unto the Office of being the Head and Savior of his Church.

These Manifestations of the Son of God unto the Church of old, as the Angel or

Some of late would apply all these Appearances unto a created delegate Angel;
ancient Writers of the Christian Church. A large Collection of Testimonies from
them is not suited unto our present Design and Purpose, I shall therefore only
mention two of the most ancient of them; one of the Latin, the other of the
Greek Church. The first is Tertullian, who tells us, Christus semper egit in
Dei Patris nomin^; ipse ab initio conversatus est and congressus cum
Patriarchis and Prophetis. adv. M^r^. lib. 2. Christ always dealt ( with men)
in the name of God the Father; and so himself from the beginning conversed with
the Patriarchs and Prophets. And again, Christus ad colloquia humana semper
descendit, ah Adam usque ad Patriarchas and Prophetas, in visione, in somno, in
speculo, in aenigmate, ordinem suum praestru^ns semper a^ initio; and Deus in
terris cum hominibus conversatus est, non alius quam sermo qui caro erat
futurus. Adv. Praxeam. It was Christ who descended into communion with men,
from Adam unto the Patriarchs and Prophets, in Visions, Dreams, and
Appearances, or Representations of himself, instructing them in his future
condition from the beginning; And God who conversed with men on earth, was no
other but the Word who was to be made flesh. The other is Justin Martyr, whose
word needs not be produced, seeing it is known how he contends for this very
thing, in his Dialogue with Trypho.

That which is more direct unto our purpose, is to enquire into the
Apprehensions Jewish Masters concerning the Divine Appearances insisted on,
granted unto the Patriarchs and Church of old, with what may thence be
collected for their conviction, concerning the Person of the Messiah. The most
part of their Expositors do, I confess, pass over the difficulties of the
places mentioned, (I mean those which are such unto their present Infidelity)
without taking the least notice of them. Some would have the Angel mentioned to
be Michael, whom they assign a Prerogative unto above the other Angels, who
preside over other Countries. But who that Michael is, and wherein that
Prerogative does consist they know not. Some say that Michael is the High
Priest of Heaven who offers up the prayers of the Righteous; so R. M^nahem; The
Priest above, that offers or presents the souls of the Righteous says
another, more agreeably unto the Truth then they are aware of. One signal
instance only, of the evidence of the Truth insisted on, in the words of Moses
Nechmanides Gerundensis, on Exodus 23. which has been taken notice of by many,
shall at present suffice. His words are; l^te Angelus si rem ipsam dicamus, est
Angelus Redemptor, de quo Scriptum est quoniam nomen meum in ipso est. Ille
inquam Angelus, qui ad Jacob dicebat, Genesis 31.13. Ego Deus Bethel. Ille de qu^
dictum est, Exodus 3.4. and vocabat Mosen Deus de ruho. Vocatur autem Angelus
quia mundum gubernat. Scriptum est enim Deuteronomy. 6.21. eduxit vos Jehovah ex
Aegypto; and alibi Numb. 20.6. misit Angelum suum and eduxit vos ex Aegypto.
Praeterea scriptum est Isa. 63.9. and Angelus facici ejus salvos fecit ipsos.
Nimirum ille Angelus qui est Dei facies; de quo dictum est Exodus 33.14. Facies
mea praeibit, and efficiam ut quiescas. Denique ille Angelus est de quo vates
Mal. 3.1. and subito veniet ad templum suum dominus quem vos quaeritis, and
Angelus foederis quem cupitis. And again to the same purpose. Animadver^e
attente quid ista sibi velint. Facies mea praeibit. Moses enim and Israelitae
semper optaverunt Angelum primum, caeterum quis ille esset vere intelligere non
potuerunt. Neque enim ab aliis percipiebant, neque prophetica notione satis
assequebantur; Atqui Facies Dei, ipsum Deum significat, quod apud omnes
interpretes est in confesso. Verum ne per somnium quidem ista intelligere
quisquam possit, nisi sit in mysteriis legis eruditus. And again, Facies mea
praecedet, h. e. Angelus foederis quem vos cupitis in quo videbitur facies mea:
de quo dictum est, tempore accepto exaudiam te; nomen meum in eo est. Faciamque
ut quiescas; sive efficiam ut ipse tibi sit lenis and benignus; neque te ducat
per rigidum, sed placide and clementer. This Angel, if we speak exactly, is the
Angel the Redeemer, concerning whom it is written, my Name is in him; Exodus
22.21. that Angel who said unto Jacob, I am the God of Bethel, Genesis 31.13. He
of whom it is said, and God called unto Moses out of the Bush: Exodus 3.4. And
he is called an Angel because he governs the world. For it is written, Deuteronomy.
6.21. The Lord our God brought us out of Egypt; and elsewhere, Numb. 20.6. He
sent his Angel and brought us out of Egypt. Moreover it is written, Isa. 63.9.
And the Angel of his Face (Presence) saved them. Namely, that Angel who is the
Face of God; of whom it is said, Exodus 33.14. My Face shall go before thee, and
I will cause thee to rest. Lastly, it is that Angel of whom the Prophet speaks,
Mal, 3.1. And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come unto his Temple, the
Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in, His following words are to the same
purpose. Mark diligently what is the meaning of (...) words, My Face shall go
before thee. For Moses and the Israelites always d^sired the chiefest Angel,
but who that was, they could not truly understand. For neither could they learn
it of my others, nor obtain it by Prophecy. But the Face of God signifies God
himse^f; as a^l Interpreters acknowledge. But no man can have the least
knowledge hereof unless he be (...) in the M^steries of the Law. He adds
moreover; My Face shall go before th^e, that is the Angel of the Covenant whom
ye desire; in whom my Face shall be seen; of wh^m it is said, in an acceptable
time have I heard thee; my Name is in him; I will cause the^ to re^i; or cause
that he shall be gentle or kind unto thee, nor shall lead thee with rigor, but
quietly and mercifully.

Ra. Moses ^^r Nachman; wrote about the year of the Lord, 1220. in Spain, and
dyed at J^rusal^m, An. 1260. and is one of the chiefest Masters of the Jews.
And there are many things occurring in his Writings, beyond the common rate of
their present Apprehensions. As in the Places cited, he does plainly evert one
of the principal foundations of their present Infidelity. For he not only
grants, but contends and proves that the Angel spoken of, was God, and being
sent of God as his Angel, he must be a distinct Person in the Deity, as we have
proved. The Reason indeed he fixes on why he is called an Angel, namely,
because he governs the world, although the thing its self be true, is not so
proper. For he is so called because of his eternal designation, and actual
delegation by the Father, unto the work of saving the Church in all conditions
from first to last. And as he acknowledges that his being called the Face of
God, proves him to be God, so it does no less evidently evince his Personal
distinction from him whose Face he is; that is, the Brightness of his Glory,
and the express image of his Person. And what he adds of the Mercy and
Benignity which by the appointment of God he exercises toward his People, is
signally suitable unto the tenderness and mercy which the great Captain of our
Salvation exercises by Gods appointment toward all those whom he leads and
conducts unto Glory.

Tanchuma, an ancient Comment on the five Books of Moses, speaking of the Angel
that went before them from Exodus 23. v. 20. God, say they, said unto Moses,
behold I send my Angel before thy face. But Moses answered, I will not have an
Angel, but I will have thy self. But when Joshua the Son of Nun first saw the
Angel, he said, art thou for us, or for our adversaries? then the Angel
answered, I am the Captain of the Lords Host; and now I come; as if he had
said, I am come a second time, that I may lead the Israelites into their
Possession. I came when Moses thy Master was the Ruler, but when he saw me, he
would not have me to go with him, but refused me. As soon as Joshua heard this,
he fell on his face and worshipped, saying, what speaks my Lord unto his
servant.

Answerable hereunto in the Talmud. Tractat. Saned. cap. 4 Echad dine M^mono^h
they have a gloss on those words, Exodus 23. v. 21. (...), he will not pardon
your transgressions; (...). He cannot spare or pardon your transgressions: what
then does he do, or could he do; wherefore he said unto him, (to God) we
believe that he cannot pardon our Transgressions, and therefore we refuse him,
and will not accept of him; no not for a leader to go in and out before us.
They greatly mistake in supposing that the Angel whom alone Moses refused, was
he that afterward appeared unto Joshuah; for he was the same with him, in whom
was the name of God, and who was promised unto them under the name of the Face
or Presence of God. But herein they were right enough; that, not Moses, but
their Church under the Law, refused that Angel of Gods Presence, who was to
conduct them that obey him into everlasting rest. And the Church of Believers
under Joshua, which was a Type of the Church of the New Testament, adhering
unto him found rest unto their souls.

And this Angel of whom we have spoken, was he whom the Talmudists call
Metatron. Ben Vzziel in his Targum on Genesis 5. ascribes this name unto Enoch. He
ascended, says he into Heaven by the Word of the Lord, (...); and his name was
called Metraton the great Scribe. But this Opinion is rejected and confuted in
the Talmud. There they tell us that Metatron is (...), the Prince of the world.
Or as Elias calls him in Tishbi, (...), the Prince of Gods Presence. The
mention of this name is in Talm. Tract. Saned. cap. 4. where they plainly
intimate that they intend an uncreated Angel thereby. For they assign such
things unto him as are incompetent unto any other. And as Reuchlin informs us
from the Cabbalists, they say (...), Metatron was the Master or Teacher of
Moses himself. He it is says Elias who is the Angel always appearing in the
Presence of God, of whom it is said my name is in him. And the Talmudists add
that he has power to blot out the sins of Israel, whence they call him the
Chancellor of Heaven. And Bechai a famous Master among them affirms, that his
Name signifies both a Lord, a Messenger, and a Keeper, on Exodus 23. A Lord
because he rules all. A Messenger, because he stands always before God to
do his Will; and a Keeper, because he keeps Israel. The Etymology I confess
which he gives unto this Purpose of that name is weak and foolish. Nor is that
of Elias one jot better, who tells us that Metatron is (...), in the Greek
Tongue, One sent. But yet it is evident what is is intended by these obscure
intimations, which are the corrupted relicts of ancient Traditions, namely the
increated Prince of Glory, who being Lord of all appeared of old unto the
Patriarchs, as the Angel or Messenger of the Father. And as for the word its
self, it is either a corrupt expression of the Latin Mediator, such as are
usual amongst them, or a more Gematrical Fiction to answer unto (...), the
Almighty, there being a coincidence in their numericall signification of their
Letters.

And this was another way, whereby God instructed the Church of old in the
Mystery of the Person of the Messiah who was promised unto them.

Exercitatio XI.
Messiah promised of Old. Faith of the ancient Church of the Jews concerning
him. State of the Jews at his coming. Expectations of it. Exposed to the
seducements of Impostors. Faith of their Forefathers lost among them.
Sadducees expected a Messiah. On what Grounds. Consistency of their Principles.
True Messiah rejected by them. General Reason thereof. Story of Barcosba: and
Rabbi Akiba. Miracles to be wrought by the Messiah. State of the Jews after the
days of Barcosba. Faith of their Forefathers utterly renounced. Opinion of
Hillel, denying any Messiah to come. Occasion of it. Their Judgment of him.
The things concerning the Messiah mysterious. Seeming inconsistencies in the
Prophesies and Descriptions of him: Reconciled in the Gospel. That rejected by
the Jews. Their imagination of two Messiah's: Messiah Ben Joseph, and Messiah
Ben David. Story of Messiah Ben Joseph. Of Annillus; Rise and occasion of the
Fable concerning him. Jews acqainted with the Revelation. Their story of the
building of Rome. (...) what. Death of Ben Joseph. The Fable concerning him
disproved. The same with that of the Romanists concerning Antichrist. Of
Messiah Ben David. The faith and expectation of the Jews concerning him. The
Opinion of Maimonides. Sum of the Judaicall Creed. Ground and Reason of their
present Unbelief. Ignorance of their miserable condition by Nature. Ignorance
of Acceptable Righteousness. And of the Judgment of God concerning Sin. Also
of the Nature and End of the Law. Corrupt Assertions: Envy against the
Gentiles. Because of the Privileges claimed by them; And their Oppressions.
Judaical Faith concerning the Messiah. The Folly of it. Of the Promises of the
Old Testament. Threefold Interpretation of them.

Person to be born, and anointed unto the Work of relieving mankind from sin
and misery, and to bring them back unto God. And what kind of Person he was to
be we have also showed. It remains that we consider what was the Faith of the
Ancient Church of the Jews concerning him, as also what are, and have been for
many Generations the Apprehensions and Expectations of the same People, about
the same object of faith, with the Occasions and Reasons of their present
Infidelity and obstinacy.

Ancient Church it has been already sufficiently discoursed. What God
revealed, that they believed. They saw not indeed of old clearly and fully into
the sense of the Promises, as to the way and manner whereby God would work out
and accomplish the Mercy and Grace which they lived and dyed in the Faith and
hope of. But this they knew, that God would in his appointed time, in and by
the nature of man in one to be born of the seed of Abraham and house of David,
caused Atonement to be made for sin, bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and
work out the Salvation of his Elect. This was abundantly revealed, this they
steadfastly believed, and in the faith thereof obtained a good report, or
Testimony from God himself, that they pleased him, inherited the Promises, and
were made partakers of Life eternal; and farther at present, we need not
enquire into their Light and Apprehensions, seeing they must be considered in
our Exposition of the Epistle it self, which now way is making unto.

Jews, as divested of the Privileges of their Forefathers, we may consider
them with reference unto two Principal Seasons. First, From the time of the
actual exhibition of the promised seed, or the coming of the Messiah, to the
time of the composition of their Mishnae, and Talmuds, that ensued thereon.
Secondly, from thence, unto this present day; and in both these seasons we may
consider the prevailing Opinions amongst them concerning the promised Messiah,
his coming, and the work that he has to do. That toward the close of
Prophecy in the Church of old, the hearts and Spirits of men were intently
fixed on a desire and expectation of the coming of the Messiah, the last of the
Prophets clearly testifies, Mal. 3. v. 1. The Lord whom ye are seeking, the
Angel of the Covenant whom you are desiring, shall come suddenly. As the time
of his coming drew nigh, this expectation was increased and heightened, so that
they continually looked out after him, as if he were to enter amongst them
every moment. No sooner did any one make an appearance of something
extraordinary, but instantly they were ready to say, is not this the Messiah.
This gave advantage unto sundry seditious Impostors, as Theudas and Judas of
Galilee to deceive many of them unto their ruin. John the Baptist also they
enquired about. John 1. v. 19, 20. Yea, and they had divulged such a report of
their expectations, with the Predictions and Prophesies that they were built
upon, that the whole world took notice of it; as has been elsewhere manifested
out of the best Roman Historians. This was the state of the Judaical Church not
long before the destruction of the Second Temple. And so fixed were they in
their Resolutions, that he was to come about that season, that during the last
desolating Siege of the City, they looked every day when he would come and save
them.

But together with this earnest desire and expectation, they had utterly lost
the Light and Faith of their Forefathers, about the Nature, Work, and Office
of the promised Messiah. For being grown carnal, and minding only things
earthly and present, they utterly overlooked the Spiritual Genealogy of the
seed of the Woman from the first Promise; and wresting all Prophesies and
Predictions to their ambitious, covetous, corrupt inclinations and Interests,
they fancied him unto themselves, as one that was to deliver them from all
outward trouble, and to satisfy them with the glory and desirable things of
this world, without respect to sin, and the curse, or deliverance from them.
And hence the Saaducees who denied the immortality of the soul, and
consequently all Rewards and Punishments in another world, yet no less desired
and expected the coming of the Messiah, then the Pharisees and their Disciples.
And the Truth is, they had brought their Principles unto a better consistency
than the others had done. For if the Promised Messiah was only to procure them
the Good things of this world, and that whilst they lived in it, it was in
vain to look for another world to come, and the blessings thereof. To look for
eternal life, and yet to confine the Promise of the Seed to the things of this
life only, there was neither ground nor Reason. So that the Pharisees laid down
the Principle, which the Sadducees naturally drew their Conclusion from. Some
in the mean time among them, Gods secret ones, as Simeon, Anna, Joseph, Zechary
and Elizabeth, but especially the Blessed Virgin with many more, retained no
doubt the ancient Faith of their Forefathers. But the Body of the People with
their Leaders, being either flagitiously wicked, or superstitiously proud
fancied a Messiah suited unto their own lusts and desires, such an one as we
shall afterward describe. And this prejudicate opinion of a terrene outward
glorious Kingdom, in and of this world, was that which working in them a
neglect of those spiritual and eternal purposes for which he was promised,
hardened them to an utter rejection of the True Messiah when he came unto them.

That this was the Ground on which they rejected the Promised Messiah, is
evident Gospel, and we shall farther prove it upon them in our ensuing
Discourses. How they did that, and what was the End thereof, is well known. But
after they had done this, and murdered the Prince of Life, to justify
themselves in their wickedness and unbelief, they still with all earnestness
looked after such a Messiah as they had framed in their own imagination. And
herein they grew more earnest and furious than ever. For they had not only
their own false pre-conceived Opinion, strengthened by their carnal Interests
and desires of earthly things to act and provoke them, but also their
Reputation and pretense unto the Love and favor of God, to heighten them in
their Presumptions; because they could not retain the least sense of them, if
it might be supposed, that they had rejected the true Messiah, because in his
way and work he answered not their Expectation. For this is the course of Pride
and carnal Wisdom, to pursue those miscarriages with violence wherein they have
been wickedly engaged; and to lay hold on any pretense that they may seem to
justify them in what they have done. And on this account they exposed
themselves as a prey unto every Seducer, who made the least appearance of being
such a Messiah as they thought meet for them to receive. This at last cast them
on a second shipwreck, in the business of Barchocheba who pretending himself to
be their Messiah sent to deliver them from the Roman Yoke, and to set up a
Kingdom amongst them, drew them all the world over, into that Sedition, Outrage
and War, which ended in an almost universal extirpation of the whole Nation
from the face of the Earth.

Now because in the business of this Barchosba they met with a sore
disappointment that turned the stream of their imaginations and expectations
for a long season, it may not be amiss, to give in our passage, a brief account
concerning him, and the things which befell them in those days. Some of the
Jews affirm that there were two of that name, both Heads of Sedition amongst
them. One of these they place under Domitian, and the other who was his
Grandchild under the Reign of Trajan and Hadrian. So do the Authors of
Schalschelet Hakabala, and of Tzemach David. But the Stories of those times
with the condition of the Jews under Domitian will allow no other place unto
the former, but in their own imaginations. The latter was well known in the
world, and has left himself a Name, such as it is, in the Writings of
Christians, and the Histories of the Romans. For H^drian the Emperor provoked
by seditious Tumult and Rebellion of the Jews in the second year of his Reign,
which he suppressed ^y M^rtius Turbo, as Dio, Eusebius, and Orosius declare,
drove them from Jerusalem, and built a Temple to Jupiter in the place where the
Old Temple stood. This proved a great provocation to the Jews all the world
over; yea, turned them into rage and madness. And they were in those days
exceedingly prone unto Tumults and Vproars, as being poor and needy, not having
as yet given themselves to scrape wealth together, the love whereof, has been
the great means of keeping them in quietness in succeeding, Ages. In this
condition Barcosba shows himself amongst them, pretending that he was their
Messiah, as they confess in the Talm. Tract. Saned. Did. Cheleck. He reigned,
they say, three years and an half, a fatal period of time; and (...); he said
to the Rabbis I am the M^ssiah. Immediately one of their famous Masters, whose
memory they yet much Reverence, Rabbi Akiba became his Armor-bearer; and so
far his Trumpeter also, as to proclaim him to be their King Messiah. For this
is their way; when they get a false Messiah, they have also a false Prophet to
usher him in, or to set him off unto the People. And this Akriba, as M^im^nides
informs us, (...), was a great Wise Man, and one of the Wise Men of the
Mishnae, as his sayings in it manifest; so that all the Wise men of that
Generation followed him, and took this Barcosba for their King and M^ssiah. And
He first applied unto him the Prophecy of Balaam; Number. 24. v. 17. concerning
the Star that should arise out of Jacob, whereon they changed his name, and
called him Barchocheba, or the Son of the Star; or as some say, that was his
name at first whence the blind Rabbin took occasion to apply that Prediction
unto him. Concerning him also they interpreted the Prophecy of the Shilo, and
that also in H^ggai about the shaking of the Heavens and the earth, as they
acknowledge in the Talmud in the place forecited. This man therefore, a
Magician and a bloody Murderer by the common advise and Counsel of their
Doctors and Wise men they gathered unto in multitudes, and embraced as their
Deliverer. So soon as he had got strength and power, he set himself to the work
which they expected from their Messiah; namely to conquer the Romans, and to
extirpate the Christians, which last, as Justin Martyr who lived near those
days informs us, he endeavored with all Cruelty. In the pursuit of this
design, he continued for three years and an half, obstinately managing a bloody
War against the Romans, until the Impostor himself was slain, their great Rabbi
taken and tortured to death with iron Cards, and such a devastation made of the
whole Nation, as that to this day they could never gather together in great
numbers in any place of the world.

Maimonides tells us of this Barcosba whom they all received for their Messiah;
(...), that the Wise men required of him neither Sign nor Wonder; that is no
miracle; but others of them, report that he caused Fire to come out of his
mouth, with other diabolical delusions, fit to deceive a poor blinded credulous
multitude And the Opinion of Maimonides that they look for no Miracles from the
Messiah seems to be vented on purpose to obviate the plea of the Christians
from the Miracles wrought by the Lord Jesus; and is contrary unto the constant
persuasion of most of their Masters, and his own judgment declared in other
places. And the Targum its self in H^b. 3. v. 18. has these words, (...),
because of the Miraculous Signs and Redemption that thou shall work for or by
thy Messiah. So they call the Miracles wrought at their coming out of Egypt:
(...) or (...), see Hos. 2.15. Targum. And on this ground do they studiously
and wickedly endeavor to stain by any means the Glory of the Miracles of the
Lord Jesus; But the end of this Impostor, who probably was intended in those
words of our Savior, John 5.43. if another come in his own name him will ye
receive, has proved the shame and reproach of their hopes and expectations
unto all Generations.

From this time forward the remaining Jews with their Posterity utterly
rejected Abraham, and of the rest of their Progenitors who thereby obtained a
good report, and this Testimony that they pleased God. A Messiah that should be
promised unto Adam the common Father of us all, one that should be a Spiritual
Redeemer from sin and misery, a Goel, or Redeemer from Death and Wrath, a
Peacemaker between God and man, one that should work out everlasting
Salvation, the great blessing wherein all the Nations of the Earth were to have
an interest, a spiritual and eternal Prophet, Priest and King, God and man in
one Person, they neither looked for any more, nor desired. A temporal King and
Deliverer, promised unto themselves alone, to give them Ease, Dominion, Wealth
and Power, they would now have, or none at all. They would not think it
thankworthy toward God himself, to send them a Messiah to deliver them from
sin. And in their expectations of such a one, after they had been well wearied
with many frustrations, they were, as was said, in their adherence unto
Barcosbi almost extirpated from the face of the earth, only God in his
Providence who has yet another work to accomplish toward them, has preserved
them a Remnant unto his Glory.

In this condition some of them began to deny that there was any Messiah to be
expected Talmud unto Rabbi Hillel. lib. Sand. C^p. Chelek. This was not that
Hil^el whom they call (...) the Elder, the famous Master of Traditions, who
with Shammai lived under the second Temple, but another of whom some say that
he was the Son of Gamaliel, others more probably that he lived a long time
after those days. But when ever he lived they say of him, (...), Rabbi Hillel
said, A Messiah shall not be given unto Israel, for they enjoyed him in the
days of Hezekiah, This was a fruit of their applying that Prophecy of Isaiah,
Chap. 9. v. 5, 6. unto Hezekiah; for if he was intended therein, he was
unquestionably the only Messiah. But it does not appear that this opinion was
much followed; for a great dispute arose amongst them whither Hillel were not
to be esteemed an Apostate, and to have lost his interest in the world to come
by this Opinion. Those who following Maimonides, make the Article of the coming
of the Messiah one of the Fundamentals of the Law, are greatly offended at him;
but he is more gently treated by Joseph Albo, Sepher Ikkarim, Orat. 1. on the
account that this Article is not fundamental, but only one branch of the great
Root of Reward; and Punishments. Abarbinel goes another way to excuse him, but
generally they all condemn his Opinion. In this Persuasion then, that a Messiah
is promised and shall come, they all continue. But whereas, as was before
observed, they have utterly rejected the Faith and Light of the Church of old,
they have in their Talmuds, and Ages ensuing their Composition, coined so many
foolish imaginations concerning Him, his Person, Work, Office, Kingdom, Life,
Continuance, and Succession, as are endless to recount. But yet that the Reader
may in them consider the woeful condition of men rejected of God, cast out of
his Covenant, and bereaved of his Spirit, and withal of how little use the
Letter of the Old Testament is unto the vain minds of men, wholly destitute of
Divine Illumination and Grace, and also learn what is that present Persuasion
of the Jews, which they prefer before the faith of their Forefathers, and what
they conceive of that Messiah for whose sake they reject him in whom alone
there is Salvation, I shall give an account of the most important heads of
their Opinions, and conjectures about him, as also of the principal occasions
of their being hardened in their impenitency and unbelief.

Our Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 3. v. 16. That without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received
up into Glory. All things which concern the Messiah, his Person, Office and
Work, are exceedingly Mysterious, as containing the principal effect of the
Eternal Wisdom and Goodness of God, and the sacred depths of the counsel of his
Will. Hence the things spoken of him in the Old Testament, are unto carnal
Reason full of seeming inconsistencies. As for instance, it is promised of him
that he should be the seed of the Woman; Genesis 3. v. 15. of the seed of Abraham,
Genesis 22. v. 18. and of the Posterity of David; And yet, that his name should
be, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. v. 6.
and of him it is said, Thy Throne O God, is for ever and ever, Psalm. 45. v. 6.
that he is the Lord our Righteousness; Jer. 23. v. 6. that he is the Lord of
Hosts; Zech. 2. v. 8. Moreover it is declared, that he shall sit upon his
Throne for ever, and reign, whilst his enemies are made his footstool, Isa. 9.
v. 7. Psalm 2.7, 8. Psalm 45.6, 7. and yet, that he shall be cut off, Dan. 9.
v. 26. that he shall be pierced in his hands and feet, Psalm 22. v. 16. slain
by the sword of God, Zech. 13. v. 7. and that in his death he shall have his
grave made among the wicked and with the rich, Isa. 53. v. 9. Al^o, That he
shall come with great Glory, and the clouds of Heaven, Dan. 7. v. 13, 14. and
that he shall come lowly, riding on an Ass, and a Colt the Foal of an Ass,
Zech. 9. v. 9. That the soul of the Lord was well pleased with him and always
delighted in him, Isa. 42. v. 1. and yet, that it pleased him to bruise him and
put him to grief, Isa. 53. v. 10. to forsake him, Psalm 22. v. 1. That he was
to be a King and a Priest upon his Throne, Zech. 6. v. 13. and yet these things
were inconsistent, the Kingdom being annexed unto the family of David, and the
Priesthood to the Posterity of Aaron by Divine Constitution: That he should be
honored and worshipped of all Nations, Psalm. 45. v. 11, 12. Psalm. 72. v. 10,
11, 15. and yet that he should be rejected and despised as one altogether
undesirable, Isa. 53. v. 3. That he should stand and feed, or Rule in the Name
and Majesty of God, Micah 5. v. 4. and yet complains, I am a worm and no man, a
reproach of Men, and despised of the People, Psalm. 22. v. 6. All which, with
sundry others of the like nature concerning his Office and Work, are clearly
reconciled in the New Testament, and their concurrence in the Person of our
Lord Jesus Christ openly and fully declared.

Jews were generally as ignorant of these things, as Nic^demus was of
Regeneration; they knew not how they might be. And therefore when ever our
Savior intimated unto them his Divine Nature, they were filled with rage and
madness, John 8. v. 58, 59. They wo^ld stone him because being a man, he
declared himself to be God: John 10. v. 30, 31, 33. and yet, when he proved it
to them that the Messiah was to be so, inasmuch as that being David's Son, yet
David in Spirit cal^ed him Lord, they were confounded, not being able to answ^r
him a word; Matthew. 22. v. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. when he told them, that the Son
of Man the Messiah must be lifted up, that is in his death on the Cross, they
obj^cted unto him out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever, John 12. v. 34.
and they knew not how to reconcile these things. Hence some of his own
Disciples thought he could not be the M^ssiah when they saw that he dyed, Luke
24. v. 20, 21. and the b^st of them seemed to have expected an outward temporal
Kingdom. But of all these difficulties, as was said, and seeming
inconsistencies, there is a blessed Reconciliation revealed in the G^spel, and
an Application made of them to the Person of the Lord Jesus, the Office he
bare, and the Work that he accomplished. This the Jews refusing by unbelief,
they have invented many fond and lewd imaginations to free themselves from
these difficulties and entanglements. Some things they deny to be spoken
concerning the M^ssiah; some things they wrest and pervert to their own
apprehensions, and somewhat they allow and look for, that is truly promised.

Person and the things spoken concerning it, they apply thereunto the Principal
Engine which they have invented for their relief. For whereas the Scripture
has declared unto us such a Messiah, as should have the natures of G^d and man
in one Person, which Person should in the nature of man suffer and dye, and
reign for spiritual ends and purposes; they have rejected the Divine Nature of
this Person, and split that which remains, into two Persons, to the one
wher^of they assign one part of his work, as to sorrow, suffer, and dye, to the
other, another part, namely to Conquer, Rule and Reign according unto their
carnal Appr^hensions of these things. They have, I say, feigned two Messiah's
between whom they have distributed the whole work of him that is promised,
according unto their understanding of it. And one of these, is to come, as they
say, before the other, to prepare his way for him.

This first they call Messiah Ben Joseph, because he is to be of the Tribe of
Ephraim; the other Messiah Ben David, of whom afterward. Both of them are
mentioned together in the Targum on Cant. 4.5. (...); Thy two Deliverers which
shall deliver thee, Messiah the Son of David, and Messiah the Son of Ephraim;
are like to Moses and Aaron. The same words are repeated again, Chap. 7. v. 3.
And in those places alone in the whole series of Targums, is there any mention
of this fictitious Messiah; the Author of that Paraphrase on the Canticles
being Josephus Caecus, who lived after the finishing of the Talmuds whereof he
makes mention. In other parts of the Targum he appears not. But in the
Talmud he is fr^quently brought on the Stage. So Tractat. de F^^to T^berna^ul.
Distinct. Hachalil Chamesha. It is a Tradition of our Masters, that the Holy
Blessed God shall say unto Messiah the Son of David who shall redeem us, (let
him do it suddenly in our days) ask somewhat of me, and I will give it thee:
as Psalm. 2. And when he shall hear that Messiah the Son of Joseph is ssain, he
shall say before the Lord, Lord of the world, I only ask life of thee; for it
seems that he shall be much terrified with the death of Ben Joseph. Unto this
Messiah they assign all things that are dolorous, and include suffering in
them, (which they call (...)) that are in the Scripture assigned to the
M^ssiah; especially that Prophecy, Zech. 12. v. 10. They shall look upon me
whom they have pi^r^ed. And hereby they sufficiently discover the Occasion of
the whole figment to have been that before intimated; namely, a necessity of an
evasion from those Testimonies of Scripture, and ancient Traditions which
assign sorrows and sufferings unto the M^ssiah, which they will not allow to
belong unto the Son of David.

A brief account may be given of what it is, that they now ascribe unto this
Messiah, and what it is that they expect from him. The whole of his story
depends on that of one Armillus against whom he shall fall in Battle, whose
Legend we must therefore also touch upon. And this is given us at large in
(...) in the seventh sign of the coming of the M^ssiah, and with some variation
in (...), or the Colloquy between Zerubbabel, and Michael the Archangel. A
Fable it is of no small Antiquity; for we have mention of him, not only in the
latter Targums on the H^giographa, but in that of Jonathan also on the Prophet,
Isa. 11.4. (...), and by the word of his mouth he shall slay the wicked
Armillus. And yet this invention is not older then the Talmud, however it came
into that Targum, which for the main of it, was certainly written long before.
The Mother of this Armillus, is they say, to be a St^tua of stone at Rome,
wrought into the similitude of a beautiful Woman. This, says the Dialogue of
Zerubbabel, is the Wife of Belial; and Armillus that shall be born of her, is
to be the head of all Idolatry. (...), Armillus the Son of the Stone which is
in the house of filth of the Scorners, (that is the Churches of the Christians)
shall be the Tenth King that shall afflict Israel.

The Author of Abkath R^chel, gives us somewhat another account of his
Nativity. The People of all Nations, says he, allured with the beauty of the
Image, shall come to Rome, and commit fornication with it, from whose
uncleanness at length Armillus shall be born. The same Author after a
description of his stature and bigness, (for he shall be twelve Cubits high,
and as broad as he is long) with his hair, eyes, and whole complexion, gives us
also an account of his Actions and proceedings. First, therefore he shall give
himself out to the (...) Heretics, (that is Christians) to be their Messiah,
who gave them their Law; saying unto them, (...) I am Messiah, I am your God;
and they shall presently embrace him, and give him their (...), or Prayer
Books, acknowledging him to be the Author of them. After this by the h^lp of
the Edomites (Romans) he shall conquer many Nations, until coming unto the
Jews, he shall require of them to receive him as their M^ssiah, and the Author
of their Law. But these good Jews shall with one consent oppose him, under the
Conduct of Messiah Ben Joseph, and Nehemiah the Son of Husiel says one, of
Menachem the Son of Ammiel says another. And in this War shall Messiah Ben
Joseph be slain, as it is written, Zech. 12. v. 10.

I shall stay a little by the way to unriddle this aenigmatical Fable, it
having not been Armillus some suppose to be formed of (...), a Waster of the
People, for such they intend he shall be. But the Truth is, as Broughton first
observed, and sundry others have assented unto him, it is no other then Romulus
with the usual Chaldee formation by Aleph. For whereas he contends that it
should be read Romulus, and not Armillus, or Armilus, there is no necessity for
it. For the Coyners of the Fable might either ignorantly mistake the name, as
is usual with these Masters, or on purpose obscure it, that it might not at
first view be known by the Christians, of whom they were afraid. And by Romulus
who was the first Founder of the City and Empire, they intend a Prince of Rome,
for such they declare their Armillus to be. And the whole story of him is
compounded out of some Prophetical passages and expressions in the Revelation
of St. John; or is feigned by themselves from the Event of things, mixing their
own conceits with the Opinions of some Christians concerning Antichrist. For
they plainly say that this Armillus is called by the Christians, (...),
Antichristus. Image Worship in the Revelation, as in the Old Testament is
expressed by the name of Fornication; and Rome because of her abounding
therein, is called the Mother of Harlots. Hence the Image at Rome in the
Church, is become the Mother of Armillus; and that by the People of all Nations
committing Fornication with it, which is the rise assigned unto Antichristian
Power in the Revelation. This then is that which in their way they aim at; The
Worship of Images in Churches, b^gun and promoted at Rome, furthered by the
consent of the Nations shall bring forth that Roman Power which shall seek to
destroy the Israel of God.

Book of the Revelations; as those of them who are Cabbalistical have a great
desire to be enquiring into things Mystical which they understand not, which
they wrest and corrupt unto their own imaginations. Besides, it may be they are
pleased with that description that is in it of the New Jerusalem, which some
Judaizing Christians of old wrested unto a restoration of the earthly City of
Jerusalem, and the renewed observation of the Law of Moses. Thus the Author of
the Questions and Answers published by Brenius, Qu. 26. enquires how Christians
interpret those words of the Revelation, Chap. 13. v. 18. here is Wisdom, let
him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, for it is the number
of a man, and his number is 666. to which he adds, I have heard of none who
has clearly interpreted this place, but I can give a good interpretation of
it. It is very likely he had considered it, though possibly his interpretation,
which he was not pleased to declare, was little worth. And the Visions of Rabbi
Joshu^ about the Heavenly Paradise, with the gates of it made of precious
stones, wherein are mixed many Fables ^ot unlike those about M^homets entrance
into Heaven in the Al^or^n, were originally taken from the A^egorica^
description given us of the N^w Jeru^alem in that Book, and abused to their
superstitions. And from the same fountain it is that they have got a great
Tradition among them, that they shall not be delivered until Rome be
destroyed. For understanding Rome by Babylon in that Prophecy, they apply that
unto themselves which is foretold upon its destruction, concerning the Church
of Christ. So Rabbi in (...), or Bundle of Myrrh, a Commentary on the Law,
says more than once (...), upon the destruction of Rome, our Rede^pti^n shall
ensue out of hand; And it is by many observed that an Alteration is made in the
later Editions of the Commentary of David Kimchi, on O^ad. 1. in those words;
(...). That which the Prophets spea^ concerning the destruction of Edom in the
latter days, they spoke it of Rome; as I have expounded it on that of Isaiah;
draw nigh ye Nations to hear, (Chap. 34. v. 1.) for when Rome shall be
destroyed then shall be the Redemption of Israel; but the name of Rome is left
out in the latter Editions, though it abide in that of Robert Stephens, which
he published on the Minor Prophets. Sayings also unto the same purpose are
cited out of Rabbi B^chai in Cad Hakkemach, Rabbi Solomon on Levit. 6. and
sundry others.

Rome its self. Mention is made of it, in the Talmud, Tract. Saned. and more
largely de^lared in Midrash Rabba Canti^. Canti^o cap. 1. v. 6. as it is from
thence reported by Buxtorfe in his Lexicon Talmud. Rad. (...). And their words
are to this purpose. Rabbi Levi said, that on the day that Solomon was married
unto the Daughter of Pharaoh, Micha^l the great Prince descended from Heaven,
and fixed a reed in the Sea, so as that mud and dirt might on all sides be
gathered unto it. And this place afterward bec^ming a wood, was that place
where Rome was afterward built. For at the time that Jeroboam the Son of N^bat
made the two Golden Calves, there were two small Houses built at Rome, which
presently fell down; and being again set up, immediately they fell down again.
But there was then present an old man whose name was (...) Abba Kolon, who said
unto them, that unless you bring water hither out of the River of Euphrates,
and mix it with this clay and build the houses therewith, they will never
stand. They said therefore unto him, and who shall bring it unto us; He
answered that he would. He went therefore and took on him the habit of one that
carries Wine to sell, and so went from one City unto another, from one Country
unto another, until he came at length unto Euphrates. When he came thither, he
took water out of the River; which when he had brought unto them they mixed it
with their Clay, and therewith built up the houses, which stood firm and
stable. From that time it was a Proverb amongst men; Every City or Provin^e
where there is not Abba Kolon deserves not the name of a City or Province, or a
Metropolitical City; and they called that place Rome, Babylon; and the Gloss
adds, this is the place where Rome that afflicts Israel was ^uilt. Cartwright
in his Mellificium Hebraicum lib. 1. cap. 9. reporting this story out of
Buxtorf, adds; h^nd dubi^andum vi^etur, eos sub isto verborum involucro Romam
tanquam alteram Babylon^m perstringere voluisse, quod nimirum quae prius a
Babyloniis, eadem atqu^ etiam gr^viora postea a Romany passi fuerint. Quin and
Romanam Idololatriam in eo perstringi arbitror, quod e^d^m die quo Jeroboamus
filius Nebat vitulos aureos constituit, Romae (1. in loco ubi poste^ condita
est Roma) duo tiguria aedificata esse dicunt. So He; who alone has conjectared
at the intendment of this aenigmaticall story, and that to good purpose; I
shall therefore make it more fully to appear. Rome they have learned to call
Babylon out of the Revelation as was declared; and thence conclude that upon
the destruction of Rome they shall be delivered. Two things were eminent in
Babylon; First, that it was its self the beginning of all false Worship and
Idolatry in the World; and therein the Mother of Harlots; the other, that God
made use of it to punish the Idolatries of the Jews. Hence they say that Rome
this New Babylon had its foundation when Solomon married Pharaohs Daughter; and
that it began to be built when Jeroboam set up his Calves: which they look upon
as the two first fatal instances of the declension of Israel into false Worship
and Idolatry. And hereby they intimate, partly that Rome should set up
Idolatry, as Solomon and Jeroboam did, and partly that God had then provided a
New Babylon to punish and destroy them. The Abba Kolon is a Monster, whom no
man has as yet set upon. But it is no other but Capitolium, as they will
easily grant, who know how usual it is with them strangely to Metamorphise
things and words; instances whereof I shall elsewhere give. Thence is the
Proverb they speak of; no Abba Kolon, no Capitol, or Temple of Idolatry, no
City; the Capitol answering the Tower of Babel which was a Temple of Belus.
Neither is that Proverb any thing but an allusion to that in the Roman History;
Capitolium est ubi quondam Capite humano invento, responsum est eo loco caput
rerum, summamque imperii sore: Tit. Live. lib. 5. And the tempering of the clay
of Rome with the water of Euphrates by the help of Abba Kolon, is nothing but
an expression of the succession of Rome into the stead of Babylon whic was
built on that River, by the means of the Capitol that great Seat of Idolatry.
Nor do they at all distinguish between the present Idolatry of Rome and that of
old. So that although all things are confounded by them with monstrous Fictions
and Expressions, which it may be they invented on purpose to obscure their
intention, yet their aim in the whole is manifest.

But to return; for the remaining part of the story concerning this Armillus, I
Roman Church, or these from them; but evident it is that they strive to impose
the odium of Antichrist upon one another. The Papists say that Antichrist shall
be a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan, and that he shall persuade the Jews that he is
their Messiah; that by their help, and others joining with them, he shall
conquer many Nations, destroy Rome, slay Enoch and Elias, and afterward be
destroyed himself by fire from Heaven, by the power of Christ. The Jews, that
their Armillus shall be a Roman, born of Idolatrous Fornication, that he shall
persuade the Roman Christians, that he is the Head of their Religion and Author
of their Prayer Books; that he shall conquer many Nations, fight against
Jerusalem, slay Messiah Ben Joseph, and afterward be consumed with fire from
Heaven, through the power of Ben David. To whether party the Glory of this
invention is to be assigned, I am uncertain; the story for the substance of it,
is the same on both sides, only variously fitted unto their several interests.

And this shall be the End of Messiah Ben Joseph, or Ephraim; Armillus having
received Nehemiah Ben Husiel, (...), he sha^^ gather the forces of all the
Nations of the world into the vall^y of decision, (...), and shall fight with
Israel; (...), And they shall slay of them (of Armillus his Army) heaps (or
multitudes) on heaps, and they shall finite a few of Israel, and they shall
slay the Messiah of the Lord. (...); And the ministering Ang^lls shall come and
perfuming his body shall lay it up with the ancient Fathers; where it is to be
kept many days without putrefaction, as H^ctors Body was (in Homer) after he
was slain by Achilles. And it is not unlikely but that they may allude somewhat
to the Prophecy of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. who were to be slain and
afterward called up to Heaven. Thus do they at their pleasure dispose of this
creature of their own; for having framed him themselves he is their own to do
with him what they will, alive and dead. But that which is the poison and sting
of this Fable is, that the death of this fictitious Messiah, must amongst them
bear all that is spoken in the Scripture, or continued by Tradition concerning
the Humiliation, suffering, and death of the true Messiah of the Lord.

Mormo out of our way. Should they invent twenty other Messiahs, as they have
done this, and which on the same grounds, and with as good Authority they may,
the case would still be the same. Who gave them power to substitute themselves
in the place of God, to give New Promises, to appoint New Saviors, and to
invent new ways of Deliverance? The Scripture is utterly silent of any such
person, nor have they any Antetalmudical Tradition concerning him. And what
their Masters have invented in the Talmuds, is of no more Authority, then what
they coin every day themselves; The truth is, this whole story of Armillus and
Ben Joseph is a Talmudical Romance, the one the Giant, the other the Knight.
But these fictions seria ducunt. Poor creatures are hardened by them unto their
eternal destruction. But is the world bound to believe what every one whom they
are pleased to call Rabbi can imagine, though never so contrary to the
Principles of that Religion which themselves pretend to own and profess? so
indeed some of them say, that if their Masters teach the right hand to be the
left, yea, Heaven to be Hell, yet their Authority is not to be questioned; and
as I remember others say some such things of the Pope. But God I hope of his
Goodness, will not suffer poor mankind to be always so deluded. All the
Promises of God, all the Prophesies from the found^tion of the world, concern
only one Messiah, of the Seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, and of the
family of David. All the faith of the Church of old as we have proved respected
that one only. And who will lay any weight upon what is spoken, foretold, or
promised concerning him, if the Jews have power to invent another at their
pleasure?

foolishly also in this matter, in that they have not suited their own creature
unto the Ends for which they have made him. The End as was showed before, why
they advanced this imagination, was to give countenance unto what is spoken in
the Scriptures or retained by themselves in Tradition, concerning the
sufferings of the Messiah. And it is somewhat strange to me, that having raised
up this Ben Joseph, they did not use him worse then they have done, but by a
little foolish Pity have spoiled their own whole design. They have a Tradition
among themselves that the Messiah must bear a third part of all the
afflictions, or persecutions, that ever were, or shall be in the world. And
what proportion does a man's being slain in battle where his Army is victorious,
which is all the hardship this Ben Joseph is to meet withal, bear unto the
Afflictions which befall the Church in every Age? And for the Scripture it is
mere lost labor to compare the death of this Warrior, with what is delivered
therein concerning the sufferings of the Messiah. Every one not judicially
blinded must needs see that there is no affinity between them.

The fifty third Chapter of Isaiah is acknowledged by their Targum and sundry
of the principal Masters of their faith to be a Prophecy concerning him, and
we shall afterward undeniably prove it so to be. Now the Person there spoken
of, is one, whom the Jews are to reject and despise, whom God is to a^flict and
bruise, by causing the sins of the whole Church to meet upon him. One who by
his sufferings is to fulfill the pleasure of the Lord, making his Soul an
Offering for sin, justifying the Elect, and conquering Satan by his Death. This
ficti^^ous Messiah is to be honored of all the Jews, to raise Armies, to fight
a Battle, and therein after the manner of other men to be slain. So that a
story was never worse told, nor to less purpose. No other use can be made of
it, that I know of, but only to consider in it the blindness of poor obstinate
sinners given up unto hardness of heart, and a spirit of folly, for the
rejection of him whom God sealed, anointed, and sent to be the Savior of the
world. Leaving them therefore in the embraces of this cloud, we may consider
the other expected Messiah, whom they call Ben David, in whom principally they
place their confidence.

Jews about their Messiah, as they have been in part discovered by others, so I
design not here at large to recount them. The chief Masters of them in the
Talmud are full of disputes and contradictions about him, and those of after
Ages succeed them in their uncertainties. Such will the conceptions of all men
be, when they take up fancies and opinions of their own in matters of Divine
Revelation. But some things there are wherein they all generally agree, and
those relating unto his Person, Work and Office* which it shall suffice to give
an account of, as answering our present Design. First, Therefore they contend
that he shall be a mere man; and there is nothing that they strive to avoid
more then the Testimonies of Scripture which show that the promised Messiah was
to be God and man in one Person, as has been already evidenced. They contend
also that he shall be born after the manner of all men, not of a Virgin, but of
a married Woman begotten by her Husband. About the place of his birth they are
not fully agreed; for although they all acknowledge the Prophecy of Micah
about Bethlehem to relate unto him, Chap. 5.2. yet knowing, that Town now to
have been desolate for many Generations, and waste without inhabitant, which
would seem to prove that he is come already, they contend, that it is said he
shall be born at Bethlehem, because he is to spring of David who was born
there; for of the Tribe of Judah and Family of David he must proceed; although
they have neither distinction of Tribes, nor succession of Families left in the
world amongst them. To relieve themselves from that difficulty, they feign that
he shall restore unto them all their Genealogies.

About the time of his coming, they are woefully perplexed, as we shall see
afterward. But many tokens they have of it when it does come; for they heap
up, out of some Allegorical passages in the Scripture, such stupendous
Prodigies as never were nor shall be in the world. One of the principal of them
is the sounding of the great Trumpet which all Israel shall hear, and the world
tremble at; from Isa. 27. v. 13. The finding of the Ark and Sacred Fire, which
things were talked of in the late Rumors about them, are indeed a part of
their Creed in this matter. His Office, when he comes, is to be a King, which
he shall be anointed unto by them, when they are gathered together. And the
work he is to do, is in War, to fight with Armillus, Gog and Magog, to conquer
the Edomites and Ishmaelites, that is the Romish Christians, and Turks or
Saracens, and in so doing to erect a glorious Kingdom at Jerusalem: in Peace,
he is to Rule righteously, not only over Israel, but also all the Nations of
the world if they have any difference amongst them, shall refer all unto his
determination and Vmpirage. In Religion, he shall build the Third Temple
mentioned by Ezekiel, restore the Sacrifices, and cause the Law of Moses to be
most strictly observed. But that which is the head of all, he shall free the
Jews from their Captivity, restore them to their own Land, make Princes and
Lords of them all, giving them the wealth of all Nations, either conquered by
him, or brought voluntarily unto him; feast them on Behemoth, Zis, and the Wine
of Paradise, so that they shall see want and poverty no more.

This is the substance of their persuasion, concerning his Coming, Person,
Office and Work. When he shall come, whether he shall live always, or dye at
an hundred years old, whether he shall have Children, and if he have, whether
they shall succeed him in his Throne, whether all the Jews that are dead shall
rise at his coming, and their Galgal, or rolling in the earth from all parts of
the world into the Land of Canaan shall then happen or no, whether the general
Resurrection shall not succeed immediately upon his Reign, or at least within
forty years after, or how long it will be to the end of the world, they are not
at all agreed. But this, as has been declared, is the substance of their
persuasion and expectation; that he shall be a mere man, and that the
Deliverance which he shall effect, shall be by mighty Wars, wherein the Jews
shall be always victorious, and that in the Dominion and Rule which they shall
have over all Nations, the Third Temple shall be built, the Law of Moses be
observed by him and them, and the Noachichal Precepts be imposed on all others.
As for any Spiritual Salvation from sin and the curse of the Law, of
Justification and Righteousness by him, or the procurement of Grace and Glory,
they utterly reject all thoughts about them.

With these Opinions, many of them have mixed prodigious fancies, rendering
their Messiah in this world, not much inferior unto that which Mahomet has
promised unto his followers in another. And some of them on the other hand
endeavor to pare off what superfluities they can spare, and to render their
folly as plausible as they are able. Wherefore that it may appear what is the
utmost height of their conceptions in this matter, and that which the most
contemplative persons amongst them fix upon, I shall subjoyn a description of
him and his Kingdom, in the words of Maimonides, one of the wisest and soberest
persons that has been amongst them since their last fatal dispersion. This man
therefore in his Exposition of the tenth Chapter of Tractat. Saned. observing
the fond and frivolous imaginations of their Talmudical Masters about the
Messiah, gives many rules and instructions about the right understanding of
their sayings, to free them from open impieties and contradictions. And
hereunto he subjoyns, as he supposes the true Notion of the Messiah and his
Kingdom in the ensuing words. As to the days of the Messiah, they are the time
when the Kingdom shall be restored unto Israel, and they shall return unto
Palestine. And this King shall be Potent, the Metropolis of whose Kingdom shall
be Sion; and his Name shall be famous unto the uttermost parts of the Earth. He
shall be greater and richer then Solomon, and with him the Nations shall make
peace and yield him obedience, because of his Justice, and the Miracles that he
shall perform. If any one shall rise against him God shall give him up into his
hand to be destroyed. All the Scripture declares his Happiness, and the
Happiness we shall have by him. Howbeit nothing in the nature of things shall
be changed, only Israel shall have the Kingdom; for so our Wise men say
expressly, there is no difference between these days, and the days of the
Messiah, but only the subduing of the Nations under us. So indeed says Rab.
Samuel, and others of them; (...): He goes on, In those days Victuals shall be
had at an easy rate, as if the earth brought forth Cates and Clothes; And
afterward, The Messiah shall dye, and his Son, and his Sons Son shall reign
after him; but his Kingdom shall endure long, and men shall live long in those
days; so that some think his Kingdom shall continue a thousand years. But the
days of the Messiah are not so much to be desired, that we may have store of
Corn and Wealth, ride on Horses, and drink Wine with Music, but for the
society and conversation of good men, the Knowledge and Righteousness of the
King, and that then without wearisomness, trouble, or constraint, the whole Law
of Moses shall be observed.

Creed of the most sober part of the Jews concerning the Messiah whom they look
and long for; if any are so sober as to embrace it; For the same Author tells
us, that there were very few so minded, it may be scarce anoth^r in an Age
besides himself; generally they look after nothing but Rule, Dominion, Wealth,
and Pleasure. But he, and they all own him as a temporal King, a mighty
Warrior, subduing the Nations unto the Jews, a Furius Camillus, or an
Alexander, or a Caesar's of Redemption from sin, death and Hell, of Pardon of
sin, Justification and Righteousness, of eternal Salvation by him, they know,
they believe nothing. Maimonides thinks indeed, that his Kingdom shall long
continue, not like Manasseth of late, who supposes that it might not abide
above forty years, and those immediately preceding the Day of Judgment.

Jews which is Catholic unto them, and has been so ever since they rejected
the true Messiah, contains an absolute renunciation of the faith of the Church
of old, and an utter rejection of all the ends for which the Messiah was
promised. I shall not therefore enter here upon a particular refutation of it,
for it will occur in our ensuing Discourses. Neither is this the Person about
whom we contend with them: nor have we any concernment in him. When he comes,
let them make their b^st of him; we have already received the Captain of our
Salvation. What also they plead for themselves as the ground of their obstinacy
in refusing the True Messiah, must afterward be particularly discussed. At
present therefore, I shall only reflect on those depraved habits of their
minds, which in concurrence with occasions and Temptations suited unto them,
have seduced them into these low, carnal, and earthly imaginations about the
Promised Seed, his Person, Office, and Work that he was to perform.

Ignorance of their miserable condition by nature, both as to sin and wrath,
justly claims the first place. For although, as was by instances before
manifested, the Evidence of Truth, and Power of Traditions amongst them, have
prevailed with some, to avow the notion of the Sin of Adam and the corruption
of our nature thereby, yet indeed there is not any of them, that have a true
sense and conviction of their Natural Condition, and the misery that does
attend it. The Messiah, as we have proved at large, was first promised to
relieve mankind from that state whereinto they were cast by the Apostasy of
Adam the Common Root and Parent of them all. Such as are men's apprehensions of
that condition, such also will be their thoughts concerning the Messiah, who
was promised to be a Deliverer from it. They who know themselves cast out of
the favor of God thereby, made obnoxious unto his eternal displeasure, and
disenabled to do any thing that shall please him, as being cast into a state of
universal Enmity against him, must needs look on the Messiah promised in the
Grace, Goodness and Wisdom of God for a Savior and Deliverer, to be One that
must by suitable ways and means free them from Sin and Wrath, procure for them
the favor of God, enable them to serve him again unto Acceptance, and so
bring them at length unto their chief End, the everlasting enjoyment of him. As
these things answer one another, and are on both sides fully revealed in the
Scripture, so the Church of old who had a due Apprehension of their own
condition, looked for such a Messiah as God had promised. Ignorance therefore
of this condition, is no small cause of the present Judaical misbelief. What
ever may be the estate of other men, about which they do not much trouble
themselves, for their parts they are Children of Abraham, exempted from the
common condition of mankind by the Privilege of their Nativity; or at least
they are relieved by their circumcision, by the pain whereof, they make
sufficient satisfaction for any ill they bring with them into this world. That
they are dead in Trespasses and Sins, standing in need to be born again; that
they are by nature children of wrath, obnoxious unto the curse of God; that the
sin of our first Parents is imputed unto them, or that if it be, that it was of
any such demerit as Christians teach, they believe not. Upon the matter they
know no misery but what consists in Poverty, Captivity and want of Rule and
Dominion. And what should a spiritual Redeemer do unto these men? What beauty
or comeliness can he have in him, for which of them he should be desired? What
Reason can they see, why they should understand the Promises concerning him in
such a way and sense, as that they should not be concerned in them? And this
blindness had in a great measure possessed their minds at the first
promulgation of the Gospel. See John 8. v. 33, 34. Chap. 9. v. 40, 41. And
therefore our Apostle in his Epistle unto the Romans, wherein he deals both
with Jews and Gentiles, before he declares the Propitiation that was made, with
the Justification that was to be obtained by the blood of Christ, convinces
them all of their miserable lost condition, on the account of sin, Original and
Actual, Chap. 1, 2, 3. Until therefore this Pride, self-fulness, and Ignorance
of themselves be taken from them, and rooted out of their hearts, all Promises
of a spiritual Redeemer must needs be unsavory unto them. They stand in no
need of him, and why should they desire him. An Earthly King that would give
them Liberty, Wealth, Ease and Dominion, they would gladly embrace, and have
long in vain looked for.

Secondly, Ignorance of the Righteousness of God, both as to what he requires
justified before him, and of his Judgment concerning the desert of sin, has
the same effect upon them. Romans 10. v. 3, 4. The great End for which the
Messiah was promised, as we have in part declared, and shall afterward farther
evince, was to make Atonement for sin, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. A Righteousness was to be brought in, that might
answer the Justice of God, and abide its trial. Of what nature this
Righteousness must be, the Scripture declares; and that as well in the
Revelation it makes of the Holiness of God, Psalm. 5. v. 4, 5. Joshua 24. v. 19.
Hab. 1. v. 13. as of the purity and severity of his Law, Deuteronomy. 33. v. 2. Chap.
27. v. 26. and the absolute Perfection of his Justice in the Execution of it,
Psalm 50. v. 21. An Universal spotless innocence, with a constant unerring
Obedience in all things, and that in the highest degree of Perfection, are
required to find Acceptance with this Holy and Righteous God. Of the Nature
and necessity of this Righteousness the Jews are ignorant and regardless; They
and their Masters were so of old, Matthew. 5. v. 20. An outside, partial,
hypocritical Observance of the Law of Moses, they suppose will serve their
Turns. See Romans 9. v. 31. And indeed there is not any thing that more openly
discovers the miserable blindness of the present Jews, then the consideration
of what they insist upon, as their Righteousness before God. The Faith and
Obedience of their Forefathers, the Privilege of Circumcision, some outward
Observances of Mosaical Precepts, with anxious scrupulous abstinencies, self
macerations in fasts, with prayers by tale and number, Sabbath rests from
outward labor with the like bodily exercises, are the sum of what they plead
for themselves. Now if these things which are absolutely in their own power,
will compose and make up a Righteou^ness acceptable unto God, cover all the
sins whereof they know themselves to be guilty, to what end should they look
for a Redeemer to bring in Everlasting Righteousn^ss, or to make Atonement for
sin? Why should they look out in this case for Relief, seeing they have enough
at home to serve their turns? Let them that are we^^y and heavy laden seek
after such a Deliverer, they have no need of him or his Salvation. According
therefore as this building of Self-Righteousness went on and prospered amongst
them, Faith in the Messiah, as to the true Ends for which He was promised,
decayed every day more and more, until at length it was utterly lost. For as
our Apostle tells them, if Righteousness were by the Law, the Promise of the
Messiah was to no purpose; and if the Law made things Perfect, the bringing in
of another Priesthood and Sacrifice was altogether needless.

Judgment of God concerning the Desert of sin. The natural notion hereof the
vilest Hypocrites amongst them were sometimes perplexed withal. See Isa. 33.
v. 14, 15. Micah 6. v. 8. But the generality of them have long endeavored by
prejudicate Imaginations, to cast out the true and real sense of it. That God
is angry at sin, that in some cases an Atonement is needful they will not
deny. But so low and carnal are their thoughts of his severity, that they think
any thing may serve the turn to appease his Wrath, or to satisfy his Justice,
especially toward them whom alone he loves. Their Afflictions and
Persecutions, the Death of their Children, and their own Death, especially if
it be of a painful distemper, they suppose to make a sufficient Propitiation
for all their sins. Such mean and unworthy thoughts have they of the Majesty,
Holiness, and Terror of the Lord. Of late also, lest there should be a failure
on any account, they have found out an invention to give their sins unto the
Devil by the Sacrifice of a Cock, the manner whereof is at large described by
Buxtorfius in his Synagoga Judaica. And this also has no small influence on
their minds to pervert them from the Faith of their Forefathers. Let the
Messiah provide well for them in this world, and they will look well enough
unto themselves, as to that which is to come.

Ignorance of the whole Nature, Use and End of the Mosaical Law, which also
contributes much to the producing of the same Effect upon them. To what End the
Law was given, whereunto it served, what was the nature and proper use of its
Institutions shall be declared as occasion is offered in the Exposition of the
Epistle its self. For the present it may suffice unto our purpose, to consider
their Apprehensions of it, and what influence they have into their misbelief.
In general they look on the Law and their observance of it, as the only means
of obtaining Righteousness, and making an Atonement with God. So they did of
old, Romans 9. v. 32, 33, 34. In the observation of its Precepts they place all
their Righteousness before God, and by its Sacrifices they look for Atonement
of all their sins. That the Law was not given, that the Sacrifices were not
appointed for these Ends, that the Fathers of old never attended unto them
absolutely with any such Intention, shall be afterward declared. In the mean
time it is evident that this Persuasion corrupts their minds as to their
thoughts about the Messiah. For if Righteousness may be obtained, and
Atonement made without him, to what End serves the Promise concerning him? But
having thus taken from him the whole Office and Work whereunto of God he was
designed, that he might not be thought altogether useless, they have cut out
for him the work and employment before mentioned. For looking on Righteousness
and Atonement with the consequent of them Eternal Salvation, as the proper
Effects of the Law, they thought meet to leave unto their Messiah the work of
procuring unto them Liberty, Wealth, and Dominion, which they found by
experience that the Law was not able to do. But had indeed their Eyes been
opened in the knowledge of God and themselves, they would have found the Law no
less insufficient to procure by its self an Heavenly than an Earthly Kingdom
for them. And against their Prejudicate obstinacy in this matter, does the
Apostle principally oppose himself in his Epistle unto them.

Jews, if they look for Atonement and the Remission of sins by the Sacrifices
of the Law, can now expect to have their sins pardoned, without which they
cannot be eternally saved, seeing they are confessedly destitute of all Legal
Sacrifices whatever? Have they found out some other way, or do they utterly
give over seeking after Salvation? This very Question being put unto one of
them, he answers; that they now obtain the pardon of their Sins, by Repentance
and Amendment of Life; according to the Promises made in the Prophets unto that
Purpose; as Ezekiel. 18. v. 20. And concludes, Quamvis jam nulla sint sacrificia
quae media erant ad tanto facilius impetrandam remissionem peccatorum, eadem
tamen per poenitentiam, ac resipiscentiam declinando a viis malis impetratur.
Although there are now no Sacrifices which were a means the more easily to
obtain the forgiveness of sins, yet it may be obtained by Repentance, and a
departure from ways of evil. This is their Hope which like that of the
Hypocrite is as the giving up of the Ghost. For (1.) It is true, Repentance and
Amendment of Life, are required in them who seek after the forgiveness of their
sins, and many Promises are made unto them; But is this all that God required,
that sin might be forgiven? They are sufficient indeed in their own way and
place, but are they so absolutely also? Did not God moreover appoint and
require, that they should make use of Sacrifices to make atonement for sins,
without which they should not be done away? See Levit. 16. And (2.) What is the
meaning of that Plea, that by Sacrifices indeed Remission of sins might more
easily be obtained, but obtained it may be without them? Does this more easily
respect God or man? if they say it respects God; I desire to know, if he can
pardon sin without Sacrifice, why he cannot do it as easily as with them? or
what is he eased of by Sacrifices? If it respect themselves, as indeed it does,
then it may be enquired what it is that they shall be eased of in the obtaining
of the Pardon of sins, by the use of Sacrifices; when that is again restored
unto them? this can be of nothing but of that which they are now forced to make
use of, for that end and purpose, and what is that? Why Repentance and
Amendment of Life. If then they had their Sacrifices these might be spared, or
at least much in them abated which at present is necessary. This then it seems
was the End why God instituted Sacrifices, namely that these Jews might obtain
pardon of sin, without either Repentance or Amendment. And this is that which
they love as their souls; namely that they may live in their sins, and be
acquitted of all Danger by Sacrifices and outward services. (3.) Atonement for
sin is expressly necessary, or all the Institutions of Sacrifices for that End
of old were vain and ludicrous. At the same time when Sacrifices were in use,
Repentance was also required, and therefore not to be a cause or means for the
same End, in the same kind with them. And therefore notwithstanding their
Pretense of Repentance, no Jew upon his own Principles, can now in the total
Cessation of all Sacrifices, obtain either Pardon of sin here, or Salvation
hereafter. But to proceed.

Their corrupt carnal Affections have moreover greatly contributed, and yet do
so Messiah, and the work that he has to do, That He should be a King, and
reign gloriously, that his Dominion should be over all the world, and endure
throughout all Generations, was promised concerning him from the Beginning.
They think much therefore what Advantage this Kingdom may afford unto them,
comparing it in their minds with those other Empires which they see in the
world. Wealth, Ease, Liberty, Dominion, or a share in Power and Rule are the
things that please their carnal minds, and evidently fill them with Envy and
Wrath against them by whom they are possessed. These things they look after and
hope for; as the only things that are desirable, the only Pledges indeed of the
favor of God. No Persons on the Earth have their thoughts more fixed on them
then they. As their Oppressions increase, so do their Desires after Liberty and
Rule; and they have learned nothing by their Poverty, but to grow in a greedy
fierceness after Riches. And when they would at any time set out the care of
God toward their Nation, they declare that such a one in such a place was
worth so many thousand Crowns, or drove such a Trade, or was in such favor as
that he rode in a Coach or Chariot; as may be seen in the Address of Manasseh
unto the English. This Covetousness, and Ambition with Revengefull thoughts
against their Oppressors possessing their minds, makes them desire, hope and
believe that the Kingdom of their Messiah shall be of this world, and that
therein their Enjoyments shall be as large, as what ever now their Fancy can
reach unto. And so perfectly are they under the Power of these lusts and
earthly desires in this matter, that take away their Hopes of satisfying of
them in the good things of this world, that they will on very easy terms bid
adieu unto their Messiah, or grant that he is already come. But whilst they
are obstinately fixed in the expectation of them, to tell them of a Spiritual
and Heavenly Kingdom, wherein the poorest and most persecuted Person on the
Earth may have as good an Interest, and enjoy as much Benefit by it, as the
greatest Monarch in the world, and you do but cast away your words into the
wind.

Secondly, Since the Propagation of the Gospel and its success in the world,
Envy, Gentile Believers, has exceedingly perverted their minds, in their
Notions about the Messiah. And this they are filled withal upon a twofold
account.

First, Upon that of the Spiritual Privileges which they saw claimed by them.
That the Gentiles, or Nations of the Earth distinct from Israel, should be
Fellow-Heirs in the Promise with the Posterity of Abraham according unto the
flesh, was declared by all the Prophets of old. But yet, as we have showed,
this was done by them in that obscure manner, in comparison of the Revelation
made of it in the Gospel, that the Grace and Counsel of God therein is called a
Mystery hid from the Ages that went before. Wherefore when this Design of the
Love and Wisdom of God was brought to Light, it filled the Jews who had lost
the faith of it with Envy and Wrath. See Acts 13. v. 45, 46, 47, 50. Chap. 22.
v. 21, 22, 23. 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 15, 16. The Stories of all Ages from thence unto
this Day testify the same, nor do they yet stick to express these corrupt
Affections, as occasion is offered. And this Envy being greatly predominant in
them hardens them in their imagination of such a Messiah, as by whom the
Gentiles may receive no Benefit, but what may accrue unto them by becoming
their Servants. They cannot endure to hear unto this Day that the Gentiles
should be equal sharers with themselves in the Promise of the Messiah. They
would have him unto themselves alone, or not at all. And this keeps up their
Desires and Expectations of such an one as they have fancied for their own Ends
and Purposes.

Envy against the Gentiles is greatly increased and excited by the Oppressions
and Sufferings from them which they undergo. This adds hatred and desire of
Revenge unto it, which render it impotent and unruly. I speak not now of their
present and past sufferings from Christians, which in many places have been
unrighteous and inhumane, and so undoubtedly a great occasion of hardening them
in their obstinacy, but of their long continued oppressions under the Power of
the Gentiles in general. Having been greatly harrased and wasted by them in
most Ages, and having a Deliverer promised unto them, they are strongly
inclined to fancy such a Deliverance as being peculiarly th^irs, should enable
them to avenge themselves on their Old Enemies and Oppressors. And this they
think must be done, not by an Heavenly Spiritual King, ruling in the things
concerning Religion and the Worship of God, but by one that having a ^^ghty
Kingdom in this world, shall by force and Power subdue their Enemies under
them. Such an one therefore they desire and look for; and how hard it is for
them to depose these thoughts unless they are freed by the Grace of God from
the ^^rn^l Aff^ct^^ns mentioned, is not hard to ghess. And these are some of
those especial occasions w^ereby the Jews through their own blindness are
hardened in their unbeli^f, and diso^^dience unto the Gospel, whereunto others
of the like kind may be added.

present Jews all the world over concerning the Messiah in whom they place
their Confidence. A mere man he is to be; a King over the Jews at Jerusalem,
who shall conqu^r many Nations, and so give Peace, Prosperity and Plenty unto
all the Israelites in their own Land. But what great matter is in all this?
Have not other men done as much or more for their Citizens and People? Can they
fancy that their Messiah should be more victorious or successful then
Alexander? they dare not hope it. At a Disputation before the Pope and
Cardinals at Rome which they have recorded in Shebat Jehuda, they openly
professed that they never expected so great glory by their Messiah, as that
which they saw them attended withal. And Manasseh confesses that it is no
great or extraordinary matter which they looked for by him. De Resur. lib. 2.
cap. 21. Non est, says he, tantum miraculum si Messiah veniat subjugatum regna
sibi and imperia multa, cum non raro accidisse videamus ut humiles aliqui
abjectique ad regna and imperia pervenerint, terrarumque multarum Domini
fierent. It is no such Miracle that the Messiah should come and subdue many
Kingdoms and Empires unto himself, seeing it often falls out that men of mean
and abject condition, do come unto Kingdoms and Empires, and are made Lords of
many Countries. It is so indeed; they say nothing of him, but what may be
paralelled in the Stories of the Nations of the world, especially considering
the shortness of his reign which they begin to think shall not be above forty
years.

Promises made concerning him from the foundation of the world? Is this the
meaning of the Promise given unto Adam? Was this the End of the Call and
Separation of Abraham? This the intendment of the Promise made unto him, that
in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed? Is this only the
importance of it, that toward the end of the world, many of them shall be
conquered? Was this the intent of the Oath made unto David, and of the sure
mercies confirmed unto him, and his, thereby? Do all the Promises in the
Prophets, set out in words glorious and magnificent, end in a Warri^ur,
inferior it may be unto many of those whose destruction they Prophesied of? Or
is not this rather a way to expose the whole Old Testament unto scorn and
reproach, as making the Promises thereof not to extend unto that Glory, which
in others the Penmen of it despised; or at least to regard only things of the
same nature with them? Was this the Expectation of the Fathers of old? Is this
that which they desired, prayed for, longed for, esteeming all the Glory of
their present Enjoyments as nothing in comparison of it? What is in this
Messiah that he should be the Hope and Desire of all Nations? Did God set him
forth as the great Effect of his Love, Grace, Goodness and Faithfulness toward
them, and then bring forth a Military King, in whose exploits they were not all
to be concerned? Was the Church in travail for so many Generations to bring
forth this Fighter? Had they no Eye of old unto Spiritual and Eternal things in
the Promise of the Messiah? Of late indeed Josephus Albo tells us that the
Doctrine of the coming of the Messiah is not fundamental; And Hiliel of old
maintained that Hezekiah was the M^ssiah; He should have been so, says
another, had he composed a Song unto God. Barcosba a seditious Negromancer is
the Messiah, says R. Akiha; He shall come, it may be, immediately before the
Resurrection says Manasse. But do these thoughts suit the Faith, Hope,
Prayers, and Expectations of the Church of old? Do they answer any one Promise
of God concerning him? No man not utterly unacquainted with the Scripture can
give the least countenance unto such imaginations.

What all this while is become of the work every where in the Scripture
assigned Messiah? Who is that cast off unto? Who shall break the Serpents Head?
Who shall take away the curse that entered on Sin? Who shall be a blessing unto
all Nations? To whom shall the Gentiles be gathered to be saved by him? Who
shall be a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck? Who shall have a Body
prepared him to offer in stead of the Sacrifices of the Law? Who shall have his
hands and feet pierced in his suffering, and his Vesture parted by Lot? Who
shall make his Soul an Offering for sin? Who shall be bruised, grieved, and
afflicted by God himself, because he shall bear the Iniquities of his People?
Who shall make Atonement for Transgressors and bring in everlasting
Righteousness? Who shall for ever make Intercession for Transgressors? And who
shall sit at the Right Hand of God in his Rule over the whole world? All these
things and sundry others of the like kind, are openly and frequently promised
concerning the true Messiah, whereof not any of them is to be accomplished in
or by him whom they look for. But these men indeed take a way to destroy all
Religion, and to turn the whole Bible into a story of earthly things, without
either Life, Spirit, or Heavenly Mystery in it.

It is acknowledged that there are many Promises of Mercy and Glory unto the
Messiah expressed in Words, whose first literal sense represents things outward
and temporal. And there is a threefold Interpretation of them contended for.
The first is that of the Jews, who would have them all understood according
unto their literal importance, without the allowance of any Figure or Allegory
in them. But no thing can be more vain then this imagination; nor do they make
use of it, but where they suppose that it will serve their present design. For
whereas the Wisest of them do grant, that in the days of the Messiah the
Nature of things shall not be changed, but only their use, many of these
Promises in their first literal sense, import a full and direct alteration in
the Heavens and Earth and all things contained in them. So Isa. 11. v. 6, 7, 8.
Lions, Bears, Leopards, Cockatrices, Aspes, Calves, and young Children are said
all to live, feed, and play together. And Chap. 60. v. 7. That the Flocks of
Kedar, and the Rams of Nebaioth should minister unto the Church; ver. 16. that
they should suck the Milk of Kings; and ver. 19. that the Sun should no more
give light by day; and yet ver. 20. that it should no more go down. Chap. 65.
v. 17. That new Heavens, and a new Earth shall be created, and that the old
shall be remembered no more; that Trees and Fields shall rejoice and clap their
hands for gladness; with other things innumerable in the same kind. Now if they
grant, as they must, unless they intend to expose all Sacred Truth to the scorn
and contempt of Atheists, that these expressions are figurative and
Allegorical, they must do the same in all other Promises of earthly things, as
of Peace, Plenty, Victory, long Life, Dominion, Wealth and the like, being set
out in the same kind of Allegorial Expressions. At least they cannot make them
in the strict literal sense of the words the object of their Faith and
Expectation, unless they can by some infallible rule declare, what is
figuratively to be understood in them, what properly, or which Promises are
expressed Allegorically, which not. And this they can never do. The Event
therefore is the only infallible Interpreter of the meaning of such Prophetical
Predictions; what ever precedes that, is but conjecture. Wherefore,

Secondly, Some interpret all these Promises and Prophesies Spiritually,
without the least respect unto those outward terrene things, which are made use
of in figurative Expressions only to shadow out those spiritual, heavenly, and
eternal things which are intended in them. And indeed this way of
Interpretation which Calvin follows in all his Commentaries, is attended with
great probability of Truth. For the main Ends and work for which the Messiah
was promised, being as we have proved Spiritual and eternal, and whereas it is
evident, that many promises of things relating unto him, and the condition of
them that believe in him are Allegorically expressed (it being the constant way
of the Old Testament to shadow out spiritual and heavenly things, by things
earthly and carnal,) this way of interpreting the Promises, seems to have
great countenance given unto it, both from the nature of the things themselves,
and the constant tenor of the Prophetical Style. According unto this Rule of
Interpretation, all that is foretold in the Psalms and Prophets, of the
Deliverance, Rest, Peace, Glory, Rule and Dominion of the Church, of the
subjection and subserviency of Nations, Kingdoms, Rulers, Kings and Queens
thereunto, intends only either the Kingdom of Grace, consisting in Faith, Love,
Holiness, Righteousness and Peace in the Holy Ghost, with that spiritual
Beauty and Glory which is in the Worship of the Gospel; or the Kingdom of
Heaven its self where lies our Happiness and Reward. And indeed this
Interpretation of the Promises, as in respect of many of them it is evidently
certain, true, and proper, they being so expounded in the Gospel it self; so in
respect of them all, it is safe, and satisfactory to the souls of Believers.
For they who are really made partakers of the spiritual good things of the
Messiah, and are subjects of his spiritual Kingdom, do find and acknowledge,
that Liberty, Rest, Peace and Glory, those durable Riches therein, as they are
abundantly content withal, what ever their outward condition in this World may
be. And unto this Exposition, as to the main and prime intendment of the
Promises, the whole Doctrine of the Gospel gives countenance.

Thirdly, Some acknowledging the Kingdom of the Messiah to be Heavenly and
Spiritual, and the Promises generally to intend spiritual and heavenly Glory
and Riches, that is, Grace and Peace in Christ Jesus, do yet suppose moreover
that there is in many of them an intimation given of a blessed, quiet,
peaceable, flourishing estate of the Church through the power of the Messiah,
to be in this world. But this they do with these limitations. (1.) That these
Promises were not made unto the Jews as they were the seed of Abraham according
unto the flesh, primarily and absolutely, but unto the Church, that is the
children of Abraham according unto the Promise, Heirs of his Faith and
Blessing. That is, they are made unto all them who receive and believe in the
promised Messiah, Jews and Gentiles, with whom as we have proved, the
Privilege of the Church, and interest in the Promises was to remain. (2.) That
the Accomplishment of these Promises is reserved unto an appointed time when
God shall have accomplished his work of severity on the Apostate Jews, and of
Trial and Patience toward the called Gentiles. (3.) That upon the coming of
that season, the Lord will by one means or other, take off the Veyl from the
eyes of the Remnant of the Jews, and turn them from ungodliness unto the Grace
of the Messiah; after which, the Jews and Gentiles being made one Fold under
the great Shepherd of our souls, shall enjoy Rest and Peace in this world.
This they think to be intimated in many of the Promises of the Old Testament,
which are brought over unto the use of the Church as yet unaccomplished, in the
Book of the Revelation. And herein lies all the Glory which the Jews can or may
expect, and that only on such terms, as yet they will not admit of. But these
things must all of them be spoken unto at large, when we come to answer the
Objections which they take from them, unto our Faith in Jesus Christ.

That which above all things manifests the Folly and Irreligion of the
imagination Jews, about the Person and Work of the Messiah, is the Event. The
true Messiah is long since come, has accomplished the work assigned unto him,
made known the nature of the first, and consequent Promises, with the Salvation
that he was to effect, no way answering the expectation of the Jews, but only
in his Genealogy according unto the flesh. And this is that which is the
second Supposition, on which all the Discourses and Reasonings of the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Hebrews is founded, and which being absolutely
destructive of the Judaical Infidelity, shall be fully confirmed in our ensuing
Dissertations.

Exercitatio XII.
Second Principle supposed by the Apostle Paul in his Discourses with the
Hebrews. The Promised Messiah was then come, and had done his Work. The first
Promise recorded (...). Promise with the limitation of time for his coming
necessary. First determination hereof made by Jacob, Genesis 49. The Promise
confined to Judah; afterward to David; no more restrained. Jews
self-contradicting exceptions to the words of Jacob's Prophecy. Interpretation
of Jarchi. Of Aben Ezra examined. Who meant by Judah. The Tribe. Not his Person
proved. Scepter and Scribe how continued in Judah. The same Polity under
various Forms of Government. How long they continued. Did not depart on the
Conquest of Pompey. Nor Reign of Herod. Continuance of the Sanhedrim. The name
(...) whence. (...). The Place and Court of Judges. Jews Etymology of the
Word. Institution of that Court, Numb. 11.16. The order of the Court. Place of
their meeting. (...). John 19.13. Qualifications of the Persons. Who excluded.
Their Power. Punishments inflicted by them. The lesser Courts. Mistake of
Hilary. Shilo who, and what the word signifies. Judaical Interpretation of
(...) refuted. Argument from the words. Rule granted unto Judah. Proved by the
Context. Consent of Targums. Judaical Evasions removed. Rise and signification
of the word Shilo. Messiah intended thereby. (...) opened and vindicated.
Consent of Targums, Talmuds, and most Learned Rabbis. Scepter long since
departed. Story of Benjamin Tudelensis examined. Messiah long since come.

great Principle supposed by the Apostle in all his Discourses with the Hebrews
in his Epistle to them, and which he lays as the foundation of all his
Arguments, is, that the Messiah whom we have proved to have been promised from
the foundation of the world, was actually come, and had finished the work
appointed for him, then when he wrote that Epistle. This the Jews
pertinaciously deny unto this very day, and this denial is the center wherein
all the lies of their unbelief do meet; and hereupon in a miserable deplorable
condition do they continue crying for, and expecting his coming, who came long
since, and was rejected by them. Now this being the great difference between
them and Christians, and that such an one as has a certain influence into
their Eternal condition. As they have endeavored to invent evasions from the
force of the Testimonies and Arguments, whereby our Faith and Profession is
confirmed; so are we to use diligence in their vindication and establishment;
which we hope to do unto the satisfaction of the sober and godly wise in our
ensuing Discourse.

Messiah at large insisted on before, declared only his coming; and the end of
it in general. This Promise was recorded (...), Psalm. 40.8. or, as our
Apostle, Heb. 10.7. (...); in the beginning, head, or first roll of the Book of
God, namely, Genesis 3. as a stable foundation of all the rest that ensued. And it
respected all the posterity of Adam, that they might have a refuge whereunto to
repair in all their distresses. When the care of it, and respect unto it, and
faith in it were rejected by the world, (...), Acts 14.16. God left it unto the
ways of its own choosing, to shift for its self; and in his Sovereign Grace
and Pleasure renewed the Promise unto Abraham with a restriction and limitation
of it unto his Family, as that which was to be separated from the rest of
mankind, and dedicated to the bringing forth of the Messiah in the appointed
season, as we have declared. Upon the giving of that Promise, with the Call and
Separation of Abraham, wherein the Church became in a special manner visible,
there wanted nothing to confirm the faith, and fix the expectation of those
that desired his coming; but only the determination of the time wherein he
should so do.

And this was necessary upon a double account: (1.) That those who were to live
before his Advent, or appearance in the flesh, might not only by faith, see his
Person afar off, and be refreshed, as Cant. 2.8. but also, Behold his Day, or
the time limited and prefixed unto his coming, and rejoice therein; and that
not only as Abraham who knew that such a day should be* John 8.56. but also
those who had a certain day so limited, as that by diligent enquiry, 1 Pet.
1.11. they might take some especial prospect of it. (2.) To guide them who were
to live in the days of the accomplishment of the Promise, unto a more earnest
expectation of him, and desire after him, as Daniel had for the return of the
People from the Captivity, when he understood by Books, that the time limited
for it was accomplished, Dan. 9.2, 3. Accordingly it came to pass, for from
hence it was, that at that season when he was to be exhibited, all men were in
expectation of him, and prepared thereby to enquire after him, Luke 3.15.

Now this determination of time enquired after, was first made by Jacob, Genesis
49.8, person, from whom the Messiah was to proceed, even in the Family of
Abraham himself; such another restriction also, and but one, ensued, when that
privilege which originally rested in Abraham and his family, and afterward
restrained unto Judah and his posterity; and lastly, confined unto David and
his offspring, was ever after left at large unto any branch of that Family.
And this I mention by the way, to prevent any difficulties about his
Genealogy. For as in the very first instance of the Regal Succession in the
house of David there was no respect had to the Primogeniture, 1 Kings 2.22. So
there was no necessity that the Messiah should spring from the reigning Family,
although he did so; but only that he should be of the Seed of David. For as
after the Promise given unto Abraham, the Messiah might have sprung from any
Family whatever of his posterity by Isaac, until the limitation made by Jacob
unto the person of Judah; and after that limitation, might have done so from
any Family of his Tribe or Posterity, until the confienment of that privilege
to the person of David; so no restriction or limitation being afterward added,
his production by any person of his Posterity, whether in a nearer or further
alliance, to, or from the Reigning Line, was all that was included in the
Promise. To return, the words of the place above quoted are, Judah thou art be
whom thy Brethren shall praise; thine hand shall be in the neck of thine
enemies; Thy Fathers children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a Lions
whelp from the prey, my Son, thou art gone up, he stooped down, he couched as a
Lion, and as an old Lion who shall rouse him up, (...); The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver, or Scribe, from between his feet until
Shilo come; and to him the gathering of people; These last words are the seat
of our Argument, the former therefore we shall no otherwise consider, but as
they give light and evidence to their interpretation.

The great Masters among the Jews are exceedingly perplexed with this
Testimony, Rod, of correction, say some, of supportment say others; and (...),
they would only have to be a Scribe, such as they fancy their present Rabbis
to be. Some by (...), understand the person of Judah unto whom they ascribe I
know not what pre-eminence, and not his Family and Tribe. Some would have (...)
to be separated from (...), that follows, because of the accent Jethib, and to
signify for ever. Some by the Shilo would have David intended, some Ahijah the
Prophet, some the City Shilo, and most know not what. (...), some would have to
be destruction, some instruction and obedience: And on every one of these
cavils, do they build various interpretations, and provide various evasions for
themselves, all which we shall either obviate or remove out of the way in the
ensuing Discourse.

It were endless to consider all their several Expositions, and useless,
because they are Reader a specimen of their Sentiments, I shall briefly
consider the sense and Exposition of one of them; and he of such reputation
that he has generally obtained the name of (...), the Wise. And this is R.A.B.
Meir, Aben Ezra. And that we may the better see the perverseness of this man,
and therein of his followers, I shall briefly give an account of the Exposition
of Rashi his Companion in Annotations on the Pentateuch, in their Rabbinnical
Bibles. First, By (...), Scepter, he understands Rule and Government; as he
does Scholars in the Law, by (...), from these words (...), from between his
feet; expressing as he conceived the posture of Disciples. By Judah, he
understands the House of David, the Ruling Family amongst them, the Authority
whereof was preserved in the (...), or Heads of the Captivity whilst they were
in Babel; And on these words, (...), waving all the former trivial exceptions,
he adds expressly (...), Until the Shilo come, that is Messiah the King, to
whom that Kingdoms belongs, as the words are interpreted by Onkelos in his
Targum, and in Midrash Agadah, and (...), he expounds (...), the collection or
gathering together of the people so agreeing with the Targum, and the the truth
in the most material passages of the Text.

Aben Ezra, as we observed, is otherwise minded; and in him, we have an example
of the wilful blindness of the residue of them, who will not endure the light
of that Conviction which is tendered unto them in this Testimony. First, By
Shebet, he grants Rule to be intended, or pre-eminence above others, being then
somewhat more modest then their latter Masters. This says he, shall not depart
from Judah, (...) until David come; and why David? (...) for he was the
beginning of the Kingdom of Judah. So that it seems the meaning of the words
is, that the Scepter shall not depart, until the Scepter come; that is, they
should have rule, until they had rule, For as himself well observes, the
Kingdom of Judah began in David. But what Scepter had the House of Judah
before? Four hundred years the people were ruled under Judges, of which but one
was of that Tribe. At length a Kingdom was set up in the House of Benjamin;
where was all this while the Scepter of Judah, If that was the space of time
designed for its continuance? Two instances he gives hereof. First, (...), The
Standard of Judah marched first in the Wilderness; (...), Again, God said,
Judah shall go up first. But what was this to a Scepter and a Lawgiver? The
first belonged only unto the order of the Tribes in the Wilderness, whilst
Moses was Prince of the Tribe of Levi, and afterward Joshua of the Tribe of
Ephraim; nor was that privilege, if any it were, peculiar unto Judah, but
common to the other Tribes joined with him. The other was only an occasional
Expedition, wherein the especial concernment of Judah lay; which gave him no
power nor Sovereignty amongst his Brethren. So that we have here no small
instance, how the Wisest of their Masters do befool themselves, in seeking
evasions from this Testimony. Of the sense of the following words, abstracting
from the design of the whole, he gives a tolerable account, Nor a Lawgiver
from between his feet. (...), Mechochek is a Scribe, who engrosseth any thing
on a Roll or Books, (...) and that expression of from between his feet, is
taken from the common custom of such Scribes, to sit at, or between the feet of
the Prince; namely, to record and enroll the Laws of his Kingdom. Although the
phrase of speech seems to incline to another sense, but about this we will not
differ with him.

Shilo, which before he applied unto David; and to show the uncertainty and
wanderings of all them who reject the true and only intendment of the Holy Ghost
in this expression, he gives us the various opinions of his Masters, not
knowing, himself what to adhere unto. (...); some, he says, there are who
interpret it from the Syriack, as it were as much, as (...) unto him, or cujus
omnia. But this yields him no advantage. Sundry learned men suspect some such
sense in the word, or derivation of it; (...) being put for (...); and the
Translation of the LXX. reading (...), seems to have had respect thereunto. But
then the Messiah is signally denoted, whose the Kingdom was; whom the Promises
especially respected, and to whom the gathering of the people was to be. Some,
he adds, derive it from (...), which signifies the Embrio in the Womb; and in
allusion hereunto many interpret the word his Son; from (...), which is as much
as (...), from (...) the second Birth, or certain Membranes of the Womb: and he
adds afterward, that (...), may be as much as (...) being put for (...). But
yet neither can he hence obtain any thing toward his design. Wherefore, he
proceeds, some expound it of the City Shilo, and then they interpret (...)
shall come, (...), as that, the Sun comes; that is, sets, or goes down,
Eccles. 4. that is, (...) until the end of Shilo come; for so it is written,
he rejected the Tabernacle at Shilo; and chose David his servant. But it is
evident unto all who use the least attention unto these things, how forced,
indeed foolish this Exposition is: until Shilo come; that is, until the City
Shilo be deserted, or forsaken, or destroyed, so that, until it comes,
signifies, when it shall be no more: The application of that word to the
setting of the Sun, (...) and the Sun goes down, is clearly from the nature of
the thing it self; and the preceding words, (...), the Sun rises, but thence
to draw it here to express the destruction of a City; in which sense it is
never used, is a Conceit purely Rabbinicall. Besides, we have showed already
that Scepter and Lawgiver could in no sense be said to abide with Judah until
David came; for before his days that Tribe had no especial interest in
Government at all. But this catching at relief from a word, no way suited to
contribute the least assistance in the case in hand, is as strong an Argument
of a desperate sinking cause, which rather than men will foregoe, they will
reach after helps from the shadow of the least twigg that seems to be nigh
unto them. I shall not contend with him about what he nextly asserts, namely
that this until; does not prove the ceasing of Rule and Government when the
Shilo comes. Its enough for us, that it was not to cease before it came, as
shall further be manifested in our ensuing Explication and Vindication of this
Prophecy. I have only by the way more particularly considered the Evasions of
this man, who is called amongst the Masters of the present Judaical Profession,
the Wise, that the Reader may know what thoughts to entertain concerning the
Expositions and Objections of others of them, who have not attained that
reputation.

The subject here spoken of is Judah; and that not as merely declaring the
person of Jacob; but the Tribe and Family that sprang, and was to spring from
him. So are the whole Tribes every where called in Scripture by the name of him
from whom they sprang; and that principally from the Prophecy and Blessing in
this Chapter, wherein the common stream of Patriarchal blessing, hitherto
running in one channel, is divided into twelve branches; each Son* of Jacob
being constituted a distinct spring of Benediction unto his posterity.

Now that the Tribe of Judah and not his person, but only as from him the whole
received its denomination, and as he is included therein is intended in this
Prophecy, is evident. For (1.) The things mentioned in this great Patriarchal
Benediction were such, as should befall the Posterity of his Children, to whom
he spoke (...) in the latter days; or in the end of the days, as were all the
blessings of them that went before Jacob also. Now that expression in general
signally denotes the times of Messsiah, as we shall afterward declare, and as
has in part already been made manifest. And as it relates in particular unto
any of the Tribes, it denotes the whole continuance of their times until that
season should be accomplished. So that it cannot be restrained unto the persons
of any of them. (2.) Nothing that is spoken of any of the rest of the Sons of
Jacob, belonged unto them personally, no though it had its foundation in their
persons, or in an allusion unto their personal Actings. Thus the dividing of
Simeon and Levi in Jacob, and the scattering of them in Israel, belonged not
unto their persons, though what befell their posterity of that nature, had a
special eye unto their personal miscarriage, v. 5, 6, 7. Neither was any thing
here spoken of Judah in any measure fulfilled in his person, who spent his
days in Egypt, without any pre-eminence among his Brethren, or Rule with
Conquest, and terror like a Lion over others. It is then the Family, Tribe, or
Posterity of Judah that by that name is here intended.

Now this Tribe of Judah may be considered either absolutely in its self, as it
was in accession which was afterward made unto it occasionally from the other
Tribes. And this was fourfold: First, From the Lot of Simeon falling within its
lot in the first inheritance of the Land, Josh. 19.1. whence that Tribe, though
still keeping its distinct Genealogy, was reckoned unto Judah, and became one
people with them. Secondly, By the cleaving of the Tribe of Benjamin, whose lot
lay next unto it, and mixed with it in the very City of the Kingdom, to the
reigning house of David in the fatal division of the people, 1 Kings 12.20, 21,
27. upon which both those Tribes were after called by the name of Judah, v. 20.
and the people of both (...) Judaei or Jews. Thirdly, By the falling off of the
Tribe of Levi, with multitudes of other good men unto it out of all the Tribes
of Israel, upon the Idolatries and persecution of Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14,
15, 16, 17. verses, by which means that one Tribe quickly became more numerous
and potent then all the rest. Fourthly, By the mixture and addition of those
great numbers which out of all the Tribes of Israel joined themselves unto them
upon their return from Babylon, and the restitution of the Worship of God
amongst them in its proper place. Now it is Judah with all these accessions
that is intended in this Prophecy and Benediction, yet so, as that in many
things, as namely, in the production of the Messiah, the natural Genuine
Offspring of Judah was still to have the pre-eminence.

Judah is that it should have (...) and (...), a Scepter, and Lawgiver, or a
Writer of Laws for others observation. That Rule, Power and Government are
hereby intended, shall be afterward evinced. What time this should come to
pass, is not limited, only after it did so; it was not to cease until the
Shilo came. The foundation of the execution then of this Promise, in the
erection of Polity and Government in that Tribe, was not laid until about six
hundred and twenty years after this time. So certain is that which we before
observed, that this Patriarchal Benediction concerned not the persons of his
Sons, and their then present condition, but that of their posterity in the
latter days. And this was done, when the Kingdom was given to David of the
Tribe of Judah. Neither is the kind of Government or Rule, which should be
erected in that Tribe, expressed in the words; only a Rule and Polity is
promised unto it; or that they should be a people having the Principle of Rule
or Government in and among themselves. Whilst they continued such, the Scepter
and Scribe departed not from them; and this they did as with great variety in
the outward form of Government, though the Law and Polity amongst them were
still the same: so not without some intercision of Rule until the time
specified was accomplished. And where the Law and Polity are still the same;
Accidental alterations in the Modes and manner of Governing, make no Essential
Change in the State of the people, or nature of the Government. Thus the first
Constitution of Rule in that Tribe, was in a way of Government absolutely
Monarchical; This being imprudently managed by Rehoboam, lost the ten Tribes
who would never afterward submit unto the Regal Family of Judah. Its retrival
after an intercision made of it in the Babylonish Captivity was Ducal, or by an
honorary President, with a mixture both of Aristocracy, and of the power of the
people. Upon the ceasing of these Rulers extraordinarily called, the
Aristocracy in the San^^^drin prevailed; whereunto succeeded a mixed Monarchy in
the Hasmonaeans into their power and place, their interest being ruined by
intestine Divisions, Herod by craft and external force intruded himself.

Neither did his Usurpation make any Essential Change in the Rule or Polity of
the Nation; Although in his own person he were a Forreigner: for even during
the turbulent Government of the Herodians, with the interposition of the Roman
Arms, the Nation with that which constitutes a people, its Laws and Polity, was
still continued though the Administration of Superior Rule was not always in
the hands of Jews. In this state things continued amongst them until the
destruction of the Commonwealth by Vespasian, and of the City and Temple by
Titus; only as a presage of the departure of Scepter and Scribe, the power of
Judgment as to the lives of men was some years before taken from the
Sanhedrin, John 18.31.

Rule in general in Judah, we are freed from any concernment in the Disputes of
Learned men, about the precise time of the departure foretold. And indeed if
any thing be more intended in this prediction, but only that the Tribe of Judah
should continue in a National Political State, with Government in its self, it
will be utterly impossible to determine exactly and precisely upon the
accomplishment of this Prophecy. Some would fix it on the conquest of
Jerusalem by Pompey, during the time of Hircanus, and Aristobulus the
Hasmonaeans; not many years after which the Shilo came; which small remnant of
time as they suppose, impeacheth not the truth of the prediction, for in that
action of Pompey, Cicero declares the Nation conquered: Orat. pro Flacc. victa
est, elocata, servata. But if this might suffice for the departure of Scepter
and Scribe, much more might the former Conquest by the Babylonians do so; which
yet by all men's consent it did not. Besides, the Nation was left free by Pompey
unto its own Laws and Policy, as were many other Nations subdued by him (...),
says Appianus, he left some of the conquered Nations free to their own Rule
and Laws; among whom were the Jews. Some fixed the period in Herod an Idumaean,
a stranger to Judah, only a Proselyte; on which account we have many contests
managed by Baronius, Scaliger, Casaubon, Bulinger, Montacue, Pericus, A Lapide,
Capellus, Scultetus, Rivetus, Spanhemius, and others innumerable.

But granting Herod to have been an Idumaean, as he was undoubtedly by Extract,
and that Nation not to have been incorporated into Judah upon the Conquest made
of it by Hircanus, only that he was in his own person a Proselyte, why the
Scepter should any more depart from Judah, because of his reign, then it did in
the days of the Hasmonaeans before him, who were of the Tribe of Levi, I see
no reason. The Government and Polity of the Nation was that of the Jews, who
ever Usurped and enjoyed the place of Supreme Rule. As in the Roman Empire the
Rule and Government was that of the Romans, though Philip an Arabian, Maximinus
a Thracian, and sundry others Foreigners, were Emperors amongst them. One
would salve the difficulty of the Hasmonaeans and Herodians by affirming that
the supreme power of the Nation in their days was in the Sanhedrim; the
greatest number of the persons whereof it was constituted, being always of the
Tribe of Judah, as the Talmudists constantly affirm. But neither are we
concerned herein. The Government as has been manifested was still in and of
the Tribe of Judah, with the forementioned accessions denominated from it,
until the destruction of the Country, City and Temple by Vespasian and Titus,
which is all that in the prediction is intended. And that was the precise
season aimed at, especially if we suppose as rationally we may, that (...), is
to be repeated, (...), and to respect the last clause of the prediction, and to
him the gathering of the Nations; which was accomplished signally before the
final ruin of the Church and State of the Jews according as Christ himself
foretold, Mat. 24.14.

Now because some fix the departure of the Scepter and Lawgiver unto the
removal of Sanhedrin, it may not be amiss to declare in our passage, what that
Sanhedrim was, and what the power wherewith it was entrusted, and this briefly,
Because it is a subject that many Learned men have labored in. The name (...)
or (...) Sanedrim or Sanhedrim is taken from the Greek, (...) sometimes
signifies the place where the Senators meet, the same with (...); as in
Herodian, (...). They assembled not in the accustomed Council House, but in the
Capitol, the Temple of Jupiter. But most frequently it is taken for cons^ssus
Judicum, an Assembly of Judges. A court made up of many Assessors; whence the
Areopagum, that is, the Court of Judges, is so called in Aeschines. (...) is an
Assessor in such a Court; and (...), is such an Assembly of Magistrates or
Princes, as they call corona considentium, such as the Sanhedrim was. And this
name of Sanhedrim though it be plainly a Greek Word, a little corrupted as is
the manner of the Jews in their use of them, is frequently used in the Targum
of the Hagiographa, which places are collected by Elias in Tishbi. Some of the
Jewish Masters would have it to be a word of their own language, whence they
invent strange Etymologies of it, which are some of them mentioned by Buxtorf.
Lex. Tal. Coll. 15 13. in Aruth they would have derived from (...); haters of
gifts; not knowing doubtless that doronoth was a Greek, and no Hebrew, word.

The first appointment of this Court, the Original of this Consessus Judicum is
recorded, Numb. 11.16. where by Gods order, LXX. Elders are called and designed
to join with Moses in the rule of the people, and are instructed with Gifts to
fit them for that purpose. The continuance of this with the institution of
other Courts depending thereon is enjoined the people, Deuteronomy. 16. Some say the
first LXX. were of them who had been Officers over the people in Egypt, and
had suffered for them; whom thou know to be the Elders of the people and
Officers over them. (...); and (...), in the New Testament, Elders and Elders
of the people. Others think these had been Elders and Officers of the people,
before in Criminal and Civil Causes; But now were absolutely joined with Moses
in all. These with him made up LXXI. which was the constant number afterward.

The principal things recorded concerning this Court of Elders, or Judges; are
Orders, namely, that there was one that always presided amongst them, whom
they called (...), the Prince, and (...), the Excellent, who supplied the place
of Moses. And on his right hand sat he, whom they called (...), the Father of
the House of Judgment, or consistory, who gathered the suffrages of the
Assessors. By whom stood two Scribes (...), Scribes of Judgments, one on the
right hand of the Prince, the other on his left; one whereof wrote down the
sentences of them who condemned, the other them who absolved the persons that
were to be judged. There belonged also to the Courts two Cryers, and two who
received the Alms that was given by them who were absolved. Before them at some
distance sat these wise men, out of whom the number of the Sanhedrim when any
dyed, or were removed, was to be supplied.

Secondly, The place of their meeting; which usually and ordinarily was at
Jerusalem, in a Chamber of hewed stones, where the Judges are sometimes called
by them (...), The Wise men of the stone Chamber. Although it may be, no more
is intended in that expression but that it was a Magnifick Stately Place, or
building, such as usually are made of stones hewed and carved. And they tell us
that this place was built nigh the Temple, part of it being on the Holy Ground,
and part on that which was profane and common. Whence also it had two doors,
one on the sacred side, by which the Prince and the Assessors entered, the
other on the profane, by which criminal persons were brought in before them by
their Officers. So Talmud in Joma. And this some take to be the place where our
Lord Christ was judged, John 19.13. They sat down in the Judgment Seat in the
place that is called (...); that is (...), the place built and raised up with
hewed or squared stones. For that (...) does not signify merely the pavement,
as we translate it, or the floor of the place, the Apostle manifests by adding
that in the Hebrew it is called Ga^batha, (...), in the Hebrew; for although
the word have a Syriack termination according to the corrupt pronuntiation of
the Hebrew in those days among the people, yet the Original of it is Hebrew;
and the Syriack renders it here, (...), and reads not (...), now this signifies
an High-Place, or a place built up on all sides and exalted, such as the Roman
(...), or Judgment Seats were placed in. But this might be an alike place to
the other; for I much question whether the Roman Governor sat in Judgment in
the meeting place of the Sanhedrim.

Jews treat much of the Qualification of the persons, who were to be of the
number of the Assessors of this Court. For First, They were to be of the
Priests, Levites, or Nobles of Israel; that is principal men in the
Commonwealth: yet none were admitted into their number merely on the account
of their Dignity or Offices; not the King, not the High Priest, unless they
were chosen with respect unto their other qualifications. For they, Secondly,
Were to be (...), men of stature, and (...), men of countenance, or good
Appearance to keep up, as they say, a Reverence unto their Office: and they
were also to be (...), men of Wisdom, and (...) men of Age, according to the
first institution; and this carried the common Appellation, Elders of the
People. They add in Dine M^moneth, that they were to be (...), men skilled in
the Art of Incantations and Charms to find out such practices; which the
Talmudist thought good to add, to countenance themselves, many of whom were
professed Magicians. And lastly, they were to be (...) skilled in LXX. Tongues,
that they might not need an Interpreter; but fewer I suppose served their turn.
They treat also in general that they ought to be men fearing God, hating
Covetousness, stout and courageous to oppose Kings and Tyrants if need were.

From this number they exclude expressly persons over old, deformed, and Eunuchs
whom they conclude to be cruel and unmerciful, as Claudian does,

Add quod Eunuchus nulla pietate movetur
Nec generi natisve cavet, clementia cunctis
In similes, animosque ligant consortia damni.
Mercy from Eunuchs is removed away,
No care of Race or Children does them sway;
This only renders men compassionate,
When misery is known their common fate.
power of this Court was great, yea, supreme many times in all things among the
people; and at all times in most things of concernment. All great Persons and
weighty Causes were judged by them. When a whole Tribe offended, or an High
Priest, or a King of the House of David, by these were their Causes heard and
determined. They had power also to determine about Lawful War. They had two
sorts of War, (...), Commanded War. Such they esteemed War against the Nations
of Canaan, against Amaleck, against any Nation that oppressed Israel in their
own Land; and this kind of War, the King at any time of his own accord might
engage in. And they had (...), War permitted only; as War for security and
enlargement of Territories, which could not be engaged in at any time, but by
consent, and upon the Judgment of this Court. The Enlargement of the City of
Jerusalem, the reparation of the Temple, and the Constitutions of Courts of
Judicature in other Cities, belonged also unto them. In a word they were to
judge in all hard Cases upon the Law of God.

This sentence extended to life and death; which last they had power to inflict
four deaths, (four kinds of death) were committed to the House of Judgment, to
Stone, to Burn, to slay with the Sword, and to strangle. These were they who in
the days of the Restoration of the Church by Ezra, who by reason of the
excellency of the persons (many of them being Prophets, and men divinely
inspired) are usually called (...), the men of the great Congregation. And the
power of this Court was continued, though not without some interruption and
restraint unto the time of the last destruction of the City by Titus.

Besides this greater Court, they had also two lesser in other places; one of
the twenty three Assessors, which might be erected in any City or Town where
there was an hundred and twenty Families or more, but not less, and these also
had power over all Causes Criminal and Civil which happened within the
Precincts of their Jurisdiction, and over all Punishments unto Death it self.

Hilary on the second Psalm tells us, that, Erat a Mose ante institutum in omni
Synagoga LXX. esse Doctores. Moses had appointed that in every Synagogue there
should be LXX Teachers. He well calls them Teachers because that was part of
their duty, to teach and make known the Law of God in Justice and Judgment;
And he adds, Cujus doctrinae dominus in Evangeliis meminit dicens. Whose
teaching our Lord mentions in the Gospel saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses Chair. So referring the direction there given by our Savior to the
Judicial determinations of these Judges, and not to their ordinary Teachings or
Sermons to the people. But herein his mistake is evident, that he supposes the
number of seventy to have belonged to every Synagogue which was peculiar to the
great Court before described. For besides this Judicature of twenty three in
the greater Towns, there were also in the lesser Towns appointed a Court of
three Ass^ssors, who might Judge and determine in many cases; about money,
debts and contracts, but had nothing to do in transgressions that were capital.

In this Courts judging and determining according to the Law of Moses,
consisted the Shilo. For themselves constantly averr that the power of Judging
capital^y, was taken from the Sanhedrim about forty years before the
destruction of the second Temple; though I suppose it will be found, that their
power was rather occasionally sometimes suspended by the Romans, then
absolutely taken away until the final destruction of the City.

Unto this Judah, that we may return, upon the grant and during the continuance
Scepter and Law-writer, it is promised that the Shiloh should come; that is the
Messiah, and that unto him shall be the gathering of the people. So was the
Promise unto Abraham, namely that in his seed, all people, or all Nations of
the Earth should be blessed. (...), Shilo is a word used only in this place;
and it comes from (...), Shalah, to prosper, or save. So that the most probable
denotation of the word is a prosperer, a deliverer, a Savior, as we shall
afterward more fully manifest. The promise of the continuance of Scepter and
Law-writer is (...), until this Shilo should be come.

The Jews, as was intimated before, lay a double exception to the sense and
interpretation until. First, That (...) signifies for ever: So that the
meaning of the words is, that the Scepter and Law-writer shall not depart from
Judah for ever. The reason whereof is given in the next words, because the
Shilo shall come, (...) being often causal. But though (...) may sometimes
signify as much as for ever, though mostly it does but adhu^, yet, or, as yet;
yet it does not, nor can so, when it is joined as here with (...), which limits
the duration intimated by the subject matter treated on, and sense of the
ensuing words that they have respect unto. They except again, that (...) is
burdened with the accent Jethib, which distinguishes the sense, and puts a
stop upon it. But this they can give no instance in the confirmation of,
especially when it has Athnac immediately preceding it, as in this place it
has. Besides (...) and (...), Scepter and Law-writer are long since actually
departed from Judah, and in their Judgment the Shilo not yet come; which
perfectly destroys the verity of the prediction.

Having taken this brief view of the words, we may draw our Argument from them,
Messiah according to this prediction, must come while the Rule and Government
of Judah was continued, or before it was utterly removed or taken away; but
they are long since departed, and taken away. They have been so at least ever
since the destruction of the Nation, City and Temple by Titus. And therefore
the Messiah is long since come, which was proposed unto confirmation. To
manifest the uncontrollable evidence of this Testimony and our Argument from
it: There is no more necessary but that we demonstrate; First, That by Scepter
and Law-writer, Rule and Government are intended. Secondly, That the promised
Shilo is the Messiah. Thirdly, That all Rule and National Polity was utterly
long since taken away from Judah, even in the destruction of the City and
Temple. Now the Proof of the two former, we shall take First, From the Text and
Context. Secondly, From the confession of the Ancient Jews themselves. The last
being matter of fact, must be evinced from Story; and the state of things in
the world from those days, whereon there will be no rising up against this
Testimony by any thing but that pertinacious obstinacy which the Jews are
Judicially given up unto.

Scepter and Lawgiver, Rule and Government are intended is evident, not only
from the words themselves, which are plain and expressive, but from the Context
also; neither was it ever denied by any of the Jews until they found
themselves necessitated thereunto by their corrupt interest. Amongst other
things, the dying Patriarch foretelling the erection of a Rule and Government
amongst his posterity, whereas it might have been expected that of course it
should have been fixed in Reuben his first born, according to the line of its
descent from the foundation of the world, he deprives him of it, v. 4. Though
he was in the ordinary course of nature, (...), the excellency of his dignity,
and the excellency of his strength, v. 3. Yet says he, (...), thou shall not
excel; not preserve that Excellency in thy posterity; nor have the
pre-eminence of Rule, for the reason which he there expresses. In like manner
he passes by the next in order, Simeon and Levi, taking from them all
expectation of that privilege, by foretelling that they should be divided in
Jacob, and scattered in Israel, v. 7. Coming to Judah there he fixes the seat
of Rule, v. 8. Judah, thou art he whom thy Brethren shall praise, alluding unto
his name, (...); thou shall be exalted unto that Rule amongst them, from the
right whereunto the others fell by their transgression. And this rule, says
he, shall consist as all prosperous Dominion does in two things. First, In the
regular obedience of those who de jure are subject unto it, Thy Fathers
Children shall bow down before thee; thou shall have the Authority among, and
over the rest of my posterity. Secondly, In the conquest of the enemies and
adversaries of the Dominion it self; Thy hand shall be in the neck of thine
enemies; as a Lions whelp thou art gone up from the prey; whereunto the words
insisted on are subjoyned; The Scepter shall not depart; that is the Scepter of
Rule amongst thy Brethren, and prevalency against thine enemies, however it may
be weakened or interrupted, shall not utterly depart or be removed until the
Shilo come. The Context is clear and perspicuous: the Jews only as we shall see
cavil at words and syllables; the reason of the Scripture, and the coherence
of the Context, they take no notice of.

Targumists have with one consent given us the same account of the sense and
importance of these words; and some of them are acknowledged by the Jews in
Shebet Jehuda to have been composed by Divine Inspiration, or assistance of the
(...), as they express it in their Talmuds. Thus Onkelos the best of them,
(...), The Ruler, Lord, or Prince, he that has Dominion, shall not be taken
from the House of Judah. And Jonathan, (...), Kings and Rulers shall not cease
from the House of Judah. The same words are used by that called of Jerusalem.
The Authority of these Paraphrases among the Jews is such, as that they dare
not openly recede from them. And therefore Manasse in his Conciliator, where he
endeavors to enervate this Testimony, passes over these Targums in silence,
as having nothing to oppose to their Authority, which is a sufficient evidence,
that he saw the desperateness of the cause wherein he was engaged. Solomon and
Bechai acknowledge Rule and Dominion to be intended in the words, but according
to the latter they are not to be erected until the coming of the Messiah,
which is no less expressly contrary to the Targum, then to the Text it self,
affirming plainly, that then it was to end, and not begin. Add hereunto,
further to manifest the consent of the Ancient Jews unto this sense of the
words, that in their Talmuds they affirm the Lawgiver here mentioned to be the
Sanhedrim whose power continued in Judah, until the Shilo came, whereof we
have spoken before.

rod, or staff; all other significations of it are Metaphorical. Among them
the principal is that of Scepter, an Ensign of Rule and Government. Nor is it
absolutely used in any other sense, in that very frequently; Psalm 45. (...), A
Scepter of uprightness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, Numb. 24.17. (...), a
Scepter shall arise out of Israel; that is, a Prince or a Ruler; Targum; Christ
shall rule out of Israel. And this sense of the words is made more evident by
its conjunction with (...), a Lawgiver; he that prescribes and writes Laws
with Authority to be observed. Deuteronomy. 33.2. in a portion, (...), of the
Lawgiver hidden, that is Moses; the great Scribe says the Targum: for as they
suppose, the Sepulcher of Moses was in the Lot of Gad. Mechokek says Aben
Ezra; that is (...), the great President or Ruler. Psalm. 108.19. Judah (...),
my Lawgiver; with Allusion to this Prediction of Jacob. Isa. 33.22. The Lord
is our Judge, the Lord is (...), our Lawgiver. These two words then in
conjunction, do absolutely denote Rule and Dominion.

The latter Masters of the Jews to avoid the force of this Testimony, have
coined Shebet, they say is only a rod of Correction, and Mechokek any Scribe or
Teacher which they would refer to the Rabbis, they have had in every
Generation. Some of them by Shebet understand a staff of supportment, which
they were to enjoy in the midst of their troubles; so I remember Manasse Ben
Israel not long since made it one of his reasons for their admission into
England, that therein this Prophecy might receive somewhat of accomplishment,
by this countenance and encouragement in this Land. But the most of them adhere
to the former sense of the words. So they call the story of their calamities
and sufferings, (...); the rod of Judah. But this evasion is plainly and fully
obviated in the former opening of the words, and confirmation of their genuine
importance: For, (1.) It is openly contrary to the whole Context and Scope of
the Place. (2.) To the meaning and constant use of the words themselves,
especially as conjoined. (3.) To the Targums, and all old Translations. (4.) To
the Talmud, and all their own Ancient masters. (5.) To the truth of the Story;
Judah having been long in a most flourishing and prosperous condition, without
any such signal calamity as that, which* they would intimate to be intended in
the words; namely such as for sixteen hundred years they have now undergone.
(6.) The supportment they have had, has not been National, nor afforded to
Judah as a Tribe, or People, but has consisted merely in the greatness and
wealth of a few individual persons scattered up and down the world, neither
themselves, nor any else, knowing unto what Tribe they did belong. And (7.)
This has been in things no way relating to the Worship of God, or their
Church State, or their spiritual good. (8.) Their Scribes were not formerly of
the Tribe of Judah, and their latter Rabbis wholly of an uncertain extraction;
so that this pretense proves nothing, but the misery of their present State and
condition, wherein they seek a refuge for their infidelity, in vanity and
falsehood.

Our second enquiry is concerning the subject of the Promise under
consideration, Shilo; whereby we say the promised Seed is intended. About the
derivation and precise significations of the word, we have no need to contend.
Most learned men look upon it as derived from (...), to be quiet, safe, happy,
prosperous, whence also is (...) Psalm. 122. safety, peace, prosperity,
Abundance. Hence Shilo says Mercer, sonat tranquillum, prosperum, pacatum,
felicem, Augustum, victorem, cui omnia prospere succedunt; signifies one,
quiet, prosperous, peaceable, happy, honorable, a Conqueror, to whom all
things succeed well and happily. To this Etymology of the word, agrees
Galatinus, Fagius, Melancthon, Pagninus, Prusius, Schindler, Buxtorfius,
Armama, and generally all the most learned in the Hebrew tongue. The Vulgar
Latin, rendering the words qui mittendus est, who is to be sent, as if it were
from (...), corrupts the sense, and gives advantage to the Jews to pervert the
words, as both Raymandus and Galatinus observe. Neither is there any thing
nearer the truth in the derivation of the word from (...), as though (...) were
put for (...) and (...) for (...), so making it as much as (...), quae ei,
which to him; whereunto yet that (...), and the (...), of the Greeks, the first
mentioned by Eusebius, the latter in the present Copies, both by Justin Martyr,
do relate or allude.

Others suppose (...), to signify a Son, from (...), which denotes the after
birth; or Membrane wherein the Child is wrapped in the Womb. Thence (...) Shilo
should be the same with (...), his Son; (...) being put for (...), which is not
unusual, says Kimchi. But Galatinus supposes (...), to be a foeminine affix,
denoting that the Messiah was to be the seed of the Woman, or to be born of a
Virgin. Neither is his conjecture absolutely to be rejected: Although Mercer
pronounce it to be against the rule of Grammar; for we know they hold not
always in things mysterious. He that would be further satisfied about the
importance of the word, may consult Reymandus, Porchetus and Galatinus in their
Discourses against the Jews on this subject; Kimchi, Pagnin, Mercer, Schindler,
Philip ab Aquino, and Buxtorf in their Lexicons; Munst^r, Fagius, Drusius,
Grotius in their Annotations on the Text; Helvicus, Rivet, Episcopius, Boethius,
Hornebecke in their Discourses from it. The weight of our Argument lies not in
the precise signification of the word: The Messiah it is who is intended in
that expression.

Messiah was the foundation of that Nation and people; the reason of the Call
of Abraham, and of the erection of a Kingdom and a State in his posterity. This
we have elsewhere demonstrated. This promise concerning him, and Covenant in
him, was always the chief matter and head of the Patriarchal Benedictions,
when they blessed their Children and posterity. Now unless we grant him to be
intended in this expression, there is no mention of him at all in this
Prophetical Eulogie of Jacob. Besides, his posterity being now to be
distributed into twelve distinct Tribes or Families, and each of them having
this peculiar blessing appropriated unto him, wherein it is certain and
confessed by all the Jews, that this privilege of bringing forth the Messiah
was henceforth impaled unto Judah. It must be done in this place, or there is
no footstep of it in the Scripture. And it is very strange that Jacob, in
reckoning up the privileges and advantages of Judah above his Brethren, should
omit the chief of them, from whence all the rest did flow. And the very tenor
of the words manifest this intention; fixing on that which was the fountain and
end of all blessing in the promised seed, he passes over his Elder Children,
and determines it on Judah with the continuance of Rule to the coming thereof.

Shilo, makes it yet more evident, who it was that is intended, (...), To him
the gathering of the people. (...); LXX. (...), the expectation of the Nations;
that is, (...), from (...), to expect or look for: So the Vulgar, Expectatio
Gentium. Onkelos (...), and him shall the people obey, or to him they shall
hearken. Ben Vzziel; (...), because of him the people shall faint; that is,
^ease their opposition, and submit unto him. Targum Hierusal. (...); and to him
shall all the Kingdoms of the Earth be subject: all to the same purpose. (...)
in construction from (...) is from (...) to hear, attend, obey. The word is but
once more used in the Scripture, Prove. 30.17. where it is rendered Doctrine, or
Teaching given out with Authority, and therefore to be obeyed. So that
primarily it may seem to denote obedience unto Doctrines; which because men
gather themselves together to attend unto it, it signifies also that gathering
together; and so is rendered by Rashi, (...) the gathering together,
Collection, or Congregating. And also is it by others, who seem to look on
(...), as its root, which signifies to gather and collect as well as to hope,
expect, and look after. That which in all these Interpretations is aimed at,
wherein they all agree, is one and the same thing, namely. That the Gentiles,
People, Heathen, should be called and gathered unto the Shilo, should hear his
Doctrine, obey his Law, and be made subject unto him.

Now as this was eminently contained in the great fundamental Promise
concerning the Messiah made to Abraham, namely, that in him all the Nations of
the earth should be blessed: So there is not any description of him in the
following Prophets more eminet then this, that unto him the gathering of the
people should be, which in many places is made the Characteristical Note of his
Person and Kingdom. Hence some of the Jews themselves interpret this place, as
Rabbi Solomon by that of Isaiah, (...), to him shall Gentiles seek; and that of
Chap. 42.4. (...); the Isles shall wait for his Law. The sense also of the
words given by the LXX. and that vulgar, (...), expectatio Gentium, have good
countenance given unto it, in other places of Scripture. For as he is called,
Hag. 2.7. (...), the desire of all Nations, that which they desire and expect;
so speaking of himself, Isa. 60.9. he says, (...), the Isles, the same with
(...), the Gentiles shall wait for me, or expect me. Now he to whom the
Gentiles shall seek, whose Doctrine they shall learn, whose Law, they shall
obey, to whom they shall be subject, in whom they shall be blessed, and to whom
they shall be gathered, for all these ends, and purposes, is the true and only
Messiah, and this is the Shilo here mentioned.

Targums unto this application of the word Shilo. Ben ^V;zziel; (...), Until
the time wherein the King Messiah shall come. The same are the words in that of
Jerusalem; both of them as we saw before interpreting the next words also of
the Messiah. And Onkelos to the same purpose. (...), Until the Messiah shall
come whose is the Kingdom. Now after the Scripture it self, there is no greater
evidence of the persuasion of the Old Church of the Jews then what is found in
the consent of these Targums; and of how little validity the exception of the
modern Jews are against their Authority, is known to all.

And we have also the concession of their Talmuds, and most Learned Masters,
fully Talmud. Hierusul. in Chelek^. The world, say they, is created for the
Messiah, (...), and what is his name, in the house of Rabbi Shilo, They said,
his name is Shilo, as it is written, until Shilo come. And in Bereshith Rabba,
on this place of Genesis, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah until Shilo
come, (...); This is Messiah the Son of David, who shall come to rule the
Kingdoms with a Scepter; as Psalm 2. And in Beresh. Rebanna; until the Shilo
come, (...), For it shall come to pass, that the Nations of the World shall
bring their gifts unto Messiah the Son of David. And Kimchi in (...), Shilo is
interpreted his Son, and it is a Prophecy of the Messiah; and innumerable other
Testimonies, from them to the same purpose may be produced. Yea, this sense is
so common among them, and so known to have been the sense of the Ancient
Church, that the wisest among them turn every stone to retain this
interpretation of the words, and yet to avoid the force of the Testimony
insisted on from them.

This then we have from this testimony obtained, namely, that the Political
Rule, Judah until the promised seed should be exhibited, until the Messiah
should come. It remains that we also evidence that all Rule, Government and
Polity is long since taken away from, and ceased in Judah, and that for many
Generations there has been no such thing as a Tribe of Judah in any National
or Political Condition or Constitution in the world. And had we not here to do
with men obstinate and impudent, there would need very few words in this
matter. But they must have that proved unto them, which all the world sees and
knows, and takes care to make good, and which themselves, as occasion serves
confess and bewail. Is it not known to all the world, that for these sixteen
hundred years last past, they have been scattered over the face of the earth,
leading a precarious Life, under the Power of Kings, Princes, Commonwealths,
as their several lots in their dispersion have fallen; sine Deo, sine homine
rege, cast out of Gods especial care, they wander up and down without Law,
Government, or Authority of their own or amongst themselves. And this, as I
said, themselves also confess, as they have occasion. To this purpose see
Kimchi on Hosea 3.4. (...); And these are the days of Captivity, wherein we
are at this day, for we have neither King nor Priest of Israel: But we are in
the power of the Gentiles, and under the Power of their Kings and Princes, does
this man think that Scepter and Lawgiver are departed from Judah or no? And
the Targum of Jonathan on that place is considerable: for, says he, The
children of Israel shall abide many days without a King of the house of David,
and without a Ruler in Israel; afterward the children of Israel shall repent,
and seek the Worship of the Lord their God, and shall obey the Messiah the Son
of David the King. So also are the words of Abarbinel on Isa. 53. he tells us,
that in their Captivity and Banishment part of their misery is, (...), that in
Israel there is neither Kingdom, nor Rule, nor Scepter of Judgment: that is,
plainly, Scepter and Lawgiver are departed. And therefore if there be any
truth in this Prophecy, the Messiah is long since come. In like manner
Maimonides; from the time that we have left our own Land we have no power of
making Laws; and they jointly confess in the Talmud. Tract. Saned. that
sometime before the destruction of the Temple, all power of Judging both as
unto life and death, and as unto pecuniary punishments, was taken from them. So
that if there be a certainty in any thing in this world, it is certain that
Scepter and Lawgiver are long since departed from Judah.

There are not many things wherein the present Jews do more betray the
desperateness Itinerary of Benjamin Tudelensis.

This Benjamin was a Jew, who about 500. years ago passed out of Europe into
the Eastern parts of the world in a disquisition of his Contrymen, and their
state and condition whereof he has given an account in his Itinerary, after
the manner of vulgar Travelers. Among other things which he relates, fide
Rabbinica, he tells us of a Jew that has, or then had, a principality at
Bagdat, whom his Countrymen called the Son of David, there being a thousand of
them living there all in subjection unto him. This honor was allowed him by
the Caliph, who in those days ruled there; so that when he passes in the
streets they cry before him, make way for the Son of David. Fagius long since
returned a proper Answer to this Story in a Proverb of their own; (...), He
that has a mind to lie, let him place his Witnesses at distance enough. When
Benjamin passed over those Eastern parts of the world, they were greatly
unknown to Europaeans, and he had thence advantage to feign what he pleased for
the reputation of his Nation, which he was not wanting to the improvement of.
Time has now brought truth to light. The people of Europe, especially the
English and Hollanders have some while since discovered the state of things in
those parts, and can hear no tidings of Benjamins principality, nor his Son of
David; nor could the Jews ever since get any one to confirm his relation.
Besides, if all that he averrs should be granted to be true, as in the main, it
is undoubtedly false, what would it amount unto as to the matter in hand: Is
this the Scepter and Lawgiver promised unto Judah as the great privilege
above his Brethren? It seems an obscure unknown person in Bagdat in Captivity,
by the permission of a Tyrant whose Slave and Vassal he is, has a pre-eminence
among a thousand Jews, all slaves to the same Tyrant.

And this is all they pretend unto in (...), in the forty second story, where
they give us an account of this (...) or (...), Prince, or Head of the
Captivity, as they would have him esteemed. A rich Jew they would make him to
be, chosen unto a Presidentship, by the Heads or Rectors of the Schools of
Bagdat, Sora, and Pombeditha; And they confess, that for many Ages they have
chosen no such President, because the Saracens killed the last that was so
chosen. Is this I say the continuance of the Tribe and Scepter of Judah? Judah
must be a Nation, a People in a Political Sense and State, dwelling in his own
Land, and have Rule and Dominion exercised therein according to its own Law, or
the Scepter and Lawgiver are departed from it; and this they evidently are
sixteen hundred years ago, and therefore the Shilo, the promised Messiah is
long since come; which is the Truth whose Confirmation from this Testimony was
intended.

Exercitatio XIII.
Other Testimonies proving the Messiah to be come. Hagg. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Mal. 3.1, 2. State of the People at the building of the Second Temple. In
the days of Darius Hystaspes, not Nothus. The House treated of by Haggai the
second House. Proved against Abarbinel. The Glory promised to this House. Brief
summary of the Glory of Solomon's Temple. Its Projection; Magnificence. Treasure
spent about it. Number of Workmen employed in it. Ornaments. Worship. Second
Temple compared with it. Pretensions of the Rabbis about its Greatness, and
Duration; removed. What was the Glory promised to the second House. Opinion of
the Jews. The Promise of it not conditional. The meaning of (...) in the Text.
Evasions of Abarbinel, Kimchi and Aben Ezra examined. Their Opinion of the
Glory promised to the second House. Of the greatness of it. Things wanting in
it by their own confession. The Glory of this House not in the days of the
Hasmonaeans, or Herodians. Not in its continuance. Circumstances proving the
true Messiah to be the Glory. Anomalous Construction of the Words removed. Mal.
3.1. explained. Confession of the ancient Jews.

WE shall now proceed to other Testimonies of the same evidence and importance
Jews, from the rest of the world, the forming of them into a Nation, and the
setting up of a Political State and Rule amongst them, being solely, as we have
declared, to bring forth the promised Messiah by them, and to shadow out his
Spiritual Kingdom: It was necessary that he should come before their utter
desolation, and final rejection from that state and condition, which also he
did according to the promise and prediction before insisted on and explained.
The same was the end of their Ecclesiastical, or Church State, with all the
Religious Worship that was instituted therein. Whilst that also therefore
continued and was accepted of God in the place of his own appointment, he was
to be brought forth and to accomplish his work in the world. This also in
sundry places of the Old Testament is foretold, one or two of the most eminent
of them we shall consider, and manifest from them, that the true Messiah is
long since come, and exhibited unto the world, according to the Promise given
of old to that purpose. The first we shall fix upon, is that of Haggai, Chap.
2. v. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9. whereunto we shall add Mal. 3.1. The words of the
former place are, Who is left among you, that saw this house in her first
Glory, and how do you see it now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as
nothing? Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once it is a little while, and I
will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea; and the dry Land, and I will
shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come: And I will fill
this House with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The Silver is mine, and the
Gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts, and the Glory of this latter House,
shall be greater then the former, says the Lord of Hosts: And in this place
will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts. Those of the latter are, Behold, I
will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord
whom I seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the
Covenant, whom ye delight in, Behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts.
Both to the same purpose.

The occasion of the former words must be enquired after, from the story of
Ezra, and the whole Discourse of the Prophet in that place. The people
returning from their Captivity with Zerubbabel in the days of Cyrus had laid
the foundation of the Temple; but having begun their work, great opposition was
made against it, and great discouragements they met withal, as it will fall
out with all men that engage in the work of God in any Generation. The Kings of
Persia who first encouraged them unto this work, and countenanced them in it,
Ezra 1.7, 8, 9. being possessed with false reports and slanders, as is usual
also in such cases; at first began to withdraw their assistance, as it should
seem in the days of Cyrus himself, Ezra 4.5. And at length expressly forbad
their proceedings, causing the whole work to cease by force and power. v. 23.
Besides this outward opposition, they were moreover greatly discouraged by
their own poverty and disability for the carrying on their designed work in any
measure, so as to answer the beauty and glory of their former House builded by
Solomon. Hence the Elders of the people who had seen the former House in its
glory, wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundations of this laid, Ezra
4.12, 13. As foreseeing how much the splendour and beauty of their Worship
would be ecclipsed and impaired: for as the measures of the Fabric it self
assigned unto it by Cyrus, Ezra. 6.3. did no way answer Solomon's Structure, so
for the Ornaments of it wherein its magnificence did principally consist; they
had no means or ability to make any provision of them. Being therefore thus
hindered, and discouraged, the work ceased wholly from the end of Cyrus Reign,
unto the second year of Darius Hystiages. For there is no reason to suppose
that this intercision of the work continued unto the Reign of Darius Nothus:
Between the first year of the whole Empire of Cyrus, to the second of Darius
Nothus; there were no less then a hundred years as we shall afterward declare.
Now it is evident in Ezra, that Zerubbabel and Joshuah, who began the work in
the Reign of Cyrus, were alive, and carried it on in the days of Darius. And
it is scarcely credible, that they who it may be were none of the youngest men,
when they first returned unto Jerusalem, should live there an hundred years,
and then return unto the work again. Outward force and Opposition then they
were delivered from, in the second year of Darius Hystiages. But their
discouragements from their poverty and disability still continued. This the
Prophet intimates, v. 4. Who is there left among you, who saw this House in its
first glory, and what do you now see it? Is it not as nothing in your eyes?
There is no necessity of reading the words with a supposition; As Scaliger
contends, if there were any amongst you who had seen. For it is much more
likely, that some who had seen the former House of Solomon, and wept at the
laying of the foundation of this in the days of Cyrus, should now see the
carrying of it on in the second year of Darius Hystiages, that is about ten or
twelve years after, then that those who began the work in the Reign of Cyrus,
should live to perfect it in the second year of Darius Nothus an hundred years
after. However it is evident that the old discouragement was still pressing
upon them. The former House was Glorious and Magnificent, Famous and Renowned
in the world: and full of comfort unto them, from the visible pledges of the
presence of God that were therein. To remove this discouragement, and to
support them under it, the Lord by this Prophet makes them a Promise, that
whatever the streightness and poverty of the house were which they undertook to
build: however short it came of the glory of that of old, yet from what he
himself would do, he would render that House far more glorious then the former;
namely, by doing that in it, for which both it and the former were instituted
and erected. Says he, (...), The glory of this latter house, shall be great
above that of the former. To clear our Argument intended from these words we
must consider (1.) What was this latter House we spoke of: (2.) Wherein the
Glory of it did consist.

what House it is whereof the Prophet speaks, now this is most evident in the
Context. This House, says he, v. 4. that your eyes look upon, and which you so
much despise in comparison of the former. And v. 8. I will fill, says the
Lord, (...), this House which you are now finishing, with glory. And v. 9. it
is called (...), this latter House. The Prophet does as it were, point to it
with his finger. This House that you and I are looking upon, this House which
is so contemptible in your eyes, in comparison with that of Solomon which you
have either seen or read of, this House shall be filled with glory. It is true,
this Temple was three hundred years after re-edified by Herod in the eighteenth
year of his Reign; which yet hindered not, but that it was still the same
Temple. For this first Structure was never destroyed, nor the materials of it
at once taken down. But notwithstanding the reparation of it by Herod, it still
continued the one and the same House, though much enlarged and beautified by
him. And therefore the Jews in the days of our Savior, overlooked as it were
the re-edification of the Temple by Herod, and affirm, that that House which
then stood, was forty six years in building, John 2.20. as they supposed it to
have been upon the first return from Captivity; when the whole work and
building of Herod was finished within the space of eight years. The Targum also
of Jonathan, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi and others interpret the words of that House
which was then building by Zerubbabel and Joshua, nor do any of the Ancient
Jews dissent.

Abarbinel one of their great Masters, and Chief among them who invent
pretenses Christians, and made use of the reasonings of former Expositors, to
apply the whole Prophecy unto the second House, at least as it was restored by
Herod, at length refers all that is spoken of the House here, unto a third
Temple prophesied as he fancieth, by Ezekiel, to be built in the days of the
M^ssiah; because he saw, that if the second House was intended, it would be
hard to avoid the coming of the Messiah, whilst that House stood and
continued. But we need not insist long in the removal of this fond
imagination. For (1.) It is contrary to express re-doubled affirmations in the
Text before insisted on. (2.) To the whole design of the Context and Prophecy,
which is expressly to encourage the Jews unto the building of that House, which
seemed so contemptible in the eyes of some of them. (3.) To the repetition of
this Prophecy, Mal. 3.1. where the second Temple is evidently expressed. (4.)
To the Prophecy of Ezekiel, wherein a Spiritual and not a material Temple is
delineated, as we shall elsewhere demonstrate. (5.) To the time assigned to the
glorifying of the House spoken of; (...), yet a little while, which in no sense
can be applied unto a Temple to be built longer afterward then that Nation had
been a people. From the Call of Abraham, to the giving of this Promise, there
had passed about fourteen hundred and ten years; and it is now above two
thousand years since this Prophecy; which in what sense it can be called, a
little while is hard to imagine.

This then is the sense that Abarbinel would put on these words, It is yet a
little while, and I will fill this House with Glory; that is, a very great
while hence, longer hence then you have been a people in the world; I will
cause another House to be built. (6.) To the Targum, and all the ancient
Masters among the Jews themselves. (7.) To its self, for it is by his own
confession promised, that the Messiah should come to the Temple, that is
promised to be filled with Glory: but the other Third Temple that he fancies,
is as he said, to be built by himself; so as he cannot be said to come unto it.
So that this evasion will not yield the least relief to their obstinacy and
unbelief. It is evidently the second Temple built by Zerubbabel, whose Glory is
here foretold.

The Glory promised unto this house, is nextly to be considered. This is
expressed v. 7. I will fill this House with Glory: and comparatively, with
reference unto the Temple of Solomon, which some of them had seen, v. 9. The
Glory of this latter House, shall be greater then of the former. To understand
aright this Promise, we must reflect a little upon the Glory of the first
House, which the glory of this second was to excel. It would not answer our
present design, to digress unto a particular description of Solomon's Temple:
It is also done by others with great Judgment, Diligence, and Accuracy. I
shall therefore only give a brief account of some of the heads of its
excellency, which our present Argument does require.

First then, It was very Glorious its principal Architect, which was God
himself. David delivered unto Solomon the pattern of the House, and the whole
Worship of it, he tells him, All these things the Lord made me understand in
writing, by his hand upon me, even all the Work of this pattern, 1 Chronicles. Chap.
25.19. God gave him the whole in writing; That is, divinely and immediately
inspired him by his holy Spirit to set down the frame of the House, and all the
concernments of it, according to his own appointment and disposal. This
rendered the House Glorious, as answering the Wisdom of him by whom it was
contrived. And herein it had the advantage above all the Fabrics that ever was
on the Earth; and in particular, the Second Temple, whose Builders had no such
Idea of their Work given them by inspiration.

Secondly, It was Glorious in the Greatness, State, and Magnificence of the
Fabric

First, The design of Solomon, the Wisest and Richest King that ever was in
this world, in the building of it. When he undertook the work, and sent to
Hyram King of Tire for his assistance, he tells him, that the House which he
was to build was to be great, because their God was great above all Gods, 2 Chronicles. 2.5. Nay, says he, The House which I am about to build, shall be
wonderful and great. No doubt, but he designed the Structure Magnificent to
the utmost, that his Wisdom and Wealth would extend unto. And what shall he do
that comes after the King? What shall any of the sons of men think to contrive
and erect, to enlarge that in Glory, wherein Solomon laid out his utmost. There
can doubtless be no greater fondness, then to imagine that it could in any
measure be equalled by what was done afterward by Zerubbabel, or Herod.

Treasure which were expended in the building and adorning of it. I know there
is some difference among Learned Men, about reducing the Hebrew Signatures of
moneys unto our present account. But let the estimate be as low, as by any can
reasonably be imagined, setting aside what Solomon expended of his own Rev^nue
and getting; the provision left by David toward the work, of an hundred
thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand Talents of Silver; Besides
Brass and Iron without weight, with Timber and Stone, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. does far
exceed all the Treasures that the greatest part, if not all the Kings of the
Earth, are at this day possessed of. For on the ordinary computation and
balance of Coyns, the Gold amounted to 450000000. l. and the Silver unto
3750000000. l. besides what was dedicated by his Princes, and out of his
peculiar Treasure. He that would be satisfied, what immense sums of his own
Solomon added to all this, may consult Villalpandus on this subject. And what
might be the product of this Expense, Wisely managed, is not easy to be
conceived. It seems to me, that the whole Revenue of Herod was scarce able to
find Bread for Solomon's Workmen; so unlikely is it, that his Fabric should be
equal unto that other. It was surely a Glorious House that all this charge was
expended about.

number of Workmen employed in the Structure. We need not greaten this number
out of conjectures with Villalpandus, who reckons above four hundred thousand;
seeing there is evident mention in the Scripture of an hundred and fourscoure
and three thousand and six hundred. Besides the Tyrians that were hired, who by
their Wages seem also to have been a great number, 2 Chronicles. 2.10. That is,
there was an hundred and fifty three thousand and six hundred strangers of the
posterity of the Canaanites; 2 Chronicles. 2.17, 18. and thirty thousand Israelites,
1 Kings 5.13. Neither was all this multitude engaged in this work for a few
days or months, but full seven years, 1 Kings 6.38. And therein, as Josephus
observes, the speed of the work was almost as admirable as its magnificence.
And what a glorious Structure might be raised by such numbers of men, in such a
space of time, when nothing was wanting unto them, which by the immense
Treasures before mentioned, could be procured, may easily be conceived. It does
not appear that the whole number of the people, rich and poor, who were
gathered together under Zerubbabel after the return from the Captivity, did
equal the numbers of Solomon's Builders; so that they were not like to erect a
Fabric, answerable unto what he effected: nor can it be imagined, that Herod
employed so many in the whole work, as Solomon had to oversee his Laborers.

Pillars of Brass with their Chapiters, whose Magnificence was wonderful, and
Workmanship inimitable; the Molten Sea, with the Oxen, and the like Ornaments
innumerable. If we do but consider, that the whole House, upon the vaulting and
Coiling with Cedar, was overlaid with pure beaten Gold, how glorious must it
need be rendered to the thoughts of every man, who remembers the greatness of
the structure. In especial those Vtensils of the Sanctuary, the Ark, Oracle,
Mercy-Seat, and Cherubims that represented the presence of God, what tongue can
represent their beauty and glory? In the second House there was little of all
these; and for the things of most cost and charge nothing at all. Nor did the
riches of this House consist only in the solid parts of the Fabric, but in
those vast treasures of Silver and Gold with other precious things, which being
dedicated to the service of God, were laid up therein; for besides what was
consecrated by himself and his Princes, Solomon brought in all the things which
David his Father had dedicated, 2 Chronicles. 5. v. 7. And put them them among the
treasures of the House of God. And although I do not think with some, that the
whole sums of money before mentioned, were herein included, because it was
dedicated by David; for so also was his Brass and Iron and Timber: It is all to
be expended about, or used in the building of the House it self; yet I cannot
but judge, that those treasures were exceeding great, and such as the poverty
and confusion of the people, under the second Temple, never allowed them to do
any thing that was answerable unto it.

Lastly, The glory of the Worship of this Temple consummated its beauty. Now
Divine Presence into it, upon its Consecration by the Prayer of Solomon. Hereof
God gave a double pledge. First, The fal^ing down of the Fire from Heaven to
consume the first Offerings, and to leave a Fire to be kept alive perpetually
upon the Altar, a Type of the effectual operation of the Holy Ghost, making all
our Sacrifices acceptable to God. And this the Jews expressly confess to have
been wanting in the Second Temple. 2 Chronicles. 7.1. Secondly, The Glory of the
Lord, as a Cloud filling the whole House, and resting upon it, v. 2, 3. This
foundation being laid, and attended with a Sacrifice of many thousands of
Cattle, the whole Worship was gloriously carried on, according to the
institution revealed unto David by the Spirit of God. And the better to enable
them to a right performance hereof, some of the chief Ministers, as Heman,
Ethan and Jeduthan were themselves inspired with the Spirit of Prophecy. So
that plainly here we had the utmost Glory, that a Worldly Sanctuary and Carnal
Ordinances could extend unto.

Having taken this brief view of the Glory of Solomon's Temple, we may now
enquire Glory was, which was promised to this second House, concerning which
the Prophet affirms expressly, that it shall excel all the Glory which on any
account belonged unto the first. And first we shall consider the apprehension
of the Jews in this matter: First, Some of them plainly insinuate, that this
whole Promise was conditional, and depended upon the obedience of the people,
wherein they sailing, it is no wonder if the Promise was never accomplished.
Thus Abarbinel would have the Prophet speak to them, (...); If your works be
right in the Observation of the Law. And to this end, Kimchi after Aben Ezra,
gives us a new connection of the words: For that expression, v. 4. Be strong
all ye people of the Land, (...), and work, he carries on to the beginning of
the next verse; (...), and work; it coheres in sense with the following Verse,
or this word, if you do the work that I covenanted with you; and so leaps over
those words in the end of ver. 4. and whereon the whole fifth verse does
evidently depend: For I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts: And these
following words, so my Spirit remains among you, he interprets for a Promise
depending upon the same condition; If you do the word that I covenanted with
you, that is, observe the Law; (...). But after they sinned, and observed not
the Law, the Holy Ghost, and Prophecy-ceased from amongst them in the days of
Zachariah and Malachi. And to the same purpose Abarbinel, (...), The glorious
Presence, Prophecy, and the rest of the Holy things that were then wanting,
should return unto them, if their ways were right and good. And in this fancy
they all agree.

But this wresting of the Text is evident. There is no condition intimated in
the Egypt, wherein the work that he wrought for them, depended not on their
Obedience, but was a mere effect of his own faithfulness, as he often declares.
And those words (...), and my Spirit standing, abiding, or remaining, in the
midst of you, among you, is no Promise of any thing that was future; but a
declaration of the presence of God by his Spirit then amongst them, to carry
them through all difficulties and discouragements that they had met withal.
And this is evident from the Inference that is made thereon, (...), fear ye
not. For as the presence of God with them by his Spirit and power, was their
great encouragement; so a Promise of any thing that was future, was not suited
unto that purpose. And hence the Targum of Jonathan, supposing the Spirit of
Prophecy to be intended, refers the words to the Prophets that were then
amongst them, who instructed them in the Will of God. But by the Spirit,
nothing is there intended, but the efficacious working of the Providence of
God, in their Protection, as it is explained, Zech. 4.6. Not by Might, nor by
Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. And the trajection of the
words invented by Kimchi, is a bold corruption of the Text, and contrary to the
whole design of the Prophets message to the people. His business was to
encourage them to go on with the building of the Temple: To this end, he bids
them be strong and do their work, (...), says Rabbi Levi: Work on this
building; carry on this Fabric. (...), says Jonathan, fall to your labor,
and thereunto he adds the encouragement from the presence of God, who was
powerfully present with them by his Spirit, as in the days that he brought
them out of the Land of Egypt.

glory of the latter House must excel that of the former. That they may not be
utterly silent, the Masters of the present Judaical Infidelity fix upon two
things, which they would persuade us this Glory might consist in: First, They
say the Structure it self, either as built by Zerubbabel; or at least, as
restored by Herod, was Higher, as more capacious then that built by Solomon;
and the glory of it was increased by the great riches of the Nations, that were
brought into it, in the days of the Hasmonaeans, and of Herod, when that was
accomplished, which was here foretold, that the riches of the Nation, should
come to that House. So Kimchi, I will shake, this is an Allegorical Expression,
says he, of the great glory and good, that God would bring to Israel in the
days of the second Temple; and when was this? (...); it was in the days of
the Hasmonaeans; (...); or in the time of Herod: for which he refers us to the
Book of Joseph Ben. Gorion, the Plagiary of the time of Josephus. And this also
is repeated by Jarchi and A^arbinel, for the Glory of the House its self. The
same man tells us, that his Masters of blessed Memory were divided; some
referring it unto the time of the standing of the second House, of which
afterward. Some to its greatness: And for its greatness he informs us. The
second House, (...), in the Structure of it, was great: as it is written in the
words of our Rabbis of blessed memory, and in the Book of Joseph Ben Gorion,
namely, that there was no building in the whole world, to be compared with that
Structure which Herod built for beauty and excellency.

But there are not many of this opinion, and those that pretend themselves so
to be, speak contrary to their own Science and conscience. They know well
enough, that the latter Temple was in nothing to be compared unto the former.
And this Abarbinel acknowledges in the entrance of his Exposition of this
Prophecy, affirming that the people were troubled at the remembrance of the
House built by Solomon, which was great and high, filled with multitudes of
Vessels of pure Gold and precious Stones: whereas that which they were
building, was small, according to the Command of the King of Persia; and
without treasure, because of the poverty of the people: and though this House
was built higher by Herod; yet it was not at all enlarged by him but erected
precisely on the old foundation. But not to enter at present into consideration
of the measures of the former Structure: Let the latter Temple be thought as
wide and long as the former, and some Cubits higher, does this presently give
it a greater glory then the other? a Glory so much greater, as to be thus
eminently promised and intimated to be brought in with the shaking of Heaven,
and Earth, Sea, and dry land? Can any thing more fondly be imagined? It were
endless to reckon up the particular instances wherein it came short of the
Glory of the first House. Let but the heads of the Beauty and Magnificence
thereof above recounted be run over, and this will quickly appear. In a word,
notwithstanding the imaginary greatness pretended, it had not the hundredth
part of the Glory of Solomon's House, which also these Masters on all occasions
acknowledge: for besides all the Golden Glorious Vessels and Ornaments of it,
Besides all the treasures disposed in it, besides sundry of the most
magnificent parts of the building it self, they generally acknowledge that
there were five things wanting in the last, wherein the principal glory of the
first House consisted. These are diversely reckoned up by them, but in general
they all agree about them; and they are given us by the Author of Aruch in the
root (...) in this order: (...), the Ark propitiatory and Cherubins, one; that
is, the whole furniture of the Sanctuary. (...), the Divine Majesty or
Presence, the second: It entered not into the House in that glorious and solemn
manner, that it did into the Temple of Solomon. (...), the Holy Ghost which is
Prophecy, the third; all Prophesies ceasing under that House, from the days of
Malachi unto John Baptist: (...), Vrim and Thummim, the fourth thing. (...);
Fire from Heaven, to kindle the everlasting fire on the Altar, the fifth thing.
They that acknowledge all these things to have been wanting in the second
Temple, as the Jews generally do, and the Talmud in (...), Chap. 5. expressly,
cannot well compare the glory of it, with the glory of that Temple wherein they
were, and whereof they were indeed the chiefest glory and the most eminent
pledges of the presence of God therein.

The pretense about the glory of this House from the riches of the Hasmonaeans
and Herod is no less vain. That which amongst the Hasmonaeans had the greatest
appearance of glory was their High Priest (who also came irregularly unto that
Office) assuming the Royal Power and Titles. But this as themselves confess,
was a sinful disorder; and their whole race was quickly extirpated for Herod
the great; it is well they are on this occasion reconciled unto him, whom
elsewhere they execrate as an Usurper, cruel Tyrant, and Slave to the Romans,
all which he was indeed. Little glory came to the Temple by his Rule and
Sovereignty. Besides, during his Reign and the Rule of the remainder of his
Race, the High Priests were thrust in and out, at the pleasures of Brutish
Tyrants; no order in their Succession, no beauty in their Worship being
observed, or sought after. Hence comparing the number of High Priests under the
Second Temple, with that of them under the first, which it tr^bly surmounts,
they apply unto it that of Solomon, because of the wickedness of the people,
the Rulers are many. To seek for the Glory mentioned among these things and
persons is assuredly vain.

Wherefore others of these Masters, waving these empty pretenses would have the
R. Jonathan in Bereshith Rabba, Jarchi on this place, and Kimchi whose opinion
is repeated by Abarbinel. Kimchi tells us that their Masters are divided in
this matter; and Jarchi that it was Raf and Samuel that were the Authors of
this different opinion; one affirming that the glory of this House consisted in
its greatness, the other in its duration; and their Dispute in this matter is
in Perek Kama: of Baba Bathra. (...), The first House, says he, continued four
hundred and ten years, The second four hundred and twenty: This is their
account, though in truth, it continued longer, as did the first House also. But
is this the Glory promised? What was the condition of that House in those ten
years, and almost half ten times ten years before? The whole Nation during this
space of time was shattered and wasted with Oppressions, Seditions, and
Miseries inexpressible; and the House it self made a D^n of Thieves; and for
the greatest part of the ten years they boast of, was filled with cruel
bloodshed and daily murders. And is it likely that a mere duration in that
season, wherein for what it was put unto, it was abhorred of God, and all good
men; should in this prediction of its State, deserve that Prophetical Eulogie
of obtaining more glory then the House of Solomon was ever made partaker of?
There is then nothing more evident, then that these inventions, are evasions of
men who diligently endeavor to hide themselves from Light and Truth; not in
the least answering either the letter of the Prophecy, or the intention of him
that gave it.

It remains then, that we enquire from the Text, what is the tru^ Glory
promised coming unto it of the desire of all Nations. The desire of all Nations
shall come, and I will fill this House with glory; and the glory of this latter
House shall be greater then that of the former. This is directly affirmed to be
the glory promised, and nothing else is in the least intimated wherein it
should consist. And there are three circumstances of this glory expressed in
the Text. (1.) The way whereby it should be brought in: I will shake the
Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land: and I will shake all
Nations. Secondly, The season wherein this was to be done: Yet once it is a
little while. Thirdly, The Event of it: and in this place will I give peace,
says the Lord of Hosts: all which are severally to be considered, and the
intendment of the Holy Ghost in them vindicated from the objections of the Jews.

The first thing we are to enquire after, is the Glory it self that is promised
in these and the desire of all Nations shall come. The Jews by these words
generally understand the desirable things of the Nations, their Silver and
Gold, which above all things are unto them most desirable. These, they say, the
Nations being shaken, did bring unto the Temple, and therein the glory of it
did consist. Herein all their Expositors on this place, Jarchi, Aben Ezra,
Kimchi, and others of them whose Judgments are repeated by Abarbinel do ag^ee.
Aben Ezra briefly, The Nations shall be shaken, (...), and shall bring gifts
unto my house, (...); and they shall bring the Treasures of Gold and Silver,
says Jarchi, as it is recorded in the Book of Joseph Ben Gorion. Kimchi to the
same purpose somewhat largely, (...); As if it had been said, they shall bring
in their hands all desirable things that are found in their Lands: Vessels of
Silver and of Gold, Garments and precious stones; and this, as I said, is their
general s^nse.

But First, It is directly contrary unto the Context: for it is the plain
design of the Holy Ghost to take of the thoughts of the people from that kind
of glory, which consisted in coacervation of ornaments of Silver and Gold,
which being all of them always in his power, he could at that time have
furnish^d them withal, but that he would have them look for another glory.
Secondly, It is perfectly false as to the event; for when was there such an
outward shaking of all Nations under the second Temple, as that thereon they
brought their Silver and Gold unto it, and that in such abundance, as to render
it more rich and glorious, then the House of Solomon: So to wrest the words, is
plainly to averr, that the Promise was never fulfilled. For nothing can be more
ridiculous, then to make a comparison between the Riches and Treasures of
Solomon's Temple, and those which at any time, were laid up in the second
Temple. Besides, what was so, It was but Gifts and Oblations of the people of
the Jews, which the Nations sometimes took away, but never brought any thing
unto it. And therefore themselves which use this evasion, dare not place the
excelling glory of this House herein, though the Text do plainly affirm, that
it does consist in what these words intend, but turn to other imaginations of
largness and duration.

Thirdly, Open force is offer^d unto the words themselves; for they are not
(...), and all Nations shall bring their desirable things, but (...), the
desire of all Nations shall come. So woeful is the condition of men, rebelling
against light, that they care not into what perplexities they run themselves,
so they may avoid it. Abarbinel having repeated all these Expositions, and
seeing, no doubt, that they would not endure a tolerable Examination, would
have the desire of all Nations to be Jerusalem; because they should all come up
to War against it, with a desire to take it in the days of the third Temple,
which, he fancieth to be here intended. There are scarce more words, then
Monsters in this Subterfuge. It may suffice for its removal, that we have
already demonstrated, that his Figment of a third Temple, is devoid of any
pretense to cover it from open shame.

Messiah, and of the real glory that should accrue unto the second Temple, by
his coming unto it, whilst it was yet standing. This is the importance of the
words, (...), The LXX. give us a corrupt interpretation of the words, (...),
and choice things of all Nations shall come: in which error they are followed
both by the Syriack and Arabic Translators. (...) does in nothing answer to
(...), the word here used by the Prophets, and retained by Jonathan in the
Chaldee Targum; who indeed is not unfaithful in places relating unto the
Messiah, so as to exclude him; although he pervert the true meaning of many of
them. The Vulgar Latin has rightly to the sense rendered these words; Et veniet
desideratus cunctis gentibus; and he shall come who is the desired of all
Nations. (...) from (...), is properly desiderium, desire; but is no where used
in the Scripture, but for a thing, or person desired, or desirable, loved,
valued, or valuable: as is (...) also. Dan. 9.23. Chap. 10.11. Chap. 11.8.43.
Genesis 27.15. Ezekiel 23.6. Amos 5.11. Jer. 3.19. Isaiah. 2.16. This I say, is
the constant use of the words, to denote the person or thing that is desired,
or desirable: And it being said here emphatically, that this desire shall come;
nothing but a desired, or desirable person can be intended thereby. And this
was no other but the Messiah, the bringing of whom into the world was the end
of the build^ng of that Temple; and of the whole Worship performed therein: and
therefore by his coming unto it; it had the complement of its Glory. The
Promise of him of old unto Abraham was, that in him all the Nations of the
Earth should be blessed. Until his coming they were generally to be left to
walk in their own ways; and in the issue everlastingly to perish, by him were
they to be relieved; and so is rightly called their desire, or he that de jure,
ought to be desirable above all things unto them, the desire of all Nations,
and he to whom the gathering of the people should be, that is the Shilo, are
one and the same. It is true, being filled with blindness and ignorance, the
ages past before his coming had de facto, and actively no desire after him; but
as there was a secret groaning and tendency in the whole nature of things after
his production; So he, when he came, who was alone to be desired by them, was
actually received and embraced, as the full accomplishment of their desires.
That then, wherein all their blessedness and deliverance were laid up, may be
properly called their desire, because containing all things truly desirable,
and because like desire fulfilled, it was perfectly satisfactory unto them when
enjoyed.

The only difficulty in the interpretation of these words, lies in their
unusual construction. Verb (...), shall come, is of the plural number; venient.
(...), the desire, whereunto we refer it, of the singular: desiderium omnium
gentium venient: Kimchi observing this anomaly, to suit the words unto his own
sense, affirms that (...) is wanting, which should be prefixed to (...), and so
be rendered, all Nations shall come with their desire, that is, their desirable
things; their Silver and Gold, but there is no need of this Arbitrary supply of
the Text; and the sense contended for by him, we have sufficiently disproved.
Nor is it unusual in the Hebrew Tongue, where two Substantives are joined in
construction, that the Verb agrees in number and person, not with that which
directly and immediately it respects, but with that whereby it is regulated.

As (...) here is put in statu construct^, by (...), and the Verb from thence
put in the plural number, so 2 Samuel 10.9. Joab saw (...), that the face of
battle was against him. The Verb (...), was, which refers directly to (...),
the face, agrees not in number with it, but with (...), the battle, by which
the other is put in construction. So Job. 15.20. (...), the number of years is
hid: (...), are hid, it agrees with (...), years; and not with (...), the
number; in the very same kind of construction with that of the words here used
by the Prophet. So likewise 1 Samuel 24. (...); arcus fortium confractorum. The
Adjective (...) broken, agrees in number with (...), the mighty, though it be
apparently spoken of the bow: and likewise, Hos. 6. v. 5. (...), thy Judgments
shall go forth as the light: (...), shall go forth, agrees in n^mber with (...)
the light, though it respect (...), thy Judgments, in the plural number; and
many other instances of the like kind, may be alleged to the same p^rpose.
This construction then, though anomalous, yet is in that Language so frequent,
as not to create any difficulty in the words; and yet possibly the words may
not be without a further sense, intimating the coming of the Nations to Christ
upon his coming into the Temple.

Though the words of the Promise are thus clear in themselves, we may yet see I
will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, the Sea, and the dry Land, and I will
shake all Nations. All the Jewish Expositors agree, that these words are to be
interpreted (...); that is, Metaphorically and figuratively. Yet it cannot be
denied, that a great concussion and shaking of the World, and all the Nations
of it, is intended in them; otherwise nothing is signified by them. And this
must be with reference unto that house, and the Worship thereof, and that in a
tendency unto its glory. Now I desire to know what work among the Nations in
the whole World it is, that was wrought with respect unto the Temple which is
here intended. The Nations indeed under Antiochus, and almost ruined it; under
Crassus, and robbed it; under Pompey, and profaned it; under Titus and
destroyed it. But what tended all this to its glory? But refer these words unto
the coming of the Messiah, and all things contained in them were clearly
ful^illed. Take the words literally and they suit the event. At his Birth, a
New Star appeared in the Heavens; Angels celebrated his Nativity; Wise men came
from the East, to enquire after him; Herod and all Jerusalem, was shaken at the
tidings of him; and upon his undertaking of his work, he wrought Miracles in
Heaven, and Earth, Sea, and dry Land, upon the whole Creation of God. Take them
Metaphorically, as they are rather to be understood, for the mighty change
which God would work in his Worship, and the stirring up of the Nations of the
world to receive him, and his Doctrine, and the event is yet more evident. All
Nations under Heaven were quickly shaken and moved by his coming. Some were
stirred up to enquire after him; some to oppose him; until the world, as to
the greatest and the most noble parts of it, was made subject unto him. Evident
it is, that since the creation of all things, never was there such an
Alteration and Concussion in the world, as that wherewith the Messiah and his
Doctrine was brought into it; and which is therefore so expressed by the
Prophet.

Abarbinel affirms that the (...), Christian Doctors, would argue and prove
Temple of the Jews, but their own House of Worship, that is intended in these
words, and that because there was no such confluence of the Nations unto the
Jews, either under the first, or second Temple, as is here promised: But unto
their Church and Faith, all Nations were converted. But he mistakes, and
confounds things, as all of them constantly do, in their Disputations against
Christians. We contend not, that it is the Christian Church, that is here
intended by the House, that Glory was to come unto. Only we say, that he to
whom the Nations or Gentiles were to be gathered, whom they were shaken and
stirred up to receive, did actually come unto the Temple at Jerusalem, and
thereby gave it a greater Glory then what ever the Temple of Solomon received.
This first Circumstance then clears our intention from this Text.

season wherein the promised glory was to be brought in, is next noted in the
Context. It is expressed v. 6. (...), The Jews generally refer these words,
unto the Rule or Kingdom of the Hasmonaeans, under whom the people were to
enjoy their liberty, which is said to be a little season, as continuing seventy
or eighty years: For it is said to be little, because they had but a small
Dominion in comparison of their former Kingdom and Empire. But it is evident
from the Context, that the Prophet had no respect unto Rule or Dominion in
these words. For what ever is intended in this Expression, it has a direct and
immediate influence into the bringing in of the desire of all Nations, and the
glory promised, which the Rule of the Hasmonaeans reached not unto. Our
Apostle, Heb. 12.24. renders these words (...), literally and properly (...),
yet more once, or yet once more. God had before done some work, whereunto that
which he promised now to do is compared. Such a concussion of all things had
been before; and this as is evident from v. 5. was the work that he wrought at
the giving of the Law, and the erection of the Judaical Church, State and
Ordinances. In answer hereunto, he would bring in the everlasting Kingdom of
the Messiah, and the spiritual Worship to be celebrated therein, the Old
Church State of the Jews in this shaking of all things being removed and taken
away.

And this plainly is evinced from the comparison that God makes between the
work here promised, and that which he wrought when he covenanted with the
people upon their coming up out of Egypt. Concerning the work which God will
thus do; once more, it is said to be (...), a little while, that is, ere it be
accomplished: It is not the nature, or quality of the work; but the season or
time wherein it shall be wrought, that is denoted in these words: In that sense
is (...), often used in the Scripture, as we prove elsewhere. As the same work,
Mal. 3.1. is promised to be done (...), suddenly, speedily. It is then
foretold, that it should be but a little space of time before this work should
be wrought. And hence Abarbinel would prove, that it cannot respect the coming
of our Messiah, which was about four hundred years after. But this season is
not called a little while absolutely, but with respect unto the former duration
of the people, or Church of the Jews, either from the calling of Abraham, or
the giving of the Law by Moses. And this space of four hundred years is but a
little in comparison thereof; and is so termed, to stir up Believers unto a
continual expectation of it, and desire after it; It being now nearer unto
them, then unto their Forefathers, who beheld the time of its performance, a
very great way off. And this also serves for the conviction of the Jews, for
whereas their forefathers of old did confess, and themselves at present cannot
with any modesty deny, but that the Messiah is here intended, whom they suppose
not yet to be come, how can this space of time from the days of Haggai in any
sense be called a little while, seeing it far exceeds all the space of time
that went before, from the Call of Abraham, which is the first Epoch of their
privilege and claim.

circumstance contributing light unto our interpretation of this place, is
taken from the event, or the coming of the desire of all Nations, and the glory
of the second House ensuing thereon, in these words; (...); and in this place I
will give peace, says the Lord of Hosts. From these words Abarbinel seeks to
overthrow our Exposition, by this place, says he, is intended Jerusalem. Well
let that be granted, what will thence ensue? Why says he, (...); Behold from
the day that the Messiah was born, there was no Peace in Jerusalem, but Wars,
Destruction, and Desolation. We say then, that by Peace, here, must be
understood either outward, Temporal, Worldly Peace, or Spiritual Peace between
God and man, between Jews and Gentiles in their joint communion in the same
Worship of God. If they say the former was intended, I desire to know when this
promise was accomplished under the second Temple? before days of the
Hasmonaeans, the whole people was in perfect bondage and slavery: First, To the
Persians, then to the Graecians; and bondage is not, especially peace in the
Hebrew Dialect, wherein, that word denotes an affluence of all good things. The
Rule of the Hasmonaeans was wholly spent in bloody Wars, and intestine
Divisions. Their power issued in the Dominion of the Romans, and their Vassals
the Herodians? What signal peace they had in those days, they may learn from
their own Joseph Ben Gorion. To say then, that this was the peace intended, is
to say directly, that that God promised what he never performed, which is fit
only for these men to do.

Besides, though God promised to give this peace at Jerusalem, that is amongst
the Jews, yet he promised not to give it only to Jerusalem, unto the Jews, but
to all Nations also, whom he would shake and stir up, to bring in this Glory.
Now what pretense of peace had the Jews under the second Temple wherein all
Nations were concerned? I suppose they will not say they had any. Moreover, the
peace promised, was that which was to be brought in by the Messiah. This
Abarbinel grants; and thence seeks to strengthen his Objection: for says he,
Then we shall have Peace, Rule and Dominion according to the manifold Promises
given us unto that purpose. I answer, those Promises are of two sorts; Some
express Spiritual things, Allegorically by words literally signifying things
outward; And they are all of them fulfilled in and unto them that do believe.
Others of them, that really intend outward Peace and Glory, are made concerning
them to be fulfilled, not when the Messiah came to them, but when they shall
come to the Messiah: At his Coming unto them, they rejected him, and he
rejected them; but when their blindness shall be taken away, and they shall
return unto the Lord, all these Promises shall have a blessed accomplishment
amongst them. But we have sufficiently proved that the principal work of the
Messiah was to make peace between God and man by taking away sin that was the
cause of their separation, distance and Enmity. This then is the peace here
promised. This God gave at Jerusalem, whilst the second Temple was standing:
For he is our peace who has made both one, and has broken down the middle
wall of partition between us, having abolished in his flesh, the Enmity, even
the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances for to make in himself of
twain, one new man, so making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto God,
in one body by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby, and ^ame and
preached peace to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh. Thus did
God give peace at Jerusalem, both to the Jews and Gentiles, by him that was the
desire of all Nations; and so by this Circumstance of the Context also, is our
interpretation fully confirmed.

Although we have sufficiently confirmed our Argument, and vindicated it from
Jewish Masters; yet because it is most certain, that the constant faith of
their Church of old was; that the Messiah should come whilst that second
Temple was standing, which they have now Apostatized from, and renounced,
countenancing themselves in their infidelity, by the miserable evasions before
mentioned. I shall add yet farther strength unto it from a parallel Testimony,
and from their own confessions. The parallel place intended, is that of Malachi
3.1. Behold I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, even
the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in: Behold he shall
come, says the Lord of Hosts, the time future of his coming, is by Haggai said
to be (...), a little while; and he i.e. Malachi answerably affirms, that he
shall come (...), suddenly, in the sense before declared he who by Haggai is
called (...), the desire of all Nations, with respect unto the Gentiles, all
desirable things being laid up in him, is by Malachi called (...), with respect
unto the Jews, the Lord whom ye seek; whose coming they looked for so long, and
prayed for so earnestly. And what Haggai expressed absolutely, shall come,
afterward intimating the respect his coming should have unto the Temple,
Malachi sets down fully, (...), he shall come unto his Temple. Further to clear
what it is, that in both these places is intended, he is called (...), the
Angel of the Covenant; Gods Messenger, who was to confirm and ratify the New
Covenant with them; that is, the Messiah. The Targum of Jonathan expresses it
on Jer. 30.21. closing the Promise of the Covenant with these words, (...), and
their King shall be anointed from among them, and their Messiah shall be
revealed from amongst the midst of them; He who was the desire of all Nations,
the Lord whom the Jews sought, the Messenger by whom the New Covenant was to be
ratified; that is, the Lord the Messiah was to come, and he did come unto that
Temple.

Jews are at an end of all shifts and evasions. It cannot be avoided but the
Messiah must be here intended; Rashi would fain yet evade; the Lord whom ye
seek, that is (...), the God of Judgment: because they had said before, Chap.
2.17. Where is the God of Judgment? Vain man, these words which he himself had
but just before interpreted, to be the Atheistical Expression of wicked men
questioning the Judgment of God, are now to serve his turn, an earnest desire
of seeking after the Lord, which in these words is evidently set forth; the
Lord whom ye seek, the Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in; for both these
are the same, as Aben Ezra acknowledges, (...), The Lord he is the Glory, and
the Angel of the Covenant, the same things being intended under a double
expression. And it is evident whom he intends thereby, by his interpreting the
Messenger to be sent before him, to be Messiah Ben Joseph, whom they make the
forerunner of Messiah Ben David.

Kimchi interprets the Angel to be sent before him, the Angel of Gods presence
from Heaven, to lead the people out of their Captivity, as of old he went
before them in the Wilderness when they came out of Egypt. But we are better
taught, who this Messenger was, Matthew. 11.10. Mark 1.2. As for the Lord whom
they sought, he speaks plainly, (...); This is the King the Messiah, and this
the Angel of the Covenant; he adds indeed the old Story about Elijah, and his
zeal for the Covenant: whence he had the honor to preside at Circumcision, to
see the Covenant observed, and may be thence called the Angel of the Covenant.
But it is plain in the words, and confessed by Aben Ezra, that the Lord whom
they sought, and the Angel of the Covenant are the same. And as to these words,
(...), he shall come suddenly unto his Temple, he adds in their Explication;
(...), because the time of the end is not revealed nor unfolded in the Book of
Daniel. It is said he shall come suddenly, because there is no man that knows
the day of his coming before he came. We grant that the precise day of his
coming, was not known before he came; but that the time of it was foretold,
limited and unfolded in the Book of Daniel, so far as the season and age of it
would admit, was made evident, all future expectation declared to be void, and
that in the Book of Daniel, we shall immediately demonstrate. At present we
have proved, and find that they cannot deny, but that he was to come unto the
second Temple, whilst it was yet standing.

Doctors are Cited by others; I shall only name one or two of them in Talmud it
self, Tractat. San^d. ca^. 11. the application of this place of Haggai unto the
Messiah, is ascribed unto Rabbi Akiha, his words as they report them, are
(...), a little glory will I give unto Israel, and then the Messiah shall come.
And this man of so great repute among them, that Rabbi Eleazar affirms that,
(...), all the wise men of Israel were like a little Garlic in comparison of
that bald Rabbi. This then is their own avowed Tradition, and the other place
of Malachi, concerning the Angel of the Covenant, is expounded of the Messiah
by Rainbain in (...); in the days, says he, of the Messiah, the Children of
Israel shall be restored unto their Genealogies, by the Holy Ghost, that shall
rest upon him, as it is said, Behold, I send my Messenger before me, and the
Lord whom ye seek shall come unto his Temple. We have then found out both from
the clear words of both these Prophesies, and the consent of the Jews
themselves, who it is that is here promised in them, that he should come to his
Temple.

second house promised in Haggai, The end of the Temple, and of all the glory
of it, and all the Worship performed in it, was to prefigure the promised seed,
who was the true and only substantial glory of them all, and of the people to
whom they were committed; for he was to be a Light to light the Gentiles, and
the glory of his people Israel. Therefore in all the Worship of the Temple,
those who believed, and in the use of the Ordinances of it, saw unto the end of
their institution, did continually exercise faith on his coming, and earnestly
desire the accomplishment of the promise concerning it. The great glory then of
this Temple could consist in nothing but this coming of the Lord whom they
sought, the desire of all Nations unto it. Now that he should come whilst the
Temple stood and continued, is here confirmed by this double Prophetical
Testimony; and the Temple being utterly and irreparably destroyed now above
1600. years ago. It must be acknowledged that the Messiah is long since come,
unless we will say, that the Word of God is vain, and his Promise of none
effect.

The General Exception of the Jews unto this Argument taken from the limitation
Haggai and Malachi, that he should come unto the Temple then built amongst
them; which they acknowledge is so truly ridiculous, that I shall not need to
retain the Reader with the consideration of it. They say the Messiah was born
at the Time determined, before the destruction of the second Temple, but that
he is kept hid in the Sea, or in Paradise, or dwells at the Gates of Rome among
the Lepers, waiting for a Call from Heaven to go and deliver the Jews; with
such follies do men please themselves in the great Concernments of the glory of
God and their own eternal welfare, who are left destitute of the Spirit of
light and truth, sealed up under the efficacy of their own blindness and
unbelief. But hereof we shall treat further in the Consideration of their
General Answers to this whole Argument in hand.

Exercitatio XIV.
Daniels Weeks, Chap. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. proposed unto consideration. Attempt of
a Learned man to prove the coming and suffering of the Messiah not to be
intended; examined. First Reason from the difficulties of the Computation, and
differences about it, removed. Whether this place be used in the New Testament.
Objection from the time of the Beginning of this computation, answered.
Distribution of the LXX Weeks into VII, LXII. and one. Reason of it. Objecti^n
thence answered. The cutting of the Messiah, and the destruction of the City,
not joined in one Week. Things mentioned, v. 24. peculiar to the Messiah. The
Prophecy owned by all Christians to respect the Messiah. The Events mentioned
in it, not to be accommodated unto any other. No Types in the words, but a
naked prediction. The Prophecies of Daniel not principally intending the
Churches of the latter days. Streights of time intimated when they fell out.
Coincidence of Phrases in this and other Predictions considered. Removal of the
daily Offering, and causing the Sacrifice and Offering to cease, how they
differ. The Desolation foretold. Distribution of the LXX. Weeks accommodated
unto the Material Jerusalem. Objections removed. Distribution of things
contained in this Prophecy. Argument from the computation of time warranted.
First neglected by the Jews, then cursed; yet used by them vainly. Concurrent
Expectation and Fame of the coming of the Messiah upon the Expiration of
Daniels Weeks. Mixture of things good and poenal. Abarbinels Figment rejected.
Four hundred and ninety years the time limited. Fancy of Origin, and
Apollinaris. The true Messiah intended. Proved from the Context. The Names and
Titles given unto him. The work assigned to him. That work particulary
explained; the expressions vindicated. To make an end of Transgression what. To
seal up sins: To reconcile iniquity: To bring in everlasting Righteousness. To
seal Vision and Prophet. Messiah how cut off. The Covenant strengthened.
Ceasing of the daily Sacrifice. Perplexity of the Jews about these things.
Opinion of Abarbinel and Manasse Ben Israel. Cyrus not intended. Not Herod
Agrippa. Not Magistracy. Africanus, Clemens, and Eusebius noted. Messiah came
before the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice. Chronological Computation, not
necessary.

Calculation of time, granted unto Daniel by the Angel Gabriel. Chap. 9.24, 25,
26, 27. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City,
to finish the Transgression, and to make an End of Sins, and to make
Reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and to
seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. Know therefore
and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven Weeks, and threescore
and two weeks, the Street shall be built again, and the wall in troublous
times. And after threescore and two weeks, shall Messiah be cut off; but not
for himself: and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the
City and the Sanctuary; and the End thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the
end of the War, desolations are determined. And he shall confirm the Covenant
with many for one week; and in the midst of the week, he shall cause the
Sacrifice and the Oblations to cease, and for the overspreading of
Abominations, he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined, shall be poured upon the desolate. So our Translation reads the
words, how agreeably unto the Original, we shall consider and examine
particularly in our progress.

Jews themselves are in a great measure sensible; as we shall see in the
consideration of those manifold evasions which they have invented to avoid the
efficacy and conviction of it. But before we engage into its management and
improvement, an attempt against our Apprehension, the whole design, intendment,
and subject matter of the Prophecy it self, must be removed out of our way. A
Reverend and Learned Person in a late Exposition of the Visions and Prophecies
of Daniel, endeavoring to refer them all unto the state of the Churches of
Christ in these later days of the world, with their sufferings under, and
deliverance from the power of Antichrist, amongst the rest contends expressly,
that this Prophecy, Prediction, and Computation does not relate unto the coming
and suffering of the Messiah, but only unto the state of the Churches before
mentioned. Hence he who published those Discourses, declares in the Title of
the Book, that a New way is propounded in it, for the finding out of the
determinate time signified unto Daniel in his seventy Weeks, when it did begin,
and when we are to expect the end thereof. And a NEW WAY it is indeed, not only
diverse from, but upon the matter, contrary unto the Catholic Faith of the
Church of God, both Judaical and Christian, ever since the first giving out of
the Prophecy. And such a way it is, as is not only groundless, as we shall
discover in the examination and trial of it, but also dangerous unto the
Christian Faith if received. Yet because the Author of it, (if he be yet alive)
is a Person Holy, Modest and Learned, and proposes his conjectures with
submission unto the Judgment of others, not peremptorily determining what he
says, page 51. His discourse deserves our Consideration, and a Return unto it,
with a sobriety answerable unto that wherewith it is proposed. And herein we
shall attend unto the Method chosen by himself, which is first to give Reasons
and Arguments to prove, that this Prophecy cannot be applied unto the coming of
the Messiah, and then those which countenance, as he supposes, the application
of it, unto these latter days, both which shall be examined in their Order.

That which in general he first insisteth on as a Reason to abjudicate this
Prediction Messiah, is the difference that is among Learned men about the
Chronological Computation of the time here limited and determined. The variety
of opinions in this matter he terms monstrous, and the difficulties that attend
the several Calculations inextricable. But whether this Reason be cogent or no
unto his purpose, is easy to determine; yea, it seems to have strength on the
other side. For notwithstanding the difficulties of the exact Computation
pretended, not one of them whom he mentions, nor scarce any other Person,
Ancient or Modern before himself, or a very few besides, did ever doubt, or
call in question, whether the time designed, did concern the coming of the
Messiah or no. And it seems to be a great evidence of the Truth thereof, that
no difficulty in the computation did ever move them to question the Principle
its self.

Besides that, this is indeed no tolerable Argument, namely, that Learned Men
cannot agree in the exact computation of any time appointed unto such an end,
to prove that it was not designed unto that end, is evident from other
instances in the Scripture to the same purpose. Thus God tells Abraham, that
his seed should sojourn in a strange Land four hundred years, Genesis 15.13. which
Stephen repeats, Acts. 7. v. 6. After this, Moses with some difference in the
years themselves, affirms, that their sojourning in Egypt, was four hundred and
thirty years, Exodus 12. v. 40. which St. Paul repeats, Gal. 3. v. 17. Now
learned men greatly differ about the right stating of this Account, as from
what time precisely, the Computation is to be dated: and that on the very same
Reason which divides their Judgments in the stating of these Weeks in Daniel.
For as in this place of Daniel, the Angel fixing the Beginning of the time
limited unto the going forth of the Decree to build Jerusalem, there being
several Decrees, at several seasons, made as it should seem to that purpose,
they are not agreed from which of them precisely to begin the Account; So Paul
affirming, that the four hundred and thirty years began with the giving of the
Promise unto Abraham, it having been several times, and at several seasons
solemnly given unto him, there is great question from which of them the
Computation is to take its date and Beginning. And yet as notwithstanding this
difficulty never any man doubted, but that the years mentioned contained the
time of Abraham's and his Posterities being in Egypt; no more notwithstanding
the difficulties and difference pleaded about the computation of these Weeks of
Daniel, did ever any doubt but that the time limited in them, was that allotted
unto the Judaical Church and State, until the coming of the Messiah. The like
difference there is amongst Learned men about the Beginning and Ending of the
seventy years in Jeremiah, allotted unto the Babylonish Captivity; and that
because the people were carried Captive at three different times by the
Babylonians.

There is therefore indeed no weight in this exception, which is taken merely
from the weakness and imbecility of the minds of men, not able to make a
perfect Judgment concerning some particulars in this divine account, which, as
we shall afterward manifest, is of no great importance as to the principal,
yea only End of the Prediction it self, whether we can do so or no. But yet
that this difficulty is not so inextricable as is pretended, but as capable of
a fair Solution, as any computation of time so far past and gone, we shall I
hope sufficiently evidence in the account that shall be subjoyned unto our
Exposition and Vindication of the Prophecy its self.

Learned Author proceeds to give five particular Reasons to prove his
intention, which we shall examine in their order. And the first is as follows.

Because, says he, in no place of the New Testament this Prophecy is used
against the Jews to prove the Messiah already come.

Answ. Might this Reason be allowed as cogent, it would disarm the Christian
Church of the principal Testimonies which in the Old Testament it has always
rested in, to prove that the Messiah is long since come, and that Jesus of
Nazareth is he. For as any of that nature are sparingly recorded in the
Writings of the Gospel, so of the most evident and illustrious unto that
purpose, there is no mention at all therein. And it is most evident, that as
well in dealing with the Jews, as in his instruction of his own Disciples, the
Lord Jesus made use of innumerable other Testimonies, then what are recorded in
the Books of the New Testament. So also did his Apostles, and other Primitive
Teachers of the Gospel. Hence are they said to prove Jesus to be the Christ out
of Moses and the Prophets, and he to have instructed his Disciples out of Moses
and all the Prophets in the things concerning himself; and yet the particular
places, whereby the one and other was performed, are not recorded.

Besides, this Reason labors under another unhappiness, which is, that it is
grounded upon a mistake. For indeed this Prophecy is expressly made use of in
the New Testament, to denote the time by us allotted unto it; and that by our
Lord Jesus Christ himself. For Matt. 24. v. 15. speaking of the destruction of
Jerusalem, which according unto this Prediction, was immediately to succeed
upon his coming and suffering, he says unto his Disciples, When ye shall see
the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet standing in the
Holy Place, (who so reads, let him understand) then let them which be in
Judaea flee into the Mountains. That which here is called (...), or (...), as
the words of the Evangelist are inserted into the Version of the LXX. in this
place, is, (...), the Desolater, or Waster over a Wing of abominations; that
is, as Luke interprets the words, an Army compassing Jerusalem unto the
desolation thereof, Chap. 21. v. 20. Wherefore our Savior expressly applying
this Prophecy of Daniel to the Destruction of Jerusalem, which was the
consequent of his Passion, he plainly declares, that in his Suffering, and the
Desolation that ensued on the Jews, this whole Prediction and limitation of
time is fulfilled, and ought not to be sought after in any other season of the
Church. And this is abundantly sufficient, not only to render the foregoing
Reason utterly useless; but also to supersede all the following Considerations
and Arguments, as those which contend directly against the Interpretation of
this Prophecy given us by the Lord Christ himself. But yet having made this
entrance, we shall examine also the ensuing Reasons in their Order.

If the restoration of the City, v. 25. is of the material Jerusalem after
Nebuchadnezzars Captivity, it must begin in the first year of Cyrus, from which
time seventy weeks of years, will fully expire long before the Birth of Christ.

Answer. There are sundry Learned Men who despair not to make good the
computation from the first of Cyrus, whose Arguments it will not be so easy to
overthrow, as to make their failure in Chronology, to be the foundation of so
great an inference, as that here proposed, namely, that the coming of the
Messiah is not intended in this Prophecy. But we shall afterward prove, that
there is not only no necessity, that the Decree mentioned for the Restoration
of Jerusalem, v. 25. should be thought to be that made in the first year of
Cyrus, that indeed it is impossible that any such Decree should be intended:
seeing no such was made by him, but only one about the re-edifying of the
Temple, which here is no respect unto. Another Decree therefore express to what
the Angel here affirms, we shall discover, from whence unto the sufferings of
Christ, the seventy Weeks are an exact measure of time.

The first division of the seventy Weeks, is seven Weeks of years, v. 25. The
end whereof it expressly characterized by the setting up of a Messiah Governor,
which cannot be verified in the setting up of the first Governor of the Jews
after the Captivity, much less of Christ. For Zerubbabel was set up in the
Beginning, and Christ long after the End of all. No other Governor can be
meant after the first; because the setting up of one, points at the first.
Therefore if the seven Weeks end not in the setting up of Zerubbabel, or
Christ, as they cannot, then they cannot be verified in the material state of
Jerusalem after the Captivity of Babylon.

Answer. This exception fixes on one of the greatest difficulties in the Text,
which yet is not such as to bear the weight of the Inference that is here made
from it. For the Argument from the Division of the time in the Text, is of this
importance: Because it is said, That from the going forth of the Decree to
build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore
and two Weeks the Street shall be built again, and the Wall in troublous times;
Therefore if the seven Weeks end not in the setting up of Zerubbabel, or
Christ, they cannot be verified in the material State of Jerusalem after the
Captivity. Now I see not the force of this Argument. For the words may have
another Interpretation, and the separating of the seven Weeks from the LXII, as
all of them from the LXX. before mentioned, excluding one out of the
Distribution, may be to another end, then to denote, either the setting up of
Zerubbabel, which assuredly they did not, or the coming of Christ, which they
extend not unto. In brief, they do not precisely assert, that at the End of the
Seven Weeks Messiah the Prince should be; for although they are distinguished
from the other for some certain Purpose not expressed, as to the Determination
of the time of the coming of the M^ssiah, they are to be joined with the sixty
two Weeks, as is expressly affirmed in the following words. Now not to prevent
my self in what is more largely afterward to be insisted on, in the Exposition
of the several passages of this Prophecy, after a full consideration of what
sundry learned men have offered for the solving of this Difficulty, I shall
here briefly propose my apprehensions concerning it, which I hope the Candid
and Judicious Reader will find to answer the Conduct of the Context, and Design
of the place.

First, I fix it here as unquestionable, that the whole space of Seventy Weeks
does the Unction of the Most Holy, with his Passion that ensued, some few years
of the last Week remaining, not reckoned on to keep the Computation entire by
weeks of years. This is so expressly affirmed, v. 24. that the Interpretation of
all that ensues is to be regulated thereby. And this, as we shall afterward
prove, so here we take it for granted, as the Hypothesis on which the present
difficulty is to be solved. There is then a Distribution of these LXX. Weeks
into VII, LXII. and One; upon the account of some remarkable events, happening
at the distinct expiration of those several parcels of the whole season, v. 25.
We have two portions of this time expressed; namely VII. Weeks, and LXII Weeks,
and two Events attending them, Messiah the Prince, and the building of the
Street and Wall. From the going forth of the Decree to restore and to build
Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven Weeks, and threescore and two
Weeks the Street shall be built again, and the Wall in troublous times. The two
Events here mentioned did ensue the two distinct parcels of time limited, but
not in the Order which the words at first view seem to represent, as is evident
from the Context. For as the Messiah did not come at the Expiration of the VII.
Weeks, so the LXII. Weeks were not expired before the building of the City; nor
is that mentioned as the Event designed by the whole space of LXIX. Weeks, but
as that which should fall out in some interval of it; for the Prophecy issues
not in the Restoration, but Desolation of the City.

The Angel therefore, expresses the distinct divisions of time, and the
principal distinct events of them, but not the Order of their accomplishment.
For the natural Order of these things, is, that in VII. Weeks, the building of
the City, Wall and Street, should be finished, and in LXII. Weeks after the
Messiah should be cut off. And this is evident from the Text; for as the
building of the City can no way be said to be after the LXII. Weeks, but in and
after the seven, which was the season wherein the Decree was executed; so the
cutting off the Messiah, is expressly said in the next verse, to be after those
LXII. Weeks, which succeeded unto the VII. Weeks wherein the Restoration of
the City was finished. And to suppose the Messiah in v. 25. not to be the same
with the Messiah v. 26. and the Most Holy, v. 24. is to confound the whole
order of the Words, and to leave no certain sense in them. For the single
remaining Weeks, the use of it shall be afterward declared. This distinction
therefore of the several portions of the whole time limited, does rather
confirm our Application of this Prophecy, then any way impeach the Truth or
Evidence of it.

It is added Fourthly, That the cutting off the Messiah here spoken of, is
expressly joined with the destruction of the City in one Week, to be
accomplished the last seven years; whereas Christ sufferred above thirty years
before the destruction of the Material Jerusalem, v. 26, 27.

Answer. There appears no such thing in the Text. The destruction of the City
and People is only mentioned as a consequent of the cutting off, and rejection
of the Messiah, without any limitation of time wherein it should be performed;
and de facto it succeeded immediately in the causes of it, and direct tendency
thereunto.

Those Phrases, v. 24. to finish the Transgression, to make an end of sin, to
purge iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, are manifest
Characters of the time of the end, as shall be showed.

Answ. But why are not the other Ends expressed in the Prophecy, namely, to
seal up Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy, here mentioned also?
Why is that Phrase (...), translated, to purge iniquity; whereas it rather
signifies, to make Atonement or Reconciliation for iniquity? Is it not because
it would be very difficult to make any tolerable application of these things
unto the season, which is called the time of the End? In brief, these things
are so proper, so peculiar unto the Lord Christ, and the work of his Mediation;
that in their first, direct and proper sense, they cannot be ascribed unto any
other things or Persons, without some impiety. And there is no reason why we
should here wrest them from their native and genuine signification; all which
will be fully manifest in our ensuing Exposition of the words themselves.

Messiah to be intended in this Prophecy: For as they are needless unto
Christians, who are universally satisfied with the truth hereof, so we shall
from the Context and other Evidences, immediately confirm them against the
Modern Jews, and their Masters. In the mean time wholly to remove this
unexpected Objection out of our way, I shall show the invalidity of those
pretenses which the same Learned Author makes use of to countenance his
Application of this whole Angelical Message unto the Christian Churches of
these latter days, which are these that follow.

Because the effects Characterizing the end of those years, the consuming of
transgression, and the bringing in of everlasting righteousness, are effects to
be accomplished in the Christian Church at the fall of Antichrist. Isa. 1.25,
26, 27, 28. and 27.19. Apocal. 21.27.

Answ. These are but some of the effects mentioned, and one of them not rightly
expressed; there are others in the Prophecy, as the Anointing of the most
Holy, and cutting off the Messiah, that can with no color of probability be
applied unto that season. (2.) However something analogous unto what is here
spoken of as an effect and product of it, may be wrought at another time in the
conformity of the Church unto its Head, yet properly and directly as here
intended, they are the immediate effects of the anointing, death and
sufferings of Jesus Christ. (3.) The places quoted out of Isaiah have no
respect unto the Churches of the latter days, other then all Scripture has
which is written for their Instruction. (4.) The things mentioned, Apoc. 21. v.
27. are effects of this work of Christ in and toward his Church, not the work
its self here expressed, as the first view of the place will manifest.

In the other Prophets, the Restoration of the Christian Church from the
Babylon of Antichrist, is in like Types proportionably represented. Isa. 10.
and 11. and 13, 14. Jer. 50 and 51. Apoc. 14.6.7, 8. and 16.19. and 15.7. and
18.2, 10, 21.

Answ. I know not what is understood by, represented in the like Types; Here
are no Types in this Prophecy, but a naked Prediction of the State and
continuance of the Judaical Church until the coming of the Messiah, and of the
Work that he should accomplish at his coming, with the effects and consequences
thereof. To allow Types in these things, is to enervate all the Prophecies
which we have of him in the Old Testament. (2.) The places directed unto in
Isaiah and Jeremiah, intend not the deliverance of the Christian Churches,
unless it be (...), and that in expressions no way coincident with, or suited
unto this Prophecy. (3.) Where any thing is represented in a Type, there must
be an accomplishment of somewhat answerable unto it in the Type its self; and
such was the deliverance of the Israelites from Babylon of old insisted on by
those Prophets. But here our Author allows no such Type, but refers the whole
Prophecy, firstly and only unto the Christian Churches. (4.) In the Revelation
indeed the deliverance of the Churches of Christ from Antichristian Persecution
is foretold, which hinders not but that the coming and suffering of the
Messiah, may be immediately intended, as undoubtedly it is, in this place.

He says, Thirdly, In all other Prophecies of Daniel the main subject of them
is the History: See Chap. 7. and 2. and 8. and 10, 11, 12.

Answ. This is Petitio Principii, and has no foundation, but the arbitrary
Hypothesis of our Author; and it seems strange that there should be so many
Prophecies of the Churches of Christ, and none amongst them of Christ himself:
For this is far from the Genius and strain of the Old Testament, all the
principal Prophecies whereof firstly and directly intend him, and the Church
only as built on him. (2.) Grant therefore, (for we will not needlessly contend)
that some of those Prophecies may concern these latter times, it does not at
all follow that this also must so do; considering the great variety of Daniels
Visions, and there are Arguments unanswerable that it does not do so, as will
afterward appear.

It is added fourthly, That the parallel proportion of phrase argues the
anointed Prince, to be the Prince of the Covenant, Chap. 11.22. which there
does signify the Princes of the Waldenses.

Answ. (1.) That expression (...), v. 25. is not well rendered the Anointed
Prince. It is Messiah the Prince, King, or Leader; as all Translations what
ever agree. And indeed this is, if not the only, yet far the most signal place
in the whole Old Testament wherein the promised Redeemer is directly called the
MESSIAH, whence his usual Appellation in both Churches, Judaical and Christian
is taken. For there is not above one place more where he is immediately and
directly so called, and not in his Types; neither is that place without
Controversy. To interpret this expression therefore in this place otherwise,
is to take away the foundation of that Name of our Redeemer, by which the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament does principally propose him unto our Faith and
Obedience; which certainly would be in prejudicium fidei Christianae. (2.) The
Prince of the Covenant, Chap. 11. v. 22. in those wars of Antiochus Epiphanes,
or Persecutions of Antichrist, (I determine not whether) may be another from
Messiah the Prince here promised.

The streights of times, he says Fifthly, v. 25. and the destruction of the
City, v. 26. do fitly agree to the Antichristian Persecution: See Chap. 8.24.
11.23.

Answ. They do more fitly agree to the times of the building of Jerusalem, and
last destruction thereof, concerning which they are spoken. All Streights and
Destructions have somewhat alike in them, wherein they may seem to agree; but
it does not thence follow, that one is intended in the Prediction of another.

It is further urged, The effects of the last weeks, are parallel with the
Antichristian Apoc. 11. For as the Christian Church is in both places signified
by the Holy City, Apoc. 11.2. with Dan. 9.26. and streights of time said in
both places to go before the last afflictions, Apoc. 11.5, 3, 7. with Dan.
9.25. so the last afflictions are also proposed with mavelous agreement;
those three years and an half of Tyranny over the conquered Saints in the end
of the Persecution; here ^alf a week of years, that is precisely three years
and an half cut out for the same end. The War immediately preceding the
foresaid Triumph, Apoc. 11.7. here in like manner.

Answ. (1.) The likeness of Phrases and Expressions in setting out different
Events agreeing only in some generals, especially in the Predictions that
concern Christ and his Church, which is predestined to be conformed unto him,
is so frequent in the Prophecies of the Old Testament, that nothing unto the
purpose of this Learned Author, can be concluded from such an Observation
concerning these places. (2.) The Christian Church is not intended by the Holy
City, Dan. 9. v. 26. but expressly that City, which was to be built upon the
Decree of the King of Persia, whose condition was revealed unto Daniel upon his
prayer for it, and about it. (3.) It is no wonder that there should be
Streights before Desolations, at all seasons of them whatever. (4.) The half
week cut off from the rest of the weeks, is not to be three years and an half
of Persecution, Tyranny and Triumph; but on the contrary, it is designed for
the Confirmation of the Covenant, by the Preaching of the Gospel; so that here
is nothing of the parallelism pretended in the places compared.

He proceeds; From the beginning of the second half of the last week, or of the
three years and an half, a Prince is said to cause the Sacrifice and Oblation
to cease; v. 27. a Phrase ascribed unto Antichrist, Chap. 8.11. and 11.31.

Answ. I have showed before that the similitude of Phrases in different places,
is no ground to conclude a coincidence of the same things intended. (2.) The
Phrases are not the same, nor alike in the places compared. Concerning him who
is spoken of Chap. 8.12. it is said, (...), and of them, Chap. 11.32. (...),
they shall take or remove away the continual Offering; that is, hinder the
observation of it, and attendance unto it, when it ought to be observed. Of the
Prince, Chap. 9. v. 27. it is said, (...), he shall cause to cease Sacrifice
and Offering; so that de jure, they ought no more to be observed.

In the same time, says he, the said Prince is said, v. 27. for the
overspreading of abominations to make desolate; a phrase attributed unto
Antichrist, Chap. 8.12, 13. and 11.31. there said to set up the abominations
making desolate.

Answ. Although great desolations and destructions being treated of in all
these places, it would not be strange, if the same Author should express the
alike events in the same terms; yet those which we are referred unto, are not
the same in the Original, nor of any considerable correspondency. And the like
may be said of another instance, which he adds in the ninth place, between an
expression, Chap. 9. v. 27. and Chap. 11. v. 36. wherein is no agreement at
all, and the places treat directly of things different, yea contrary.

That as in the seventy Weeks, the division of the seven from the sixty, and of
both from the one Week, are unapplicable to the material restoration out of
real Babylon, so they will exactly and precisely agree to the Restoration out
of Antichristian Babylon, as shall be showed.

Answ. That the distribution of the LXX. Weeks mentioned in the Text, is
applicable unto the continuance of the Judaical Church and State, with the
coming of the Messiah, and the accomplishment of his work, has been in part
already showed, and shall be fully cleared in our ensuing Exposition of the
place. (2.) Unto the exact answering of it unto the Restoration of the Church
from Antichristianism: I shall only say, that if men may be allowed to fix
Epocha's arbitrarily at their pleasure; and make applications of what is spoken
in any place of Scripture, unto what things and persons they please, there is
no doubt, but that they may make their own imaginations to adhere and agree
well enough together.

Reverend Author, both those whereby he endeavors to prove, that in this
Prophecy, the coming of the Messiah is not intended, and those whereby he would
induce a persuasion, that the whole of it, is not only applicable unto, but
also does directly intend the state and condition of the Church in these latter
days, whereby whether he has evinced his intention, and whether his Arguments
are sufficient to dispossess us of the Catholic Faith of the Church in all
Ages, concerning the sense and importance of this Angelical Message unto
Daniel, is left unto the Judgment of men sober and learned. For my part, I
shall take it for granted, that they are all of them so far removed out of our
way, as that we may proceed with our designed Explication and Vindication of
this Prophecy from the exceptions of the Jews, without any disturbance from
them.

illustrious Prophecy, offer themselves unto our consideration. First, The
general Testimony given unto the coming of the Messiah, and the limitation of
time wherein he should so come.

Secondly, The especial sense of the words in the several passages of it, and
the distinct Prophecies contained in them.

Thirdly, The Chronological computation of the time designed, in an exact
account of the space of time limited from the beginning unto the end.

The First of these is that wherein principally we have to do with the Jews;
namely to prove from hence, that there was a time limited and determined for
the coming of the Messiah which is long since expired. And all things herein we
shall find clear and evident. Both the space of time limited, and the several
coincidencies of its expiration are sufficiently manifest. In the second also
we have to deal with them in order unto the confirmation of the former. In both
these the latter Masters have studiously endeavored to cast difficulties and
perplexi^ies on the words, which must be removed, by the consideration of their
use and genuine importance, with the scope of the Prophecy, and the help unto
the understanding of it, which is con^rib^ted from other places of Scripture.
The third is attended with sundry entanglement^, which although they are not
absolutely inextricable, yet are such in respect o^ some minute parts of
calculation, as will not suffer us to so demonstrative a certainty, as that all
men should be compelled to acquiesce therein. This is sufficiently manifested
in the different calculations of the most Learned of the ancient and later
Writers who have labored in this subject. In reference therefore hereunto, I
shall do these two things; First, Manifest that our Argument from this place,
is not at all concerned in the exact Chronological Computation of the times,
whereunto the accomplishment of this Prophecy relates. And Secondly, Shall
demonstrate that this difficulty is conquerable, by giving a clear and
satisfactory account of the time specified and limited, such as is not liable
unto any Material Objection.

first, It is evident in general that here is given out by the Holy Ghost
himself, a Messiah was to come, and to perform the work allotted unto him. And
this gives warrant unto the kind and nature of Argument which we now insist
upon. No small part this was of the Churches Treasure of old, and a blessed
Guide it would have been unto the Faith and Obedience of them concerned
therein, had it been diligently attended unto. But having sinfully neglected it
in its season, they have ever since wickedly opposed it. To Daniel it was
granted as a great favor, relief and privilege, upon his deep humiliation and
fervent supplications, as himself records. Whilst, says he, I was speaking
and praying; ( with fasting, sackloth, and ashes, v. 3.) and confessing my
sins, and the sins of my people Israel, and presenting my supplications before
the Lord my God, for the holy Mountain of my God; yea, whilst I was speaking
in prayer, the man Gabriel whom I had seen in the Vision at the beginning,
being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening Oblation:
and he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel I am now come forth
to give thee skill and understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications the
commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, for thou art greatly
beloved; therefore understand the matter, and consider the Vision, seventy
weeks, etc. v. 20, 21, 22, 23. This was the Answer that God gave him upon his
great and fervent prayer for the Church, and that for his relief, comfort and
supportment; whence it is evidently manifest, that the great blessing of the
Church was enwrapped in it. And the computation of time mentioned, was granted
as a light to guide the Jews, that they might not shipwreck their souls at the
appointed season. But when the time of its accomplishment drew nigh, they being
generally grown dark and carnal, and filled with prejudices against the proper
work of the Messiah, wholly disregarded it. And since the misery that is come
upon them for not discerning this time and Judgment, most of them do cry out
against all computations of time about the coming of the Messiah, although they
are plainly called and directed thereunto by God himself. Neither can they
conceal the vexation which from hence they receive, by finding the design of
the Prophecy so directly against them. Hence this place of Daniel, as to the
time of the coming of the Messiah, as the fifty third Chapter of Isaiah, for
his Office and Work, are justly esteemed the racks and tortures of the Rabbis.
It may not therefore be amiss in our way to take a little prospect of their
perplexity in this matter.

In the Talmud. Tractat. Sanedrin, they have laid down this general Rule, Male
pereant qui temporum articulos suppetunt quibus venturus est Messiah. Or as
they express it by a solemn Curse in the name of Rabbi Jonathan, a great man
among them. (...), let their bones rot who compute the times of the end. And in
Shebet. Jehuda, (wherein they follow Maimonides in Jad. Chazekah, Tractat. de
Regib. cap. 12.) they give a particular account of that solemn Malediction
against the Computers of times. It was invented, they say, because upon the
mistakes of their reckonings, or failings of their calculations, the people are
apt to despond, and begin to suspect that he is already come. So openly do they
own it to be an invention to shelter their unbelief against their convictions.
Yet this has not hindered some of their chiefest Doctors, when they hoped to
make some advantage of it, (as when they saw their Disciples under any distress
enclinable unto Christianity) to give out their conjectures without any respect
unto the Talmudical Curse. So the Author of Shalscheleth Hakkabala assigns the
year for the coming of the Messiah to be the 5335th from the Creation; which
according to their computation fell out about the year of the Lord by our
account 1575. Another would have it to be in the year 5358, that is, twenty
three years after, in the year 1598. Abarbinel in his Comment on Isaiah comes
short of these; assigning it to the year 5263. or 5294. at the farthest; for he
had great expectations from the issue of the Wars between the Christians and
Saracens that were in his days. Their utmost conjecture in Zohar is upon the
year 5408. which with their wonted success, fell out in the year of our Lord
1648. or thereabouts. And all these Calculations were invented and set on foot
to serve some present exigency.

But the Talmudical Curse and Censure is pointed directly against them that
would conclude any thing from the account of Gabriel given unto Daniel in this
place. This they plainly acknowledge in a Disputation which they had with a
converted Jew before the Bishop of Rome recorded in their Shebet Jehuda. Only
they would except Daniel himself, affirming that he was not (...), a Computer
of the time, but (...), a Seer; as though the Question were about the way and
means whereby we attain a just computation of the time, and not about the thing
it self. Daniel received the knowledge of this time by Revelation, as he did
the time of the accomplishment of the Captivity, though he made use of the
computation of time limited in the Prophecy of Jeremiah; but in both he gives
us a perfect Calculation of the time, and so cannot be exempted from the
Talmudical Malediction. And I mention these things in the entrance of our
Considerations of this Prophecy, to manifest how far the Jews despair of any
tolerable defense of their cause, if the things recorded in it be duly weighed.
This then we see in general, that the Holy Ghost directed the Church to compute
the time of its spiritual deliverance by the coming of the Messiah, no less
evidently then he did that of their temporal deliverance from the Babylonian
Captivity. Neither are there more differences among Christians, about the
precise beginning and ending of Daniels LXX. weeks, then were and are about the
beginning and ending of the LXX. years of Jeremiah amongst the Jews. This Rule
was given them by God himself, to direct and guide them, if they would have
attended unto it, in that darkness, and under those prejudices, which the
coming of the Messiah was attended withal.

computation, they were all of them raised up to a great expectation of the
coming of the Messiah. And this is not only evident from the Gospel, wherein we
find that upon the first preaching of John Baptist, they sent unto him to know
whether he were the Messiah or no, and were all of them in expectation and
suspense about it, until he publicly disavowed any such pretense, and
directed them to him who was so indeed; but also from sundry other Testimonies
which themselves can put in no exception unto. Their own Historian tells us,
that what principally moved and instigated them to undertake an unequal War
with the Romans, was the ambiguity (as he thought) of the Oracle, that about
that time one of their Nation should obtain the Monarchy of the world; Joseph.
de Bell. Judaic. lib. 7. cap. 12. which he to play his own Cards, wrested unto
Vespasian, who was far enough from being one of their Nation. Now Divine Oracle
about the coming of the Messiah at that season they had none but this of
Daniel. And so renowned was this Oracle in the world, that it is taken notice
of by both the Famous Roman Historians, who wrote the occurrences of those
days. Pluribus persuasio inerat antiquis Sacerdotum literis contineri, eo ipso
tempore ut valesceret Oriens, praesectique Judaea, rerum potirentur; says
Tacitus, Histor. lib. 5. Many had a persuasion, that there was a Prophecy in
the ancient sacred Books, that at that time the East should prevail, and that
the Governors of Judaea should have the Empire of the world. And Suetonius, in
the life of Vespasian; percrebuerat toto Orient vetus and constans opinio, ut
eo tempore Judaea praesecti rerum potirentur. An ancient and constant
persuasion was famous all over the East, that at that time Governors of Judaea
should have the Empire: and this, as he adds, drew the Jews into their
Rebellion and War against the Romans.

Now this Oracle was no other but this Prophecy of Daniel, whose accomplishment
at that time the Jews all over the East expected. And they acknowledge in their
Talmud, that they were made prodigiously obstinate in the War they had
undertaken against the Romans, by their continual expectation every day and
moment, that their Messiah who was to come about that time, would appear for
their relief: For because of some expressions in this Prophecy, they always
looked for his coming in some time of great distress. But this through their
lusts and blindness was hid from them, that their distress indeed arose from
their rej^ction of him, who was come, and had actually called them unto that
Repentance, which alone would have prevented it. And this persuasion that the
M^ssiah was to come at, or about the end of Daniels Weeks, and that those weeks
were now come to an end, was so fixed in their minds, that when they found,
that he came not, as they thought, according unto their expectation, they
attempted to make a Messiah themselves, even the famous Barcoshi, which proved
the means and cause of their utter extirpation out of the Land of Canaan, as
has been declared. Thus was it with them of old, whose posterity through
obstinacy in their unbelief, do now curse all that compute the time of his
coming, and confounding it with his second appearance at the end of the world,
cast it off to the last day, or a small proportion of time immediately
preceding it.

The Prophecy its self, (that we may return to its consideration) contains a
mixture poenal in destructions and desolations upon or after the close of the
LXX. weeks, is both plain in the Text, and acknowledged by the Jews. That there
is any thing of Mercy, Love and Grace contained in the words, some of them
deny. This course takes Abarbinel in his (...), Springs or Fountains of
Salvation.

But this figment is directly contrary to the whole Prophecy, the context, and
express words of the Text. The Vision its self was granted unto Daniel in
answer unto his prayer. That the design of his solemn supplication, was to
obtain Mercy and Grace for Israel is also plainly set down. The Answer is given
him in a way of Mercy and Love, and for his Consolation in his great distress:
And is it not strange that the Spirit of God should direct him to pray solemnly
for Grace and Mercy, and give him a blessed Answer for his comfort and
supportment, which should contain nothing at all of the Mercy prayed for, but
only terrify him with Wars, Desolations and Destructions? As such an
Apprehension has nothing in the Scripture to warrant it; so it is altogether
dissonant from Reason. Besides the things mentioned and summed up, v. 24.
contain the very extract of all the good things that ever were promised unto
the Church from the foundation of the world; and which it had for many Ages
been nourished with the expectation of. But these things will be more
particularly evinced in our ^nsuing D^scourse.

For the Computation its self, the Jews universally acknowledge, that the
Sevens sevens of years; So that the whole duration of the LXX sevens comprizeth
four hundred and ninety years. This is granted by R. S^adias Hagaon, Jarchi,
and Kimchi on the place. Here we have no difference with them, nor others. For
it were lost labor to divert unto tho consideration of the fancy of Origin,
who Homil. 29. in Matthew would have ^very seven to contain LXX. years, ten
years to each day, and the account to begin at the creation of the world,
making the whole sum of years to be 4900. which expired as he thought at the
coming of Christ. Apollinaris also indulged to a more vain imagination,
supposing the Prophecy to give an account of the whole space of time, from the
death of our Savior unto the end of the world.

But these fancies are exploded by all; both Jews and Christians are generally
agreed, that the precise duration of the time determined, is four hundred and
ninety years; and not to extend farther then the destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus; whether it reach so far or no, shall afterward be discussed. That which
we have to prove and establish from this Prophecy against the Jews, is, First,
That the true and only Messiah promised unto the Fathers, is here spoken of;
and the time of his coming limited. Secondly, That he was to come, and to
discharge his work before the expiration of the LXX weeks, or four hundred and
ninety years from their proper date, that is, before the Sacrifice and Oblation
were caused to cease, in the destruction of the City and Temple. These things,
if we clearly evince from the Text, we have satisfied our Argument, and
confirmed that the Messiah is long since come. Neither are we as to the
importance of the Testimony its self, concerned in that Chronological
computation of the tim^ limited, which we shall afterward enquire into. The
first thing incumbent on us, is to prove, that it is the true and only Messiah,
and his coming that is here spoken of. And this we shall do, (1.) From the
Context and scope of the Prophecy. (2.) The Name whereby he is called. (3.) The
Work assigned unto him. (4.) The general confession of the Jews of old. (5.)
The follies and open mistakes of the latter Jews, in substituting any other
thing or Person in his stead.

First, The Context and scope of the place, evidence him to be intended. This
in Daniel had newly made his supplications. The Answer given, him is as the
Angel declar^s, suited unto his desires and requests; and it contained an
account of their state and condition, until the consummation of all things
that concerned them. The End of that people, or that for whose sake they were a
Church and people, was as we have demonstrated, the bringing forth of him, in
whom all the Nations of the earth should blessed, Until this was accomplished,
it was impossible from the Decree and Promise of God, that they should fall
under an utter rejection, or final desolation. But this is plainly foretold, as
that which should come to pass at the end of the time here determined, or
instantly upon it. (...), He shall cause the Oblation and Sacrifice to cease:
that is utterly and everlastingly, putting thereby a period and final end unto
their Church State and Worship. But what th^n shall become of the people? By a
Wing of abominations he shall make them desolate; or cause them to be wasted
and laid desolate, by overspreading Armies, either in themselves abominable, or
abhorred by them. And in both these senses were the Roman Armies, (...), a Wing
of Abominations. Neither was this to endure for a season only, but unto a
consummation of the whole, v. 27. Now it was inconsistent with all the Promises
of God, and the sole end of his wisdom, in all that he had to do with that
people, that this desolation should happen before the production of the
Messiah. It being therefore expressly said in the Text, that the Messiah should
come before all this were accomplished, who can be intended thereby, but he who
was promised unto the Fathers from the foundation of the world.

Secondly, This whole Revelation was granted unto Daniel for his relief in the
prospect that he had of the ensuing calamities of the Church; and recorded by
him for the supportment thereof in those distresses, as were also those
Prophecies of Haggai and Malachi before insisted on. Now the only general
Promise, which God for the consolation of his Church of old renewed unto them
in all Ages, was this concerning the Messiah, wherein all their blessedness was
enwrapped. This we have already manifested from Moses and all the Prophets, who
ensued in their several Generations. And he is therefore here no less intended.

Thirdly, What ever Benefit, Privilege or Advantage the Church had any ground
or Reason to expect from the Promises of God at the coming of the Messiah, they
are all here expressed, as we shall immediately declare. And we may truly say,
that if the things mentioned, v. 24. were to be wrought by any other then the
Messiah, the Church had much more reason to desire him, then the Messiah
himself, as for any other work which remained for him to do.

Fourthly, Unless the Messiah and his blessed work be here intended, there is
not one word of comfort or relief unto the Church in this whole Prophecy. For
those who deny his coming here to be foretold, are forced violently to wrest
the expressions in v. 24. unto things utterly alien and foreign from the plain
and only signification of the words. And how inconsistent this is with the
design of this Angelical message, we have before manifested. The context
therefore evidently bespeaks the true Messiah to be here intended.

Names and Titles given unto the person spoken of, declare who he is that is
designed. He is called (...), Messiah, and that (...), by way of eminency, and
absolutely. Indeed the very name of the Messiah as appropriated unto the
promised seed, is taken from this place alone; for it is no where else used of
him absolutely. His Messiah, or the Messiah of the Lord, that is his anointed
is often used; but absolutely THE MESSIAH, here only. And it is not probable,
that the name being used but once absolutely in the Scripture, any other should
be intended but he alone whose name absolutely alone it is. The name therefore
sufficiently denotes the Person.

The addition of (...), v. 25. (...), Messiah the Prince, makes it yet more
evident. For as this word is often used to denote a Supreme Ruler, one that
goes in and out before the people, in Rule and Government, as 2 Samuel 7.8. 1
Kings 1. v. 35. 1 Kings 14. v. 7. and in sundry other places, so it is
peculiarly assigned unto the Messiah, Isa. 55. v. 4. (...); Behold, I have
given him a Witness unto the people, a Leader, (or Prince) and Commander unto
the people. And those words are thus Paraphrased by Jonathan; (...); Behold, I
have appointed him a Prince to the people; a King, and Ruler over all Kingdoms.
This is (...), Messiah, the Prince, Leader, or Ruler over all. And (...) is the
same with (...), Mich. 5. v. 1. the Ruler; and (...), Ezekiel. 34. v. 23. the
Shepherd; and (...), the Prince, or (...), Mal. 3.1. the Lord. And to ascribe
this name of (...), Messiah the Prince absolutely unto any but the promised
seed, is contrary to the whole tenor of the Old Testament.

Moreover, he is called, v. 24. (...), the Holiest of Holies; the Most Holy;
Sanctitas Sanctitatum in the abstract, the Holiness of Holinesses. The Most
Holy Place in the Tabernacle and Temple was so called; but that cannot be here
intended. The time is limited, (...), to anoint, (or to make a Messiah of) the
Most Holy. But by the Jews confession the Holy Place in the second Temple was
never anointed, because it was not lawful for them to make the Holy Oil. But
suppose it was anointed, it must be so long before the expiration of these
weeks, which ended, as they suppose in its final destruction; and in truth not
long before. It must therefore be the person typified by the Holy Place, in
whom the fullness of the Godhead was to dwell, that is here said to be
anointed. Had there been any Targum on the Hebrew Chapters of Daniel, we
should have better known the sense of the ancient Jews in this matter then now
we do. Some of them in after ages agree with us. Nachmanides tells us, (...);
this Holy of Holies is the Messiah; (...), who is sanctified from amongst the
Sons of David. So He on the place.

Thirdly, The Work assigned to be done in the days of this Messiah, here
spoken of Finishing of Transgression. (2.) The making an End of Sin; (3.)
Making Reconciliation for Iniquity, (4.) The bringing in of everlasting
Righteousness: (5.) The sealing up of Vision and Prophecy: (6.) His being cut
off, and not for himself. (7.) Confirming the Covenant with many. (8.) Causing
the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. All these, especially as coincident,
demonstrate the person of the Messiah. He that shall call to mind what has
been evinced concerning the nature of the first Promise, the faith of the
ancient Judaical Church, the Person, Office, and Work of the Messiah, will upon
the first consideration of these things, conclude that this is he. For we have
in these things a summary of the Old Testament, the substance of all Temple
Institutions, the Center of all Promises, a brief delineation of the whole work
of the promised seed. Wherefore although it be not an Exposition of the place
that we have undertaken, but merely a demonstration of the concernment of the
Messiah therein; yet because the consideration of the particular expressions
above mentioned, will give light into the strength of the present Argument, I
shall in our passage briefly unfold them.

The first thing designed is, (...). The time determined for the coming of
Messiah, is also limited, (...), ad cohibendam praevaricationem; to restrain,
forbid, coerce, make an end of Transgression. (...) is to shut, to shut up, to
forbid, to coerce, to refrain, or restrain, Psalm 119. v. 101. (...), I have
refrained, or kept my feet from every evil way, Psalm. 40. v. 12. Thou Lord
(...) wilt not withold, or restrain thy mercy from me. So also to shut up, or
put a stop unto; as Jerem. 52. v. 3. Haggai 1. v. 10. 1 Samuel 25. v. 33. Psalm
88. v. 9. Thence is (...) Carcer, a Prison wherein men are put under restraint.
From the similitude of Letters and Sound in Pronuntiation, some suppose it to
have an affinity in signification with (...) to consummate, to end, to finish.
But there is no pregnant instance of this coincidence. For although (...) do
sometimes signify to restrain or shut up, as Psalm 74. v. 11. yet (...) no
where signifies to consummate, finish, or complete. The first thing therefore
promised with the Messiah, which he was to do at his coming, was to coerce and
restrain Transgression, to shut it up from overflowing the world so universally
as it had done formerly. Trangression from the day of its first entrance into
the world, had passed over the whole lower Creation like a flood. God would now
set bounds unto it, coerce and restrain it, that it should not for the future
overflow mankind as it had done. This was the work of the Messiah. By his
Doctrine, by his Spirit, by his Grace, and the Power of his Gospel, he set
bounds to the rage of wickedness, rooted out the old Idolatry of the world, and
turned millions of the Sons of Adam unto Righteousness. And the Jews who deny
his coming, can give no instance of any other restraint laid upon the
prevalency of Transgression within the time limited by the Angel, and so
directly deny the Truth of the Prophecy, because they will not apply it unto
him unto whom alone it does belong.

The second thing to be done at the season determined, is (...), to seal up
sins, (...); to seal, or to seal up. The expression is Metaphorical. To seal,
is either to keep safe, or to hide, cover and conceal. The former can have no
place here, though the word seem once to be used in that sense, with reference
unto sin. Job 14. v. 14. But this sense has a perfect inconsistency with what
is spoken immediately before, and what follows directly after in the Text. And
the most proper sense of the word is to cover or conceal, and thence to seal,
because thereby a thing is hidden, Cant. 4. v. 12. Now to hide sin, or
transgression in the Old Testament is to pardon it, to forgive it. As then the
former expression respects the s^op that was put to the power and progress of
sin by the Grace of the Gospel, as Titus 2. v. 11, 12. so does this the pardon
and removal of the guilt of it by the mercy proclaimed and tendered in the
Gospel. And in this way of expression, is God said to cast our sins behind his
back, to cover them, and to cast them into the bottom of the sea. That this was
no way to be done but by the Messiah we have before evinced. Neither can the
Jews assign any other way of the accomplishment of this part of the prediction,
within the time limited. For setting aside this only consideration of the
pardon of sin procured by the Mediation of the Messiah, and there was never any
age wherein God did more severely bring forth sin unto Judgment, as themselves
had large experience.

Thirdly, This season is designed, (...), to make Reconciliation for iniquity.
To reconcile iniquity; so our Apostle (...) renders this expression, Heb. 2. v.
17. (...); to reconcile iniquities. That is, (...), to make reconciliation with
God for iniquity; to make atonement. The sense of the word (...) when applied
unto sin, is known and granted. If it be spoken of God, it is to hide, to
cover, to pardon sin, to be gracious unto sinners; if of men in the use of any
of his institutions, it is to propitiate, appease, atone, make atonement, or
reconciliation, as I have elsewhere at large declared. How this was to be done
by the Messiah has been already evinced. This was that work for which he was
promised unto our first Parents from the foundation of the world. That he was
to do it, we are taught in the Old Testament, how he did it in the Gospel. To
expect this work of making atonement for sin, from any other, or to be wrought
by any other ways or means, is fully to renounce the first promise, and the
Faith of the Fathers from the foundation of the world.

fourth place is mentioned answers the former. To make Reconciliation for
iniquities, and (...), to bring in everlasting Righteousness. There was a Legal
Righteousness amongst the people before, consisting partly in their blameless
observation of the institutions of the Law, and partly in their ritual
attonements for sin, made annually and occasionally. Neither of these could
constitute their Righteousness everlasting. Not the former; for by the deeds of
the Law can no flesh be justified; that is, not absolutely, what ever they
might be as to the possession of the promised Land. Not the latter; for as our
Apostle observes, the annual repetition of Legal Sacrifices did sufficiently
manifest that they could not make perfect them that came unto God by them.

In opposition unto these, an Everlasting Righteousness, such as is absolute,
perfect, and enduring for ever, is promised to be brought in by the Messiah;
the Righteousness which he wrought in his life and death, doing and suffering
the whole will of God, being imputed unto them that believe. And this (...),
Everlasting Righteousness, procures and ends in the (...), everlasting
Salvation mentioned, Isa. 45. v. 17. both opposed unto the ritual
Righteousness, and temporal deliverance of the Law. To declare the nature, and
the way of bringing in this Righteousness is the design of the Gospel, Romans 1.
v. 16, 17. And I desire to know of the Jews, how it was brought in within the
time limited. According unto their Principles, the time here determined, was so
far from being a season of bringing in Everlasting Righteousness, that by their
own confession it brought in nothing but a deluge of wickedness in the sins of
their Nation, and oppressions of the Gentiles. This therefore is the proper
work of the Messiah, foretold by the Prophets, expected by all the Fathers, and
not denied by the Jews themselves at this day, though they would shamefully
avoid the application of it unto him in this place. But he, who ever he be,
that brings in Everlasting Righteousness, He and no other is the Promised Seed,
the true and only Messiah.

fifth thing here foretold, is in those words; (...); to seal Vision and
Prophet. (...) for (...); Prophet, for Prophecy; the concrete for the abstract.
The expression being Metaphorical, is capable of a triple Interpretation or
Application, every one of them proper unto the Messiah, his work, and the times
wherein he came, and to no other. (1.) To seal, is to consummate, to establish,
and confirm. Things are perfected, completed, established and confirmed by
sealing, Jer. 34. v. 44. Isa. 8. v. 16. John 3. v. 34. Romans 4. v. 11. In this
sense, Vision and Prophecy were sealed in the Messiah. They had all of them
respect unto the coming of the Just One, the promised seed. God had spoken of
him by the mouths of his Holy Prophets from the foundation of the world. In the
bringing of him forth, he sealed the Truth of their Predictions by their actual
accomplishment. The Law and the Prophets were until John, and then they were
to be fulfilled. This was the season wherein all Vision and Prophecy centred;
this the Person who was the principal subject and End of them; He therefore and
his coming is here foretold. (2.) To seal, is to finish, conclude, and put an
end unto any thing: Isai. 29. v. 11. Thus also were Vision and Prophecy then
sealed among the Jews. They were shut up and finished. The Privilege, Use, and
Benefit of them, were no more to be continued in their Church. And this also
fell out accordingly. By their own confession, from that day to this, they have
not enjoyed either Vision or Prophet. That work, as unto them came wholly to an
end in the coming of the Messiah. (3.) By sealing the confirmation of the
Doctrine concerning the Messiah, his Person, and Office by Vision and Prophecy
may be intended. The Visions and Prophecies that went before by reason of their
darkness and obscurity, left the people in sundry particulars at great
uncertainty. Now all things were cleared and confirmed. The Spirit of Prophecy
accompanying the Messiah, and by him given unto his Disciples foretold by Joel,
Chap. 2. v. 28, 29. was in his Revelations express, clear and evident,
directing unto and confirming every thing belonging unto his Person and
Doctrine. Neither had these words any other accomplishment but what is
contained in these things.

Sixthly, It is affirmed, that (...), Messiah shall he cut off: Not, occidetur
shall slain, as the Vulgar Latin renders the word, but excidetur, shall be cut
off, that is, poenally, as one punished for sin. For the word (...), when it
includes death, constantly denotes a poenal excision, or cutting off for sin.
See Genesis 17. v. 14. Exodus 12. v. 15. Numb. 15. v. 30. This the Jews themselves
acknowledge to be the meaning of the Word. So Rab. Suadias Gaeon in Haemun^th,
cap. 8. (...). It is not used for slaying, unless it be of him, who is slain by
the sentence of the Judge, (or is judicially cut off) as it said, every one
that eats of it shall be cut off, Levit, 17. v. 14. It is then foretold, that
the Messiah shall be cut off poenally for sin; which he was when he was made a
curse for sin, all our iniquities meeting upon him.

And this also is intimated in the ensuing particles, (...), and not to him.
For an Objection is prevented that might arise about the poenal excision of the
Messiah, for how could it be, seeing he was every way Just and Righteous. To
this it is answered by way of concession, that it was not on his own account,
not for himself, but for us; as is at large declared, Isa. 51. Or (...), not to
him, may be a farther declaration of of his state and condition; namely, that
notwithstanding those carnal Apprehensions which the Jews would have of his
outward Splendor, Glory, Wealth and Riches, yet in Truth he should have
nothing in or of this world, none to stand up for him, not where to lay his
head. And this is that part of the Prophecy, for the sake whereof the Jews do
so pertinaciously contend, that the true Messiah is not here intended. For, say
they, he shall not be poenally cut off. But who told them so? Shall we believe
the Angel or them? Will they not suffer God to send his Messiah in his own way,
but they must tell him, that it must not be so? To cast off Prophecies, when
and because they suit not men's carnal lusts, is to reject all Authority of God
and his Word. This is that which has proved their ruin temporal and eternal:
they will not receive a Messiah that shall suffer, and be cut off for sin,
though God foretold them expressly that it must be so.

It is added Seventhly, concerning the person here spoken of, and whose coming
is he shall confirm or strengthen the Covenant unto many. The Covenant spoken
of absolutely, can be none but that everlasting Covenant which God made with
his Elect, in the promised seed. The great Promise whereof was the foundation
of the Covenant with Abraham. And hence God says, that he will give him for a
Covenant unto the people, Isa. 42. v. 6. Chap. 49. v. 8. And the Salvation
which they looked for through him, God promises through the blood of the
Covenant, Zech. 9. v. 11. This Covenant he strengthened unto many in the Week
wherein he suffered, even unto all that believed in him. This everlasting
Covenant was ratified in his blood, Heb. 9. v. 15. and after he had declared it
in his own Ministry, he caused it to be proclaimed in and by his Gospel. At the
time here determined, the especial Covenant with Israel and Judah was broken,
Zech. 11. v. 10. and they were thereon cast off from being a Church or people.
Nor was there at that season any other ratification of the Covenant, but only
what was made in the death of the Messiah.

Eighthly, did he cause to cease the Sacrifice, and Gift, or Offering. First,
He caused it to cease, as unto force and efficacy, or any use in the Worship of
God, by his own accomplishment of all that was prefigured by it, or intended in
it. Hereby it became as a dead thing, useless, unprofitable, and made ready to
disappear, Heb. 8. v. 13. And then shortly after he caused it utterly to be
taken away, by a perpetual desolation brought upon the place where alone
Sacrifices and Offerings were acceptable unto God according unto the Law of
Moses. And this is the third evidence that this Prophecy affords unto our
Assertion; namely, that it is the true promised Messiah and none other, whose
coming and cutting off is here foretold. The great things here mentioned were
fulfilled in him alone; nor had they ever the least respect unto any other. And
the Jews do not in any thing more evidently manifest the desperateness of their
cause, then when they endeavor to wrest these words unto any other sense or
purpose.

Ancient Jews, consenting unto the Truth contended for, we have for our
confirmation therein, the woeful perplexities of their later Masters in their
attempts to evade the force of this Testimony. For some Ages they have abhorred
nothing more, then that the true Messiah should be thought to be here intended.
For if that be once granted, they know that it brings an instant ruin unto the
pretenses of their Infidelity; and that not merely upon the account of his
coming, which they have invented a sorry relief against, but on that of his
being poenally cut off, which can no way be reconciled unto their presumptions
and expectations. But if he be not here intended, it is incumbent on them to
declare who is. For the utmost extent of the time limited in the Prediction
being long since expired, the Prophecy has certainly had accomplishment in
some one or other; and it is known or may be known who; or otherwise the whole
Angelical Message, never was, nor ever will be of any use to the Church of God.

But here our Masters are by no means agreed amongst themselves; nor do they
know what to answer unto this enquiry. And if they do guess at any one; it is
not because they think it possible he should be designed, but because they
think it impossible for them to keep life in their cause, and not to speak when
the sword of truth lies at the heart of it. Some of them therefore affirm the
Messiah spoken of to be Cyrus, whom God calls (...) his Anointed, Isa. 45. v.
1. But what the cutting off, or death of Cyrus should make in this Prediction
they know not. Nor do they endeavor to show that any thing here mentioned to
fall out with the cutting off the Messiah, has the least Relation unto Cyrus
or his death. And if because Cyrus is once called the Anointed of the Lord, he
must be supposed to be intended in that place, where no one word or
circumstance is applicable unto him, they may as well say, that it is Saul the
first King of Israel who is spoken of, seeing he also is called (...), the
Anointed of the Lord, 1 Samuel 24. v. 6. as was Zedekiah also, Lament. 4. v. 20.
But it must needs be altogether incredible unto any, unless they are Jews who
can believe what they please that serves their ends, that because the Lord
calls Cyrus his Anointed, in reference unto the especial work of destroying
the Babylonian Empire, in which sense the term of anointing, namely for a
designation unto any employment, is obvious and familiar in the Old Testament,
should therefore be esteemed the promised Messiah of the people of God, who is
here evidently described. But that which casts this fancy beneath all
consideration is the time allotted to the cutting off of the Messiah.

Those amongst the Jews themselves who begin the Account of the Weeks from the
most early date imaginable, fix their Epoch in the giving of the Promise unto
Jeremiah concerning their return from captivity, which was in the days of
Jehojakim. Now from thence unto the Death of Cyrus, no computation will allow
above LXXX years; which comes short somewhat above four hundred years of the
season here allotted for the cutting off the Messiah. And the same is the case
with Joshua, Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, whom some of them would have to be
designed. For neither were any of them poenally cut off, nor did they cause in
any sense the Sacrifices to cease, but endeavored to continue them in a due
manner, nor did they live within some hundreds of years of the time determined,
nor was any thing besides here forefold, wrought, or accomplished in their days.

Abarbinel, and after him Manasse Ben Israel with some others of them fix on
Agrippa the last King of the Jews, who, as they say with his son Monabasius was
cut off or slain at Rome by Vespasian. A learned man in his Apparatus ad
Origines Ecclesiasticas, mistakes this Agrippa for Herod Agrippa, who was
(...), Acts 12. But he who dyed long before the destruction of the City is not
intended by them, but the younger Agrippa the Brother and Husband of Berenice.
Neither is there any color of probability in this Fancy. For neither was that
Agrippa properly ever King of the Jews, having only Galilee under his
Jurisdiction, nor was he ever anointed to be their King, nor designed of God
unto any work on the account whereof he might be called his Anointed, nor was
he of the posterity of Israel, nor did by any thing deserve an illustrious
mention in this Prophecy. Besides in the last fatal War, he was still of the
Roman side and party, nor was he cut off or slain by Vespasian, but after the
War lived at Rome in honor, and dyed in peace. Yea, he did not only outlive
Vespasian, but Titus and Domitian his Sons also, and continued unto the third
year of Trajan, as Justus the Tiberian assures us in his History, whose words
are reported by Photius in his Bibliotheca. So that (...), there is nothing of
Truth, no color of probability in this desperate figment.

Their last evasion is, that by Messiah the Prince, the Office of Magistracy
and Priesthood, anointed unto Authority are intended. These they say were to
be cut off in the destruction of the City. And herein they have the consent of
Africanus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius among the Ancients, who are also
followed by some later Writers. But this evasion also is of the same nature
with the former, yea, more vain then they, if any thing may be allowed so to
be. The Angel twice mentions the Messiah in his message. First, His coming
and anointing, v. 25. and then his cutting off, v. 26. If the same person or
thing be not intended in both places, the whole Discourse is aequivocal and
unintelligible, no circumstance being added to difference between them, who are
called by the same Name in the same place. And to suppose that the Holy Ghost
by one and the same Name, within a few words, continuing his speech of the same
matter without any note of Difference or distinction, should signify things
diverse from one another, is to leave no place for the understanding of any
thing that is spoken by him. The Messiah therefore who was to come, and be
anointed and cut off, is one and the same individual person. Now it is
expressly said, that there shall be seven Weeks, and sixty two Weeks, that is
four hundred eighty three years from the going forth of the Decree unto Messiah
the Prince. I desire therefore to know whether that space of time was passed
before they had any such Magistrates or Priests, as they pretend afterward
were cut off: This is so far from Truth, that before that time, the Rule of the
Hasmonaeans, the last Supreme Magistrates of their own Nation, was put to an
end. This pretense therefore may pass with the former. And this perplexity of
the Modern Jews in their attempts to apply this Prophecy unto any other thing
or person besides the true Messiah, confirms our Exposition and Application of
it. There is no other person that they can imagine, unto whom any one thing
here mentioned, may seem to belong; much less can they think of any, in whom
they should all center and agree. It is then the promised Messiah, the hope and
expectation of the Fathers, whose coming and cutting off, is here foretold.

That which remains for the full confirmation of our Argument from this place,
Messiah was to come whilst the Temple was standing, and the daily Sacrifice
continued, before the expiration of the LXX Weeks of years limited by the
Angel. This is put beyond all Q^estion in the Text its self, nor is it denied
by the Jews, all whose exceptions lie against the person spoken of, whom we
have proved to be the Messiah. LXX Weeks are assigned by the Angel for the
Accomplishment of the whole Prophecy, and all things contained in it. After
VII. Weeks, and LXXII Weeks, that is, in the beginning or middle of the last
Week, the Messiah was to be cut off. When this was past, and the Covenant
confirmed with many, unto the expiration of the whole time limited, the daily
Sacrifice was to cease, and an overflowing desolation was to come upon the City
and Temple. This the Jews themselves acknowledge to be the destruction brought
upon them by the Romans; nor do any of them extend the four hundred and ninety
years, any farther. It remains therefore that the Messiah came before that
Desolation, which is that we undertook to demonstrate from this place.

There are yet some Arguments to the same purpose with those foregoing that
remain. But before we proceed unto them, it will be necessary to consider the
Computation of the times, which we are here directed unto by the Angel. I have
already manifested that our Argument from this place is not concerned in the
exact Chronological Computation of the time here limited, as to its precise
Beginning and Ending, with the commensuration of it, unto the times, seasons,
and accounts of the Nations of the world. For when ever the time mentioned
began, all men agree that it is long since expired, namely, at or before the
desolation of the City and Temple. Now all that we undertook to prove, which
also is sufficient unto our present purpose, is, that before that season the
Messiah was to come, and to be cut off, which we have done, and cleared our
Argument from all further concernment in this account. But yet that it may
appear, that there is no entanglement cast upon this Testimony, by the
Chronological difficulties which are pretended in the computation of the time
here determined, as also that there are no such difficulties therein, but what
are fairly reconcilable unto all that is affirmed in the Text, before we
proceed to the consideration of our remaining Arguments, they also shall be
considered and stated in the ensuing Exercitation.

Exercitatio XV.
Chronological Computation of the Times determined in Daniel 's weeks.
Difficulty thereof acknowledged. Beginning before the Reign of Cyrus rejected.
Double beginning of the Kingdom of Cyrus. That over Persia. That over the
Babylonian Monarchy. Foreign Accounts to be suited unto the Scripture.
Beginning of the Reign of Cyrus over Persia when. Over the whole Empire when.
The space of time from thence to the destruction of Jerusalem, 599 years.
Duration of the Persian Empire. Of the Empire of the Seleucidae to the Rule of
Jonathan among the Jews. Duration of the Egyptian Kingdom, or Reign of the
Ptolomey's Rule of the Hasmonaeans and Herod the Great. From the Birth of
Christ, to the destruction of Jerusalem. From the first Decree of Cyrus, to the
destruction of Jerusalem 599 years. Precise End of Daniels Weeks, the death of
the Messiah. 37 Years taken from the former account. Opinion of Reynolds.
Examined, rejected. Meaning of (...) cut off; limited; not abbreviated. Vulgar
Latin, and Mountacue noted. Opinion of the Jews, rejected. Account of
Beroaldus, Broughton, Genebrand, Willet. The Decree of Cyrus not intended in
the Prophecy. Of the Life and Age of Nehemiah. He came not up with Zerubbabel.
The Decree of Darius. What Darius that was. Hystaspes. Not the Decree intended.
This Darius not Nothus; proved against Scaliger. The Decrees of Artaxerxes to
Ezra and Nehemiah examined. Longimanus, not Memor, intended. Decree unto Ezra
proved to be the Decree mentioned.

THat there is some difficulty in finding out the true and exact computation of
Chronologers and Expositors do confess: Neither is there any thing that belongs
unto the account of the times mentioned in the Scripture, that has been
debated of old, or of late, with more difference of opinion, or diligence of
endeavor. And the Holy Ghost himself by the Angel seems to intimate this
difficulty unto Daniel in the double caution given him about it in the preface
of the Revelation made unto him, v. 23. (...) and (...) declaring that not
ordinary wisdom, diligence, consideration and understanding, is to be used in
the investigation of the time here determined. Nor is it necessary to suppose
that Daniel himself exactly understood the beginning and ending of the time or
weeks mentioned. The hiding of the precise time intended, was also greatly
subservient unto the providence of God, in the work he had to do by the
Messiah, and what that people were to do unto him. The general notation of it,
sufficed for the direction of the godly, and the conviction of unbelievers, as
it does unto this day. And it may be, we shall not find any comp^tation, that
will exactly answer in all particulars and fractions to a day, month, or year.
And that either because of the great darkness and confusion of some of the
times falling under the Account, or else because perhaps it was not the mind of
God that ever the time should be so precisely calculated, or that any thing
which he revealed for the strengthening of the faith of his Church, should
depend on Chronological niceties. It shall suffice us then to propose and
confirm such an Acc^unt of these Weeks, which infallibly comprizing the
substance of the Prophecy, contains nothing in it contrary to the Scripture,
and is not liable unto any just rational exc^ption. And herein I shall not
examine all the several Accounts and Computations that by learned men of old,
or of late, have been given, (being eleven or twelve in number) but only
mention those which carry the fairest probability, and the greatness of whose
Authors or Abetters, call for our consideration.

In the first place, we may wholly lay aside the consideration of them, who
would Weeks from any time whatever before the first year of the Reign, and
first Decree or Cyrus. Among these are, Lyra, Burgensis, Galatinus, and he from
whom he borrowed his Computation Raymandus Martini. These fix the beginning of
the Weeks on the fourth year of Zedekiah, as they say, when Jeremiah gave out
his Prophecy about the Babylonish Captivity, and the return from it at the end
of seventy years; indeed the fourth year of Jehoiakim, and not of Zedekiah, as
is apparent, Jer. 25.1, 11.

Of the like nature is the account of Solomon Jarchi, among the Jews, who dates
the time limited from the destruction of the Temple by the Chaldaeans. But both
these accounts are expressly contrary to the words of the Angel, fixing the
beginning of the time designed, on the going forth of a Decree for the building
Jerusalem. To these we may add all that would extend these Weeks beyond the
destruction of the City and Temple by Titus, as some of the Jews would do, to
comprize the Prophecy of their second fatal destruction by Hadrian, which is no
way concerned in it:

seventy Weeks then mentioned, we must seek for, between the first year of
Cyrus, when the first Decree was made for the re-edification of the Temple, and
the final destruction of it by the Romans. This space we are confined unto by
the Text; the seventy Weeks are (...) from the going forth of the word to cause
to return and build Jerusalem, verse. 25. Now the Kingdom of Cyrus had a double
first year: The one absolutely of his Reign over Persia, the other of his rule
over the Babylonish Monarchy which he had conquered after the death of Darius
Medus. The first year it is of this second date of the Kingdom of Cyrus, which
may have any relation unto the time here limited; for whilst he was King of
Persia only, he could have nothing to do with the Jews, nor make any Decree for
the building of the Temple, both the people and place being then under the
dominion of another. Besides, Ezra 1.11. Where it is said, that he made his
Decree in the first year of his Reign, himself plainly declares that he had
obtained the Eastern Monarchy by the conquest of Babylon. The Lord God of
Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth; which words can in no sense
be applied unto the Kingdom of Persia, supposing, the Monarchy of Babylon still
to continue. The whole space of time then here limited is seventy Weeks, verse.
24. The beginning of these seventy Weeks is the going forth of the Decree or
Word to restore or build Jerusalem, v. 25. The first Decree or command that
could have any relation unto this matter, was that made by Cyrus in the first
year of his Empire. We must then in the first place, find out the direct space
of time between the first year of Cyrus, and the destruction of the Temple, and
then enquire whether the whole, or what part of it is denoted by these seventy
Weeks.

Epocha's by which they limited and distinguished their computations: For
whereas, say they, we have certainly the term of this duration of time, its
beginning and ending fixed, namely, the first of Cyrus, and the death of
Messiah. It is positively det^rmined, that between them were seventy Weeks, or
four hundred ninety years, unto which all other accounts are to be squared and
made proportion^ble. Indeed the conclusion were unquestionable, if the premises
were certain. If the terms be rightly fixed in the first of Cyrus, and the
death of the Messiah, there must be but 490 years between them: for whether we
understand the reason of it or no, all foreign Accounts must be suited unto
what of infallible truth is stated in the Scripture.

But these things are much questioned; for whereas some do doubt whether the
time limited do absolutely expire in the death of the Messiah, and be not
rather to be ex^ended unto the destruction of the City and Temple. There be
many more, that do peremptorily deny that it is to take date from the first
Decree of Cyrus: And so must we also, unless it can be proved that the times
mentioned are justly commensurate from thence unto the death of Messiah: For
seeing there were other Decrees, as we shall find, to the same purpose, which
might be respected as well as that; there is no reason why we should offer
violence unto other approved computations, to force them to submit unto the
Scripture Account, when we first offer violence unto that, to make it serve our
own opinion. I shall therefore proce^d in the way proposed, and first give a
just computation of the time from the first year of the Empire of Cyrus, unto
the destruction of the City and Temple, and then enquire whether the seventy
Weeks, or 490 years here determined, be commensurate unto the whole, or only
unto some part of it; and if to some part only, then to what part of it, and
how we are directed by the Text to the beginni^g and end of the computation.

And herein I shall not scrupulously bind my self unto days, or months, or
seasons of the year in any single account, but only consider the full and sound
number of years, which in such computations, according to the custom of holy
Writ, is to be observed. And indeed, what through the silence, what through the
disagreement of Anti^nt Historians, it is utterly impossible to state exactly,
as to those lesser fractions, the times that are passed of old. And we seek for
no more certainty in these things, than the condition of them will naturally
bear.

Hi^torians and Chronologers, that Cyrus began his Reign over Persia, in the
first year of the fifty fifth Olympiad; probably the same year that Nab^nidus,
or Darius Medus began his reign over Babylon. And this was the year wherein
Daniel set himself solemnly to seek the Lord for the delivery of the people out
of Captivity, He being now come to a Kingdom who was so long before prophesied
of to be their deliverer, Dan. 9.1. In the twenty seventh year of his reign, or
the first of the sixty second, Olympiad, having conquered the Babylonian
Empire, he began the first year of his Monarchical reign, from whence Daniel
reckons his third, which was his last, Chap. 10.1. And therein he proclaimed
liberty unto the people of the Jews, to return to Jerusalem, and to build the
Temple, Ezra 1.1. The City and Temple were destroyed by Titus, in the third
year of the eleventh Olympiad; now from the first year of the sixty second
Olympiad, unto the third of the two hundred and eleventh Olympiad inclusive,
are five hundred ninety nine years, and within that space of time are we to
enquire after, and find the four hundred and ninety years here prophesied of,
and foretold.

Of this space of time, the Persian Empire from the twenty seventh of Cyrus, or
first Monarchy, and the first of the sixty second Olympiad, continued two
hundred and two years, as is generally acknowledged by all ancient Historians,
ending on, and including in it the second year of the one hundred and twelfth
Olympiad which was the last, of Darius Codomanus. For Cyrus reigned after this
three years: Cambyses and Smerdes Magus eight: Darius Histaspes thirty four:
Xerxes with the months ensuing of Artabanus twenty one: Artaxerxes Longimanus
forty one: Darius Nothus nineteen: Artaxerxes Mnemon forty three: Ochus twenty
three: Arses three: Darius Codomanus seven, in all two hundred and two years.

After his death Alexander beginning his Reign in the third year of the 112th
Olympiad, reigned six years: from him there is a double account, by the two
most famous branches of the Grecian Empire. The first is by the Syrian, or
Era of the Seleucidae, which takes its date from the tenth year after the
death of Alexander, when after some bloody contests, Seleucus settled his
Kingdom in Syria, and reigned thirty years. After him reigned Antiochus Soter
twenty one years, Antiochus Theos fifteen, Seleucus Callinicus twenty, Seleucus
Ceraunus two, Antiochus Magnus thirty seven, Seleucus Philopater twelve,
Antiochus Epiphanes twelve, Eupator two, Dementrius Soter ten. In the second
year of this Demetrius, which was the 153d. of the account of the Seleucidae,
was Judas Macchabaeus slain, being the one hundred sixty ninth year after the
death of Darius Codomanus, or end of the Persian Empire, allowing six years to
the reign of Alexander, and ten more to the beginning of the Kingdom of the
Seleucidae. Demetrius Soter in the tenth year of his reign was expelled out of
his Kingdom by Alexander Vales; in the second year of whose reign, ten years
after the death of Judas, Jonathan his Brother took upon him the supreme
Government of the people of the Jews, and began the Rule or Reign of the
Hasmonaeans: So that the time of the Grecian Empire in Syria from the death of
Darius Codomanus, unto the liberty of the Jews and erection of a supreme
Government amongst them, was one hundred seventy nine years, which being added
unto two hundred and two years of the Persian Empire, makes up three hundred
eighty one years.

To the same issue comes also the account by the other branch of the Grecian
Empire Egypt: For Alexander reigned as we said, after the death of Darius six
years, Ptolomaeus Lagi thirty nine: Philadelphus thirty eight: Euergetes twenty
four: Philopater nineteen: Epiphanes twenty three: Philometor thirty: in which
thirtieth year began the rule of the Hasmonaeans.

The Rule of the Hasmonaeans, with the reign of Herod the great, who obtained
the Jonathan began his Rule in the second year of the one hundred fifty seventh
Olympiad, as may be seen, by adding the Seleucian Era to the one hundred and
fourteenth Olympiad, wherein Alexander dyed; and our Lord Christ was born in
the second year of the one hundred ninety fourth Olympiad, in the last year, or
the last save one of Herod the great. This sum of one hundred forty eight
years, being added to the forementioned, from the beginning of the Empire of
Cyrus, which is three hundred eighty one years, makes up in all five hundred
twenty nine years. From the Birth of our Lord Christ in the second year of the
one hundred ninety fourth Olympiad, to the destruction of the City and Temple,
in the third year of the two hundred and eleventh Olympiad, are seventy years;
which makes up the whole sum before mentioned of five hundred ninety nine
years, from the first of the Empire of Cyrus, unto the destruction of
Jerusalem. Petavius and our Mountacue reckon from the first of Cyrus, unto the
eighteenth of Tiberius, wherein our Lord Christ suffered five hundred ninety
four years, which differs very little from the account we have insisted on: For
take from them twenty seven years of the reign of Cyrus, before the first of
his Empire, and add unto them thirty seven for the continuance of the City and
Temple after the death of Christ, and the sum remaining will exceed our
account only four years, or five at the most.

But the computation we have fixed on, being every way consistent with it self,
and the stated Aeras of the Nations, and abridging the time to the shortest
size that will endure the trial, we shall abide by it. Now the number of five
hundred ninety nine years, exceeds the time limited in this Prophecy of four
hundred and ninety, the whole space of one hundred and nine years.

seventy Weeks of Gabriel, or the four hundred and ninety years, are not
commensurate to the whole space of time between the first Decree of Cyrus in
the first year of his general Empire, and the final desolation of City and
Temple by Titus. One hundred and nine years must be taken from it, either at
the beginning, or at the ending, or partly at the one, partly at the other.

End of them, which being clear in the Prophecy will regulate, fix, and state
the beginning. Two things in general are insisted on in this Prophecy. (1.) The
coming of Messiah the Prince, his anointing unto the work which he had to do,
and his cutting off, as we before declared. (2.) The Ceasing of the daily
Sacrifice, with the destruction of the City and Temple by War and a flood of
desolations. Now these things happened not at the same time; for the City and
Sanctuary were destroyed thirty seven years after the cutting off, or death of
the Messiah. We are to enquire therefore, which of these it was that the time
mentioned was determined for, and was to expire withal. Now it is the coming,
anointing and cutting off of the Messiah, that is the thing chiefly intended
in this Prophecy. This we have proved undeniably before; manifesting that the
Vision was granted unto Daniel, and given out by him for the consolation of
himself and the Church, as was the way of the Holy Ghost in all his dealings
with the Fathers of old: Hereunto the desolation and destruction of the City
and Temple was only a consequent, a thing that should follow and ensue on what
was principally foretold and promised. And it is doubtless unreasonable to
extend the duration of the time, beyond the principal subject matter treated
of, and on the account whereof alone the computation is granted, unto that
which is only occasionally mentioned as the consequent of the accomplishment of
the Prophecy it self. Besides the computation it self is pointed directly by
the Angel unto the Messiah, and his cutting off. Seventy weeks are determined
upon thy people, Know therefore, that from the going forth of the Commandment,
unto Messiah the Prince shall be, etc. And after sixty two weeks shall Messiah
be cut off. But there is no guidance or direction of the time limited unto the
desolation of the City and Sanctuary, which is only said to ensue thereon.

Thirdly, It is expressly said, that the time limited extends it self only unto
the death of the Messiah, or a very few years farther. For he was to come after
seven weeks and sixty two weeks, which are the whole time limited within one
week or seven of years. Now his coming here intended, is not his Incarnation,
but the time of his Unction in his Baptism, which fell out at the end of sixty
nine weeks. After these sixty nine weeks, or seven, and sixty two, he is to be
cut off; that is in the middle or toward the end of the last week; when he had
confirmed the Covenant by preaching three years and an half of that seven years
which remained. And if we shall say that his Unction being to be after the
seven weeks, and sixty two, we must grant it to be in the first or second year
of the last week, whereunto add the three years and an half of his Preaching,
and the remnant Fraction of one year or two can no way disturb the account,
there being nothing more frequent, then the casting in of such parcels of time
to complete and fill up an entire and round number. Here then must we fix the
end of four hundred and ninety years, in the death of the Messiah, and so
wholly lay aside the account of them, who would extend the time determined unto
the desolation of the City and Temple.

years before stated, the sum of thirty seven years, which ensued after the
death of our Savior, until the destruction of Jerusalem; and the remnant is
five hundred sixty two years. Now five hundred sixty two years exceeds the
number of four hundred ninety stated in Daniels Vision, seventy two years. It
appears then, that the beginning and ending of the seventy Weeks, cannot be the
Decree of Cyrus, and the death of our Savior; there being seventy two years
between them, more then the Weeks contain, or can be extended unto. The end we
have already fixed from the Text, and therefore it does not appear that their
date and rise can be taken from the Decree of Cyrus. Sundry things are offered
to disintangle us from this difficulty.

The most learned Reynolds in his Praelaections on the Apocryphal Books,
allowing our account abovementioned, as to the substance of it, especially
that which concerns the Persian Empire, about which alone there is any
considerable difference, resolves yet at length, that the number of seventy
Weeks, which is a round complete number, is put for an uncertain number,
thereabouts, more or less, over or under, not much varying from it. And on this
supposition, he dates the beginning of the Weeks in the Decree of Cyrus. To
confirm his opinion, he gives sundry instances of this kind of computation in
the Scripture, and contends that the particular reason of limiting the whole
time unto seventy Weeks, was to make it answer unto the seventy years captivity
that immediately preceded it. The time to follow being declared to be just
seven times as much.

This Interpretation of words, might it be admitted, would, I confess, solve
all difficulties, profane accounts from all appearance of enterfering. But
there are two reasons, upon the account whereof I cannot assent unto it. The
first is, because indeed there is no other instance in the Scripture to give
countenance unto it; namely, wherein a number of years coming so far short of
the true and exact account, as this does, is yet put for the whole; especially
considering this number is given out for this very purpose, that men might
aright compute it, and so come to know the time of its expiration. But to name
490, for 562, seems rather to be a conjecture, then a Prophecy. This may then
be the condition of some few odd years, that may be cast in unto a full round
number, but of so considerable a part of the whole as 72 is, there is no reason
to suppose it so disposed of.

Secondly, The word used by the Angel to express the limitation of this time
(...) plainly proves that a precise duration of time, and number of years is
signified. The Vulgar Latin renders that word abbreviate, shortened, or cut
short. And a learned man of our own approves of that interpretation of it, in
opposition unto our own Translation, and that of Junius. De annis (says he)
porro loquitur signanter Propheta quod sint, non decisi, (as Junius) non
determinati (as ours) apud Deum statuti, ( quod tamen verum erat) sed quod
erant abbreviati quemadmodum transtulit doctissimus interpres vetus. Mon. App.
ad Orig. Eccl. And thereon disputes at large, how the years are said to be
shortened; and yet concludes, dicuntur autem abbreviatae hebdomadae, ^o quod
erant decisae and determinatae; as though shortened or abbreviated was the
proper sense of the word, only it might be interpreted determined; or that the
days are said to be shortened, because they were determined.

But the truth is (...) does not signify to abbreviate or make short; and all
the reason given to show why the times here are said to be shortened, are
perfectly cast away. It is in this place only used in the Scripture, and that
in the singular number joined with a Noun of the plural, to intimate that every
week of the whole number was limited and determined, and cut out, as is usual
in the Hebrews. Among the Rabbis, it is to cut off; and from it is (...) a
piece cut off, as (...), a piece of fles^ cut off, and (...), is a cutting, or
incision. So that the word in its precise signification, is cut out, or cut
off, that is set apart, limited, or determined. A portion of time cut out,
limited and apportioned unto the end, for the accomplishment of the work
foretold. Now there is nothing more contrary unto a precise determination of
time, then that a certain number of years should be named to signify an
uncertain, and that so exceeding distant from the exact account, as 490 years
are from 562. So that here is no place for the conjecture of that most learned
and renowned person.

The Jews take another course to solve this difficulty, as also to give some
countenance Chaldaeans, and ending them in the desolation of the second house,
by the Romans; for they will allow no more Kings of Persia, then are mentioned
in the Scripture, nor that they reigned any longer then they find mention
therein of the years of their Reign: As though whether they did good or evil
toward Jerusalem, it was fatal unto them; so that they must needs die
immediately upon it. Thus they allow not above four or five Kings of Persia at
most, and thereby take in the duration of that Empire from two hundred years
and upwards, unto fifty years at the most. But this supposition stands in open
contradiction to all generally allowed computation of time in the world: And
not only so, but it excludes all considerations of things done, as notorious to
mankind, as that ever there was such a thing as the Persian Empire. Of this
nature are the transactions and wars with other Nations, especially the
Graecians, which fell not out in the days of any of the Kings mentioned in the
Scripture; especially that famous expedition of Xerxes, which the whole world
looked on, and waited for its event. And yet I acknowledge that this
imagination might deserve consideration, could it pretend that the Books of
Ezra and Nehemiah did intentionally give us an account and History of the
Persian Empire, and the Reign of the Kings thereof, as some Books do of the
Kings of Israel and Judah. But whereas it is evident, that their design being
quite otherwise, and that they only occasionally mention some of the Kings of
Persia, and some years of their Reign, as they related unto the state and
actions of the people of the Jews: It is no less madness and folly to contend
from thence, that there were no more Kings of Persia, then are mentioned in
them, and that they reigned no longer then is in them expressed, then it would
be to say that there were never above three or four Kings of the Assyrian
Empire, because there are no more mentioned in the Scripture, and so many of
them are spoken of: This (...) is beneath all consideration.

Cyrus, and to make 490 years the exact measure of the time from thence unto
the death of Messiah, and not being able to disprove the computation from
Alexander unto that time, fall also upon the Persian Empire, and cut it short
above fifty years of the true account of its duration, to fit it unto the place
and measure provided for it. To this end, they reject the accounts of the
Chaldaeans, Graecians and Romans, concerning the time of its continuance, as
fabulous, and give us a new arbitrary account of the Reign of these Kings whom
they will allow.

This course steers Beroaldus, Broughton, Genebrard, and Willet, with sundry
others. And the truth is, were the supposition once cleared, that the Decree or
Commandment mentioned by Gabriel, must needs be given out by Cyrus, there were
some color for offering of this violence, unto all consent of time, with
account of things done, written by men prudent and sober in their own days.
But this is so far from being a basis or foundation sufficient to warrant such
a procedure, that take it nakedly of it self without the burden upon it, and it
is destitute of all probability. The word, Decree, or Commandment mentioned
unto Daniel, is that for the building of Jerusalem; that is the restoring of it
into a condition of rule and government; that is the building of a City, and
not only the setting up of houses. Consequent unto this, there building of the
walls also for the defense of the people is mentioned. Of this it is said, that
it should fall out in a troublesome time, or a time of streights, as
accordingly it did fall out in the days of Nehemiah. In the whole there is not
the least mention of building the Temple, which had it been intended, could not
I suppose have been omitted. But in the Decree of Cyrus, the principal thing
mentioned and aimed at, is the re-edification of the Temple, the City and the
Walls thereof being not spoken of in it, as may be seen in the first of Ezra at
large.

It seems then evident, that the Decree mentioned by Daniel for the building of
the City and Walls, not the Temple, and that given out by Cyrus, for the
building of the Temple, and not the City and Walls, were diverse. Besides this
Decree of Cyrus, although foretold long before, and made famous because it was
the entrance into the peoples return and settlement, yet it took effect for so
short a space of time, being obstructed within less then three years, and
utterly frustrated within four or five, that it is not likely to be the date of
this Prophecy, which seems to take place from some good settlement of the
people. That alone which is pleaded with any color for this Decree of Cyrus is
the praediction recorded, Isa. 44.28. It is prophesied of him, that he should
say to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundations shall
be laid: But yet neither is it here foretold that Cyrus should make any Decree
for the building of Jerusalem; or that it should be done in his days, as
indeed it was not until an hundred years after, as it is evident from the story
in Nehemiah. The whole intention of this Prophecy, is only that he should cause
the people to be set at liberty from their captivity, and give them leave to
return to Jerusalem, which he did accordingly, and thereupon both the building
of the City and Temple ensued, though not without the intervention of other
Decrees; of which afterward.

The only Argument wherewith this opinion of the duration of the Persian Empire
Nehemiah. In Ezra 2. v. 2. he is reckoned among them that came up with
Zerubbabel unto Jerusalem in the first year of Cyrus. Then he may rationally be
supposed to have been at least twenty or twenty five years of age. And it seems
from the last Chapter of Nehemiah, that he lived unto the reign of Darius
Codomanus: for Sanballat the Hornoite assisted Alexander in his Wars. And
Jaddua whom he mentions Chap. 12.11. was High Priest, when Alexander came to
Jerusalem, as appears from Josephus. Now if the Persian Empire continued for
the space of two hundred years, which we have allotted unto it, then he who
went to Jerusalem in the first year of Cyrus, and continued unto the reign of
Codomanus, must needs live two hundred and twenty years at the least, which is
not credible, that any one should do in those days. And therefore the space of
time must needs be shorter then is pretended, at least fifty or sixty years.
But indeed there is no force in this exception. For First, There is no
necessity why we should conclude that Nehemiah wrote that Genealogy, Chap. 12.
where mention is made of Jaddua, who was afterward High Priest, v. 11. for he
ends his story in the High Priesthood of Eliashib, Chap. 13.28. who was Great
Grandfather unto Jaddua, as appears, Chap. 12.10, 11. Or however if he did,
Jaddua might then be a Child, and it may be not come unto the High Priesthood
until fifty or sixty years after; after the death of Eliashib, Joiada, and
Jonathan his Great Grandfather, Grandfather, and Father. So that no evidence
can be taken from hence for the continuance of his life unto the end of the
Persian Monarchy. A^^ for that Sanballat mentioned by Josephus in the time of
Alexander, it is not improbable, but that he might name him as the head of the
Samaritans, there being no name of any other after him left upon record.

(2.) There is no reason to think that the Nehemiah, mentioned Ezra 2. v. 2.
who came up with Zerubbabel, was that Nehemiah who was afterward Governor of
Judah, and whose actions we have written probably the most part by himself, no
more then there is to think that the Seraiah there mentioned, was the Seraiah
that was slain at the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The Daniel
mentioned, Ezra 8.2. was not Daniel the Prophet, nor Baruch, Nehem. 10.6. that
Baruch who was the Scribe of Jeremiah: nor that Jeremiah mentioned, Neh. 12. v.
11. Jeremiah the Prophet. Besides Ezra is said to come up with Zerubbabel,
Nehem. 12.1. which either must not be that Ezra the great Scribe, or he must be
said to come up with Zerubbabel, because he followed him on the same errand and
account. It cannot be denied, but that there were sundry men at the same time
of the same name; as the same person had sundry names, much more might several
men have the same name in successive generations. Thus after Joshua was High
Priest, there was another Joshua chief of the Levites, Neh. 12.7, 8. And that
about this time there were two Zerubbabels one of the house of Nathan, the
other of the posterity of Solomon, we shall make it appear in the consideration
of the Genealogies of Matthew and Luke. (3.) That this was not the Nehemiah
that went up with Zerubbabel, the sacred story it self gives us sufficient
evidence. For (1.) He was ignorant of the state and condition of Jerusalem when
he lived in the Court of Persia, Chap. 1. had he been there before, and seen
their condition, and but newly returned unto Shushan, he could not have been so
surprised as he was ver. 4. upon the account then given him thereof. (2.) Chap.
7. v. 5, 6. He speaks of it as a great matter, that he should find a Roll or
Register of them that came first up to Jerusalem with Zerubbabel in the days
of Cyrus, amongst whom that Nehemiah was one. Now if this had been himself,
what reason had he to mention it as a great discovery, which he could not but
by his own knowledge be full well acquainted withal. Unto what time soever
then the period of his life was extended, there is no color to surmise, that
he was amongst them who returned from captivity in the days of Cyrus.

The account therefore before laid down being established, it is certain
enough, that Decree mentioned by Gabriel, from the going forth whereof, the
seventy weeks are to be dated, was not that of the first of Cyrus, for the
return of the Captivity and building of the Temple. For from thence, the period
would ensue long before the just time allotted unto it, yea, before the
beginning of the reign of Herod the great, where Eusebius would have them to
expire. We must therefore enquire for some other Word, Decree or Commandment,
from whence to date the four hundred and ninety years enquired after.

Persia in reference unto the Jews was that of Darius made in his second year,
when the work of the building of the Temple was carried on through the Prophecy
of Haggai and Zechariah. This is the Decree or Commandment mentioned in Ezra 6.
granted by Darius, upon appeal made unto him from his neighboring Governors;
and it was a mere revival of the Decree of Cyrus, the Roll whereof was found in
Achmetha in the Province of the Medes, v. 2. And this is that which Haggai and
Zechariah relate unto, dating their Prophecies, from the second year of Darius,
Hag. 1.2, 10. Zech. 1.1. Upon the Roll of the Kings of Persia, we find three
called by the name of Darius, or Darianes, as the Jews term him. (1.) Darius
Hystaspes who succeeded Camhyses, by the election of the Princes of Persia,
upon the killing of Smordes Magus the Usurper. (2.) Darius Nothus who succeeded
Artaxerxes Longimanus. (3.) Darius Codomanus in whom the Persian Empire had its
period by Alexander the great. That the last of these can be no way concerned
in the Decree, is notorious. The two others are disputed. Most learned men
grant that it was Darius Hystaspes which was the Author of this Decree; and
indeed that it was so, at least, that it can be ascribed unto no other Darius,
we shall afterward undeniably prove. And it is not unlikely that he was
inclined unto this favor and moderation toward the Jews by his general design
to relieve men from under the oppressions that were upon them during the reign
of Cambyses, and to renew the Acts of Cyrus their first Emperor, who was
renowned amongst them, to ingratiate himself unto Mankind, and confirm himself
in that Kingdom whereunto he came not by succession. And it is not improbable,
but that this was he; who was the H^sband of Hester, though if so, it was not
until after this Decree made in the second year of his reign, the putting away
of Vashti happening in his third, Hest. 1.3. Now Cyrus reigned after his first
Decree three years; Cambyses with S^erdes eight, whom succeeded this Darius,
who issued out this Decree in the second year of his reign; that is at most
thirteen years after the death of Cyrus; or if with some we should grant Cyrus
to have reigned twenty years over the whole Empire, it was but nineteen or
twenty years at the most. Now the whole sum of years from the first of Cyrus,
to the cutting off the Messiah we have manifested to have been five hundred
sixty two: deduct thirteen years from five hundred sixty two, and there yet
remains five hundred forty nine years, which exceeds the number of years
enquired after fifty nine years, neither does the addition of seven years to
the reign of Cyrus, make any alteration in this general account. For on that
supposition, his first year must be taken seven years backwards, and the space
of time from thence unto the end of the weeks will be five hundred sixty nine
years, and the remnant from Darius, as we declared before, five hundred forty
nine years. So that neither can this be the Commandment intended, there being
from the going forth of it, unto the cutting off of the Messiah not four
hundred and ninety years, but as is declared five hundred forty nine. Besides
indeed this Decree of Darius was no new command, nor had any respect unto the
restoration of Jerusalem, but was a mere renovation, or a new acknowledgement
of the Decree of Cyrus about the re-edifying of the Temple, and so doubtless
was not designed as the signal Epoch of the time here limited and determined.

Scaliger who would date the weeks from this Decree of Darius, knowing that the
time would not suit with the reign of Darius Hystaspes contends that it was
Nothus who succeeded Longimanus that was the Author of it, and extends the
whole time or space of four hundred and ninety years, to the destruction of the
City and Temple, that space of time, according to his computation, being
elapsed from the second year of Darius.

But the truth is, as may be seen from our former account, from the second year
of Darius Nothus to the destruction of the City was but four hundred and eighty
years short of the whole sum. Besides we have before proved from the Text,
that the time determined, was to expire in the death of the Messiah. And there
are sundry other circumstances which plainly evince the inconsistency of this
computation: for from the first of Cyrus, when the first command went forth for
the building of the Temple, whereupon the work of it was begun, unto the second
year of Nothus are fully an hundred and eight years. And it is not credible
that the work of building of the Temple should so long be hindered, and then
come to perfection by them who first began it. For on this supposition
Zerubba^^^ and Joshua must live at Jerusalem after their return, above an
hundred years, and then take in hand again the work which they had so long
deserted. And this is yet more incredible upon his own opinion that Xerxes was
the Husband of Hester, about fifty years before the Reign of Nothus. When it is
not likely but the Jews would have attempted, and not have been denied their
liberty of going on with their work.

Neither is it consistent with the Prophecy of Jeremiah, that the Temple should
lie waste so long a space, that is about a hundred and seventy years. Again,
Haggai does plainly declare, that when the work of the Temple was carrying on
in the second year of Darius, that many were yet alive, who had seen the first
Temple, cap. 2.3. As multitudes were upon the laying of its foundation in the
days of Cyrus, Ezra 3.12. And this was impossible, had it been in the days of
Nothus, an hundred and sixty, or an hundred and seventy years after it was
destroyed. And Scaliger does plainly wrest the words of the Text, when he would
have them pronounced by way of supposition; if any were then alive who saw the
first house in its glory: for Haggai does plainly relate unto the distemper of
the people upon the laying of the foundation of the house mentioned in the
forenamed place of Ezra; and the words themselves will bear no other sense;
(...), Who is among you that is left, that saw this house in her glory. He
speaks of them who were yet left, and remaining; and spoke to them, to remove
and take away their complaint and repinings. Moreover that Artaxerxes, in whose
days Ezra and Nehemiah went up to Jerusalem, was Longimanus, who reigned
before Nothus, and not Memor, who succeeded him, as will afterward appear: Now
this Artaxerxes was long after that Darius, upon whose warranty the building of
the Temple was finished, Ezra 7.1. Which certainly could not be Nothus who was
his successor.

It appears then that Darius Nothus was not the Author of the Decree mentioned,
as Darius Hystaspes, who was the Author of it.

After this, there is mention made of two other Commands or Decrees relating to
the Artaxerxes, one in the seventh year of his Reign unto Ezra, chap. 7.7. The
other in the twentieth year of his Reign, unto Nehemiah, chap. 2.1. And from
one of these must the account enquired after be dated. Now, supposing that one
of these Decrees must be intended, it is evident that it was Longimanus, and
not Memor, who was the Author of them: For from the seventh year of Memor,
which was the second of the ninety fifth Olympiad, unto the eighteenth year of
Tiberius Caesar, wherein our Savior suffered, being the third year of the two
hundred and second Olympiad, are only four hundred twenty eight years, sixty
two years short of the whole, or four hundred and ninety. Now these sixty two
years added to the beginning of the account, from the seventh of Memor, fall in
exactly on the seventh of Longimanus; from the seventh of Longimanus then to
the seventh of Memor are sixty two years, and from the seventh of Memor to the
eighteenth of Tiberius are four hundred twenty eight years, in the whole, four
hundred and ninety. The whole number enquired after.

It was then this Decree of Longimanus, that was intended by the Angel Gabriel:
for Ezra unto Jerusalem, and unto that work which he afterward commissionated
Nehemiah to carry on and perfect, unto the cutting off of the Messiah, are
exactly seventy Weeks, or four hundred and ninety years, as may appear from the
accounts formerly insisted on and declared: From the first of Cyrus, supposing
him to reign but three years over the whole Empire, unto the death of Christ,
there was, as we have proved, five hundred sixty two years: From the first of
the same Cyrus, unto the seventh of Longimanus, were seventy two years, which
being deducted from the whole of five hundred sixty two years, the remainder is
four hundred and ninety; which space of time, how it was apportioned between
the Persian, Grecian, Hasmonaean, Herodian, and Roman Rule, we have before
declared.

And there wants not reason to induce us to fix on this Decree, rather than any
other, Ezra had great favor with the King, and that he had convinced him of
the greatness and power of that God whom he served, chap. 8.22. Besides, it was
not a mere proclamation of liberty, like that of Cyrus, which was renewed by
Darius; but a Decree, a Law made by the King and his seven Counselors, chap.
7.14. The highest and most irrefragable Legislative Power amongst the Medes and
Persians. Moreover, with the Decree he had a formal Commission, where he is
said not only to have leave to go, but to be sent by the King and his Council.
Besides, the former Decrees barely respected the Temple; and it seems that in
the execution of them, the people had done little more then built the bare
fabric, all things as to the true order of the Worship of God remaining in
great confusion, and the civil state utterly neglected. But now in this
Commission of Ezra, he is not only directed to set the whole Worship of God in
order, at the charge of the King, chap. 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. But
also that he should appoint and erect a Civil Government and Magistracy with
supreme power over the lives, liberties, and estate of men, to be exercised as
occasion required, v. 25, 26. Which alone, and no other, was the building of
the City mentioned by Gabriel; for it is not walls and houses, but Policy, Rule
and Government, that makes and constitutes a City.

necessity of this work, was then put upon the spirits of the Governors of the
Persian Empire; for the King himself he calls Ezra the Scribe of the Law of the
God of Heaven, owning him therein for the true God; for he who is the God of
Heaven, is God alone, all others are but the dunghill gods of the Earth, v. 12.
Again, he declares that he was persuaded, that if this work was not done, there
would be wrath from Heaven upon himself, his Kingdom, and his Son, v. 23, The
seven Counselors they join in that Law, v. 14. And the mighty Princes of the
Kingdom assisted Ezra in his work, v. 28. So that no command that concerned
that people before or after, was accompanied with that solemnity, or gave such
glory unto God as this did. Besides, the whole work of the Reformation of the
Church, the restitution of the Worship of God, the recollection and recognition
of the sacred Oracles was begun, carried on and finished by this Ezra, as we
elsewhere at large have declared. All which considerations falling in with the
account before insisted on, makes it manifest that it was this, and no other
Decree that was intended by the Angel Gabriel; and from thence unto the death
of the Messiah, was seventy weeks, or four hundred and ninety years, the just
and true limitation of which time we have been ^nquiring after.

Daniel against the Jews, does not depen^ on t^^s Chronological Computation of
the time determined. All then that I aime^ at it, was to vindicate it in
general from such perplexities, as whereby they pretend to render the whole
place inargumentative: And this we have not only done, but also ^o st^^ed the
account, as that they are not able from any records of times past, to lay any
one considerable objection against it, or which may not be easily solved:
Return we now to what remains of our former designed discourse.

Exercitatio XVI.
Other Considerations proving the Messiah to be long since come. Fluctuation of
the Jews about the Person and Work of the Messiah. Their state and condition in
the world for sixteen Ages. Promises of the Covenant made with them of old. All
fulfilled unto the expiration of that Covenant. Not now made good unto them.
Reason thereof. The Promise of the Land of Canaan failed. Of protection and
Temporal deliverance. Spirit of Prophecy departed. Covenant expired. Jews
exceptions. Their prosperity. Their sins. Of their forefathers; of themselves.
Vanity of these exceptions. Concessions of the Ancient Jews. Folly of
Talmudical Doctors. Traditions of the Birth of the Messiah before the
destruction of the second Temple. Tradition of the School of Elias; about the
worlds continuance. Answers of the Jews unto our Arguments, by way of
concession. The time prolonged, because of their sins. Vanity of this pretense.
Not the Jews only but the Gentiles concerned in the coming of the Messiah. The
Promise not Conditional. Limitations of time not capable of conditions. No
mention of any such condition. The condition supposed overthr^ws the Promise.
The Jews in the use of this plea, self condemned. The Covenant overthrown by
it. The Messiah may never come upon it.

UNto the invincible Testimonies before insisted on, we may add some other Jews
themselves, that are both suitable unto their conviction, and of use to
strengthen the faith of them who do believe. And the first thing that offers
its self unto us, is their miserable fluctuation and uncertainty in the whole
Doctrine about the Messiah ever since the time of his coming and their
rejection of him.

That the great fundamental of their profession from the days of Abraham, and
that Messiah, we have before sufficiently proved. Until the time of his
coming, this they were unanimous in, as also in their desires and expectations
of his Advent. Since that time, as they have utterly lost all faith in him, as
to the great end for which he was promised, so all truth as to the Doctrine
concerning his Person, Office and Work plentifully delivered in the Old
Testament.

In their Talmud. Tractat. Sanedr. they do nothing but wrangle, conjecture and
contend about him, and that under such notions and apprehensions of him as the
Scripture gives no countenance unto. When he shall come, and how, where he
shall be born, and what he shall do, they wrangle much about, but are not able
to determine any thing at all; at which uncertaintie, the Holy Ghost never left
the Church in things of so great importance. Hence some of them adhered to
Barcosby for the Messiah, a bloody Rebel; and some of them in after ages to
David el David a wandering Jugler, and Moses Cretensis, and sundry other
pretenders have they given up themselves to be deluded by (as of late unto the
foolish Apostate Sabadia with his false Prophets, R. Levi and Nathan) who never
made the least appearance of any one character of the true Messiah, as
Maimonides confesses and bewaileth. The Disputes of their late Masters, have
not any thing more of certainty or consistency, then those of their Talmudical
Progenitors. And this at length has driven them, to the present miserable
relief of their infidelity and d^spair, asserting that he shall not come until
immediately before the Resurrection of the dead, only they take care that some
small time may be left for them to ^njoy wealth and pleasure, with dominion
over the Edomites and Ishmalites, that is, Christians and Turks under whom they
live, as yet full of thoughts of revenge and retaliation in the days of their
Messiah. Now whereunto can any man ascribe this fluctuation and uncertainty, in
and about that which was the great fundamental Article of the faith of their
Forefathers, and their utter renuntiation of the true Notion and Knowledge of
the Messiah. But unto this, that having long ago renounced him, they exercise
their thoughts and expectation about a Chimoera of their own Brains, which
having no substance in its self, nor found^tion in any work or word of God, can
afford them no certainty or satisfaction in their contemplation about it?

State and condition of this people for the space of above sixteen hundred and
thirty years, gives evidence to the truth contended for. The whole time of the
continuance of their Church, State and Worship, from the giving of the Law on
Mount Sinai, to the final destruction of the City and Temple by Titus, was not
above sixteen hundred and thirty years, or sixteen hundred and forty upon the
longest account, allowing all their former Captivities and intermissions of
Government into the reckoning. They have then continued in a state of
dispersion and rejection from God as long as ever they were accepted for his
Church and people, what their condition has been in the world for these
sixteen Ages is known unto all, and what may be thence concluded, we shall
distinctly consider.

Jews to be his people, he did it by a special and solemn Covenant. In this
Covenant he gave them promises, which were all made good unto them unto the
utmost date, and expiration of it in the coming of the Messiah. And they
principally respected these three heads. First, That they should possess the
Land of Canaan, and there enjoy that Worship which he had prescribed unto them.
See Exodus 6.4. Chap. 34.10, 11. Levit. 26.8, 9. Deuteronomy. 18.18. Chap. 29.13. Psalm
105.10, 11. Secondly, That he would defend them from their Adversaries, or if
at any time he gave them up to be punished and chastized for their sins: Yet
upon their repentance and supplications made unto him, he would deliver them
from their Oppressors. Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Nehem. 1.9. Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36, 37.
1 Kings 8.34. Thirdly, That he would continue Prophets among them to instruct
them in his will, and to reclaim them from their miscarriage, Deuteronomy. 18.18. The
whole Pentateuch, all their Divine Writings are full of Promises about these
things. And as we said until the time limited for the expiration of that
special Covenant, they were all made good unto them. That it was to expire,
themselves are forced to acknowledge, because of the express promise, of a new,
or another Covenant to be made not like unto it; Jer. 32. The Land given them
by inheritance, and the place designed for the Worship of God therein, were
continued in their possession, notwithstanding the mighty Attempts made by the
Nations of the world for their extirpation. And when at any time he gave them
up for a season, unto the power of their Adversaries, because of their sins and
provocations, as unto the Babylonians in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, and
afterward unto the Graecians or Syrians in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes:
yet still he foretold them of their condition, promised them deliverance from
it, and in a short time accomplished it, though it could not be done without
the ruin of other Kingdoms and Empires. The Oppression of the Babylonians
continued but seventy years; and the persecution of Antiochus prevailed only
for three years and half. Prophets also he raised up unto them in their several
Generations: yea, in the time of their great distress; as Jeremiah at the time
of their desolation: Ezekiel and Daniel in Babylon: Haggai and Zechariah, in
their poverty after their re^^rn, which dispensation ceased not, until they
pointed out unto them the end of the Covenant, and told them that the Messiah
should come speedily and suddenly unto his Temple, Mal. 3.1, 2.

Jews (I hope) will not deny, but that God is faithful still, and as able to
accomplish his Promises, as he was in the days of old. Let us then enquire
whether they enjoy any one thing promised them in the Covenant, or any thing
relating thereunto, or have done so since the days wherein, as we have proved,
the Messiah was to come. (1.) For the Country given unto them by Covenant, and
the place of Gods Worship therein, the whole world knows, and themselves
continually complain, that strangers possess it, they being utterly extirpated
and cast out of it. It is with them all, as it was with Abraham before the
grant of the inheritance was accomplished, they have not possession of one foot
in it in any propriety, no not for a burying place. Their Temple is destroyed,
and all their attempts for the restoration of it, which God so blessed of old,
frustrated, yea ceased. Their daily Sacrifice is ceased, and whatever they
substitute in the room of it, is an open abomination unto the Lord. We need not
insist on these things. The Stories of their ruin, exile, vain attempts to
recover their Land, of their Forefathers, of the utter pollution of the places
of their Worship are known to themselves, and all men that take care to know
ought of these things. Where is now the Covenant of the Land of Canaan? Was it
to be absolutely everlasting? Whence comes it to pass, that the great promise
of it does utterly fail? Was it to expire? What period can be assigned unto its
duration, but only that of the coming of the Messiah and the establishment of a
New Covenant in him? Is not the denial hereof, the ready way to make the men of
the world turn Atheists, and to look upon the Scriptures of the Old Testament
as a mere Fable, when they shall be taught that the Promises contained in it,
were but conjectures, deceitful words, that came to nothing.

Again, How are they delivered from their Adversaries? How are they defended
Messiah, why are they not delivered? What word is there in the Law, or the
Prophets, that they shall not be delivered out of Temporal distresses any other
way but by the Messiah? has it not been otherwise with them? Were they not
delivered from former Oppressions and Captivities, by other means? Could not
God of old have dispossessed the Romans of the Land of Canaan, and afterward
the Saracens, and can he not now the Turks, as easily as he did the
Babylonians, Persians and Graecians? If the Covenant of those promises be not
expired in the coming of the Messiah, what account can they give of these
things?

Further, where are the Prophets, promised unto them? can they name one since
the John Baptist, whom they owned for a Prophet? has any one amongst them
pretended to any such thing, whom the event, and themselves thereon have not
discovered to be an Impostor? Such was Theudas, and Moses Cretensis, with some
few others. Is it not strange, that they who never long wanted a Prophet in
their streights and difficulties, and sometimes had many of them together,
should now in their utmost misery, wanderings and darkness, be left utterly
destitute of any one for a thousand six hundred years, and upwards? It is the
general confession of all their Masters, that they have left the Holy Ghost, or
Spirit of Prophecy. After the finishing of the second Temple, they say, and
they say truly, that Prophecy ceased. (...); says Saadias Haggeon on Daniel
the 9th. Israel had no Prophet after the finishing of the second house, but
those who enjoyed the Bath Kol. But what is now become of that Bath Kol also
for a thousand six hundred years? Is not all pretense of Revelations utterly
departed? what then is become of that Covenant wherein it was promised unto
them? yea we know that they have not only left the Holy Ghost, as a spirit of
Prophecy; but also as a spirit of grace and supplications; so that besides a
few superstitious forms repeated by number and tale; there is no such thing as
prayer amongst them; as some of their late Masters have acknowledged.

What reason now can be assigned of this state and condition of things, but
only Covenant wherein the good things mentioned were promised unto them, had a
time limited unto it, when it was to give place unto a new one of another
nature. And this the Jews acknowledge is to take date from the coming of the
Messiah. God is faithful, unchangeable, able to make good his promises and his
word to the utmost. The present Jews are no less Jews of the carnal seed of
Abraham, then their forefathers were. It cannot be then but that the Covenant
made with them, until the coming of the Messiah, is long since expired. And
therefore also, that he is long since come.

Two things in general, the Jews reply unto these considerations, the one, as
they prosperity of some of their Nation in this or that Country, with the
honor and riches, that some of them have attained unto. Unto this purpose,
they tell us stories of their number and wealth in the East, out of Benjamin
Tudulensis and others, with the riches of some of them in the Western parts of
the world also. But themselves know that none of these things, not one of them,
was promised unto them in the Covenant that God made with them upon Mount
Horeb. All the promises of it respected the Land of Canaan, with their
preservation there, or return thither. What they get abroad in the world,
elsewhere under the power and dominion of other Nations, befalls them in a way
of common providence, as the like things do the vilest wretches of the earth,
and not in a way of any especial promise. And therefore when Daniel and
Nehemiah, with others, were exalted unto glory and riches among the Babylonians
and Persians, yet they rested not therein, but pleaded the Covenant of God for
their restoration unto the Land promised unto Abraham. And to suppose that the
wealth of a few Jews up and down the world, gotten by Physic, or Usury, or
farming of Customs, is an accomplishment of the promises before insisted on, is
openly to despise the promises, and the Author of them?

secondly, by them, That it is for their sins that the coming of the Messiah is
thus retarded and prolonged. But it is not about the coming of the Messiah,
directly and immediately, that they are pressed withal in these
considerations; that which we enquire about, is their present state, and their
long continuance therein, with the reason of it; only aiming to find out and
discover the true cause thereof: This, they say, is because of their sins; and
this also in general we grant, But yet must further enquire, what they intend
thereby: I ask therefore whether it be for the sins of their forefathers, who
lived before the last final dispersion, or for their sins, who have since lived
in their several Generations, that they are thus utterly forsaken. If they
shall say, it is for the sins of their forefathers, as Manasseh plainly does,
Quest. 43. in Genesis p. 65. And sundry others of them do the same, then I desire
to know whether they think God to be changed from what he was of old, or
whether he be not still every way the same as to all the promises of the
Covenant; supposing they will say that he is still the same, I desire to know
whether he did not in former times, in the days of their Judges and Kings,
especially in the Babylonian Captivity punish them for their sins, with that
contemperation of Justice and mercy, which was agreeable unto the Tenor of the
Covenant? This I suppose they will not deny, the Scripture speaking so fully
unto it, and the Righteousness of God requiring it. I desire then to know what
were the sins of their forefathers, before the destruction of the second
Temple, and your final dispersion, which so much, according to the Rules of the
Covenant, exceeded the sins of them who lived before the desolation of the
first Temple, and the captivity that ensued; for we know that the sins of those
former were punished only with a dispersion, which some of them saw the
beginning and ending of; the duration of the whole of it not exceeding seventy
years, after which they were returned again to their own Land.

But the captivity and dispersion which has befallen them upon the sins of
those who lived before the destruction of the second Temple, as they were in
their manner and entrance much more terrible, dreadful and tremendious then the
former; so they have now continued in them above twenty times seventy years
without any promise of a recovery. God being still the same that he was, if the
Old Covenant with the Jews be still in force. The difference between this
dispensation must arise from the difference of the sins of the one sort of
persons, and the other. Now of all the sins, which on the general account of
the Law of God, the sons of men can make themselves guilty of, Idolatry
doubtless is the greatest: The choosing of other Gods is a complete
renunciation of the true one. And therefore comprised in it all other sins what
ever, for casting off the yoke of God, and our dependence on him as the first
cause, and last end of all, it does that in gross, and by wholesale, which
other sins do only by retail; and therefore is this sin forbidden in the head
of the Law, as intimating, that if the command of owning the true God, and him
alone, be not adhered unto, it is to no purpose to apply our selves unto them
that follow. Now it is known to all that this sin of Idolatry abounded amongst
them under the first Temple, and that also for a long continuance, attended
with Violence, Adulteries, Persecution and Oppression, but that those under the
second Temple had contracted the guilt of this sin, the present Jews do not
pretend; and we know that they hated all appearance of it. Nor are they able to
assign any other sins what ever, wherein they went higher in their
provocations, then their Progenitors under the first Temple. What then is the
cause of the different event and success between them before insisted on? It
cannot be, but that either they have contracted the guilt of some sin,
wherewith God was more displeased, then with the Idolatry of their
forefathers, or that the Covenant made with them is expired, or that there
has been a coincidence of both these; and that indeed is the condition of
things with them. The Messiah came, in whom the carnal Covenant was to expire,
and they rejected and slew him, justly deserving their perpetual rejection
from it, and disinheritance.

own sins and the sins of the Generations that succeeded the destruction of the
second Temple, that they are kept thus long in misery and captivity. But we
know, that they use this plea only as a covering for their obstinate blindness
and infidelity. Take them from this dispute, and they are continually boasting
of their Righteousness and Holiness, for they do not only assure us that they
are better then all the world besides, but also much better then their
forefathers, as Manasse plainly affirms in the place before cited, and that on
the day of Expiation, that is, once a year; they are as holy as the Angels in
Heaven: There are therefore one or two things which I would desire to know of
them, as to this pretense of their own sins, which on another account must also
be afterward insisted on.

First Then, whereas it is a principle of their faith, That all Jews excepting
Apostates are so holy and righteous, that they shall all be saved, have all a
portion in the blessed world to come, whence is it that none of them, are so
Righteous as to be returned into the Land of Canaan? Is it not strange, that
that Righteousness which serves the turn to bring them all to Heaven, will not
serve to bring any one of them to Jerusalem. This latter being more openly and
frequently promised unto them then the former. I know not how to solve this
difficulty; ipsi viderint.

Again, Repentance from their sins is a thing wholly in their own power, or it
is not; if they shall say, it is in their own power, as generally they do; I
desire to know why they defer it? The brave imaginations that they have of the
levelling of Mountains, the dividing of Rivers, the singing of Woods, and
dancing of Trees, of the Coaches and Chariots of Kings to carry them, as also
their riding upon the shoulders of their rich neighbors into Jerusalem, the
Conquest of the world, the eating of Behemoth, and drinking the Wine of
Paradise, the Riches, Wives, and long Life that they shall have in the days of
the Messiah, do make them as they pretend, patiently endure all their long
exile, and calamity. And can this not prevail with them for a little
Repentance, which they may perform when they please, with a wet finger, and so
obtain them all in a trice? If they are so evidently blind, foolish and mad, in
and about that which they look upon as their only great concernment in this
world, have they not great cause to be jealous, lest they are also equally
blind in other things, and particularly in that wherein we charge them with
blindness? This it seems is the State of these things. Unless they repent, the
Messiah will not come; unless he come, they cannot be delivered out of their
calamity nor enjoy the promises. To repent is a thing in their own power,
which yet they had rather endure all miseries, and foregoe all the promises of
God then take in hand, or go through with it. And what shall we say to such a
perverse generation of men, who openly proclaim, that they will live in their
sins, though they have never more to do with God unto eternity. If they shall
say, that Repentance is the gift of God, and that without his pouring forth his
Spirit upon them, they cannot attain unto it, then I desire to know whence it
is that God does not give them Repentance, as he did to their forefathers, if
the Covenant continue established with them, as in former days? From what has
been discoursed, It does sufficiently appear that the state and condition of
the Jews has been such in the world, for these sixteen hundred years, as
manifests the end of their special Covenant to be long since come, and
consequently the Messiah, in whom it was to expire.

There is one of them, a nameless person, not unlearned, who has written
somewhat Portugal Language, which is translated into Latin by Brenius the
Socinian, who gives so satisfactory an Answer in his own conceit, unto this
Argument, that he concludes, that every one who is not obstinate, or blinded
with corrupt affections, must needs acquiesce therein. His confidence, if not
his reasons, deserves our consideration, especially considering that he offers
somewhat new unto us, which their former Masters did not insist upon.

That then which he returns as an Answer, unto the enquiry of the Causes and
Reasons of their present long captivities and misery, is the sins of their
forefathers under the first Temple. The greatness of these sins, he says, is
expressed by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 16.48. As I live, says the Lord God,
Sodom thy Sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as though have done,
thou and thy daughters. To which he adds, Isa. 1.9. where mention is made again
of Sodom. So that this Captivity is to them, in the room of such a destruction,
as Sodom was overthrown withal.

But it may be said, that these sins what ever they were, were expiated in the
Babylonish Captivity, and pardoned unto them upon their return. So that now
they must suffer, on the account of their sins committed under the second
Temple; to which he replies, that this exception is of no force. Nam liberatio
e Babilone nihil aliud suit, quam exploratio, qua Deus experiri voluit, an cum
restitutione Regni and Templi possint abbreviari, and expiari enormia ista,
quae commiscerant, adulterii, homicidii, and Idolatriae peccata; sed pro
antecedentium debitorum solutione, quam prestare debuerunt, nova insuper debita
accumulaverunt. For the deliverance from Babylon was nothing but a trial,
whereby God would make an experiment, whether with the restitution of their
Kingdom and Temple, these enormous sins of Adultery, Murder and Idolatry which
they had committed, might have been cut off and expiated, but instead of a
discharge of their former arrears, which they were obliged unto, they heaped up
new debts by their sins. Thus he. At their deliverance out of Babylon the
people had no discharge of their former sins by the pardon of them; but were
only tried how they would afresh acquit themselves, with a resolution in God,
that if they made not satisfaction, then for those sins, to charge the guilt of
them again upon themselves and all their posterity, for all the generations
that are passed, until this day. But First, This is plainly a fiction of this
man's own devising. Let him produce any one word, from the Scripture where it
treats of these things, in the least giving countenance thereunto; or let him
show, how this procedure is suitable unto the Justice of God, either unto the
general notion that we have of it, or as unto any other instance recorded of it
in the Scripture.

But if these men may fain what they please, there is no doubt but they will
justify themselves and maintain their own cause.

Secondly, Why did none of the latter Prophets whom God granted unto the
people, after their return from Captivity; as Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi
let the people know, that this was the condition of their return into their
Land, but only require of them to walk answerable unto the mercies they had
then received.

Thirdly, As the very nature of the dispensation did declare, that God having
purged out the Rebels of the people, and destroyed them with his sore
judgments, had forgiven their sins, and was returned unto them, in a way of
mercy and grace never to call over their forepast iniquities any more, so the
Prophets that treated concerning that dispensation of God, do in places
innumerable assert the same, and plainly contradict this imagination.

Fourthly, God punishes not the sins of the Fathers upon their children,
unless the Children continue in the sins of their Fathers. This he declares at
large, Ezekiel. 18. Now what were the sins of this people under the first Temple
before their captivity? our Author reckons Adultery, Murder and Idolatry: It is
no doubt but many of them were Adulterers, and that sin among others was
charged on them by the Prophets; but it is evident that their principal ruining
sins were their Idolatry, and persecution or killing of the Prophets. And God
by Ezekiel declares, that in and by their Captivity, he would punish and take
away all their Idolatry, and Adulteries ev^n from the Land of Egypt, or their
beginning to be his people, Chap. 23.11, 27. Now were the Jews, that is, the
body of the people guilty of these sins under the second House? it is known
that from all Idolatry they preserved themselves, which was that sin, that in
an especial manner was their ruin before; and for killing the Pophets, they
acknowledge that after Malachi they had none, so that none could be persecuted
by them, but those whom they will not own to be Prophets: But,

Fifthly, Suppose that all those under the second House continued in the sins
of their forefathers, which yet is false, and denied by themselves as occasion
requires, yet what have the Jews done, for sixteen hundred years since the
destruction of that House? they plead themselves to be holy, and in application
of the Prophecy, Isa. 53. unto themselves, proclaim themselves innocent and
righteous; at least they would not have us to think that the generality of
them, are Adulterers, Murderers and Idolaters: whence is it then that the
punishment of their Fathers sins lies so long on them? What Rule of Justice is
observed herein? What instance of the like dispensation can they produce? for
our parts we affirm, that they continue unto this day in the same sin, for
which their forefathers under the second House were rejected and destroyed,
and so know the righteousness of God in their present captivities and miseries.
Besides,

Sixthly, They say they abhor the sins of their forefathers, repent of them,
and do obtain Remission of sins through their observation of the Law of Moses;
Wherein then is the faithfulness of God in his prom^ses unto them? Why are they
not delivered out of captivity? Why not restored to their Land according to
express Testimonies of the Covenant made with them unto that purpose? There is
no color of truth nor reason therefore in this evasion, which they invented to
countenance themselves in their obstinate blindness and unbelief.

But our Author yet adds an Instance, whereby he hopes to reinforce and confirm
Deus per manus Salamanassani december tribus in captivitatem passus est abduci in
regiones nobis incognitas sexcentis fere annis ante destructionem Templi
secundi, hoc ^^t ante presentem hanc nostram captivitatem, n^cdum in hodiernam
hanc diem in terram si^am reversae aut dominio suo restitutae sunt, quae omnia
speciali Dei Providentia nobis ita ev^nerunt ne quis causam hujus nostrae
captivitatis speciali alicui peccato sub secunda domo commisso imputaret: Cum
december tribus qui tum absuerunt captivitatem pati debent sexcent^s annis
longiorem. God suffered the ten Tribes to be carried captive by Salamanasser
into Countries unknown to us six hundred years before the destruction of the
second Temple, and our present captivity: neither are they yet returned to
their own Land, or restored to their former rule, all which things have
happened unto us, by the especial Providence of God. That n^ne might impute the
cause of the captivity unto any sin committed under the second Temple, seeing
the ten Tribes that were then absent must endure a captivity six hundred years
longer. Neither will this instance yield them the least relief. For (1.) It was
before granted that the sins under the second Temple were even greater then
those under the first, whence the punishment of them was revived, which is here
denied, manif^sting that this is an evasion invented to serve the present turn.
(2.) What ever is pretended, no impartial man that owns the special relation of
that people unto God, and his Covenant with them, can but grant, that their
present rejection is for some outrageous sins breaking the Covenant under the
second Temple, and continued in by themselves unto this day; (3.) The case of
the t^n Tribes, after they had publicly reject^d all that Worship of God, and
all that Government of the people, which was appointed to Type out, and to
continue unto the bringing of the ^^ssiah, is different from that of the other
Tribes, to whom the Promises were appropriated in Judah, and in the house of
David; so that their rejection implies no disannulling of the Covenant. (4.) As
all of the two Tribes came not up to Jerusalem at the return from the captivity
of Babylon, so very great numbers of the ten Tribes appear so to have done,
which b^ing added to those multitudes of them, which before that had fallen
away to Judah, partly upon the account of the Worship of God, partly upon the
account of outward peace, when their own Land was wasted, makes the condition
of the body of the people to be one and the same; and these men committed, and
their posterity continue in the sins on which we charge their present
dispersion and captivity. (5.) The remant of that people dispersed amongst
strange Nations, seems voluntarily to have embraced their manners and customs,
and utterly to have forgotten their own Land, whereas those with whom we have
to do, daily expect, desire, and endeavor a return thereunto: so that neither
does this evasion, yield our present Jews any relief, and we may return to the
notions of their more ancient Masters.

For a Close then of these considerations, I shall add some of the confessions
of the Jews themselves, which the evidence of the Truth contended for has at
several seasons extorted from them. And this I shall not do, as though they
were of great importance in themselves, or unto us, but only to discover their
entanglements in contending against the light: for the present Masters of their
unbelief, are more perplexed with the convictions of their Predecessors then
with the plainest testimonies of the Scripture. The Authority of their
Predecessors being equal with them unto, if not more sacred then that of the
word of God its self.

First then, Being pressed with the Testimonies before insisted on out of
Haggai concerning the glory of the second Temple, and the coming of the desire
of all Nations thereunto, they have a Tradition that the Messiah was born the
same day that the second Temple was destroyed. The story indeed which they make
it up with, is weak, fabulous and ridiculous, and he who is offended with the
citation of such things out of their Talmudical Doctors, is desired only to
exercise patience until he shall be able himself to report from them things
more serious and of greater importance; and yet from them must we learn the
persuasions and convictions of the Ancient Jews, or be utterly ignorant of
them. Be their stori^s what they will also, the powerful convincing Evidence
of Truth, and the miserable shifts that the poor wretches are put unto, to keep
off the Efficacy of it from their minds do sufficiently appear in them.

The Tradition mentioned, they give us in Tractat. Bezaroth. distinct.
Hajakorr; in Rabbi Joden in the name of Rabbi Ibbo said, the Messiah was born
in the day that the house of the Sanctuary was destroyed; and the story they
tell to this purpose, is as follows: It came to pass, that as a Jew was
plowing, his Ox before him lowed, and there passed by him (...), an Arabian,
and he heard a voice saying, O Jew the Son of a Jew, loose thy Oxen for behold
the house of the Sanctuary is destroyed; the Ox lowed the second time; and he
said, O Jew the Son of a Jew, Yoke thy Oxen, for behold Messiah the King is
born, he said unto him, what is his name, he answered (...), Menachem, that is,
the Comforter. And in Bereshith Rabba on Genesis 30. they have a long story to the
same purpose. (...), vel, (...), Rabbi Samuel the son of Nachman said, as Elias
of good memory was walking on the way, on that very day that the house of the
Sanctuary was destroyed, he heard, (...), the voice from Heaven, crying unto
him, the house of our holy Sanctuary is brought unto destruction: when Elias of
good memory heard this, he thought the whole world should be destroyed, he went
therefore and finding (...), men plowing and sowing, he said unto them the holy
blessed God is angry with the world, (or all this generation) (...), and will
destroy his house, and send his children into captivity among the Nations of
the world, and you are solicitous about this temporal life. (...), came forth
again and said unto him, Let them alone, for unto Israel is born a Savior; he
said unto the voice, where is he? the voice said unto him in Bethlehem Judah;
he went, and found a woman sitting in the door of her house, and her Child
lying in its own blood before her: he said unto her, my daughter have thou born
a Son, she said unto him, yea; he said, and why does it lie so long in its own
blood? she said unto him, because of the great evil; for on this day wherein he
is born, the house of the Sanctuary is destroyed; he said unto her my daughter
be of good Courage, and take care of the Child, for great salvation shall be
wrought by his hand, and she was streightway encouraged, and took care of him.
In the process of this story they tell us, that this Child was carried away by
the four winds of Heaven, and kept in the great Sea four hundred years, of
which afterward. I doubt not but this Tale is hammered out of the second of
Luke, about the appearance of the Angels to the Shepherds, and their finding
his Mother in a stable; All the use that I intend to put this confession of
theirs unto, is to urge the present Jews with a conviction, and acknowledgement
of their forefathers that the Messiah was to be born under the second Temple.

Elias, a famous Master amongst them of the Tannarei or Antetalmudical Doctors
which they have recorded in the Talmud Tractat. Saned. distinct. Chelec. about
the continuance of the world, which is as follows, (...), It is a Tradition of
Elias that the world shall continue six thousand years, two thousand void
(which the gloss of Rabbi Solomon Jarchi reckons from the Creation of the
world, unto the Call of Abraham) two thousand to the Law (from thence to the
destruction of the second Temple) and two thousand to the days of the Messiah.
It is incredible how the latter Rabbis are perplexed with this Tradition of
their Masters, which is recorded in the Talmud as sacred. In the account they
give in Shebet Sehuda of a Disputation they had with one Hierom a converted Jew
before the Bishop of Rome, they know not how to disintangle themselves from the
Authority of it. The sum of their answer is, that the next words in the
Tradition are, that that time is elapsed, because of their sins; but as others
have already manifested that that gloss is no part of the Tradition, but an
addition of the Talmudists, so we shall immediately manifest the vanity of that
pretense. Others of them say, that it suffices to maintain the truth and
credit of the Tradition, if the Messiah come at any time within the last two
thousand years. But besides, that even they also are now drawing toward their
period, not a fifth part in their computation of that space of time remaining,
so this gloss is directly contrary to the very words of the Tradition. For as
two thousand years are assigned to the world before the Law, and two thousand
to the Law, which they reckon from the Call of Abraham to the ruin of the
second Temple, so the two thousand years allotted to the time of the Messiah
must begin with his coming, as the other portions do one of them with the
Creation, the other with the Call of Abraham, or else the space of time above
sixteen hundred years between the expiration of the second two thousand years,
and the third, must be left out of the computation. And the time limited for
the duration of the world extended above sixteen hundred years, beyond what is
allotted unto it in their Tradition.

wrested from sundry of them, which having been collected by others we shall
not trouble the Reader with their recital: these that have been insisted on,
may and do suffice to make good the Argument in hand. And so we have fully
demonstrated the second thing proposed unto confirmation; Namely, that the true
Messiah is long since come, and has finished the work allotted unto him. Now
whereas we have in our passage vindicated the Testimonies insisted on from the
particular exceptions of the Jews; It remains for the closing of this
Discourse, that we consider the general Answer which they give unto the whole
Argument taken from them all.

That which they principally insist on is, a concession with an exception,
rendering Messiah; But add withal, It is prolonged beyond the limited season,
because of their sins; that is, that the promise of his coming at that season
was not absolute, but conditional, namely on supposition that the Jews were
righteous, holy and worthy to receive him. Thus unto the Tradition of Elias
before mentioned, determining the coming of the Messiah upon the end of the
second two thousand years of the worlds duration; they add in the Talmud.
Tractat. Saned. distinct. Cheleck. cap. 11. these words as an exception, (...),
because of our sins, those days have exceeded the time, all that is past. And
again they add in the same place; (...), Rab. said, all times appointed are
finished, and this matter is not suspended, but upon account of repentance and
good works. And nothing is more common with them then this condition, if they
deserve it, if they repent, the Messiah will come, the time is already past,
but because of our sins he is not come. If all Israel could repent but one day
he would come. This is the sum of their Answer. There was a time limited and
determined, for the coming of the Messiah; This time is signified in general in
the Scripture to be before the destruction of the Second Temple, and the utter
departure of Scribe and Lawgiver from Judah; but all this designation of the
time was but conditional, and the accomplishment of it had respect unto their
righteousness, repentance, good works, and merits, which they failing in, their
Messiah is not yet come. To this issue is their infidelity at length arrived.
But there are reasons innumerable, that make naked the vanity of this pretense.
Some of them I shall briefly insist upon at present, and more fully afterward.

First, We have before proved, that not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also,
even Messiah. The first promise of him concerned mankind in general, without
the least particular respect, unto any one peculiar people, Genesis 3.15. The next
solemn renovation of it unto Abraham extends the blessing wherewith it was to
be attended unto all the kindreds of the earth, Genesis 12.3. Chap. 18.18. The
whole restriction of the promise unto him and to his posterity; consisted only
in the designation of them to be the means of bringing forth that Messiah, who
was to be a blessing unto all Nations; And when Jacob foretells his coming of
Judah, Genesis 49.10. he declares who were to have an equal share in the blessing
of it, together with his posterity; to him, says he, shall be the gathering of
the people. The same course do all the succeeding Prophets proceed in. They
every where declare, that the Gentiles; the Nations of the world, were equally
concerned with the Jews in the promise of the coming of the Messiah, if not
principally intended, because of their greatness and number. In mercy, love,
compassion, and philanthrophy did God provide this blessed remedy for the
recovery of mankind, (both Jews and Gentiles) out of that misery whereunto they
had cast themselves by sin and Apostasy from him. The time of exhibiting this
remedy unto them, he promised also, and limited, stirring them up unto an
expectation of its accomplishment, as that whereon all their happiness did
depend. Shall we now suppose, that all this love, grace and mercy of God
toward mankind, that his faithfulness in his promises, were all suspended on
the goodness, righteousness, merits and repentance of the Jews? that God who so
often testifies concerning them, that they were a people, wicked, obstinate,
stubborn and rebellious, should make them keepers of the everlasting happiness
of the whole world? that he has given the fountain of his grace and love,
which he intended and promised should overflow the whole earth, and make all
the barren Wildernesses of it fruitful unto him, to be closed and stopped by
them at their pleasure? that it should be in their power to restrain all the
promised ^ffects of them from the world? As if he should say in his promises, I
am resolved out of mine infinite Goodness and Compassion toward you, O ye poor
miserable Sons of Adam, to send you a Savior and a Deliverer, who at such a
time shall come and declare unto you the way of life eternal, shall open the
door of Heaven, and save you from the wrath that you have deserved, but I will
do it on this condition, that the Jews an obstinate and rebellious people, be
good, holy, righteous and penitent; for unless they be so, the Savior shall
not come, nor is it possible he should, until they be so, This of themselves
they will never be, nor do I intend to make them so. If they can persuade us,
that God has thus placed them in his Throne, and given his Grace and truth
into their hands to make effectual, or frustrate at their pleasure, and
suspended his good will toward the residue of mankind on their obedience, whom
he testifies to have been always stubborn and disobedient, they may also hope
to prevail with us to believe, that they only are men, and all other beasts, as
some of their Talmudical Masters have affirmed. At present we find it by
blessed experience, that their wickedness has not made the Truth of God of no
effect.

Messiah, he either foresaw what would be the State and condition of the Jews
as to their Repentance and Good Works, or he did not? If they say he did not,
then besides that they deny him to be God, by denying those Essential
Attributes of his nature, which the very Heathen acknowledged in their Deities,
They also utterly overthrow all the Prophecies and predictions of the Old
Testament: for there is not any of them but depend on a supposition of the
prescience of God; and this is nothing but to countenance their unbelief with
perfect Atheism. If they say he did foresee, that their conditions and manners,
would be such as the event has proved them, whence he must also know that it
was impossible, that the Messiah should come at the time limited and
determined; I ask to what end and purpose he does so often, and at so great a
distance of time, promise and foretell, that he should come at such a time and
season, seeing he knew perfectly that he should not so do, and so, that not one
word of his predictions should be fulfilled? why I say, did he fix on a time
and season, foretell it often, limit it by signs infallible, give out an exact
computation of the years, from the time of his predictions, and call all men
unto an expectation of his coming accordingly, when by his foresight of the
Jews want of merit and repentance, no such thing could possibly fall out? God
who is (...), does not deal thus with the sons of men. This were not to promise
and foretell in infinite veracity, but purposely to deceive. The condition then
pretended, cannot be put upon the promise of the coming of the Messiah without
a direct denial of some, and by just consequence of all the essential
properties of the nature of God.

condition, as that which they pretend the promise insisted on, to be clogged
withal. It is no where said, no where intimated, that if the Jews repented,
and merited well, the Messiah should come, at the time mentioned; no where
threatened, that if they did not so, his coming should be put off unto an
uncertain day. We know not, nor are they able to inform us whence they had this
condition, unless they will acknowledge, that they have forged it in their own
brains, to give countenance unto their infidelity. Before the time allotted,
was elapsed, and they had obstinately refused him, who was sent, and came
according unto promise: There was not the least rumor of any such thing
amongst them. Some of their Predecessors invented it to palliate their impiety,
which so they may do, they are not solicitous what reflection it may cast upon
the honor of God. Besides as the Scripture is silent, as to any thing that may
give the least color unto this pretense, so it delivers that which is contrary
unto it, and destructive of it; for it informs us, that the season of the
coming of the M^ssiah shall be a time of great sin, darkness and misery which
also their own Masters, in other places, and on other occasions acknowledges.
So Isa. 52. and 53. Jer. 31.32, 33. Dan. 9.24. Zach. 13.1. Mal. 3.4. He was to
come to turn men from ungodliness, and not because they were turned so before
his coming. There can be no place then for this Condition.

mere love and sovereign Grace: There was not any thing in man, Jew nor
Gentile, that should move the Lord to provide a remedy and relief for them who
had destroyed themselves. Now to suspend the promise of this Love and Grace, on
the righteousness and repentance of them unto whom it was made, is perfectly to
destroy it, and to place the merit of it in man, whereas it arose, purely from
the Grace of God. Again, it utterly takes away and destroys the nature of the
thing promised. We have proved, that it is a Relief, a Recovery, a Salvation
from sin and misery that is the subject matter of this promise. To suppose that
this shall not be granted, unless men as a condition of it, deliver themselves
from their sins, is to assert a plain contradiction, so wholly to destroy the
promise. He was not promised unto men, because they were penitent and just, but
to make them so. And to make the righteousness of Jews or Gentiles the
condition of his coming, is to take his work out of his hand, and to render
both him and his coming useless. But this figment proceeds from the (...) of
the Jews; namely, that the Messiah is not promised to free them from their own
sins, but to make them possessors of other men's goods; not to save their souls,
but their bodies and estates, not to make men heirs of Heaven, but Lords of the
earth; which folly has been before discovered and disproved.

Fifthly, The Jews on several accounts are (...), or self-condemned, in Messiah
is retarded. But First, what those sins are they cannot declare. We readily
grant them to be wicked enough, but withal we know their great wickedness to
consist, in that which they will not acknowledge; namely, not in being unfit
for his coming, but in refusing him when he came. They instance sometimes in
their hatred one of another, their mutual animosities, and frequent adulteries,
and want of observing the Sabbath, according to the rules of their present
superstitious scrupulosity. But what is all this unto the Abominations, which
God passed over formerly in their Nation, and also fulfilled his promises unto
them, though really conditional. (2.) Take them from the rack of our
Arguments, and you hear no more of their confessions, no more of their sins and
wickedness, but they are immediately all righteous and holy, all beloved of
God, and better then their forefathers; yea, (3.) On the day of expiation,
they are all as holy, if we may believe them, as the Angels in Heaven. There is
not one sin amongst them, so that it is strange the Messiah should not at one
time or another come to them on that day. (4.) They have a Tradition among
themselves, that the coming of the Messiah may be hastened, but not retarded.
So they speak in their gloss on Isa. 60.22. I the Lord will hasten it in its
time. Tractat. Saned. (...) Rabbi Alexander said, and Rabbi Joshua the Son of
Levi, it is written in his time, and it is written, I will hasten it, I will
hasten it if they deserve it, and if they deserve it not, yet in its own time;
and this they apply to the coming of the Messiah. (5.) They assert many of
them, that it is themselves who are spoken of in the fifty third of Isaiah, and
their being causelessly afflicted by the Gentiles; now he whom the Prophet there
speaks of, is one perfectly innocent and righteous, and so they must needs be
in their own esteem, supposing themselves there intended. So that this pretense
is known to themselves to be no more.

Sixthly, This plea is directly contrary to the nature of the Covenant, which
God promised Messiah, or that which he came to ratify and establish, and the
reason which God gives, for the making of that Covenant, Jer. 31, 31, 32, 33.
The foundation of the New Covenant lies in this, that the people had
disannulled and broken the former made with them. Now surely they do not
disannul that Covenant, if they are righteous according to the tenor of it, and
unless they are so, they say the Messiah will not come, that is, the New
Covenant shall not be made, unless by them it be first made needless. Again,
the nature of the Covenant lies in this, that God in it makes men righteous and
holy, Ezekiel 11.19. So that righteousness and holiness, cannot be the
Condition of making it, unless it be of making it useless. This then is the
contest between God and the Jews, he takes it upon himself, to give men
righteousness by the Covenant of the Messiah, they take it upon themselves, to
be righteous, that he may make that Covenant with them.

Lastly, If the coming of the Messiah, depend on the Righteousness and
repentance Jews, it is not only possible, but very probable that he may never
come. Themselves conceive that the world shall not continue above six thousand
years. Of this space, they do not suppose, that there is any more then five
hundred remaining; the time past since the expiration of the days determined
for the coming of the Messiah, is at least sixteen hundred years; seeing that
they have not repented all this while, what assurance have we, nay what hope
may we entertain, within the four or five hundred years that are behind.
Greater Calls to Repentance from God, greater motives from themselves and
others they are not like to meet withal. And what ground have we to expect,
that they who have withstood all these Calls without any good fruit by their
own confessions, will ever be any better. Upon this supposition then, it would
be very probable, that the Messiah should never come. Nothing can be replied
hereunto, but that God will either at length effectually by his Grace, give
them that Repentance, which they make necessary for his coming, or that he will
send him at last, whether they repent or no: But if either of these may be
expected, what reason can be imagined, why God should so deal at any season
concerning which he had made no promise, that the Messiah should come therein,
and not do so at the time concerning which he had so often promised and
foretold, that he should come therein.

Exercitatio XVII. The Third general Dissertation, proving Jesus of Nazareth to
be the only true and promised Messiah.
Jesus whom Paul preached, the true Messiah. First Argument from the time of
his coming. Foundation of this Argument unquestionable. Coming of Jesus at the
time appointed, proved by Scripture, Record, and Catholic Tradition. By the
testimonies of Heathen Writers. By the confession of the Talmudical Jews. Jesus
Christ intended by them, in their story of Jesus the Son of Pandira and Stada.
No other came at that season, by them owned. Force of this Argument.
Characteristical notes of the Messiah, given out in the Old Testament. His
Family, Stock, or Lineage, confined unto the posterity of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Judah, David. Our Lord Jesus, of the posterity of Abraham, and Tribe of
Judah, also of the Family of David. Testimonies of the Evangelists vindicated.
Jesoes exceptions in general answered. In particular, the Genealogy, not
proved; answered. The Genealogy of Matthew declared, and of Luke. The place of
the Birth of the Messiah, Bethlehem, Micah 5.2. Circumstances enforcing this
consideration. The Evangelists Citation of the words of the Prophet vindicated.
The Messiah to be born of a Virgin. Isa. 7.10, 11. and Matthew. 1.21, 22. Jews
convinced that Jesus was born of a Virgin. Jews exceptions, to the Application
of this Prophecy. Their weight. The answer of some unto them; unsafe, needless.
True sense of the words. Exceptions answered. The signification and use of
(...). Greatness of the sign promised. No other Virgin and Son designed but
Jesus Christ and his Mother. The Prophecy cleared in this instance. In what
sense the Birth of the Messiah, a sign of present deliverance. Remaining
Objections answered. Other Characters of the Messiah. He was to be a Prophet,
Deuteronomy. 18.19. A Prophet like unto Moses. Expected by the Jews. Jesus Christ a
Prophet. That Prophet. The nature of the Doctrine which he taught. Its
perfection. The works of the Messiah revealed, only in the Gospel of Christ;
also the nature and end of Mosaical Institutions. Threatenings unto the
disobedient fallen upon the Jews. Sufferings are an other character of the
Messiah his Passion foretold, Psalm. 22. The true Messiah therein intended.
Expositions of Kimchi and others confused. Sufferings peculiar unto the
Messiah. The Psalm exactly fulfilled in Jesus Christ. Objections of the Jews
from the principles of Christians, answered. Isa. 53. Prophecy of the suffering
of the Messiah. Consent of the Ancient Jews. Targum. Bereshith Rabba. Talmud,
Ashech. Invalidity of exceptions of latter Rabbis. Applications to the Lord
Jesus vindicated. Other Testimonies concerning the sufferings of the Messiah.
Jews Traditions to the same purpose. Other Arguments proving Jesus to be the
true Messiah. Miracles. The nature of them, wrought by Christ; proved.
Testimony of the Gospel. Notoriety of Tradition. Miracles of Christ compared
with those of Moses. Excelling them, in number; in manner of their being
wrought; in their nature; in his giving power to others, to effect them; in his
resurrection from the Dead; continuance of them in the World. Jews
self-conviction evinced. Causes of the miracles of Christ, assigned by them.
Art Magical, retorted; removed. The name of God. Testimonies of his Disciples;
Success of the Doctrine of Jesus. Last Argument.

THe third branch of that great supposition and fundamental Article of faith,
Hebrews is, that Jesus whom he preached was the true and only promised Messiah
who came forth from God for the accomplishment of his work; according to the
time determined and foretold. The confirmation of this foundation of our faith,
and profession, is that which now in the third place we must engage in. A
subject this is whereon I could insist at large, with much satisfaction to my
self; nor have I just cause to fear, that the matter treated of, would be
irksom to any Christian Reader. But we must have respect unto our present
design, for it is not absolutely and of set purpose, that we handle these
things, but merely with respect unto that further end of opening the springs of
the Apostles Divine reasonings in this Epistle, and therefore must contract (as
much as may be) the Arguments that we have to plead in this case. And yet
neither can this be so done, but that some continuance of discourse will be
unavoidably necessary. And the course we shall proceed in, is the same we have
passed through in our foregoing demonstrations of the promise of the Messiah,
and of his coming. Our Arguments are first to be produced, and vindicated from
the particular exceptions of the Jews; and then their opposition to our Thesis
in general, is to be removed, referring an Answer unto their special Objections
unto another Dissertation.

Argument shall be taken from that which is proved, and confirmed therein;
namely, the time limited and determined for the coming of the Messiah. Two
ways there are, whereby the time fore-appointed of God for the coming of the
Messiah, is signified and made known. First, By certain (...), or evident
tokens, taken from the Judaical Church, with the state and condition of the
whole people of the Jews. This we have insisted on from Genesis 49.10. Hagg. 2.8.
Mal. 3.1, 2. Secondly, By a computation of the time its self as to its
duration, from a certain fixed date unto its expiration. This way we have
unfolded and vindicated at large, from Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. And although
herein we have evidenced the truth and exactness of the computation insisted on
by us, as far as any Chronological accounts of times past are capable of being
demonstrated. Yet we have also manifested, that our Argument depends not on the
precise bounding of the time limited; But lying (...) is of equal force,
however the computation be calculated, the whole time limited being undeniably
expired before, or at the destruction of the City and Temple. Hence is the
foundation of our first Argument. Before or at the expiration of that time the
promised Messiah was to come. Before, or at that time, as denoted and described
by the general (...), or evident tokens before mentioned, and limited, by the
computation insisted on, came Jesus, and no other that the Jews can or do
pretend to have been the Messiah; and therefore he was the true promised
Messiah.

Messiah was to come within the time limited, prefixed and foretold cannot be
shaken, without calling into question, the Truth of all promises and
pre^ictions in the Old T^stament, and consequently the faithf^ln^ss and power
of God. The great design, whose lines are drawn in the face, and whose
substance lies in the bowels of the Old Testament, and which is the Spirit that
enlivens the whole Doctrine, and story of it, the bond of union, wherein all
the parts of it do center, without which they would be loose, scattered, and
deformed heaps, is the bringing forth of the Messiah, the Savior of the world.
Without an apprehension of this design and faith therein, neither can a letter
of it be understood, nor can a rational man discover any important Excellency
in it. Him it promises; Him it typifieth; Him it teaches, and prophesies
about: Him it calls all men to desire and expect. When it has done thus, in
several places it expressly limits, foretells, and declares, the time wherein He
shall be sent and exhibited. If there be a failure herein, seeing it is done to
give evidence to all other things that are spoken concerning him, by which they
are to be tried, and to stand or fall, as they receive approbation or
discountenance from thence. To what end should any man trouble himself, about
that which is cast, as a fancy and empty imagination, by its own verdict? If
then the Messiah came not within the time limited, all Expectation from the
Scripture of the Old Testament, must come to naught; which these, with whom at
present we contend, will not grant.

Nor can the Jews on such a supposition, in any measure defend the truth of it
against an Infidel. For unto his enquiry where is the promised Messiah, if they
shall plead their usual pretenses. It is easy for him to reply, that these
things b^ing no where mentioned, nor intimated in the Books themselves: They
are only such subterfuges as any man may palliate the most open untruths
withal. And indeed, the ridiculous figment of his being born at the time
appointed, but kept hid to this day, they know not where, is not to be pleaded,
when they deal with men not bereft of their senses, or Judicially blinded by
God. For besides, that the whole of it, is a childish, toyish fiction,
inconsistant with the nature and being of their Messiah, whom they make to be a
mere man subject to mortality, in his whole person, like all the other sons of
Adam, it suits not at all unto the difficulty intended, to be assoyled by it.
For it is not his being born only, but also his accomplishment of his Work and
Office, at the time determined which is foretold. Nor is there any one jot more
of probability in their other pretense, about their own sins and unworthiness.
For, as we have declared, this is nothing but in plain terms to assert, that
God has violated his faith and promise; and that in a matter, wherein the
great Concernments of his own Glory, and the welfare of all mankind does
consist, upon the account of their miscarriages, which as they either cannot,
or will not remedy, so he himself has not, (though he might have so done)
provided any relief against. This then stands upon equal evidence with the
whole Authority of the Old Testament, namely, that the promised Messiah, was to
come within the time prefixed for his coming, and foretold.

We ask them then, If Jesus of Nazareth be not the Messiah, where is he? or who
is he that came in answer to the Prophecies insisted on? Two things then remain
to be proved. First, That our Lord Jesus Christ came, lived, and dyed within
the time limited for the coming of the Messiah. Secondly, That no other came
within that season, that either pretended with any color of probability unto
that dignity, or was ever as such, owned or esteemed by the Jews themselves.

First then, that Jesus came and lived in the time limited unto the coming of
the Messiah, some short space of time before the departure of Scepter and
Scribe from Judah, the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice, and final desolation of,
the second Temple, we have all the evidence, that a matter of fact so long
passed, is capable of as good, as that the world was of old by God created. The
Stories of the Church are express, that he was born during the Empire of
Augustus Caesar, in the latter end of the Reign of Herod over Judaea, when
Cyrenius was Governor over Syria; that he lived unto the time, wherein Pontius
Pilate was Governor of Judaea under Tiberius, about thirty six or thirty seven
years before the destruction of the Nation, City and Temple by Titus. This the
stories written by Divine inspiration, and committed unto the care of the
Church, expressly affirm; neither have the Jews any thing to object against the
truth of the relation, what ever thoughts they have of his Person, who he was,
or what he did: That he lived and dyed then, and there, is left testified on
Records beyond control. And if they should deny it, what is the bare negation
of a few interested, blinded persons, without Testimonies or evidence from any
one circumstance of Times, Persons, or Actions to be laid in the balance
against the Catholic Tradition of all the world, whether believing in Jesus,
or rejecting of him. For they all always consented in this, that he lived, and
died at the time mentioned in the sacred stories.

And this was still one part of the charge managed against his followers, in
the very next Age after, that they believed in a person whom they knew to live
at such a season, and in a mean condition. Neither did the most malicious and
fierce impugners of the Religion taught by him, such as Celsus, Porphyrie, and
Julian ever once attempt to attacque the Truth of the story, as to his real
existence, and the time of it. So that herein we have as concurrent a suffrage
as the whole world in any case is able to afford.

The best of the Historians of the Nations, who lived near those times, give
their Jesus, may suffice for an instance. This is Cornelius Tacitus, in the
fifteenth of his Annals: Abolendo (says he) rumori (he speaks of Nero and his
firing of Rome,) subdidit reos, and quaesitissimis poenis affecit, quos per
flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellebat. Author ejus nominis Christus
qui Tiberio imperitante per procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus
erat. He expressly assigns the time of the death of Christ unto the reign of
Tiberius, and government of Pilate. The same also is confirmed by the Jews own
Historian Flavius Josephus, in the fourth Chapter of the eighteenth Book of
their Antiquities; unto which season also he assigns the death of John the
Baptist, who was his contemporary, according to the Evangelical Story.

Further, We have that Testimony in this matter, which though in its self, it
be of little Talmud, that he lived before the desolation of the second Temple,
for they tell us, cap. Cheleck, and (...) -- cap. 2. that he was the Son of
Pandira and Stada, and that he lived in the days of the Maccabes, Alexander,
Hircanus, and Aristobulus, under whom he was crucified. I confess Galatinus,
Reuchlinus, and of late the learned Schiklard with some others do contend that
it is not Jesus Christ whom they intend in the wicked Story which they tell of
that Jesus the Son of Pandira. But the reasons they insist on, are of no
cogency to procure the assent of any one, acquainted with their Writings; no
though the latter J^ws themselves (ashamed of the prodigious lies of their
forefathers, and afraid to own their blasphemies, for fear of provoking the
Christians against them) do faintly (some of them) deny him to be the person
intended. The names of their Parents say they agree not. The Lord Jesus was the
reputed Son of Joseph, the true Son of Mary. This Jesus of the Talmud, was the
Son of Pandira and Stada. I shall not reply that Damascenus lib. 4. places a
Panther; and Barpanther, on the Genealogy of Christ, making the latter
Grandfather to the blessed Virgin, seeing it is evident that he borrowed that
part of his Genealogy from some corrupt Traditions of the Jews.

The reason why the Talmudists concealed the true names of the Parents of Jesus
are evident; for by this means they more covered their malice, in one respect,
and gave more blasphemous vent unto it, in another. They concealed it thus far,
that every one might not perfectly understand whom they intended, unless he
were a Disciple of their own. And they gave it v^nt in the r^flection they cast
upon the Evangelical Story, as though it had not given us the true names of the
Parents of Jesus. And moreover, they gave themselves liberty by this means to
coin new lies at their pleasure, for they may say what they would of their
Pandira and Stada though all the world knew it to be false as to Joseph and
Mary. (...), Pandira is a feigned name, insignificant, and invented by them for
this only purpose. They sometimes write it with (...) in the midst instead of
(...), Panthira: so that Galatinus does perfectly contradict himself in this
matter: for whereas lib. 1. cap. 7. he contends that by Jesus the Son of
Pandira mentioned in the Talmud, the Lord Jesus is not intended, lib. 8. cap.
5. he asserts, that Jesus the Son of Panthira, in whose name James the Just
healed the sick and wrought Miracles, was the Lord Jesus; as indeed it was he,
whom they intend also in that story about James. But now Pandira and Panthira
are the same; and so also was he who they term his Son, (...), Stada is also a
name framed to the same end; and as the learned Buxtorfe supposes from (...),
one that went aside, declined, or was an Adulteress. And they feign her to have
been a platter of Women's hair, with other monstrous lies at their pleasure; but
yet expressly in sundry places confess that her true name was Mary, and as I
suppose, from the imputations mentioned, do wilfully confound her with Mary
Magdalen, as Mahomet did with Miriam the Sister of Moses. These stories must be
searched for in the Talmud Printed at Venice, for they are left out in that
printed at Basil. The Exceptions is yet more impertinent that the things which
are ascribed unto Jesus the Son of Pandira, can by no means be accommodated
unto Jesus Christ. As though the Talmudical Rabbis had ever accustomed
themselves to speak one true word concerning him, or as though they intended
not him in all these blasphemous lies, wherewith they and their forefathers
reproached him; which is all one as if we should say, that it was another and
not the Lord Jesus whom they accused of Sedition blasphemies and seducing the
people, because indeed he was most remote from such things. But yet also there
were sundry things which they ascribe unto this Jesus the Son of Pandira and
Stada which make very apparent who it was whom they intended; for first, they
say that he learned Magic in Egypt, which upon his being carried thither in
his infancy, they ascribe unto him: Again, they say he was a Seducer of the
people; which we know was the accusation that they managed against the Lord
Jesus.

Again, They tell us a story concerning two men placed in a room near him, to
over-hear his seducing, that so they might accuse him; this they say was their
course to entrap Seducers, and thereof they give this instance. (...). So they
did to the Son of Stada, and they hanged him on the Eve of the Passover. The
Witnesses they speak of are no others but the false witnesses mentioned Matt.
26.60, 61. The kind of his death, hanged on a Tree, with the time of it, the
Eve of the Passover, do also fully make naked their intentions. The Age only,
or the time of his life remains, from whence any difficulty is pretended. This
Jesus the Son of Pandira they have affirmed to have lived in the days of
Alexander, and to have been crucified in the days of Aristobulus, an hundred,
or an hundred and ten years before the birth of Christ. But the mystery of
this Fiction also is discovered by Abraham Levita, in his Cabala Historiae. He
tells us that the Christians placed the death of their Christ under Pilate,
that so they might show, that the destruction of the City and Temple f^ll out
not long after his death; whereas he says, it is apparent from the Mishna and
Talmud, that he was crucified in the days of the Maccabes, an hundred years
before. And here we have unawares the sore discovered, and the true reason laid
open, why the Talmudists attempted, to transferr the time of his death, from
the days of Herod the Tetrarch, to the Rule of Aristobulus the Hasmonaean;
namely, lest they should be compelled to acknowledge their utter ruin to have
so suddenly ensued upon their rejection of him, as indeed it did. However, as
to our present purpose, we have in general this confession of our Adversaries
themselves, that the Lord Jesus came before the destruction of the City and
Temple, which was that we undertook to confirm.

We, Secondly, In the pursuit of our Argument, affirmed that no other person
came, Messiah. This the Jews themselves confess, nor can they think otherwise,
without destroying themselves. For if any such person came, seeing they
received him not, nor do own him unto this day. Their guilt would be the same,
that we charge upon them, for the refusing of our Lord Jesus. There is no need
then, that we should go over the Tragical Stories of Barchocheba, Moses
Cretensis, David el David, and such other Imposters. For whereas none of them
came or lived within the time determined, so they are all disclaimed by
themselves, as Seducers and Causers of great misery unto their people and
Nation. Herein then we have the consent of all parties concerned, which renders
all further evidence unnecessary.

From what therefore has been spoken, and disputed; It remains, that either
Jesus was, and is the true Messiah, as coming from God in the season limited
for that purpose, or that the whole promise concerning the Messiah is a mere
figment, the whole Old Testament a Fable, and so both the old and present
Religion of the Jews a delusion. At that season the Messiah must come, or there
is an end of all Religion. If any came then, whom they had rather embrace for
their Messiah then our Lord Jesus: let them do so, and own him, that we may
know who he was, and what he has done for them. If none such there were, that
can be so esteemed, as in truth, and as themselves universally acknowledge
there was not, their obstinacy and blindness in refusing the only promised
Messiah is such, as no reasonable man can give an account of, who does not call
to mind the righteous Judgment of God in giving them up to blindness and
obstinacy, as a just punishment for their rejection and murdering his only
Son. And this Argument is of such importance, as that with the consideration of
the Doctrine of Christ, and his success in the world, it may well be allowed to
stand alone in this contest.

Our second Argument is taken from those Characteristical notes that are given
in Messiah. Now these are such, as by which the Church might know him, and upon
which they were bound to receive him. All these we shall find to agree and
center in the person of our Lord Jesus. Some of the principal of them we shall
therefore insist upon, and vindicate from the exceptions of the Jews. The stock
whereof he came, the place and manner of his Birth, the course of his life and
death, what he taught, and what he suffered, are the principal of those signs
and notes that God gave out to discover the Messiah in his appointed time; and
as they were very sufficient for that purpose. So upon the matter they comprise
all the signs and tokens whereby any person may be predesigned and signified.

First, For the Family, Stock, or lineage whereof he was to come; There was a
threefold seed of Abraham, Genesis 15.17. and under that alone, there was no more
required, but that he should spring from among his posterity, until God added
that peculiar limitation unto it, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis
21.12. After this in the Family of Isaac, Jacob peculiarly inherited the
promise; and his posterity being branched into twelve Tribes or Families, the
rise or nativity of the Messiah was confined unto the Tribe of Judah, Genesis
49.10. This made it further necessary that from him, by some one of the
numerous families that sprang of him he should proceed. Out of that Tribe God
afterward raised the Kingly Family of David to be a Type and representation of
the Kingdom of the Messiah; and hereupon he restrained the promise unto that
family, though not unto any particular branch of it. Hereunto no other
restriction was ever afterward added.

It was not then at any time made necessary by promise that the Messiah should
proceed from the Royal branch, or family of the House of David, but only that
he should be born of some of his posterity, by what family soever, poor or
rich, in power or subjection, he derived his Genealogy from him. His Kingdom
was to be quite of anoth^r nature th^n that of David or Solomon; nor did he
derive his Title in the least th^reunto from the right of the Davidical House
to the Kingdom of Judah. Thus far then it pleased God to design this Stock and
Family of the Messiah. He was to be of the posterity of Abraham, of the Tribe
of Judah, of the family of David. And although this evidence in its latitude
will conclude only thus far, that no one can be pretended to be the Messiah
whose Genealogy is not so derived by David, and Judah unto Abraham; yet by the
addition of this circumstance in the Providence of God, that no one since the
destruction of the City and Temple can plead or demonstrate that original;
seeing this was given out for a note, and sign to know him by, it proves
undeniably, that he whom we assert was the true Messiah. For to what end should
this token of him be given forth to know him by, when all Genealogies of the
people being utterly lost; it is impossible it should be of any use in the
discovery of him.

Abraham there is no question between us and the Jews, but that the Lord Jesus
was of his offspring and posterity. Neither do they pretend any exceptions to
his being of the Tribe of Judah; The Apostle in this Epistle asserts it as a
thing notorious and unquestionable, Chap. 7.14. (...), says he, (...); it is
every way, or altogether manifest, that our Lord sprang of Judah: (...), is in
Greek Authors, not only manifest, but openly and conspicuously so. Thus he is
said, (...), in Sophocles, who dyed openly and gloriously by all men's consent.
Thus was the birth of our Savior among the Jews themselves, as to his
springing from the Tribe of Judah. The Apostle declares that it was (...),
without any contradiction received amongst them, and acknowledged by them. Nor
unto this day, do they lay any exception unto this assertion. It remains, that
we prove him to have been of the Family of David by some one signal branch of
it. For as we said, there is nothing in the promise restraining his original to
the first reigning family, or the direct posterity thereof. Now this is
purposely declared by two of the Evangelis^s, who being Jews, and living
amongst them, wrote the story of his life in the Age wherein he lived, for the
use of the Jews themselves, with the residue of mankind. Matthew who calls his
record of it, (...), or (...), the roll of his Genealogies, shows in the front
of it, that he wrote it on purpose to declare, that he was according to the
promise of the posterity of Abraham, and of the family of David. Of Jesus
Christ the Son of David the Son of Abraham: That is, who was promised to
Abraham and David, to spring from their loins. Luke also who derives his
G^nealogie from the first giving of the promise unto Adam, brings it down
through the several restrictions mentioned by Abraham, Judah and David. Other
testimony or evidence in this matter of fact is utterly impossible for us to
give, and unreasonable for any other to demand. It was written and published
unto all the world, by persons of unquestionable integrity, who had as much
advantage to know the truth of the matter about which they wrote, as any men
ever had, or can have in a matter of that nature. And this they did not upon
rumors, or Traditions of former days, but in that very Age wherein he lived,
and that unto the faces of them, whose great interest it was to except against
what they wrote; and who would undoubtedly have so done, had they not been
overpowred with the conviction of the truth of it: had they had the least
suspicion on the contrary, why did they not in some of their consultations and
rage against him and his Doctrine, once object this unto himself, or his
followers, that he was not of the family of David, and so could not be the
person he pretended himself to be. Besides, the Persons who wrote his
Genealogy, sealed their Testimony, not only with their lives, but with their
eternal condition; an higher assurance of Truth can no men give.

Jews except unto this Testimony. First in general, they deny the Authority of
our Witnesses, and deny the whole matter that they assert. Secondly, in
particular they say, they prove not the matter in question; namely, that Jesus
of Nazareth was of the family of David. For the first, they neither have, nor
do yield any other reasons but their own wills and unbelief. They neither do,
nor will believe what they have written. Record, Testimony, Tradition, or any
Circumstance contradicting their witness, they have none; only they will not
believe them. Now whether it be meet, that their mere obstinacy and unbelief,
wherein, and for which they perish temporally and eternally, should be of any
weight with reasonable men, is easy to determine. Besides, I desire to know of
the Jews whether they think it reasonable that any man without Reason,
Testimony, Evidence, or Record, to give them countenance, should call into
question, dis-believe and deny the things witnessed unto, and written by Moses.
It is known what they will answer unto this demand, and thereby they will stop
their own mouths, as to the refusal of our record in this matter, so that this
exception which amounts to no more but this, that the Jews believe not the
Gospel, and that because they will not, needs no particular consideration, it
being ^^at which we plead with them about in all these our discourses. And as
unto our own Faith it is secured by all these Evidences which we give of the
sacred Authority of the Writings of the New Testament.

But moreover they except in particular, that neither of the Evangelists do
either assert, Jesus did spring from the family of David. For whereas they
assert, and Christians believe, that he was born of the Virgin Mary, without
conjunction of man, and that Joseph was only reputed to be his Father, because
his Mother was legally espoused unto him, both Genealogies belong unto Joseph
alone, as is evident from the beginning of the one, and the end of the other.
Now the Lord Jesus being not related unto Joseph, but by the legal contract of
his Mother, he cannot be esteemed in his right to belong unto the family of
David. This is pleaded by many of them, as also they take notice of the
difficulties which have exercised many Christians in the reconciliation of the
several Genealogies recorded by the two Evangelists; unto all which exceptions,
we shall briefly reply, and take them out of our way.

First, Suppose it granted, that the Genealogy recorded by Matthew be properly
the Genealogy of Joseph, what madness is it to imagine that avowedly proposing
to manifest Jesus Christ to have been of the family of David, and premising
that design, in the title of his Genealogy, he does not prove and confirm what
he had so designed, according to the Laws of Genealogies, and of the legal just
asserting any one to be of such a tribe or family. No more is required for the
accomplishment of the promise, but that the Lord Jesus should be so of the
family of David, as it was required by the Laws of Families and Genealogies,
that any person might belong unto it. Now this might be by the legal marriage
of his Mother unto him who was of that family; for after that contract of
marriage, whatever Tribe or Family she was of before, she was legally accounted
to be of that Family, whereunto by her espousals she was engrafted. And of that
Family, and no other, was he to be reckoned, who was born of her, after those
espousals. Now that the reckoning of Families and Relations among the Jews by
God's own appointment, did not always follow Natural Generations, but
sometimes Legal Institutions, is manifest by the Law of a man dying without
Issue: for when the next Kinsman took the Wife of the deceased, to raise up
seed unto him, he that was born of the Woman, was by Law not reckoned to be his
Son by whom he was begotten, but was to be the Son, and of the Family of him
that was deceased, to bear his name, and inherit his estate, Numb. 36.6. And
this legal cognation, Luke seems to intimate, chap. 1.27. Where he says, that
the Mother of Jesus was espoused unto a man whose name was Joseph, of the
Family of David; there being no reason to mention his Family, but that the
Genealogy of his Wives Son was to relate thereunto. And if this were the Law of
Genealogies, and legal relations unto Tribes and Families, as evidently it was,
Matthew recording the Genealogy of Joseph, to whom the blessed Virgin was
espoused before the birth of Jesus Christ, does record his, according to the
mind of him who gave both Law and Promise, and upon this known Rule of
Genealogies, and legal relations, may Matthew proceed in his recital of the
pedigree of Joseph, and profess thereby to manifest, how Jesus Christ was the
Son of David, the Son of Abraham. Secondly, Although there was no indispensible
necessity among the Jews, binding them to marry within their Tribes, unless the
Women were inhaeritrixes, in which case provision was made, that inheritances
might not be transferred from one Tribe unto another, yet it is more than
probable, that the blessed Virgin Mary was of the same Family with Joseph, and
this so notoriously known, that seeing Genealogies were not reckoned by Women,
nor the Genealogies of Women directly recorded, there was no better, or more
certain way of declaring his pedigree, who was born of Mary, then by his, unto
whom she was so nearly related. So that on several accounts, the Genealogy
recorded by Matthew, proves Jesus Christ to have been of the Family of David.

Secondly, For Luke, he does directly, and of set purpose, give us the
Genealogy of blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of our Lord Jesus; for the line of
his progenitors, which he derives from Nathan, is not at all the same with that
of Joseph from Solomon, insisted on by Matthew. It is true, there are a
Zerubbabel and Salathiel in both Genealogics, but this proves not both the
lines to be the same: For the lines of Solomon and Nathan, might by marriage
meet in these persons, and so leave it indifferent, which line was followed up
to David; and the lines of Joseph and Mary might be separated again in the
posterity of Zerubbabel, Matthew following one of them, and Luke the other.
This, I say, is possible, but the Truth is, (as is eviden^^ from the course of
generations insisted on) that the Zerubbabel and Salathiel mentioned in
Matthew, were not the same persons with those of the same names in Luke, those
being of the house of Solomon, these of the house of Nathan. So that from David
it is not the line of Joseph, but of the blessed Virgin that is recited by
Luke. And the words wherewith Luke prefaceth his Genealogy, do no way impeach
this assertion, (...); for whereas these words (...), as was supposed, are
usually placed and read in Parenthesis, the Parenthesis may be better extended
unto (...), including Joseph; being (as was supposed, the Son of Joseph) the
Son Heli: Or Joseph may be said to be the Son of Heli, because his Daughter was
espoused unto him, otherwise the true natural Father of Joseph, was Jacob, as
Matthew declares, Heli being the Father of the blessed Virgin: So that both
legally and naturally our Lord Jesus Christ was a descendant of the house and
lineage of David, according unto the promise. And as this was unquestionable
among the Jews in the days of his conversation in the flesh; so the present
Jews have nothing of moment to oppose unto these unquestionable Records.

Characteristical Note given of the Messiah, whereby he might be known, and it
has strength added unto it by the Providence of God, in that all Genealogies
among the Jews, are now so confounded, and have been so, for so many
Generations, that it is utterly impossible that any one should rise amongst
them, and manifest himself to be of this, or that particular Family. The
burning of their Genealogies by Herod, the extirpation of the Family of David
by Vespasian, and their one thousand and six hundred years dispersion, have put
an utter end unto all probability about the Genealogies amongst them. The Jews
indeed pretend that the Family of the Messiah shall be revealed by the Miracles
that he should do; that is, by knowing him to be the Messiah, they shall know
of what Family he is. But this note of his Family is given out to know him by;
nor are we any where directed to learn his Family from our knowledge of him.

Messiah in Prophecy, was the place where he should be born, which added unto
the Time wherein, and the Family whereof, he should be brought forth, evidently
designed his person. This place of his Nativity is foretold, Mich. 5. v. 2.
(...). And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, is it (or it is) little for thee to be
amongst the thousands of Judah; out of thee shall come forth unto me, he that
shall be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth are from of old, from the days of
eternity. That of old this Prophecy was understood by the Church of the Jews,
to denote the place of the birth of the Messiah; we have an illustrious
testimony in the records of the Christian Church, Matthew. 2.5, 6. Upon the
demand of Herod, where the Messiah should be born, the Chief Priests and
Scribes affirm with one consent, that he was to be born at Bethlehem,
confirming their judgment by this place of the Prophet. And afterward when
they supposed that our Lord Jesus had been born in Galilee, because he lived
there, they made this an Argument against him, because he was not born
according to the Scripture in Bethlehem, the Town where David was, Joh. 7.41,
42. And we have the concurrence of their own Testimony in this matter: So the
Chaldee Paraphrase renders these words, (...) out of thee shall come forth to
me the Ruler, (...) out of thee shall come forth to me the Messiah, who shall
have the dominion; taking it for granted, that he it is whom this place is
spoken of. So also K. Solomon expounds the place, (...) etc. (...) little to be
in the thousands of Judah, that is, thou deservest to be so, because of the
profanation of Ruth the Moabitess, who was in thee, out of thee shall come
forth to me the Messiah, the Son of David; and so he says, the stone which the
builders refused: And though Kimchi seems to deny that the Messiah shall be
born in Bethlehem, yet he grants that it is he, who is here prophesied of, out
of thee shall come forth (...) unto me the Messiah, for he shall be of the seed
of David, who was of Bethlehem* He grants, I say, that it is the M^ssiah that
is here prophesied of, though against Rashi, the Targum and the Text, he would
deny that he should be born in Bethlehem. But his interpretation is fond and
forced to serve the present turn, because the Jews know that the Lord Jesus was
born there. God speaks to Bethlehem the City of David, and gives an account how
greatly he will magnify it, beyond what it then seemed to deserve; and this he
will do by raising out of, and from that place (not from David, who was born at
that place) the Messiah, who was to rule his people Israel. This then was the
place of old designed for the birth of the Messiah, and there was our Lord
Jesus born, at the appointed time, of the Trib^ of Judah, and Family of David;
and there are sundry circumstances giving weight unto this consideration.

First, Whereas the Parents of Jesus were outwardly of a mean condition, and
living Galilee, it may be supposed that they were very little known, or taken
notice of, to be of the lineage and offspring of David; nor it may be in their
low estate did they much desire to declare that, which would be of no
advantage, and perhaps of some hazard unto them: But now their coming unto
Bethlehem, and that whether they would or no, upon the command of public
Authority, made their house and kindred known unto all the Jews, especially
those of the Family of David, who were then all of them gathered together in
that place. Secondly, There is no just nor appearing reason to be given that
should move the Roman Emperor to decree that description and enrolment of
persons which brought them unto Bethlehem: A matter it was of great charge and
trouble to the whole Empire, which at that time enjoyed the greatest peace and
tranquillity. The Temple of Janus was then shut, and all things in quietness in
all parts of the world. Neither was there afterward any public use made of
that enrollment; nor is it certain that it was accomplished in many other
Nations. But the infinite, holy, wise Governor of all the world, puts this
into his mind, and incites him on this work, to set mankind into a motion that
two persons of low condition might be brought out of Galilee into Bethlehem,
that Jesus might according unto this Prophecy be born there. Thirdly, It is not
likely that Joseph and Mary had any thoughts at that time about the place where
the Messiah should be born, and so probably had not the least design of
removing their habitation unto Bethlehem; or if they had so, yet their doing of
it on their own accord, might have given advantage unto the Jews, to say that
the Mother of Jesus did not indeed any way belong unto Bethlehem, but only went
thither to be delivered, that she might report her Son the better to be the
Messiah. But by this admirable providence of God, all these, and sundry other
difficulties of the like nature, are removed out of the way, their minds are
determined, a Journey they must take, and that at a time very unseasonable for
the Holy Virgin, when she was so near the time of her delivery, and be
publicly enrolled of the Family of David, upon the command of him who never
knew ought of that business, which none but himself could be instrumental to
accomplish. Fourthly, Not long after this, that Town of Bethlehem was utterly
destroyed, nor has been for a thousand and six hundred years, either great or
small among the Thousands of Judah. And all these circumstances give much light
unto this characteristical presignation of the person of the Messiah, from the
place of his birth or nativity.

The Exceptions of the Jews unto the Evangelists citation of the words of the
Prophet, Evangelist intended no more, but only to direct unto that Testimony
which was given unto the Nativity of the Messiah at Bethlehem, reciting so much
of the words, and in such manner, as to prove by them that which he intended.
He took not upon him to repeat every word as they were written by the Prophet
(which he might easily have done had he designed it, and that without the least
disadvantag^ unto what he aimed at,) but only to declare how the Assertion was
proved, that the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem.

Secondly, He uses the words to no other purpose, th^^ that for which by the
Jews acknowledgement they were recorded by the Prophet ^^ther in the
Alterations that are made in this recital is there one letter taken from the
Prophets words, or added unto them, used by him to the advantage of his
Assertion, which is the whole that the utmost scrupulosists can require in the
recital of the words of another by the way of Testimony.

Thirdly, He seems not to repeat the words of the Prophet himself immediately,
but only to record the answer which from these words of the Prophet, was given
unto Herod by the Priests and Scribes. So that the repetition of the words is
theirs, and not his properly.

Fourthly, Whose ever the words are, as there is nothing in the whole of them
discrepant from, much less contrary unto, those of the Prophet, nor are used to
signify any thing but the open plain intention of the Prophet: so are all the
particulars wherein a difference appears between them, capable of a fair
Reconciliation. This we shall manifest by passing briefly through them.

The first difference is in the first words; (...), and thou Bethlehem Ephrata;
which are rendered in the Evangelist; (...); and thou Bethlehem in the Land of
Judah; That Bethlehem which was of old called Ephrata, from its first Builder,
1 Chronicles. 4.4. that name being now forgotten and worn out of use, is here said
to be, as it was indeed, in the Land of Judah; to distinguish it from
Bethlehem, that was in the Lot or Land of Zebulun, as both Rashi and Kimchi
observe, Josh. 19.15. And it may be to denote withal the relation that the
Messiah had to Judah. So that here there is no discrepancy. Bethlehem Ephrata,
and Bethlehem in the Land Judah, are one and the same name and place. 2. In the
ensuing words there is more variety, (...), little to be in the thousands of
Judah: in the Evangelist, (...); art not the least among the Leaders of Judah;
(...), parva, or little, in the positive, is rendered by the Evangelist, (...),
in the superlative degree, the Hebrews have no superlative degree in their
Language, and therefore do often express the importance of it by the positive
with (...) following, as it does in this place; (...), little in the thousands
of Judah, that is the least of them, if the word be adjectively to be expounded.

(...), that is (...), (as the word is rendered by the LXX) is in the
Evangelist (...), Princes, Rulers, Leaders. The Israelites in their political
order were distributed into Tens, Hundreds, and Thousands, not unlike the
distribution in our own Country, into Tythings, Hundreds, and Counties; and
each portion had its peculiar Captain, Ruler, or Leader. According to this
distribution, when there was a considerable number of a thousand, or more
inhabiting together, they made a peculiar kind of Town or City, which had its
special Chiliarch, or Governor. And these were called the Thousands of Israel
or Judah; or places that had such a proportion of people belonging to them, and
consequently such a special Ruler of their own; which kind of Rulers in the
Commonwealth were alone taken notice of. Those others of Tens and Hundreds
being under their Government. So that Rulers, and Thousands, denote one and the
same thing; one with respect unto the people, the other unto the Governors of
them.

The only (...), is in the mode or manner of expression. The proposition in the
Prophet seems to be affirmative, thou art little; in the Evangelist, it is
expressly negative, thou art not the least. But First, This difference
concerns not the Testimony, as to that end for which it was produced: what
ways soever the words be interpreted, the importance of the Testimony is still
the same. (2.) The words in the Prophet contain no perfect Enuntiation, nor do
yield any complete sense, unless it be on one of these two suppositions. First,
That the word (...), is to be taken adverbially, and to signify not parva, but
parum, not a little one, but a little; and then they give us this sense, and
thou Bethlehem Ephrata it is but a little that thou should be among the
Thousands of Judah; and this has no inconsistency with the words of the
Evangelist, Thou art not the least: For though it were eminent among the
Thousands of Judah, yet this was but a little, or small matter in comparison of
the honor that God would put upon it by the birth of the Messiah. And this is
not unusual in the Hebrew Language, Adjectives foeminine are frequently taken
in the Neuter Gender, which it has not, and signify Adverbially. And though
(...), be of a Masculine Termination; yet being joined with (...), the name of
a Town or City, it is put for (...), of the foeminine Gender. Or, Secondly, An
Interrogation must be supposed to be included in the words, art thou but
little? Bethlehem (...), art thou but little? which may well be rendered
negatively, (...), thou art not the least, among the thousands of Judah. The
Prophet then might have respect both to its present outward estate, which was
mean and contemptible in the eyes of men, and also the respect that God had
unto it as to its future worth, which was to prefer it above all the Thousands
of Judah, which principally the Evangelist had regard unto.

There is yet another solution of this difficulty added of late by a learned
person ( Pocock Miscelan. not. cap. 2.) who makes it probable at least, that
the word (...), is of the number of those that are used in a direct contrary
sense, as (...), to sanctify and profane, (...), to bless and curse; (...), a
living soul, and a dead carcass. And he proves by notable instances, that it
signifies, as sometimes (...), least, so sometimes (...), Great, Illustrious,
and Excellent.

The remaining differences are inconsiderable, the Pronoun (...) to me, is
omitted by the Evangelist, and the Reason of it is evident; for in the Prophet
God speaks himself in his own person, in the Gospel the words are only
Historically recited. (...), Ruler in Israel, is paraphrased by the Evangelist,
(...), the Leader that shall feed my people Israel: asserting his Rule, he adds
the manner of it, he shall do it by feeding of them, according as his rule is
declared in the next words in the Prophet, Micah 5.4. He shall stand and feed
in the strength of the Lord; which words the Evangelist had respect unto. And
thus much have we spoken by the way, for the vindication of the recital of this
Testimony, whose Application in general unto the matter in hand is every way
unquestionable, and so yields us a second characteristical note of the person
of the Messiah.

The manner of the birth of the Messiah, namely that he should be born of a
Virgin, is characteristical note given of him. The first promise does
sufficiently intimate that he was not to be brought into the world according to
the ordinary course of mankind, by natural generation, seeing he was (...), and
in peculiar manner designed to be the seed of the Woman, that is to be born of
a Woman without conjunction of man. To make this sign yet the more evident, God
gives it forth directly in a word of promise, Isa. 7.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. Moreover the Lord spoke to Ahaz, saying, ask thee a sign of the Lord thy
God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above; but Ahaz said, I will
not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord; And he said, hear ye now ye House of
David, Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but ye will weary my God also?
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and call his name Emanuel, Butter and Honey shall he
eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good; for before the
Child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the Land that thou
abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. This is the Promise and
Prophecy, the accomplishment whereof in our Lord Jesus we have recorded, Matt.
1.22, 23. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, Behold, A Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a Son, and
they shall call his name Emanuel. Now this being a thing utterly above the
course of nature, which never fell out from the foundation of the world unto
that day, nor ever shall do so to the end of it, seeing the miraculous power of
God shall no more in the like kind be exerted; it is an infallible evidence,
and demonstrative note of the true Messiah. He and he alone was to be born of a
Virgin; so alone was Jesus of Nazareth, and therefore he alone is the true
Messiah.

The Jews being greatly pressed with this Prophecy, and the Accomplishment of
it, Evangelist; but circumstances on that side are so cogent against them, that
they are very faint in that endeavor. For if it was so indeed that Jesus was
not born of a Virgin as is recorded, and as both himself and his Disciples
professed, why did they not charge him with untruth herein, in the days of his
flesh? Why did they not call his Mother into question, especially considering
that the being espoused unto an Husband; they might upon conviction have put
her unto a public and shameful death? None of this being done, or once
undertaken by their forefathers, no less full of Envy and Malice against the
Person and Doctrine of Jesus then themselves, and much better furnished and
provided for such an undertaking, might any color be given unto it, then they
are, they insist not much upon the denial of the Truth of the Record; but to
relieve themselves, they by all means contend that the words of the Prophet are
no way applicable unto the birth of our Lord Jesus, which the Evangelist
reports them prophetically to express. And to this end they multiply Exceptions
against our interpretation of the Prophecy.

First, They deny that here is any thing spoken of the conception or bearing of
a Son by a Virgin. For the word here used, say they, ((...)) signifies any
Young Woman, married or unmarried; Yea sometimes an Adulteress; as Proverbs
30.18. so that the whole foundation of our interpretation is infirm; and the
(...), here intended, was they say, no other but either the Wise of the
Prophet, or the Wife of Ahaz the King, or some young Woman in the Court then
newly married, or to be married to the King, or some other person.

Secondly, They say, that the birth of this Child with the (...), or young
Woman mentioned was to conceive, was immediately to ensue, so as to be a sign
unto Ahaz, and the house of David, of the deliverance promised unto them, from
the Kings of Dam^scus and Samaria; and so could not be Jesus of Nazareth, whose
nativity happening seven hundred years after this, would be no pledge unto them
of any thing that should shortly come to pass.

Thirdly, They insist that v. 16. it is promised, that before that Child which
should be so conc^ived and born, should come to the years of discretion, to
know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good, the Kings of Damascus and
Samaria should be d^stroy^d. Now this came to pass within few years after, and
therefore can have no relation to the birth of Jesus, of Nazareth.

Fourthly, They affirm, that in the following Chapter the accomplishment of
this Prophecy is decla^ed, in the Prophets going in unto the Prophetess, and
her conceiving a Son, concerning whom it is said, that before he should have
knowledge to say my Father, and my M^ther, the Land should be forsak^n of both
her Kings, in answer unto what is spoken of the Child of the Virgin, Chap. 7.
v. 16. Chap. 8. v. 1.

Fifthly, That the name of this Child was to be Immanuel, whereas he of whom we
speak was called Jesus, Mat. 1.21.

Sixthly, That the Child here mentioned was to be fed and nourished with butter
and honey, which cannot be spoken, nor is written of Jesus of N^z^reth.

Jews, that th^se words of the Prophet were literally fulfilled in some one
then a Virgin, and afterward married in those days, and that they are only in
a mystical sense, applied by Matth^w to the bir^h of the Lord Jesus, as they
say, are sundry other things that are spok^n p^imarily of oth^^s in the Old
Testament. But the truth is, this Answer is neither ^a^e in its self, nor
n^edfull as to the Argument of the Jews, nor consist^nt with the sen^e of the
place, or Truth of the words themselves. First, It is not safe, as to the faith
of Chris^i^ns. For wher^as the birth of the Messiah of a Virgin was so signal a
Miracle, and so emi^ent a charact^ristical note of his person, if it be not
directly fo^e^old and proph^si^d of in this place; there was no one prediction
of it made unto the Church of the Jews. Now how this should seem reasonable,
whereas things of far less concernment are foretold, is not easily made to
appear.

S^condly, Upon th^s interpretation of the words, there is no ground left for
the application of their mystical sense which they pretend to be made by
Matthew. For if indeed the Person primarily, directly and literally spoken of,
did not conceive a Child w^ilest she was a Virgin, but only that she who was
then a Virgin, did afterward upon marriage conceive in the ordinary course of
nature, there remains no ground for the application of what is spoken
concerning her, unto one, who in, and after her conception, and the Birth of
her Child, continued a Virgin. For although it be not required that there be an
agreement in all things between the Type and the Antitype; yet if there be no
agreement between them, in that wherein the one is designed to signify the
other, they cannot on any account stand in that relation. David as he was a
King, was a Type of Messiah the Great King. There was we know, not an absolute
similitude in all things between David and him: nor was there any necessity,
that so there should be, that he might be his Type. But yet if he had not been
a King, he could have been no Type of him at all in his Kingdom. No more can
any person here spoken of, unless she did conceive a Son, and bring forth
continuing a Virgin, be a Type of her who was so to do. For how can the
miraculous work of the Conception of a Virgin, be signified or expressed by the
ordinary Conception of a Woman in the State of Wedlock? Besid^s, this Answ^r is
wholly needless, as to the objection of the Jews, and inconsistent with the
sense of the place, as will be seen in the consideration of the words
themselves.

Judaical Church and State, and of the preservation of the Davidical family,
was solely the bringing forth of the promised M^ssiah. And this the Event has
fully demonstrated in their utter rejection after the accomplishment of that
end. And hence the pr^mise of the Messiah was the Foundation, Cause, and Reason
of all other promises made unto that people, as to any mercy or privileges,
that as such, they were entrusted withal. For that for whose sake they were a
people, must needs be the reason and cause of all good things; that as a people
were bestowed upon them. Thus God often promises them to do this or that unto
them, for Abraham's sake, and David's sake, that is upon the account of the
promise of the Messiah signally made unto Abraham and David, when his bringing
forth into the world was restrained unto their families and posterity. And
hence also in times of streights and difficulties, when the people were pressed
on every side, and labored for deliverance, God oftentimes renewed unto them
the promise of the Messiah, partly to support their spirits with expectation of
his coming, and the salvation that it should be accompanied withal, and partly
to give them assurance, that they should not be consumed or utterly perish
under their calamity, because the great work of God by them in bringing forth
the Messiah, was not yet accomplished. So to this purpose the 4. chapter of
this Prophecy. And on this account it was, namely, of the temporal concernment
of that people in the coming of the Messiah, that the promise of him was
oftentimes mixed and interwoven with the mention of other things, that were of
present use and advantage unto them; so that it was not easy sometimes to
distinguish the things that are properly spoken with reference unto him, from
those other things which respected what was present; seeing both sorts of them
are together spoken of, and that to the same end and purpose.

Upon these principles we may easily discover the true sense and importance of
this Ahaz, and the generality of the house of David with him, refusing a sign
of deliverance tendered unto them, God tells them by his Prophet, that they had
not only wearied his Messengers by their unbelief and hypocrisy, but that they
were ready to weary himself also, v. 13. He was even almost wearied with their
manifold provocations, during that Typical state and condition, wherein he kept
them. However, for the present he had promised them deliverance, and although
they had refused to ask a sign of him according unto his Command, yet he would
preserve them from their present fears, and utter ruin, and in his due time
accomplish his great and wonderful intendment, and that in a miraculous manner
by causing a Virgin to conceive and bring forth that Son, on whose account they
should be preserved. This is the ground of the promise of the Messiah in this
place; even to give them assurance that they should be preserved from utter
destruction, because they were to continue their Church and State until his
coming; as also to comfort and support them during their distresses with the
hopes and expectation of him; for with the thoughts of his coming, do the Jews
to this day relieve their spirits under their calamities, though they have had
no renewed promise of him for near two thousand years. But how may it appear
that it was the Messiah who should be thus born of a Virgin? This the Prophet
assures them, by telling them, in his Name, what he shall be, and be called
accordingly, He shall be called Immanuel, or God with us; he shall be so both
in respect of his Person and Office; for he shall be God and Man, and he shall
reconcile God and Man, taking away the enmity and distance that was caused by
sin. And this was such a description of the Messiah, as by which he was
sufficiently known under the Old Testament, yea from the foundation of the
world, as has been before declared. And the Prophet further assures them, that
this Immanuel shall be born, truly a man, and dwell amongst them, being brought
up with the common food of the Country, until he came as other men, unto the
years of discretion. Butter and Honey shall he eat, until he know to choose the
good, and refuse the evil. And this was enough for the consolation of
Believers, as also for the security of the people from the desolation feared.
But yet because all this discourse was occasioned by the war raised against
Judah by the Kings of Israel and Damascus, unto the promise of their
deliverance, God is pleased to add a threatening of judgment and destruction
unto their adversaries; and because he would limit a certain season for the
execution of his Judgment upon them, as he had declared the safety and
preservation of Judah, to depend on the birth of Immanuel of a Virgin in the
appointed season, so as to their enemies that they should be cut off and
destroyed, before the time that any child not yet born could come to the years
of discretion, to choose the good, or to refuse the evil, v. 16. Now that this
is the true importance and meaning of the Prophecy, will evidently appear in
our vindication of it from the exception of the Jews (before laid down) against
its application by Matthew unto the Nativity of Jesus Christ.

First, They except that it is not a Virgin that is here intended by (...)
which they young Woman, and sometimes an Adulteress. This being the foundation
of all their other objections, and on the determination whereof, the whole
Controversy from this place depends, I shall fully clear the Truth of what
we assert. For the Jews themselves will not deny, but that if the conception of
a Virgin be intended, it must referr unto some other, and not to any in those
days. (...), The word here used, is from (...) to hide, or (...) in Niphal,
hidden, kept close, reserved. Hence is that name of Virgins, partly in general
from their being unknown by man, and partly from the universal custom of the
East, wherein those Virgins who were of any esteem, or account, were kept hid
and reserved from all public or common conversation. Hence by the Grecians
also they are called (...), shut up, or recluses, and their first appearance in
public they termed (...), the season of bringing them out from the retirements
wherein they were hid. The original signification of the word then denotes
precisely a Virgin, and cannot be wrested to a person living in the state of
Wedlock, much less unto a prostitute Harlot, as the Jews pretend.

Secondly, The constant use of the words dir^cts us to the same signification.
It is seven times used in the Old Testament, and in every one of them does
still denote a Virgin, or Virgins, either in a proper, or metaphorical sense:
The first time it is used, is Genesis 24. v. 43. where Rebeckah is said to be
(...) a Virgin, v. 16. She is said to be (...) a Maid, and (...) a Man had not
known her, so that (...) is (...) a Maid that no Man has known; that is, an
unspotted Virgin. And doubtless such a one, and no other, was intended by
Abraham's Servant for a Wife unto Isaac when he prayed, that She (...) which
came forth to the water, might answer his token that he had fixed on. Again, it
is us^d, Exodus 2.8. where Moses Sister, who called her Mother unto Pharaohs
Daughter, is termed (...); and her age being then probably not above nine or
ten years old, with the course of her life in her Mothers house, declare her
sufficiently to have been a Virgin. Once it is used in the Psalms in the plural
number, Psalm. 68. v. 26. (...) in the midst, the Virgins playing with Tymbrels;
where also none but Virgins properly so called, can be intended; for they were
by themselves exercised to celebrate the praises of God in the great Assembly.
Twice is the word used in the same number in a metaphorical sense in the
Canticles; and in both places has respect unto Virgins, chap. 1.3. Therefore
do the (...) love thee; that is the Virgins, as they do a desirable person from
whence the Allusion is taken. And chap. 6, 7. They (...) are distinguished
first from (...) the Queens, or the Kings married Wives; and then from the
(...) or Concubines: those who were admitted ad usum Thori, to the
marriage bed, though their children did not inherit with those of the married
Wives: And therefore none but those who were properly Virgins, could be
designed by that name: And by them are those denoted who keep themselves chaste
unto Christ, and undefiled in his Worship. Hence are they in the Revelations,
chap. 14.5. said to be (...) Virgins, or (...), v. 17. persons unblameable
before the Throne of God, having not defiled themselves with the special
fornications of the great Whore. There remains only one place more wherein
this word is used, whence the Jews would wrest somewhat to countenance their
exceptions; this is Prove. 30.19. (...) And the way of a Man with a Maid. And
who is intended by (...) there, they say, the ensuing words declare (...) So is
the way of an Adulteress, or a Woman an Adulteress, an Harlot, so that (...)
may it seems be such an one. But 1. Suppose the word should in this place be
used in a sense quite contrary unto that of all other places wherein mention is
made of it; is it equal that we should take the importance of it from this one
abuse, rather then from the constant use of it in other places; especially
considering that this place will by no means admit of that signification, as we
shall immediately evince. Secondly, It is used here peculiarly with the prefix
(...) whence it is rendered by the LXX. in the abstract, (...), The way of a Man
in his youth; which sense Hierom follows viam viri in Adolesentia, and it may
thus seem to be differenced from the same word in all other places. But
Thirdly, Indeed the meaning of the wise man is evident, and it is a Virgin that
he intended by the word and (...) is the way that a man takes to corrupt a
Virgin, and to compass his lust upon her. This is secret, hidden, full of
snares, and evils, such as ought not to enter into the thoughts of a good man
to conceive, much less to approve of. And therefore, whereas he says of the
residue of the Quaternion joined with this, v. 18. (...) They are too wonderful
for me, he adds on the mention of this evil, (...) I know it not, or as Hierom,
penitus ignoro, which he could not say of the way of natural generation. And by
this means, she who is called (...) a Virgin, v. 19. is made (...) an Harlot,
v. 20. and become impudent in sinning. A man having by subtle wicked ways
prevailed against her chastity, and corrupted her Virginity, she afterward
becomes a common prostitute. And this I take to be the genuine meaning of the
place, though it be not altogether improbable, that the wise man in the v. 20.
proceeds unto another especial instance of things secret and hidden in an
adulterous Woman, (...) signifying as much as, so also, which it does in sundry
other places.

And these are all the places besides that of the Prophet under consideration,
wherein unspotted Virgin. Besides, the LXX. render it in this place (...) a
Virgin, and the Targum (...) which the other Targums express a Virgin by, Genesis
24.24, 59. Esth. 2.2. chap. 4.4. Ruth 2.23. 1 Samuel 25.42. Neither is any word
in the Scripture so constantly and invariably used to express an incorrupted
Virgin as this is. (...) has respect only unto Age, and signifies any one
married, or unmarried, a Virgin, or one deflowred, so she be young. (...) also
is used for one corrupted, Deuteronomy. 22.23, 24. As also for a Widow, Joel 1.8. So
that by this word, a Virgin is precisely signified, or the Hebrews have no word
denoting exactly that state and condition. And lastly, the prefixing of (...)
in this place (...) makes the denotation of the word the more signal. It is but
twice more so prefixed, Genesis 24. and Exodus 2. In both which places the Jews
themselves will not deny but that unspotted Virgins are intended.

Further, There are other considerations offering themselves from the context,
Virgin which is here intended and foretold. For first, it is plainly some
marvelous thing, above, and contrary unto the ordinary course and operation of
nature that is here spoken of. It is called (...) a signal prodigy, and is
given by God himself in the room of, and as something greater, and more
marvelous than any thing that Ahaz could have asked either in Heaven above, or
in the Earth beneath, had he made his choice according unto the tender made
unto him. The Lord God himself shall give you a sign. The Emphasis used in
giving the promise, denotes the marvelousness of the thing promised. Now
certainly it was no such great matter that the Wife of Ahaz, which had before
born him a Son who was now eight years of age, or the Wife of the Prophet, who
was the Mother of Shearj^shub then present with his Father, or any Virgin then
present immediately to be married, should bear a Son, so as to have it called a
Prodigy, an eminent sign of Gods giving a thing that he should take upon his
own power to perform, when within the same space of time hundreds of Sons were
born to other Women in the same Country. And it is ridiculous what the Jews
pretend, namely, that it was great in this, that the Prophet should foretell
that Conception, as also that it should be a Son that should be born, and not a
Daughter; for the work and sign intimated does not consist at all in the Truth
of the Prophets prediction, but in the Greatness of the thing it self that was
foretold.

The Jews cannot assign either Virgin or Son that is here intended. Some of
them Alma was the Wife of Ahaz, and the Son promised Hezekiah; but this is
rejected by Kimchi himself, acknowledging that Hezekiah was now eight years
old, being born four years before his Father came to the Kingdom, in the fourth
year of whose Reign this promise was given unto him. Others would have the Alma
to be the Wife of the Prophet, and the Son promised to be Maker-shalal-hasbaz,
whose birth is mentioned in the next chapter. But neither has this any more
color of reason: For besides that, his Wife is constantly called (...), the
Prophetess, and could on no account be termed (...) a Virgin, having a Son some
years old at that time accompanying his Father, that Son of hers in the eighth
chapter, is promised as a sign quite to another purpose, nor could for any
reason be called (...) Immanuel, whose the Land should be, which is said to
belong unto this promised child. And for what they, lastly, add concerning some
Virgin then standing by, who was shortly after to be married, it is as fond as
any other of their imaginations; for besides that the Prophet says not (...)
this Virgin, as he would have done, had he directed his speech unto any one
personally present; it is a more arbitrary invention, no way countenanced from
the Text or Context; such as if men may be allowed in, it is easy for them to
pervert the sense of holy Writ at their pleasure. On all which considerations
it appears, that none can possibly in this promise be intended, but he whose
birth was (...) a miraculous sign, as being born of (...) a Virgin, and who
being born was (...) God with us, both in respect of his person uniting the
Natures of God and Man in one, and of his Office reconciling God and Man, that
God might dwell with us in a way of favor and grace, and he whose the Land
should be in an everlasting Kingdom.

Evangelist, and all that we are concerned in it. This being proved and
confirmed undeniably, that it is the Messiah whose birth is here foretold, as
also that he was to be born of a Virgin, all other passages, whatever
difficulty we may meet withal in them, must be interpreted in answer
thereunto. And we have showed before, that by reason of the Typical State and
Condition of that people, many of the Promises of the Messiah were so mixed
with things of their then present temporal concernment; that it is often a
matter of some difficulty to distinguish between them. It is enough for us,
that we prove unquestionably, that those passages which are applied unto him in
the New Testament were spoken of him intentionally in the Old; which we have
done in this place; and what belonged unto the then present state of the Jews,
we are not particularly concerned in. However we shall manifest in answer to
the remaining exceptions of the Jews, that there is nothing mentioned in the
whole Prophecy that has any inconsistency with what we have declared, as to
the sense of the principal point of it; nay, that the whole of it is
excellently suited unto the principal Scope already vindicated.

second place is objected by the Jews against our Application of this Place and
Prophecy to Jesus Christ, is that the birth of the Child here promised, was to
be a sign to Ahaz, and the House of David, of their deliverance from the two
Kings who then waged war against them. And this they say the birth of the
Messiah so many hundred years after could give them no pledge or assurance of.
And (1.) We do not say, that this was given them as a peculiar sign, or token
of their present deliverance. Ahaz himself had before refused such a sign: But
God only shows the Reason in general why he would not utterly cast them off,
although they wearied him, but would yet deliver them as at other times. And
this was because of that great work which he had to accomplish among them,
which was to be signal, marvelous and miraculous. And this he calls (...), a
sign in its absolute, not relative sense, as denoting a work wonderful, such
as sometimes he wrought, to evidence his great power thereby. In this sense
(...), signs, are joined unto (...), Prodigies, Deuteronomy. 26.22. Jer. 32.20. Nehem.
9.10. where the works so called, were great and mavelous, not signs formally
of any thing, unless it were of the wonderful power of God whereby they were
wrought. So the Miracles of our Savior and the Apostles in the New Testament
are called (...), signs for the same, and no other cause. And the Word is thus
absolutely used very often in the Old Testament.

Besides, that which is Secondly alleged, that a thing that shall come to pass
many ages after, cannot be made a sign of that which was to be done many ages
before, is not universally true. The thing it self in its existence it is true
cannot be made so a sign; but it may in the Promise and prediction of it. And
many instances we have of things promised for signs, which were not to exist in
themselves, until after the accomplishment of the things whereof they were
signs, as Exodus 3.12. 1 Samuel 11.34. Isa. 37.10. 1 Kings 22.25. God intending by
them the confirmation of their faith, who should live in the time of their
actual accomplishment.

Thirdly, This sign had the truth and force of a Promise although it was not
immediately to be put in execution, and that is the reason, that the words here
used, are one of them (...), conceive, in the preterperfect Tense, the other
(...), in benoni, or Participle of the present Tense, to intimate the certainty
of the events, as is usual in the prophetical Dialect. Their assurance then
from this sign consisted herein, that God informs them, that as surely as he
would accomplish the great promise of bringing forth the Messiah, and would put
forth his marvelous power therein, that he should be conceived and born of a
Virgin, so certain should be their present deliverance which they so desired.

before the Child spoken of, should know to refuse the evil and choose the good;
or should come to years of discretion, v. 16. and what was this unto him that
was to be born some hundred years after? Answ. (1.) That the (...), mentioned
v. 16. is the same with the (...) promised, v. 14. does not appear. The Prophet
by the command of God when he went unto the King with his message, took with
him Shear-jashub his Son, v. 3. This certainly was for some especial end in the
Word or Message that he had to deliver, the Child being then but an Infant, and
of no use in the whole matter, unless to be made an instance of something that
was to be done. It is therefore probable that he was the (...), the young Child
designed, v. 16. before whose growing up to discretion, those Kings of Damascus
and Samaria were destroyed, or (2.) The Expression may denote the time of any
Child's being born and coming to the maturity of understanding, and so
consequently the promised Child. In as short a space of time as this promised
Child; when he shall be born, shall come to know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, shall this deliverance be wrought.

Their remaining Cavils are of little importance. The Child intended, Chap. 8.
Virgin. Besides, he is plainly promised as a sign of other things then those
treated of in this Chapter: Yea, of things quite contrary unto them. Again this
Child they tell us was to be called Immanuel whereas the Son of Mary was called
(...), or, as they maliciously write it (...). But this name is given to
signify what he should be, and do, and not what he should be commonly called.
He was to be God and man in one person, to reconcile God and man; to be every
way Immanuel. And this kind of expression in the Scripture, when a thing is
said to be called that which it is; the name denoting the Being, Nature, and
quality of it, is so frequent, that there is nothing peculiar in it as here
used. See Isa. 1.26. Chap. 8.3. Chap. 9.6. Jer. 23.6. Zech. 8.2. The like also
may be said to that which they except in the last place, namely, that they know
not that Jesus of Nazareth was brought up with Butter and Honey, which is
foretold conc^rning this Child. For the expression signifies no more but that
the Child should be educated with the common food of the Country, such as
Children were in those places and times nourished withal: It being the especial
blessing of that Land that it flowed with Milk and Honey. And thus have we
asserted and vindicated the third characteristical note of the true Messiah, he
was to be born of a Virgin, which none but only our Lord Jesus ever was from
the foundation of the world.

There remain yet other descriptive notes of the Messiah, consisting in what he
was to Jesus, who in all things fully answered unto them all. I shall briefly
pass through them, according unto our design and purpose; and begin with what
he was to teach. This Moses directs us unto, giving that great predescription
of him, which we have Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. I will raise them up a Prophet from
among their Brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and
he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to
pass, that wh^soever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him. This is that signal Testimony concerning the
Messiah, which Philip urged out of Moses unto Nathaniel, John 1.45. which Peter
not only applies unto him, but declares that he was soly intended in it, Acts
3.22, 23. and Stephen seals that application with his blood, Acts 7.37. Neither
can, or do the Jews deny that the Messiah was to be a Prophet, or that he was
promised unto the Church in the Wilderness in these words, but we shall
consider the particulars of them.

Sundry things are here asserted by Moses concerning the Messiah; as (1.) In
general, Prophet; a Teacher of the Church, and not a King only. The Jews
indeed, who greedily desire the things which outwardly attend Kingly Power and
Dominion in this world, do principally fix their thoughts and expectations on
his Kingdom. The Revelation of the Will of God which was to be made by him,
they little desire or enquire after. But the common faith of their Ancestors
from this and other places, was that the Messiah was to be a Prophet; and
reveal unto the Church the whole counsel of God, as we shall evince in our
Comment on the first words of the Epistle. (2.) That this Prophet should be
raised up unto them from among their Brethren; He shall be of the posterity of
Abraham, and of the Tribe of Judah, as was promised of old; or made of them
according unto the flesh, Romans 1.3.9.5. So that as to his original or extract,
he was to be born in the level of the people, from among his Brethren was be to
be raised up; Unto this Office of a Prophet and Teacher of the Church. (3.)
That he must be like unto Moses. The words are plain in many places, that in
the ordinary course of Gods dealing with that Church among the Prophets, there
was none like unto Moses, neither before, or after him. Hence Maimonides with
his followers conclude, that nothing can ever be altered in their Law, because
no Prophet was ever to arise of equal Authority with him, who was their
Lawgiver. But the words of the Text are plain. The Prophet here foretold, was
to be like unto him, wherein he was peculiar and exempted from comparison with
all other Prophets, which were to build on his foundation, without adding any
thing to the Rule of Faith and Worship which he had revealed, or changing any
thing therein. In that, is the Prophet here promised to be like unto him. That
is, he was to be a Lawgiver to the House of God, as our Apostle proves and
declares, chap. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And we have the consent of the most sober
among the Jews to the same purpose.

The words of the Author of Sepher Ikkarim lib. 3. cap. 10. are remarkable.
(...), It cannot be, that there should not at some tim^, (...) a Prophet, like
unto Moses, or greater then he; for Messiah the King should be like him, ^^
greater then he: but thus, these words, there arose none like him, ought to be
interpreted, not as though none should ever be like him, but that none should
be like him, as to some particular qu^lity or accident; or that in all the
space of time, wherein the Prophets followed him, until Prophecy ceased, none
should be like unto Moses; but hereafter there shall be one like him, or rather
greater then he. This is that which we affirmed before, in the whole Series of
Prophets that succeeded in that Church building on Moses foundation, there was
none like unto him; but the Prophet here promised was to be so, and in other
regards, as appears from other Testimonies, far greater then he. This was of
old their common faith from this prediction of Moses. And wherein this likeness
was to consist, our Apostle declares at large in his third chapter. Moses was
the great Lawgiver, by whom God revealed his mind, and will, as to his whole
Worship, whilst the Church State instituted by him was to continue. Such a
Prophet was the Messiah to be, a Lawgiver, so as to abolish the old, and to
institute new Rites of Worship, as we shall afterward more fully prove and
confirm. (4.) This raising up of a Prophet, like unto Moses, declares that the
whole will of God, as to his Worship, and the Churches obedience, was not yet
revealed. Had it so been, there would have been no need of a Prophet like unto
Moses, to lay new foundations as he had done. Those who succeeded building on
what he had fixed, and therefore said not to be like unto him, would have
sufficed. But there are new counsels of the Will of God, as yet hid, to be
finally and fully revealed by this Prophet. And after his work is done, there
is no intimation of any further Revelation to ensue. (5.) The presence of God
with this Prophet in his work is set down. He would put his word into his
mouth, or speak in him, as our Apostle expresses the same matter, chap. 1. v.
1. And lastly, his Ministry is further described from the Event, with respect
unto them who would not submit unto his Authority, nor receive the Law of God
at his mouth. God would require it at their hands, that is, as those words are
interpreted by Peter, they should be cut off from among his people, or from
being so. And this signal Commination in the accomplishment of it, gives light
unto the whole praediction. Some of the Jews from these words have fancied unto
themselves another great Prophet, whom they expect as they did of old, before
the coming of the Messiah. So in their dealing with John the Baptist, they
asked him whethe^ ^e was Elias, which he denied, because, though he were
promised under that name, yet he was not that individual person whom they
looked for, that is the soul of Elias the Tishbite, as Kimchi tells us with a
body new created like unto the former. Wherein they further demand whether he
were (...), the Prophet promised by Moses, which he also denies, because that
Prophet was no other then the Messiah, Joh. 1.21. To this purpose also is it,
that the Spirit of the Lord is promised to rest upon the Messiah, Isa. 11.3. to
make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, that he might not
judge after the sight of his eyes, etc. v. 3, 4, 5. So also cap. 61.1, 2. And
from this great Prophet, were the Isles of the Gentiles to receive the Law,
chap. 42.1, 2. The sum of all is, the Messiah was to be a Prophet, a Prophet
like unto Moses; that is a Lawgiver, one that should finally and perfectly
reveal the whole will and counsel of God; all with that Authority, that
whosoever refused to obey him should be exterminated, and cast out from the
privilege of being reckoned among the people of God.

Jesus of Nazareth. Now this the story of him and the event do abundantly
testify, that he was a Prophet, and so esteemed by the Jews themselves, until
through the envy of the Scribes and Pharisees, and their own unwillingness to
admit of the purity and holiness of his Doctrine, they were stirred up to
oppose and persecute him, as they had done all other Prophets, who in their
several Generations foretold his coming, is evident from the records of the
Evangelical story; see Joh. 1.46. chap. 6.17. Act. 3.22, 23. Their present
obstinate denial hereof, is a mere contrivance to justify themselves in their
rejection and murder of him. But this is not all; he was not only a Prophet in
general, but he was that Prophet who was foretold by Moses, and all the
Prophets, who built on his foundation, who was to put the last hand unto divine
Revelations, in a full declaration of the w^ole counsel of God, the peculiar
work of the Messiah; and this we shall evince in the ensuing considerations of
his Doctrine and Prophecy, with the success and event of them.

First, The Nature of the Doctrine taught by this Prophet, gives Testimony unto
our Characters of that Truth which is holy and heav^nly can rationally be
conceived or apprehended, they are all eminently and incomparably imprinted on
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Whatever tends to the glory of God, as the first
Cause, and last End of all things, as the only Sovereign Ruler, Judge, and
disposer of all, as the only infinitely holy, wise, righteous, good, gracious,
merciful, powerful, faithful, independent Being, is clearly, evidently, and in
a heave^ly manner revealed therein. Wha^ever is us^ful or suitable to excite
and improve, all that is of good in man, in the n^ti^ns of his mind, or
inclinations of his will, to discover his wants and defects that he may not
^xalt himself in his own imag^nation abov^ h^s state and condition; whatever is
needful to reveal unto him, his End, or his Way, h^s Happiness, or the Means
conducing thereunto, whatever may bring him into a d^e subjection unto God, and
subordination unto his Glory; whatever may te^ch him to be us^ful in all those
Relations wherein he may be cast, within the bounds and compass of the moral
principles of his nature, as a creature made for society; w^atever is useful
the deterr him from, and s^ppress in him every thing that is evil, even in
those hidden seeds and Embrios of it which lie beneath the first instances that
Reason can reach unto to discovery of, and that in an absolute universality,
without the l^ast indulgence on any pretense whatever, and to st^r him up,
provoke him unto, and direct him in the practice of whatever thing is true,
honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, that is virtuous, or praiseworthy,
that may begin, bound, guide, limit, finish, and perf^ct, the whole Systeme of
moral actions in him in relation unto God himself, and others; it is all
revealed, confirmed, and ratified in the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. It hath-stood upon its trial above sixteen hundred years in the world,
challenging the wit and malice of its adversaries, to discover any one thing or
circumstance of any thing that is untrue, false, evil, uncomely, not useful, or
inconvenient in it, or to find out any thing that is morally good, virtuous,
useful, praiseworthy, in h^bit or exercise, in any instances of op^rations in
any degree of intention of mind, any duty that man owes to God, others, or
himself, that is not taught, enjoined, encouraged, and commanded by it; or to
discover any motives, encouragements, or reasons unto, and for the pursuit of
that which is good, and the avoidance of evil that are true, real, solid, and
rational, which it affords not unto them that embrace it. This absolute
perfection of the Doctrine of this Prophet, joined with those Characters of
Divine Authority which are enst^mped on it, does sufficiently evidence that it
contains the great, promised, full, final Revelation of the Will of God, which
was to be given forth by the Messiah. Add hereunto, that since the delivery of
this Doctrine, the whole race of mankind has not been able to invent, or find
out any thing, that without the most palpable folly and madness might be added
unto it, much less stand in competition with it, and it will it self
sufficiently demonstrate its Author.

Secondly, We have declared in the entrance of this discourse, that the Messiah
was declared unto all in general, this they believed whom God graciously
enabled thereunto. But how this deliverance should be wrought in particular by
the Messiah, how the works of the Devil should be destroyed, how God and Man
should be reconciled, how sinners might recover a title unto their lost
happiness, and be brought to an enjoyment of it; this was unknown not only unto
all the Sons of Men, but also to all the Angels in Heaven themselves; who then
shall unfold this mystery which was hid in the counsel of God from the
foundation of the world? It was utterly beyond the reason and wisdom of man, to
give any tolerable conjecture how these things should be effected and brought
about. But all this is fully declared by this Prophet himself. In his Doctrine,
in what he taught, does this great and hidden mystery of the Reconciliation
and Salvation of mankind open it self gloriously to the minds and
understandings of them that believe, whose eyes the God of this world has not
blinded, and them alone; for although this promise of the Messiah was all that
God gave out unto Adam, and by him unto his posterity to keep their hopes alive
in their miserable condition in the Earth, yet such was its obscurity, that
meeting with the minds of men full of darkness, and hearts set upon the pursuit
of their lusts, it was as to the substance of it, utterly lost to the greatest
part of mankind. Afterward the thing it self was again retrived unto the faith
and knowledge of some by new Revelations and Promises, only the manner of its
accomplishment was still lost, hid in the depths of the bosom of the Almighty.
But as we said by the preaching of Jesus, both the thing its self, and the
manner of it, are together brought to light, made known, and established,
beyond all the power of Satan, to prevail against it. This was the work of the
promised Prophet; this was done by Jesus of Nazareth, who is therefore both
Lord and Christ.

God in his Wisdom and Sovereignty restrained the Promise unto Abraham and his
posterity, shadowing out among them the accomplishment of it in Mosaical Rites
and Institutions. And these also received manifold Explications by the
succeeding Prophets. From the whole, a Systeme of Worship and Doctrine did
arise, which turned wholly on this hinge of the promised Messiah, relating in
all things to the salvation to be wrought by him. But yet the will and mind of
God was in this whole dispensation so folded and wrapped up in Types, so veiled
and shadowed by carnal Ordinances, so obscure and hid in Allegorical
Expressions, that the bringing of them forth unto light, the removal of the
clouds and shades that were cast upon them, with a declaration of the Nature,
Reason, and Use of all those Institutions, was a work no less glorious then the
very first Revelation of the promise it self. This was that which was reserved
for the great Prophet, the Messiah; for that God would prescribe Ordinances and
Institutions unto his Church, whose full Nature, Use, and End, should be
everlastingly unknown unto them, is unreasonable to imagine. Now this is done
in the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ. The spiritual End, Use and Nature of
all these Sacrifices, and Typical Institutions, which unto them who were
conversant only with their outside. Servile performances were an insupportable
yoke of bondage, as the Jews find them unto this day, being never able to
satisfy themselves in their most scrupulous attendance unto them, are all made
evident and plain, and all that was taught by them accomplished. This was the
work of the Prophet, like unto Moses. He fulfilled the End, and unvailed the
mind of God in all these Institutions. And he has done it so fully, that
whoever looks upon them through his declaration of them, cannot but be amazed
at the blindness and stupidity of the Jews, who rejecting the Revelation of the
Counsel of God by him, adhere pertinaciously unto that whereof they understand
aright no one title or syllable: for there is not the meanest Christian, who is
instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, but can give a better account of the
Nature, Use, and End of Mosaical Institutions, then all the profound Rabbis in
the world either can, or ever could do. He that is least in the Kingdom of God,
being greater in this light and knowledge, then John Baptist himself, who yet
was not behind any of the Prophets that went before him. This I say, is that
which the promised Prophet was to do; and moreover, to add the Institutions of
his own immediate Revelations, even as Moses had given them the Law of
Ordinances of old. And in this superinstitution of new Ordinances of Worship
thereby superceding those instituted by Moses, was he like unto him, as was
foretold.

require it of him, that is, as themselves confess, to exterminate them from
among the number of his people, or to reject them from being so. Now this was
done by the body of the Jewish Nation; they received him not, they obeyed not
his voice, and what was the end of this their disobedience? they who for their
despising, persecuting, killing the former Prophets, were only corrected,
chastened, afflicted, and again quickly recovered, out of the worst and
greatest of their troubles, upon their rejection of him, and disobedience unto
his voice, are cut off, destroyed, exterminated from the place of their solemn
Worship, and utterly rejected from being the people of God. Whatever may be
conceived to be contained in the commination against those who disobey the
voice of that Prophet promised, is all of it to the full, and in its whole
extent, come upon the Jews, upon and for their disobedience unto the Doctrine
of Jesus of Nazareth; which added unto the foregoing considerations, undeniably
prove him to have been that Prophet.

There is yet another Character given of the Messiah in the Old Testament,
namely, suffer in the world, in the discharge of his work and office. This
being that wherein the main foundation of the whole was to consist, and that
which God knew would be most contrary to the appre^ension, and expectation of
that carnal people, is of all other notes of him, most clearly and fully
asserted. The nature and effects of these sufferings of the Messiah, and how
they were to be satisfactory to the Justice of God (without which apprehension
of them, little or nothing of the promise, or of Mosaical Institutions can
rightly be understood) because we must treat of them in our explication of the
Epistle it self, shall not here be insisted on. It is sufficient unto our
present intention, that we prove that the Messiah was to suffer, and that as
many other miseries, so death it self; and this his suffering is foretold as a
Character to know and discern him by, that Jesus of Nazareth by so many other
demonstrations, and evident tokens proved to be the Messiah, did also suffer
the utmost that could be inflicted on a man, and in particular the things and
evils which the Messiah was to undergo, we shall not need to prove; the Jews
confess it, and even glory that their forefathers were the instrumental cause
of his sufferings. Neither does it at present concern us to declare what he
suffered from God himself, what from man, what from Satan, in his life and
death, in his soul and body, and all his concernments; it being abundantly
sufficient unto our present purpose, that he suffered all manner of miseries;
and lastly, death it self, and that not for himself, but for the sins of others.

The first evident Testimony given hereunto, is in Psalm. 22. from the beginning
to verse. that sufferings, and those very great and unexpressible, are treated
of in this Ps^lm, the Jews themselves confess, and the matter is too evident to
be denied. That dereliction of God, tortures and pains in body and soul,
revilings, mockings, with cruel death, are sufferings, is certain, and they are
all here foretold. Again, it is evident, that some individual person is
designed as the subject of those sufferings. Most of the Jews would interpret
this Psalm of the body of the people, to whom not one line in it can be
properly applied; for besides, that the person intended, is spoken of
singularly throughout the whole Prophecy, he is also plainly distinguished from
all the people, of what sort soever; from the evil amongst them who reviled and
persecuted him, v. 7, 8. and from the residue, whom he calls his Brethren, and
the Congregation of Israel, v. 22. It cannot then be the Congregation of Israel
that is spoken of; for how can the Congregation of Israel be said to declare
the praises of God, before the Congregation of Israel, which is the sum of
Kimchi's Exposition. Some of them from the title of the Psalm (...); for the
hind of the morning, would have it to be a Prophecy of Hester, who appeared as
beautiful as the morning in the deliverance of Israel. But as the Title is of
another importance, respecting the nature of the Psalm, not the person treated
of in it, so they are not able to apply one verse or word in it unto her.
Others of them plead, that it is David himself who is intended; and this is not
without some shadow of Truth; for David might in some things propose his own
afflictions and sufferings, as Types of the sufferings of the Messiah. But
there are many things in this Psalm that cannot be applied unto him absolutely.
When did any open their lips, and shake their heads at him, using the words
mentioned, v. 7, 8? When was he, or his blood poured forth like water, and all
his bones dis-joynted, v. 14? When were his hands and feet pierced, v. 16? When
did any part his garments, and cast lots on his vesture, v. 18? When was he
brought to the dust of death, before his last and final dissolution, v. 15? And
yet all these things were to be accomplished in the person of him, who is
principally treated of in this Psalm.

This whole Psalm then is a Prophecy of the Messiah, and absolutely of no
other, as v. 22, 23, Secondly, it is he, by whom the meek shall be satisfied,
and obtain life eternal, v. 26. Thirdly, upon his sufferings, as the event and
success of them the Gentiles are to be gathered in unto God, v. 27. All the
ends of the World shall remember and turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds
of the Nations shall worship before thee. And this by the confession of the
Jews is the proper work of the Messiah, to be effected in his days and by him
alone. Fourthly, The preaching of the Truth and Righteousness and Faithfulness
of God in his Promise unto all Nations, that is of the Gospel, ensues on the
sufferings described, v. 31. which they also acknowledge to belong unto his
days: So that it is the Messiah and he alone, who is absolutely and ultimately
intended in this Psalm.

Jesus of Nazareth, in all the instances of it, that it appears to be spoken
directly of him, and no other. The manner of his sufferings is scarcely more
cleared, expressed in the Story of it by the Evangelists, then it is here
foretold by David in Prophecy, and therefore, many passages out of this Psalm
are expressed by them in their Records. He it was who pressed with a sense of
Gods dereliction cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He it
was that was accounted, a worm and no man, and reviled and reproached
accordingly; at him did men wagg their heads, and reproach him with his trust
in God, his bones were drawn out of joint by the manner of his sufferings: his
hands and feet were pierced, and upon his Vestures lots were cast; upon his
sufferings were the truth and Promises of God declared and preached unto all
the world: so that it is his suffering alone which is before hand described in
this Psalm.

Jews except against our Application of this Psalm unto the Lord Jesus, as they
imagine from our own principles, and greatly triumph in their supposed
Advantage, indeed in their own blindness and ignorance. Jesus they tell us, in
the opinion of Christians was God, and how can these things be spoken of God;
how could God cry out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, how could men
pierce the hands and feet of God. And sundry of the like Queries are made by
Kimchi on the several passages of this Psalm. But we know of how slender
importance these things are. He who suffered was God; but he suffered not as
God, nor in that wherein he was God; for he was man also, and as man, and in
that wherein he was man, did he suffer. But their ignorance of the union of the
Divine and Humane nature in the Person of Christ, each nature preserving its
distinct properties and operations, is a thing which they would by no means be
persuaded to part withal, because it stands them, as they suppose, in great
stead, as furnishing them with those weak and pitiful Objections that they use
to make against the Gospel.

signal Testimony unto the same purpose. Isa. 53. as the outward manner of the
sufferings of the Messiah, with their actings who were instrumental therein, is
principally considered in Psalm 22. so the inward nature, end and effect of
them, are declared in this Prophecy. There are also sundry passages, relating
unto the Covenant between the Lord Christ and his Father, for the carrying on
of the work of Redemption by this way of suffering, which the ancient Jews not
understanding his Personal subsistence before his Incarnation, referred unto
his soul, which they imagine to have been created at the beginning of the
world. Now is there any Prophecy that fills the present Rabbis with more
perplexities, or drives them to more absurdities and contradictions. It is not
our present business to explicate the particular passages of the Prophecy, or
to make Application of them unto the Messiah. It has been done already by
sundry learned men, and we also have cast our mite into this Sanctuary on
another occasion. That which we insist on, is obvious to all; namely, that
dreadful sufferings in Soul and Body, and that from the Will and good pleasure
of God, for ends expressed in it, are here foretold and declared. Our enquiry
is alone, after the Person spoken of; for whoever he be, the Jews will not
deny, but that he was to suffer all sorts of calamities. That it is the Messiah
and none other, we have not only the Evidence of the Text and Context, and
nature of the subject matter treated of, with the utter impossibility of
applying the thing spoken of unto any person, without the overthrow of the
whole faith of the Ancient Church, but also all the advantage from the
confession of the Jews that can be expected or need to be desired from
Adversaries. For,

Ancient and best records of their Judgment, expressly affirm the Person spoken
of, to be the Messiah. This is the Targum on the place which themselves esteem
of unquestionable, if not of Divine Authority. The spring and rise of the whole
Prophecy, as the Series of the Discourse manifests, is in v. 13. of Chap. 52.
and there, the words (...); Behold my servant shall prosper, or deal wisely,
are rendered by Jonathan, (...); Behold my servant the Messiah shall prosper.
And among others, the fifth verse of Chap. 53. is so Paraphrased by him, as
that none of the Jews will pretend any other to be intended: (...). And he
shall build the House of our Sanctuary, which is profaned for our sins, and
delivered for our iniquities, and in his Doctrine shall peace be multiplied
unto us; and when we obey his word, our sin shall be forgiven us. Wherein
though he much pervert the Text, yet to give us that sense, which by their own
confession is applicable only to the Messiah: whereby as by other parts of his
interpretation, he stopped the way unto the present Rabbinical evasions. The
Translation of the LXX, they have formerly avouched as their own. And this also
plainly refers the words to the Messiah and his sufferings; though somewhat
more obscurely then it is done in the Original.

In the Talmud its self, lib. Saned. Tractat. Chelek: among other names they
assign unto the Messiah, (...), is one; because it is said in this place,
(...), truly he bore our infirmity. We have their ancient Rabbis making the
same acknowledgement. To this purpose they speak in Bereshith Rabba on Genesis
24.67. This is Messiah the King who shall be in the Generation of the wicked,
and shall reject them, and choose the blessed God and his holy name, to serve
him with his whole heart. (...). And he shall set his heart to seek mercy for
Israel, to fast, and to humble himself for them, (...); as it is said (Isa.
53.) he was wounded for our Trangressions, (...). And when Israel sins, he
seeks mercy for them, as it is said again, and by his stripes are we healed.
So Tanchuma on v. 13. Chap. 52. (...); this is King Messiah. And not to repeat
more particular Testimonies we have their full confession in Alshech on the
place, with which I shall close the consent. (...); Behold our Masters of
blessed memory with one consent determine according as they received by
Tradition, that it is concerning Messiah the King that these words are spoken.
And therefore Abarbinel himself, who of all his companions has taken most
pains to corrupt and pervert this Prophecy, confesses that all their ancient
Wise men consented with Ben Vzziel in his Targum. So that we have as full as
suffrage unto this Character of the Messiah, from the Jews themselves, as can
be desired or expected.

We have strength also added unto this Testimony by the weakness of the
opposition pereant and amici, dummodo and inimici pereant. Let Targum, Talmud,
Cabal Tradition, former Masters be esteemed Liars, and deceived; so that
Christians may be disappointed. New Expositions and Applications of this
Prophecy they coin, wherein they openly contradict one another; yea, the same
man (as Abarbinel) sometimes himself; and when they have done, suggest such
things as are utterly inconsistent with the faith of the ancient Church
concerning the Messiah, with follies innumerable no way deserving our serious
consideration. The chief things which they most confide in, we shall speedily
remove out of our way.

First, Some of them say, that this Prophecy indeed concerns the Messiah, but
not Messiah Ben David, who shall be always victorious, but Messiah Ben Joseph,
who shall be slain in Battle against Gog and Magog. But (1.) This figment
wholly overthrows the faith of the true Messiah; and they may as well make
twenty as two of them. (2.) That Been Joseph whom they have coined in their own
brains, is to be a great Warrior from his first appearance, and after many
Victories to be slain in a Battle, or at least, be reputed so to be. But this
Prophecy is concerning a man, poor, destitute, despised, afflicted all his
life, bound, imprisoned, rejected, scorned, condemned and slain under a
pretense of Judgment, no one thing whereof they do, or can ascribe unto their
Ben Joseph.

2. Others feign that the true Messiah was born long ago, and that he lived
amongst the leprous people at the Gates of Rome, being himself leprous, and
full of sores; which as they say, is foretold in this Prophecy. Such monstrous
imaginations as these might not be repeated without some kind of participation
in the folly of their Authors, but that poor immortal souls are ruined by them;
and that they evidence what a foolish thing man is when left unto himself, or
judicially given up to blindness and unbelief. We are ready to admire at the
senseless stupidity of their forefathers, they do so themselves, who chose to
worship Baal and Moloch, rather then the true God, who had so eminently
revealed himself unto them; but it does no way exceed that of those who have
lived since their rejection of the true Messiah, nor do we need any other
instance then that before us to make good our Observation. And yet neither does
this Prodigy of folly, this leprosy, in any thing answer the words of the
Prophecy; nor indeed has any countenance from any one word therein; that
single word they reflect upon, signifying any kind of infirmities or sorrows in
general.

3. Some of them apply this Prophecy to Jeremiah, concerning whom Abarbinel
affirms and that truly, that no one Line or Verse in the whole can with any
colorable pretense be applied unto him; which also I have in particular
manifested on another occasion. Himself applies it two ways: (1.) To Josia;
(2.) To the whole body of the people; contradicting himself in the Exposition
of every particular instance, and the truth in the whole. But it is the whole
people in their last desolation that they chiefly desire to wrest this Prophecy
unto. But this is (1.) Contrary to the Testimony of their Targum, and Talmud,
all their ancient Masters, and some of the wisest of their latter Doctors. (2.)
To their own principles, profession and belief; for whereas they acknowledge
that their present misery is continued on them for their sins, and that if they
could but repent and live to God, their Messiah would undoubtedly come; this
place speaks of the perfect Innocence and Righteousness of him that suffers, no
way on his own account deserving so to do, which if they once ascribe unto
themselves, their Messiah being not yet come, they must for ever bid adieu to
all their expectations of him. (3.) Contrary to the express words of the Text,
plainly describing one individual Person. (4.) Contrary to the Context,
distinguishing the people of the Jews, from him that was to suffer by them,
among them, and for them, v. 3, 4, 5, 6. (5.) Contrary to every particular
assertion and passage in the whole Prophecy, no one of them being applicable
unto the body of the people. And all these things are so manifest unto every
one who shall but read the place with attention, and without prejudice; that
they stand not in need of any farther confirmation: Hence Johannes Isaac
confesses, that the consideration of this place, was the means of his
conversion.

Messiah, is here ascribed unto the person treated of, and his sufferings.
Peace with God is to be made by his Chastisement, v. 5. and healing of our
wounds by sin, is from his stripes. He bears the iniquity of the Church, v. 6.
that they may find acceptance with God. In his hand the pleasure of the Lord
for the Redemption of his people, was to prosper, v. 10. And he is to justify
them for whom he dyed, v. 11. If these and the like things here mentioned may
be performed by any other, the Messiah may stay away, there is no work for him
to do in this world. But if these are the things which God has promised that
he shall perform, then he, and none other is here intended.

Lord Jesus, worth the least consideration. For besides that they may all of
them be easily removed, the whole being exactly accomplished in him, and his
passion set forth beyond any instance of a Prophetic description of a thing
future, in the whole Scripture, let them but grant that the true and only
Messiah was to converse among the people in a despised, contemned, reproached
condition, that he was to be rejected by them, to be persecuted, to suffer, to
bear our iniquities, and that from the hand of God, to make his soul an
Offering for sin, by that means spiritually to redeem and save his people, and
as themselves know well enough, that there is an end of this Controversy, so
the Lord Jesus must and will on all hands be acknowledged to be the true and
only Messiah.

Targum, and Talmud, and all their ancient Doctors who with one consent
acknowledge the Messiah to be intended in this Prophecy, and wrest it unto the
People of the Jews themselves, unto whom not one line or word of it is
applicable, do object unto our interpretation of the place. First, Then they
say, it is not the Prophet from the Lord, nor in the Persons of the people of
the Jews, but the Kings of the Earth which formerly had afflicted them, who are
mentioned Chap. 52. v. 15. who utter and speak the words of this Chapter, in an
admiration of the blessed estate that the Jews shall at length attain unto.
Answ. Any man that shall but view the Context, will easily see the shameful
folly of this evasion. For (1.) Where is there any instance in the whole
Scripture of the like introduction of Aliens and Foreigners, and the Prophets
personating of them in what they say, and why should such a singular
imagination here take place? (2.) How could they say; Who has believed our
report, or the Doctrine that we had heard, and taught, concerning this person,
or these persons? Had the Kings and Nations so preached the misery and
happiness ensuing of the people of the Jews, that they are forced to complain
of the increduli^y of men, that they would not believe them? and who would not
believe them? The Jews, they believe it well enough; the Nations and their
Kings, they are supposed to be the men complaining that they are not believed;
so that the fondness of this imagination is beyond expression. (3.) How do they
say, For the iniquity of my people he was stricken, v. 8. Who are they when the
people themselves are supposed to speak? In brief, let all the Jews in the
world, find out one expression in the whole Prophecy tolerably suited unto this
Hypothesis of theirs, and I shall be contented that the whole of it be granted
unto them, and be used according to their desires.

Secondly, They add, that the subject of this Prophecy is spoken of in the
plural number, v. 8. (...) which they render, a transgressione populi mei plaga
illa. Lamo, is of the plural number, and so cannot respect any single person,
but must denote the whole people. Answ. But what perverseness is this, whoever
be intended in this Prophecy, he is spoken of twenty times as a single person;
and such things spoken of him, as can by no artifices be suited unto any
collective body of people; and shall one expression in the plural number
outweigh all these, and be made an Engine to pervert the whole context, and to
render it unintelligible? (2.) Suppose yet the word to denote many, a people,
and not one single person, will it not unavoidably follow, that here is a
mention interserted occasionally of some other persons, besides him who is the
principal subject of the Prophecy; and so the sense can be no other, but that
the people of the Prophet, that is, the Jews, should assuredly be punished for
the rejection of him, whose person and work he prophesied about. (3.) The truth
is, the word has not necessarily a plural signification, (...) lamo, is most
frequently put for (...), by the inserting of (...), whereof we have sundry
instances in the Scriptures, Genesis 6.20, 2. Blessed be the Lord of Shem; (...)
and Canaan shall be his Servant: Lamo, for Lo, Job 20.23. God shall cast the
fury of his wrath upon him, (...) and shall rain it upon him whilst he is
eating; (...) for (...). So again, the same word is used, chap. 22. v. 2. Psalm.
11. v. 7. The Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, (...) his countenance does
behold the upright; (...) for (...). And in this Prophet, chap. 44. v. 15. He
makes it a graven Image, (...) and he falls down to it. Lamo for Lo. And
this is so known, that there is scarce any Grammarian of their own, who has
not taken notice of it; so that this Exception also is evidently impertinent.

They yet urge further those words, v. 10. He shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days; This, say they, is not agreeable unto any, but those who
have children of their bodies begotten, in whom their days are prolonged.
Answ. 1. It were well if they would consider the words foregoing; of his making
his soul an offering for sin, that is, dying for it; and then tell us, how he
that does so, can see his carnal seed afterward, and in them prolong his
days. 2. He that is here spoken of, is directly distinguished from the seed,
that is the people of God, so that they cannot be the subject of the Prophecy.
3. It is not said that he shall prolong his days in his seed, but he himself
shall prolong days after his death, that is, upon his Resurrection he shall
live eternally, which is called length of days. 4. The seed here, are the seed
spoken of, Psalm. 22.30. A seed that shall serve the Lord, and be all accounted
unto him for a Generation. That is a spiritual seed, as the Gentiles are called
the Children of Sion brought forth upon her traveling, Isa. 66.8. Besides, how
the Messiah shall obtain this seed, is expressed in the next verse; By his
knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many; they are such as are
converted to God by his Doctrine, and justified by Faith in him. And that
Disciples should be called the seed, the offspring, the children of their
Masters, and Instructors, is so common among the Jews, and familiar unto them,
as no phrases or expressions are more in use. Thus speaks expressly this Prophet
also, chap. 8.18. Behold, I and the Children whom the Lord has given me; and
who were their Children, he declares, v. 16. bind up the Testimony, seal the
Law among my Disciples: These were the Children whom the Lord had given him.
And this is the sum of all that which any appearance of Reason is objected
against our application of this place unto the Messiah; which how weak and
trivial it is, is obvious unto every ordinary understanding.

Dan^el tells us, cap. 9. v. 25. (...), Messiah shall be cut off, that is, from
the Land of the Living, and that not for himself. And Zech. 9.9. It is said, he
shall be (...) poor; and in his best condition, riding on an Ass; which place
is interpreted by Solomon, Jarchi, and others, of the Messiah. He was also to
be pierced, chap. 12.10. Being the Shepherd, chap. 13.7. The (...) the King as
the Targum, that was to be smitten with the sword of the Lord. The Judge of
Israel that was to be smitten with the Rod on the cheek, Mich. 4.1. All
denoting his persecution and suffering.

sufferings of the Messiah, which sometimes breaks forth amongst them. In
Midrash Tehillim, on Psalm. 2. Rabbi Hana in the name of Rabbi Idi, says, that
the Messiah must bear the third part of the Affliction that shall ever be in
the world. And R. Machir, in Abkath Kocheb, affirms, that God inquired of the
soul of the Messiah at the beginning of the Creation, whether he would endure
sufferings and afflictions for the purging away the sins of his people, to
which he answered, that he would hear them with joy. And that these sufferings
of the Messiah are such, as that without the consideration of them, no rational
account can be given of any of their services or sacrifices, shall in our
Exposition be fully declared. Now upon these Testimonies it is evident, that
the great Argument used by the Jews to disprove Jesus of Nazareth from being
the true Messiah, namely, his meanness, poverty, persecutions, and sufferings
in this world, does strongly confirm the truth of our faith, that he only was
so indeed.



First, Then he testified of himself that he was the Messiah, and that those
who believed not that he was so, should perish in their sins. Now because,
according unto a general Rule he granted, that although the Testimony which he
gave concerning himself, being the Testimony of the Son of God, was true, yet
that it might be justly liable to exception amongst them, for the confirmation
of his Assertion, he appeals to the works that he wrought, issuing the
difference and question about his Testimony in this, that if his works were not
such as never any other man wrought, or ever could work, but the Messiah only,
that they should be at liberty as to their believing in him. The works, says
he, that my Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me, Joh. 5.36. that is, to be the
Messiah. His own Record he asserts to be true, appeals also to the Testimony of
John, but shows it withal inferior to those other witnesses which he had;
namely, the Scripture and his own works. And so also, chap. 10.37. If I do not
the works of my Father, believe me not.

Heads of them; nor is there more necessary unto our present purpose.

First, All true real Miracles are effects of divine Power. Many things
prodigious, marvelous, or monstrous, besides the common and ordinary
productions of nature, may be asserted, and brought forth by an extraordinary
concurrence of Causes, not usually falling in such a juncture and coincidence;
many may be wrought by the great, hidden, and to us unknown power of wicked
spirits; many things may have an appearance of prodigy and wonder, by the
force of some deceit, pretense, or delusion, that attend the manner of their
declaration. But real Miracles are effects so above, besides, or contrary to
the nature and efficacy of any, or all natural Causes, that by no application
or disposition of them, though never so uncouth or unusual, they can be
produced, and therefore must of necessity be the effects of an Almighty
Creating Power, causing somewhat to exist in matter or manner out of nothing,
or out of that which is more adverse unto the being or manner of existence
given unto it, then nothing its self. Such are the works of raising the dead;
opening the eyes of men born blind, etc. And this Position the Jews will not
deny, seeing they make it the foundation of their adherence unto the Law of
Moses.

Miracle-working Power, in the confirmation of any word or Doctrine, he avows
it to be of, and from himself; to be absolutely and infallibly true; setting
the fullest and openest seal unto it, which men who cannot discern his Essence
or Being, are capable of receiving or discerning. And therefore when any
Doctrine which in its self is such as becomes the Holiness and Righteousness
of God, is confirmed by the emanation of his divine Power in the working of
Miracles, there can no greater Assurance, even by God himself, be given of the
Truth of it.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus, in the days of his flesh, wrought many great, real
Miracles, in the confirmation of the Testimony that he gave concerning himself,
that Joh. 5.20. chap. 7.31. chap. 10.25. chap. 12.37. Greater confirmation it
could not have. Now that the Lord Jesus wrought the Miracles recorded by the
Evangelists with others innumerable that are not recorded, Joh. 20.30. chap.
21.25. We have in general, all the Testimony, Evidence, and certainty that any
man can possibly have of things which he saw not done with his own eyes; and to
suppose that a man can have no assurance of any thing but what he sees or feels
himself, as it overthrows all the foundations of knowledge in the world, and of
all humane society, yea of every thing that as men we either do, or know; so
being once granted, it will necessarily follow that we know not the things that
we see any longer then whilst we see them; no nor perhaps then neither; seeing
the evidence we have of knowing any thing by our senses, proceeds from
principles and presumptions, which we never saw, nor can ever so do. And as for
the Jews, we have all the advantage for the confirmation of what we affirm,
that either we are capable of, or need to desire.

First, We plead our own Records, that are written by the Evangelists. And
herein we have but one request to make unto the Jews; namely, that they would
lay no Exceptions Moses, and all the Prophets. If they declare themselves to be
such Bedlams, as to set their own houses on fire, for no other end, but to
endanger their neighbors; if they will destroy the principles of their own
Faith and Religion, to cast the broken pieces of them at the heads of
Christians; if they cry, pereant amici dummodo and pereant inimici, they are
not fit to be any longer contended withal. I desire then to know what one
Exception the Jews can lay against this Record, which mutatis mutandis may not
be laid against the Mosaical Writings: And if they have always concluded all
such Exceptions, to be invalid as to an opposition unto those grounds and
evidences on which they believe those Writings; why will they not give us leave
to affirm the same of them, in reference unto those which we receive and
believe, on no less certain Testimonies and Evidencies. Unless then they can
except any thing to the credit of our Writers, or disprove that which is
written by them, from Records of equal weight with them, which they can never
do, nor do attempt it, they have nothing reasonable to plead in this Cause. To
tell us that they do not believe what is written by them, neither did their
forefathers, is, as to themselves no more then we know, and as to their
forefathers, nothing but what those very Writers testify concerning them; and
to look for their consent unto that in any Record, which that Record witnesses
that they dissented from, is to overthrow the Record it self, and all that is
contained in it. The Jews then have nothing to oppose unto this Testimony, but
only their own unbelief; which for all the Reasons that have been insisted on,
cannot be admitted as any just Exception; story or circumstance they have none
to oppose unto it.

Secondly, We plead the Notoriety of the Miracles wrought by Christ, and the
Tradition delivering them down unto us. This also the Jews plead concerning the
Miracles Moses. They were, say they, openly wrought in the sight of all Israel,
and that they were so wrought, the Testimony of Israel in succeeding Ages, is,
next the Writings its self, the best and only witness they have of them. And
wherein does our Testimony come short of theirs? Nay, on both accounts, of
their first notoriety, and succeeding Tradition, it far exceeds what they have
to plead. For as the Miracles of Moses were wrought openly; so the most of them
were so only in the sight of that one People whom he had under his own conduct,
in a wilderness, remote from any converse with other Nations; and that in those
dark times of the world, wherein men were generally stupid and credulous, as
having not been imposed on by the delusions, which the following Ages were
awakened by. The Jews also lay no greater weight on any Miracles then they do
on those which were wrought in the wilderness of Midian, which had no witness
unto them, but that of Moses himself. But the Miracles of Jesus were all, or
most of them, wrought before the eyes of multitudes, envying, hating, and
persecuting of him; and that in the most knowing days of the world, when
Reason and Learning had improved the light of the minds of men, to the utmost
of their capacity, in, and upon multitudes for sundry years together, being all
of them sifted by his adversaries, to try if they could discover any thing of
deceit in them. And although his personal Ministry was confined to one Nation,
yet the Miracles wrought by his Disciples in his Name and by his Power, for the
confirmation of his being the Messiah, were spread all the world over, so that
all mankind were filled first with the report of them, and then satisfied with
their truth; and lastly, the generality of them with faith in him, which they
directed unto. The notoriety therefore of his Miracles, far exceeds that of
those of Moses. And for the means whereby the certainty of them is continued
unto us, whether we respect the number of persons confirming it, or their
quality, or their dis-interest as to any carnal advantage, or their suffering
for their Testimony, it is notorious that the Jews condition confined merely to
themselves, is no way to be compared with it. So that we may truly say, that no
Jew can possibly on any rational account, give credit unto the Truth of the
Miracles wrought by Moses, and deny it unto them wrought by the Lord Jesus.

Miracles wrought by our Savior, yet they might be every way inferior unto
them wrought by Moses, and so not sufficient to testify unto a Doctrine and
Authority removing and abolishing the Laws and Customs instituted by Moses. And
this the Jews of old seemed to have had respect unto, in their endless
tumultuary Calling after Signs and Miracles. And hence, though the Lord Christ
sometimes pleaded with them the works that he wrought, leaving them to stand
and fall according unto the evidence of them, Joh. 15.24. chap. 10.37. As also
did the Apostles afterward, Act. 2.22. unto the astonishment of all, and
satisfaction of the less obdurate, Job. 7.31. chap. 12.37. Yet both he himself
constantly refused to gratify their curiosity and unbelief, when they required
any Sign or Miracle of him, Matthew. 12.38, 39. chap. 16.4. Luke 11.29. And the
Apostle expressly condemns the whole principle in them, as that which in the
preaching of the Gospel was not to be gratified, nor much attended unto, 1 Cor.
1.22. But yet neither is there any strength wanting unto our Argument on this
account also. For although it be not at all necessary, that he who comes with
an after-Revelation of the will of God, reversing any thing before established,
should be attested unto with more Miracles, or those that are more signal, then
he or they were, who were the instruments of the first Revelation of things to
be repealed (seeing no more is required but that he be sufficiently evidenced
to be sent of God, which may be done by one true real Miracle, as well as by a
thousand) yet the wisdom of God has so ordered things, that the Miracles
wrought by the Lord Jesus, did on many accounts exceed those wrought by Moses,
as by a comparison in some particular instances will appear.

First, The number of them gives them the pre-eminence. The Jews contend that
Miracles wrought by Moses, whereas those of all other Prophets, as they
observe, amount but unto seventy four; for so do they lay hold on every
occasion to exalt him, who yet judges and condemns them. To make up this
number, they reckon up sundry things that happened about his birth, and death,
far enough from Miracles wrought by him, or in the confirmation of his
Ministry: They add also every extraordinary work of God that fell out in his
days, to the same purpose. Be it so then, that so many Miracles were wrought
by Moses, as we are far from diminishing any thing of the Glory of his
Ministry, yet what are those compared unto those wrought by Christ, and his
Apostles, in his Name, and by his Power and Authority? Those that are recorded
of his own, are not easily reckoned up, and yet those that are written, are far
the least part of what he did perform, and that in the space of three or four
years, whereas those of Moses were scattered unto the whole course of his life,
for an hundred and twenty years. Thus John assures us, that he did many more
signs besides those that are written, chap. 20.30, 31. and that his Testimony
is equal unto that of Moses, we have proved before. He adds, that the world
could not contain the Books that might be written of his Miracles, chap. 21.25.
by which usual hyperbole, a great multitude is designed.

Nor did the Writers of the Story of the Gospel agree to give an account of all
the Miracles that were wrought by the Author of it, but only to leave
sufficient instances on record of his Divine Power, in the effecting of them.
For this end they singled out some works that were occasionally attended with
some Disputes or Preachings, tending unto the opening and confirmation of the
Doctrine of the Gospel. Thus upon the coming of the Disciples of John unto him,
it is said, Luke 7.21. In that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and
plagues, and of evil spirits, and unto many that were blind he gave sight. The
particular stories of none of these are any where mentioned; nor had that
season been at all remembered, but upon occasion of those Persons who were sent
unto him; the present works which they saw, being made the ground of that
answer which he returned unto their Master; v. 22. Go tell John the things
which ye have seen and heard, how that the blind see, etc. Considering
therefore what is elsewhere written, of all the Regions about bringing in their
sick, weak, and impotent, and of the cures of Persons by the touching of his
garment, it is evident that his Personal Miracles amounted unto thousands,
which might well give occasion to the Hyperbole used by John in recounting of
them. Hence some among the Jews were convinced that he was the Messiah, not
only by the greatness, but also by the number of his works, John 7.31. Many of
the People believed on him, and said, when Christ comes will he do more
Miracles then these, which this man does? And what are the seventy six
Miracles of Moses unto those, as to number, which in the first place the Jews
glory in? And if we may add those which were wrought by his power by them that
preached the Gospel on his Commission: as they are all of the same efficacy
unto the end proposed, or confirmation of his being the Messiah, they amount
not unto thousands only, but probably unto millions. For of this sort were all
the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, that were granted unto the Church all
the world over. So that as to the number of Miracles, he was sufficiently by
them attested unto, to be the Messiah, the great Lawgiver of the people of the
New Covenant.

Again, The Jews much insist on this, that all other Prophets wrought Miracles
by Intervention of Prayer, Moses alone without it at his own pleasure. The Rod
they say was committed unto him as a Kingly Scepter, to denote that Authority
whereunto the whole nature of things gave place. It is true indeed it is not
recorded that Moses prayed in words before every Miracle that was wrought by
him; or in reference unto his Ministry: but yet this is plain in story, that he
wrought no mighty work, but either upon his prayer, or some express command and
direction from God in particular; which everts the Judaical pretense of an
abiding power remaining with him, enabling him to work Miracles when and how he
would. But this which they falsely ascribe unto Moses, was eminently true in the
Lord Jesus. Those thousands of miraculous works which he wrought, were the
arbitrary effects of a word of command, without any especial direction for
every new work; arguing the constant presence of an infinite power with him
exerted according to his will. Come forth of him, come out of the grave, I
will, be thou clean, be ye opened, and the like expressions he used as signs
and pledges thereof. Thus was it not with Moses, as the story manifests; yea,
he himself greatly doubted of the greatest effect of the Divine power put forth
by him, when he smote the Rock to bring forth water.

The nature of the Miracles also wrought by the one and the other may be
compared, Moses, or by God himself whilst he employed him in the service of
giving the Law, and the delivery of the people, they were for the most part
portentous Prodigies, suited to fill men with wonder, astonishment and fear.
Such were all the signs of the presence of God on Mount Sinai. The effects also
of most of them were evil and destructive, proceeding from wrath and
indignation against sin and sinners; such were all the mighty works wrought in
Egypt; such those of the swallowing up of Dathan and Abiram in the Wilderness.
Those that tended unto the good and relief of mankind, as the bringing of water
from the rock, were typical, and occasional. And those kinds of works were
suited unto that Ministry of Death and Condemnation, which was committed unto
him. But on the other side, the mighty works of the Lord Jesus, were evidently
effects of Goodness, as well as of Power, and consisted in things useful and
helpful unto mankind. Healing the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, and ears
of the deaf, giving strength to the lame; casting out of Devils, feeding hungry
multitudes, raising the dead, are things amiable and useful. And though
terrible Prodigies may more affect and astonish carnal minds, such as the Jews
were filled with, yet these works of Grace and Goodness, do more allure those
who attend unto the dictates of right Reason. Evidences they were of a gracious
Ministry, tending unto salvation and peace, in every kind; such as that of the
Messiah was promised and foretold to be. As Miracles then were the tokens of
their several Ministries, and bespake the nature of them, those of the Lord
Christ were exceedingly more excellent then those of Moses.

Moses had not a power of working miracles constantly resident with him, which
he might exert according unto his own will; so he was very far from being able
to communicate any such power unto others. God indeed took of the Spirit that
was on him, and gave it unto the Elders that were to be joined with him in the
Government of the people, Numb. 11.25. but yet neither was there a power of
working miracles going along with that Spirit, but only ability for Rule and
Government; nor yet was that communication of it any act of Moses at all. But
now our Lord Jesus, as he had the Divine Power mentioned always with him, so
he could give Authority and Power unto whom he pleased, to effect all such
miraculous works, as were any way necessary for the confirmation of their
Doctrine. Of this nature was the Commission which he gave the Twelve when he
sent them forth, Matthew. 10.8. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the
dead, cast out Devils. As also that unto the LXX. Luke 10.17, 19. yea, he
promised them, which also came to pass, that by his power and presence with
them, they should do greater things then those which they had seen him to do.
John 14.12. Mark 16.17. And this difference is so eminent that nothing can be
objected against it. This more evidently confirmed him to be the Master, then
all the mighty works which he wrought in his own Person on the earth.

miracles of Moses ended with his life. The Jews indeed some of them tell us a
company of foolish stories about his death, which as their manner is, they
would fix on those words, Deuteronomy. 34.5. and Moses dyed (...), by the mouth or
word of the Lord; as namely, how he contended with ((...)) the Angel of Death,
and drove him away with his rod, so that he could not dye, until God laid his
mouth unto his, and so took out his soul from him. But these figments are
shameful, and such as become none but themselves. However these things
extended only unto his death; therewith ended his Ministry and Miracles. But
now the greatest Miracle of our Lord Jesus, was wrought by him, after the
violent and cruel death which he underwent for our sakes. For he took his life
again, and raised himself from the dead, John 10.17, 18. This being performed
by him, after the dissolution of his humane nature in the open visible
separation of his body and soul, in which state it was utterly impossible, that
that nature should put forth any act toward the retrievement of its former
condition, manifested his existence in another superior nature, acting with
power on the humane in the same Person. And this one Miracle was a sufficient
vindication of the truth which he had taught concerning himself; namely, that
he was the Messiah the Son of God. And though any should question his being
raised again from the dead by his own power, yet the evidence is
uncontrollable, that he was raised again by the power of God, without the
application of the means and Ministry of any other; whereby the Holy and
Eternal God of truth, entitled himself unto all that he had taught concerning
his Person and Office, whilst he was alive. And this leaves no room for
haesitation in this matter: For this being granted, none will deny, but that he
was the Messiah; and what principles we proceed upon for the proof of it unto
the Jews, has been before declared.

continuance of the miracles wrought by his power, after his leaving of this
world, and his Ascension into Heaven. And there is in them an additional
evidence unto what has been insisted on. For whereas the miraculous works that
were wrought by himself and his Disciples, whilst he conversed with them in
the flesh, were confined, as we observed before, unto the Land of Canaan, those
who afterward received power from above by his Grant and Donation, continued
to assert the like mighty works and miracles all the world over; so that within
the space of a few years, there was scarce a famous Town or City in the world,
wherein some of his Disciples had not received the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost. And this also distinctly confirms him to be the promised Messiah: for
whereas the Isles of the Gentiles were to wait for, and to receive his Law, it
was necessary that among them also it should receive this solemn kind of
attestation from Heaven.

Miracles wrought by Jesus, were sufficient to confirm the Testimony which he
gave concerning himself; namely, that he was the promised Messiah, the Son of
God; but also that they were so much more eminent then those wherewith God was
pleased to confirm the Ministry of Moses in the giving of the Law, that the
Jews have no Reason to doubt or question his Authority, for the reversing of
any Institutions of Worship, which they had formerly been obliged unto.

To close this Argument, I shall only manifest, that the Jews of old were
convinced Miracles wrought by the Lord Jesus, and therein a little discover the
variety of those pretenses, whereby they attempt to shield themselves from the
natural consequence of that conviction.

1. For those who lived in his own days: see Matthew. 18.11, 12, 13, 14. Joh.
7.31. Chap. 19.16, 24. Acts 4.16. Acts 19.13. Neither did they at any time,
dispute his works, but only the power whereby they were wrought: of which
afterward.

2. The fame and reputation of them, was such amongst them, that those who made
an Art and Trade of casting out of Devils, used the invocation of the name of
Jesus over their possessed, which the notoriety of his exerting his Divine
power in that kind of works, induced them unto: See Acts 19.13. They adjured
the Spirits by the Name of Jesus whom Paul preached, observing the miracles
that he wrought in that name. For they being ignorant of the true way and means
whereby the Apostle wrought his miraculous works, after the manner of Magicians
they used the name of him whom he preached, in their Exorcisms, as it was ever
the custom of that sort of men to intermix their charms with the names of such
persons, as they knew to have excelled in mighty works. And that this was
common among the Jews of those days, is evident from Luke 9.49. which could no
otherwise arise, but from a general consent in the acknowledgement of the works
wrought by him.

3. We have also hereunto the suffrage of the Talmudical Rabbis themselves,
the most malicious adversaries that ever the Lord Jesus had in this world. They
intend not indeed to bear witness unto his miracles; but partly whilst they
relate stories that were continued amongst them by Tradition, partly whilst
they endeavor to shield their unbelief from the Arguments taken from them,
they tacitly acknowledge, that they were indeed wrought by him. This I say they
do, whilst they labor to show by what ways and means those Prodigies, and
wondrou^ works which are recorded of him, were wrought and effected. For they
who say this or that was the way, whereby such a thing was accomplished, do
plainly acknowledge the doing of the thing it self; Greater evidence of their
self-conviction, it is impossible they should give in or need we desire.

First, In the Talmud its self they have traditional stories of miracles
wrought by the Disciples of Jesus, and by others in his name; which although
they are like the rest of their Narrations, foolish and insipid, yet they
evidence the Tradition that was amongst them from the forementioned conviction.
Thus in Aboda Zara they have a story concerning James (who lived longest
amongst them) It happened they say, that Eleacer the Son of Dama was bitten by
a Serpent; and James of the Village of Sechaniah ( that is Bethany) came to
cure him in the name of Jesus (the son of Pandira) but R. Ishmael opposed him,
and said, it is not lawful for thee thou Son of Dama: So owning that Miracles
and Cures were wrought by James in the name of Jesus. And in Sabbat. Hierusal.
Distinct. Schemona Scheraticin: they tell us that the Son of Rab. Jose the Son
of Levi had swallowed poison; a certain man came and communed with him in the
name of Jesus the Son of Pandira; and he was healed; but when he was gone out,
one said unto him, how did thou advice him, he said by such a word; the other
replied, tha^ it had been better for him to have dyed, then to have heard that
word. I mention these things, only to show that they were never able to stifle
the Tradition that passed among themselves, concerning the Miracles wrought by
Jesus and his Disciples.

But this conviction more evidently discovers its self in their endeavors to
assign his mighty works unto other causes, so that they may not from them be
forced to acknowledge his Divine power, and the presence of God with him. And
there are two pretenses which they make use of. The first is that of their
forefathers, Mat. 12.24. They would have the Devil to be the Author of them,
and that he wrought them by Magical Incantations. This they pleaded of old; and
this some of them pretend to adhere unto, to this day; the folly of which
blasphemy both reflects upon themselves, and is demonstratively removable from
him, whom to their eternal ruin, they seek to reproach. For,

1. Do they not know, that their own Moses was generally esteemed by the wisest
of the Heathen, to have been skilled and exercised in Magic. So Pliny and
Apuleius testify, and that he wrought wonders by virtue thereof, as Celsus
contends at large. And can they fix on a readier course to confirm such a
suspicion in the minds of Atheistical Scoffers, then by their own taking up the
same accusation against the Author of more, and greater miracles then those
wrought by Moses? What color of answer can they return unto his reproaches,
whilst themselves with more open impudence manage the same accusation against
the Lord Jesus? Besides, as is confessed, Egypt was the spring of Magical
incantations, the worlds Academy for that diabolical cunning, where, almost
alone, it was had in honor and reputation. There in the Kings Court had Moses
his education and conversation forty years. How much more just then, though
sufficiently unjust, might a suspicion seem concerning him of his being skilled
in that falsely called Wisdom, then concerning our Lord Jesus, who was
persecuted thither, and returned thence in his infancy, which they childishly
object unto him? So that in this whole vain pretense they do nothing but
attempt to cast down their own foundations.

2. Neither indeed do they account the skill in, and use of Magical
incantations a crime, but an Excellency. Josephus would have us believe that
the Art of Magic, and the invention of incantations, was part of the Wisdom of
Solomon. And their Talmudical Doctors do expressly approve of that diabolical
Art. Nothing then but extreme malice and desperation, would put them upon
inventing this Cloak for their infidelity, which not only casts down the
foundation of their own Profession, but involves also a contradiction unto
those Principles, which at other times they avouch. So that Rabbi Achor was
mistaken when he gave out that as a Prophecy, which was indeed an history,
namely, that a generation of ungodly men among the Jews would not believe the
things that the Messiah should do, but should affirm that he does them by Art
Magical.

blasphemy its self, there needs no other answer be given unto it, but what was
returned by our Lord Jesus of old. If these things had been done by Magical
incantations, and consequently the assistance of the Devil, it must needs be
upon a division of those wicked spirits among themselves, and that upon the
main design of their Kingdom, Dominion and Interest in this world. The open and
proclaimed work of our Lord Jesus in this world, was by all ways and means to
overthrow the Kingdom of Satan and his works. This he privately taught, this he
publicly declared to be the main end of his coming into this world. The Works
and Miracles which he wrought, were very many, innumerable of them exercised on
Devils, themselves, to their shame, terror, and dispossession of the
habitations they had invaded. In, and during this work, he declares them to all
the world, to be evil, wicked, malicious, unclean, and lying spirits, reserved
for everlasting destruction in Hell, under the wrath of the great God. For this
cause, they on the other side ceased not to oppose him, and to stir up all the
world against him, until they thought they had prevailed in his death. If men
therefore shall imagine or fancy, that the works of Christ against the interest
of Satan, upon his Person, unto his shame; wrought to confirm a Doctrine,
teaching all the world to avoid him, abhor him, fight and contend against him,
commending every thing that he hates, with promises of life eternal unto them
who forsake him, and maintain his quarrel against him, threatening every thing
that he loves, and labors to promote in the world with eternal vengeance, were
wrought by his help and assistance, they had more need to be sent unto the
place where the maladies of those distracted of their Wits are attended, then
to have an answer given unto their folly.

Judaical; that is, so full of monstrous, ridiculous figments, that nothing but
an aim to discover their present desperate folly, and with what unmanly
inventions, they endeavor to cover themselves from the light of their own
conviction, can give countenance unto the repetition of it. Besides the Fable
its self is vulgarly known, and I shall therefore only give a brief compendium
of it, seeing it may not be wholly avoided.

The story they tell us is this; There was a stone in the Sanctum Sanctorum,
under the Ark, wherein was written Shem Hamphorash, (so the Cabalists call the
Name Jehovah) He that could learn this Name, might by the virtue of it, do what
miracles he pleased. Wherefore the Wise men fearing what might ensue thereon,
made two Brazen Dogs, and set them on two Pillars before the door of the
Sanctuary: And it was so, that when any one went in, and learned that Name, as
he came out, those Dogs barked so horribly, that they frighted him, and made
him forget the Name that he had learned. But Jesus of Nazareth going in, wrote
the Name in Parchment, and put it within the skin of his leg, and closed the
skin upon it; so that though he lost the remembrance of it at his coming out,
by the barking of the brazen Dogs, yet he recovered the knowledge of it again
out of the Parchment in his leg; and by virtue thereof, he wrought miracles,
walked on the Sea, cured the lame, raised the dead, and opened the eyes of the
blind. That alone which from hence we aim to evince, is the conviction that the
most stubborn of the Jews had of the miracles of our blessed Savior. Had they
not been openly performed, and undeniably attested* no Creatures that ever had
the shape of men, or any thing more of modesty then the Brazen Dogs they talk
of, would have betaken themselves to such monstrous foolish figments, for a
countenance and pretense unto the rejection of him and them. He that should
contend, that the Sun did not shine all the last year, and should give this
reason of his Assertion, because a certain man of his acquaintance climbed up
to Heaven by a Ladder, and put him in a Box, and kept him close in his Chamber
all that while, would speak to the full, with as much probability and
appearance of truth, as the grand Rabbis do in this Tale. Every word in their
story is a Monster. The stone, the writing of the name of God in it, the virtue
of the pronuntiation of that name, the Brazen Dogs, the entrance of a private
man into the Sanctum Sanctorum; the barking of the Dogs, are Dreams becoming
men under a poenal infatuation and blindness, not much distant from those
Chains of Darkness wherewith Satan himself is kept bound unto the Judgment of
the Great Day.

Fourthly, We must not forget the Testimony of his Disciples who conversed with
blood, shed by the most exquisite tortures that the malice of Hell could
invent, all in expectation of acceptance with him, and a reward from him, which
depended on the truth of the Miracles, which they asserted him to have wrought
and performed. From all these considerations, we may safely conclude, that it
is utterly impossible, that the nature of man should be more ascertained of any
thing that ever was in this world, then we may be of the Miracles wrought by
our Lord Jesus. Now all these as we have declared, were wrought by the Divine
Power of God to confirm the Truth of his being the promised Messiah. And if
this were not so, it is impossible that God should ever more require an Assent
unto any Revelation of his mind or Will, none being capable of a more evident
and full confirmation so to be, then this has received, of Jesus being the
Christ. The Application of this Consideration in particular unto his
Resurrection from the dead, has been the special subject of so many Writers,
that I shall not farther insist upon it.

One Argument more, taken from the success that the Doctrine of Jesus has had
Poverty of it, the Contempt and Reproach that it was exposed unto, was one of
the chief pretenses that they had, and have to this day for their refusal of
him. The time wherein he came, was that as has been showed, wherein the Jews
were in daily expectation of their Messiah, and when the residue of mankind
were in the full enjoyment of all that Light, Wisdom and Knowledge, which the
Principles of nature could attain unto. In this state of things, a poor man,
living in an obscure Village of Galilee, not taught by men so much as to read,
begins to Preach and to declare himself to be the Messiah, the Son of God, the
Savior of the World. With this Testimony he declares a Doctrine destructive of
the Religion and Sacred Worship of all, and every man then living in the world;
of the Jews as to the manner of it, which they esteemed above its substance,
and of all others, of its very nature and being; and presses a Course of
Obedience unto God, decried by them all. To encourage men to believe in him,
and to accept of his Testimony, he gives them Promises of what he would do for
them when this life should be ended: No sooner does he undertake this work, but
the Jews amongst whom he conversed, almost universally, at least all the great
wise learned, and esteemedly devout amongst them, set themselves to scorn,
despise, reproach and persecute him. And this course they ceased not, until
conspiring with the power of the Gentiles, they took him out of the world as a
Malefactor, by a bitter, shameful and ignominious death. After which he rises
again from the dead, and shows himself neither unto Jews nor Gentiles in
common, but only to some poor men chosen by himself, to be his Witnesses and
Apostles. These begin to teach both Jews and Gentiles the things before
mentioned. The Jews more deeply engaged then formerly, by having slain their
Master, immediately persecute them, and that unto death. The Gentiles at first
deride and scorn them, but quickly changed their note, and set all their Wit
and Power at work to extirpate them, and their followers out of the world. The
Jews on many accounts looked upon themselves as ruined and undone for ever, if
their Testimony were admitted. The Gentiles saw that on the same supposition,
they must foregoe all their Religion, and therewith every thing wherewith they
pleased themselves in this world. Invisible infernal powers who ruled in the
world by Superstition and Idolatry were no less engaged against them. With them
was neither humane Wisdom or Counsels nor external force; yea, the use of both
in their work was by their Master severely interdicted unto them. Had not the
Truth and Power of God been engaged with him, and for him, it is such a madness
to suppose that this undertaking could have been carried on, unto that issue
and event in the conquest of mankind, which it at length obtained, as no man
not utterly forsaken of reason, or cursed with blindness of mind, or made
senseless and stupid by the power of his Lusts, can make himself guilty of.
Many are the branches of this Argument, many the considerations that concur in
a contribution of evidence and strength unto it, all which to examine and
improve, is beyond our present design. The bare proposal of it, is sufficient
to cause all Jewish Exceptions to vanish out of the minds of sober and
reasonable men. From it therefore, with them that went before, we conclude the
third part of our general Thesis concerning the Messiah; namely, That Jesus of
Nazareth whom Paul Preached was He.

Exercitatio XVIII.
Objections of the Jews against the Doctrine of Christianity. Their principal
Argument to prove the Messiah not yet come. General Answer. Principles leading
to a right understanding of the Promises concerning the Messiah. Redemption and
Salvation promised by him spiritually. Folly and self-contradiction of the
Jews, that expect only temporal deliverance by him. Promises of temporal
things, accessory and occasional. Thence conditional. The general condition of
them all suited to the nature and duration of the Kingdom of the Messiah.
Spiritual things promised in words signifying firstly things temporal. Reasons
thereof. Of Peace; with God, and in the world. Seed of Abraham, Jacob, Israel,
Sion, Jerusalem. Who and what intended thereby. All Nations; the World; the
Gentiles in the Promise who. Promises suited unto the duration of the Kingdom
of the Messiah. The calling and flourishing state of the Jews thereon.
Particular Promises may not be understood, or understood amiss, without
prejudice to the faith. Application of these Principles. Promise of universal
Peace in the days of the Messiah: Isa. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. considered. Jews
Objection from it, answered. Outward Peace how intended. Promises of the
diffusion of the knowledge of God. Of Unity in his Worship, Jerem 31.34. Zeph.
3.9. Zech. 14.9. fulfilled. Jews exception; answered. Promises concerning the
restoration and glorious estate of Israel. Fulfilled to the spiritual Israel.
To the Jews in the appointed season. Their calling, and peace ensuing thereon.

THat which remains for a close unto these Dissertations, is the
consideration Reasons and Arguments, wherewith the present Jews do endeavor,
and their forefathers for many Generations have labored, to defend their
obstinacy and unbelief. And this we shall engage into, with as much briefness
as the nature of the matter treated of will admit. Many are the Books which
they have written among themselves, mostly in the Hebrew Tongue, and some in
other Languages; but the Hebrew Character, against Christians and their
Religion. Unto sundry of these they give triumphant insulting Titles, as though
they had undoubtedly obtained a perfect Victory over their Adversaries; but the
Books themselves in nothing answer their specious Frontispieces. Take away
wilful mistakes, gross Paralogisms, false Stories, and some few Grammatical
nicities, and they vanish into nothing. What is spoken by them, or for them,
that seems to have any weight shall be produced and examined.

Sundry things they object unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the
Person of the Messiah, or his being God and man, the rejection of the Mosaical
Ceremonies, and Law, which they deem eternal, and many exceptions they lay
against particular passages and expressions, in the Historical Books of the New
Testament. But all these things have been long since cleared and answered by
others, and I have also my self spoken to the most important of them, partly,
in the preceding Discourses; partly, in my defense of the Deity, and
satisfaction of Christ against the Socinians. For what concerns the Law of
Moses, and the abolition of it, as to the Ceremonious Worship therein
instituted, it must be at large insisted on in that Exposition of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, which these discourses are only intended to make way unto. I
shall not here therefore enter upon a particular discussion of their Opinions,
Arguments and Objections about these things: besides, they belong not
immediately to the subject of our present Discourse. It is about the coming of
the Messiah simply that we are disputing; this we assert to be long since past;
the Jews deny him to be yet come, living in the hope and expectation of him,
which at present is in them but as the giving up of the Ghost. The means
whereby this dying, deceiving hope is supported in them, comes now under
examination; and this alone is the subject of our ensuing Discourse.

To countenance themselves then in their denial of the coming of the Messiah,
they do by several instances. Now this is, that the Promises made and recorded
to be accomplished at the coming of the Messiah, are not fulfilled, and
therefore the Messiah is not yet come. This fills up their Books of
Controversies; and is constantly made use of by their Expositors, so often as
any occasion seems to offer its self unto them. The Messiah say they, was
promised of old. Together with him, and to be wrought by him, many other things
were promised. These things they see not at all fulfilled; nay, not those which
contain the only work and business that he was promised for; and therefore they
will not ^elieve that he is come. This general Argument I say they seek to
confirm by instances, wherein they reckon up all the promises, which they
suppose as yet unaccomplished, and so endeavor to establish their Conclusion.
These we shall afterward cast under the several heads whereunto they do
belong, and return that answer which the Word of Truth its self, and the event,
do manifest to be the mind of God in them. For the present unto their general
Argument we say, that all the Promises, concerning the coming of the Messiah,
are actually fulfilled, and those which concern his Grace and Kingdom, are
partly already accomplished, and for the remainder shall be so, in the manner,
time and season appointed for them, and designed unto them, in the purpose and
Counsel of God: So that from hence, nothing can be concluded in favor of the
Jews incredulity. To evidence the truth of this Answer, I shall lay down and
confirm certain unquestionable principles, that will guide us in the
interpretation of the Promises that are under consideration.

Promises concerning the Messiah do principally respect spiritual things, and
that eternal salvation which he was to obtain for his Church. This we have
proved at large before; and this, the very nature of the thing its self, and
the words of the Promises do abundantly manifest. The Jews, I suppose, will not
deny, but the Promise concerning the Messiah, is of the greatest Good that ever
God engaged himself to bestow upon them. I do not find, that they any where
deny it; And it is at present the sum of all their desires, prayers, and
expectations, with the hopes whereof they comfort and support themselves in all
their calamities. If they should deny it, it may easily be proved against them
by innumerable Testimonies of Scripture; many whereof have been already
produced. Now there can be no Reason of this, but only because he was to work
and effect for them who ever they be, unto whom he was promised, the greatest
Good, that they can or may be made partakers of. And if it be only a Good of an
inferior nature that he was to effect, and any other means was to be used for
that which was more principal and excellent, that means is much to be preferred
before him, and above him; Now what is this Chief Good of man? Does it consist
in Riches, Honor, Power, Pleasures? the blindest of the Heathen were never
blind enough, to think so; nor can any man entertain any such imagination,
without renouncing not only all right reason, but in an especial manner, the
whole Scripture. I think the Jews will not deny, but that this Good consists in
the favor of God in this world, and the Eternal Enjoyment of him hereafter.
Now if the Messiah were promised only to procure those first, outward,
temporary, perishing things; and these latter are to be obtained by another
means, namely, by the observation of the Law of Moses; it is evident, that,
that is to be preferred infinitely before him; which that it is not, as we
said, is manifest from the whole Scripture, and confirmed by the traditional
hope and expectation of the Jews. For if they enjoy that which is incomparably
the Chiefest Good, to what end do they so miserably bemoan themselves in their
present condition, and with so much impatience cry out for the coming of their
Messiah? Are they such slaves in their affections unto earthly perishing
things, that living in the enjoyment of all that is needful to procure them the
love and favor of God, with the eternal enjoyment of him, they can have no
rest or quiet, because they enjoy not the good things of this life? Doubtless
this great expectation, had a greater rise and cause, then now they will own. I
know men are apt to complain under, and to desire relief from outward trouble;
but to place the main of their Religion herein, when they have Grace, the
pardon of sin and Heaven on other accounts, this is only done by the Jews. But
the truth is, although they continue in their desires of the coming of the
Messiah; yet they have lost the reason why they do so; only this they find,
that their forefathers from the days of Abraham placed all their happiness in
his coming; and therefore they think that they also ought to do so, though why
they cannot tell, or will not understand. But this is that which we have proved
to be the object of their faith and expectation of old, namely, that the
Messiah was promised to be a Spiritual Redeemer, to save them from Sin, Satan,
Death and Hell, to procure for them the favor of God, and to bring them to an
enjoyment of him. Set this aside, and what have we to do, to contend with the
Jews about one that shall come and make War for them, conquer their enemies,
and make them rich. Much good may it do them with such an one, when he comes.
They say indeed, that having the affluence of all things under him, they shall
be the better enabled to keep the Law of Moses, and so the way to Heaven will
be easier for them. But I fear that which they manifest their hearts to be set
upon as their chiefest end, and aim, will scarcely much farther them unto any
other end whatever: the last end will not be made the means to another. Nor was
it otherwise with their forefathers; Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. According
to their pasture, they were filled, and forgot the Lord: Prosperity ruined
them; nor did they ever reform, but under sore afflictions. The Messiah then
that we contend with them about, is a Spiritual Redeemer; such an one he was
promised to be, as we have abundantly proved. And all Promises of that nature
are perfectly accomplished. He is come, and has saved his people from their
sins. He has made an end of sin, and made Reconciliation for iniquity, and
brought in everlasting Righteousness. There is not one Promise concerning
Grace, Mercy, Pardon, the Love of God, and eternal Blessedness by the Messiah,
which contain the whole of his direct and principal work, but they are all yea
and amen in Christ Jesus, are all exactly made good and accomplished. And this
is testified unto by millions of souls now in the unchangeable fruition of God,
and all that seriously believe in him who are yet alive. And this is firstly to
be considered in our enquiry after the accomplishment of the Promises,
concerning the Coming, Grace, and Kingom of the Messiah.

Secondly, Hence it follows, That all Promises concerning temporal things, at
his coming, or by it, are but accessory and occasional, and such as directly
appertain not to his principal work, and main design of his coming. Certain it
is, that the whole work for which God of old promised the Messiah, might have
been effected and fully accomplished, if not one word had been spoken of any
outward advantage to ensue thereon in this world. These Promises then belong
not directly and immediately to the Covenant of the Redeemer, but are
declarations only of the Sovereign Will and Wisdom of God, as to what he would
do in the dispensation of his Providence, at such and such a season. Hence two
things will ensue.

First, That all these Promises may be conditional. Those which concerned the
sending of the Messiah for the accomplishment of his principal work, were
absolute, and depended not upon any thing, in any, or all of the Sons of men.
The whole of it was a mere effect of Sovereign Grace. He was therefore
infallibly to come at his appointed season. But those that concern the
dispensation of Gods Providence in temporal things, may all of them be
conditional. And evident it is, that they have one Condition annexed to the
fulfilling of every one of them; and that is, that those who would partake of
them, do submit themselves unto the Law and Rule of the Messiah. For in the
midst of the greatest collection of Promises in the whole Old Testament, which
at first view seem to express the glory of the Kingdom of the Messiah in
outward things, it is added, the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve them
shall perish; yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted, Isa. 60.12. So that
all the happiness intimated depends on the condition of men's submitting
themselves to the Law of the Messiah, without which they are threatened with
desolation and utter wasting. This condition belongs unto them all; and what
other particular considerations there may be, on which their accomplishment may
be suspended, we know not.

Secondly, It follows also from hence, that as to the times, seasons, and
places of their accomplishment, they are left unto the designation of Gods
Sovereign Will, Wisdom and Pleasure, as are those of all other works of his
Providence whatever. It is not necessary that they should all of them be
accomplished at the same time, or in the same place, or after the same manner.
God may, and God does fulfill them when, where, how, and toward whom he
pleases; so that in the issue they shall all have that accomplishment which he
has designed unto them, and which the Church has ground to expect. And thus
has God provided that they should be a ground of comfort and direction to the
Church in all Ages, containing encouragements unto obedience, and consolations
in what his Saints may expect to fall upon their persecuting adversaries. The
Jews indeed, who know not even how to fancy the Kingdom of their Messiah to be
any other, but what the Roman Commonwealth of men only, was like to prove, res
unius aetatis the business of one age, would have all these temporal promises
to be fulfilled all at once, momento turbinis, all on a sudden. But the real
Kingdom of Christ being to continue through many Generations, even from his
coming unto the end of the world, and that in such a variety of states and
conditions, as God saw conducing unto his own glory, and the exercise of the
faith and obedience of his people, the accomplishment of these promises in
several Ages, and at several seasons, according to the counsel of the will of
God, is exceedingly suited unto the Nature, Glory and Exaltation of it. And
this one observation may be easily improved to the frustrating all the
objections of the Jews, from the non-accomplishment pretended of these promises.

Whereas spiritual things have the principal place and consideration in the
work and Kingdom of the Messiah, they are oftentimes promised in words, whose
first signification denotes things temporal and corporeal. And this came to
pass, and was so ordered on several accounts. For, first, the very way and
manner of the Prophets expression of their Visions and Revelations, wherein
after the way of the people of the East, they made use of many Metaphors and
Allegories, lead them so to set forth spiritual things. That this was the
custom of the Prophets, as they expressly own it, and is manifest in their
writings, so it is confessed by the Jews, who, in their Expositions of them, do
ever and anon grant, that this and that is to be interpreted (...) that is
Allegorically. Now when it is granted, that the subject matter treated on is
principally spiritual, all these Metaphors are plain and easily accommodated
unto the principal scope and end intended.

Again, as this was the manner of the Prophets, so it is a way exceedingly
instructive, and suited to convey an apprehension and sense of the things
treated on, unto the minds and understandings of men. All men know the worth
and usefulness of the precious things of the Creation, Gold, Silver, precious
Stones; of the desirable things of natural life, Health, Strength, long Life;
of the good things of men in civil conversation, Wealth, Riches, Liberty, Rule,
Dominion, and the like. Men know somewhat of the worth of these things, and
commonly esteem them above it. Now what is likely more to affect their minds
with, and raise their affections unto spiritual things, then to have them
proposed unto them under the names of these things, whose Excellency they are
so well acquainted withal, and whose enjoyment they so much desire. For
nothing can be more evident unto them, then that God in these condescensions
unto their capacities, does declare, that the things which he promises, are
indeed the most excellent and desirable that they can be made partakers of.

Thirdly, the state and condition of the Church of old, required such a way of
instruction. For as they had then in the Covenant of the Land of Canaan, many
Promises of earthly and carnal things, so they themselves were carnal, and
received great encouragement to abide in their expectation of the coming of the
Messiah, from that outward Glory which they apprehended that it would be
attended withal. Besides, the time was not yet come, wherein the veil was to
be removed, and believers were with open face to behold the glory of God. And
therefore although this way of instruction by Similitudes, Metaphors and
Allegories was suited, as we observed, in general, to affect their minds, and
to stir up their affections, yet it did not give them that clear distinct
apprehension of the things of the Kingdom of the Messiah, which was afterward
revealed. God had other work to do among them, by them, and upon them, then
openly and plainly to reveal his whole Counsel in these things unto them. Hence
the Prophets themselves, who received the Promises and Revelations treated of,
from God, were fain to enquire with all diligence into the nature of the
Office, Work, Sufferings and Glory of the Messiah, which they prophesied unto
the Church about, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. and yet all their enquiry came short of the
understanding of those mysteries, which he had, who only saw the Messiah come
in the flesh, and died before he had acaccomplished his work. But in all these
promises, there was provision laid in to compel, as it were, the most carnal
mind to look principally after spiritual things, and to own an Allegory in the
expressions of them. For many of them are such, or otherwise, have no tolerable
signification or sense, nor ever shall have accomplishment unto Eternity. Can
any man be so stupidly sottish as to think, that in the days of the Messiah,
hills shall leap, and trees clap their hands, and waste places sing, and sheep
of Kedar* and rams of Nebaioth, be made ministers, and Jews suck milk from the
breasts of Kings, and little children play with Cockatrices, literally and
properly? And yet those things, with innumerable of the like kind are promised.
Do they not openly proclaim to every understanding, that all the expressions of
them are Metaphorical, and that some other thing is to be sought for in them.
Some of the Jews I confess, would fain have them all literally fulfilled unto
a tittle. They would have a trumpet to be blown, that all the world should
hear, mountains to be levelled, seas to be dried up, wildernesses to be filled
with springs and roses, the Gentiles carrying Jews upon their shoulders, and
giving them all their gold and silver; but the folly of these imaginations is
unspeakable, and the blindness of their Authors deplorable; neither to gratify
them must we expose the Word of God to the contempt and scorn of Atheistical
scoffers, which such Expositions and Applications of it would undoubtedly do.
Now this rule which we insist upon is especially to be heeded, where spiritual
and temporal things, though far distant in their natures, yet do usually come
under the same Appellation. Thus is it with the Peace that is promised in the
days of the Messiah. Peace is either spiritual and eternal with God, or outward
and external with men in this world. Now these things are not only diverse, and
such as may be distinguished one from the other, but such as whose especial
nature is absolutely different; yet are they both Peace, and so called. The
former is that which was chiefly intended in the coming of the Messiah; but
this being Peace also, is often promised in those words, which in their first
signification denotes the later, or outward peace in this world amongst men.
And this is frequent in the Prophets.

Fourthly, By the seed of Abraham, by Jacob, and Israel in many places of the
Prophets, not the carnal seed, at least not all the carnal seed of them is
intended; but the children of the faith of Abraham, who are the inheritors of
the promise. Here I acknowledge, the Jews universally differ from us. They
would have none but themselves intended in those expressions; and what ever is
spoken concerning the seed of Abraham, if it be not accomplished in themselves,
they suppose it has no effect on any other in the world. And from this
apprehension an objection was raised of old against the doctrine of our
Apostle. For on supposition that Jesus was the Messiah, and that the blessing
was to be obtained by faith in him, whereas it was evident that far the
greatest part of the Jews believed not in him, it would seem to follow, that
the promise of God made to Abraham was of none effect: Romans 9.1. But the
Apostle answers, that the promise did never belong unto all the carnal seed of
Abraham; for whereas he had many sons, one of whom, Ishmael, was his
firstborn, yet Isaac only inherited the promise. And whereas Isaac himself had
two sons, yet one only of them, and he the younger, enjoyed the privilege; and
all this proceeded from the especial purpose of God, who takes into that
privilege whom he pleases. So was his dealing with the Jews at that time; he
called whom he pleased to a participation of the promise, and passed by whom he
would; whereby it came to pass at last, that all the Elect obtained, and the
rest were hardened. Now the seed to whom the promise is given, are those only
that obtain it by faith, b^ing chosen thereunto, the residue being not intended
in that appellation of Israel, Jacob, the sons and seed of Abraham. Moreover,
as those only of the carnal seed of Abraham, who embrace the promise are
received in this matter to be his seed, so all that follow the faith of
Abraham, and believe unto Righteousness as he did, are his sons and the seed of
the promise, although carnally they were not his offspring. The same also is
to be said concerning those names of Sion and Jerusalem, of both which such
glorious things are spoken. I suppose none can imagine, that it is the little
Hill so called, or the streets and buildings of the Town that God did so
regard. But one of them having been for a season in the days of David, the
special place of his worship, and the other the principal habitation of Church
and people, God expresses his Love and Goodwill to his Church and Worship
under those names; and it is a fond thing to suppose, that the respects
mentioned should be unto those places themselves, which now for a thousand
years have lain waste and desolate. Those promises then which we find recorded
concerning Sion, Jerusalem, the seed of Abraham, Jacob, Israel, do respect the
Elect of God, called unto the faith of Abraham, and worshipping God according
unto his appointment, be they of what People or Nation soever under heaven. And
this we have proved before, in our dissertation about the Oneness of the
Church, of the Old and New Testament.

Fifthly, By all people, all Nations, the Gentiles, all the Gentiles, not all
absolutely, especially at any one time or season, are to be understood; but
either the most eminent and most famous of them, or those in whom the Church,
by reason of their vicinity, is more especially concerned. God oftentimes
charged the Jews of old; that they had worshipped the gods of all the Nations;
whereby yet not all Nations absolutely, but only those that were about them,
with whom they had commerce and communication, were intended. Those Expressions
then of all Nations, and all Kingdoms who are said to come into the Church, and
submit themselves unto the Kingdom of the Messiah, at his coming, do not denote
all absolutely in the world, especially at any one time or season, but only
such as are either most eminent among them* or such as God would cause his
light and truth to approach unto. And those which in an especial manner seem to
be designed in those prophetical expressions, are that collection of Nations
whereof the Roman Empire was constituted, which obtained the common appellation
of the whole World, being for the main of them the posterity of Japhet, who
were to be persuaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem. The Jews would have all
Nations absolutely to be intended; and Kimchi, with Aben Ezra tells us on Isa.
2.4. in those words of the Prophet, He shall judge among the Nations; that all
Nations of the Earth shall live at peace; for what ever controversies they have
among themselves, they shall come and refer the determination of them to the
Messiah living at Jerusalem. But how this should be done by all the Nations of
the Earth absolutely, they are not pleased to declare unto us. Certainly the
heat of some of their differences will be much abated, before they have made a
full end of their journey.

what ever is to be done and effected by the Spirit, Grace, or Power of the
Messiah during the continuance of his Kingdom in this world, it is mentioned in
the Promises, as that which was to be accomplished, at, or by his coming. But
here, as we before observed, lies the mistake of the Jews; what ever is spoken
about his Work and Kingdom, they expect to have fulfilled as it were in a day,
which neither the nature of the things themselves will bear, nor is it any way
suited unto the Glory of God, or the duration of this Kingdom in the world. The
Kingdom of the Messiah is prophesied of, to be set up in the room of the other
great Kingdoms and Monarchies that are in the world. And if we take an instance
in the last Monarchy of Daniel, namely the Roman, it is spoken of, as that
which came forth as it were all at once into the world, and did all its work
immediately; when we know that from its first rise to the end of the things
there spoken of, there passed above the space of a thousand years. But yet all
the things ascribed unto it, are mentioned as attending its rise and coming;
and that because they were in process of time affected by its power. And in
like manner, all the things that are foretold about the Kingdom of the Messiah
are referred unto his Coming, because before that they were not wrought, and
they are produced by his Spirit and Grace, the foundation of them all being
perfectly and unchangeably wrought in what he did and effected upon his first
coming and appearance. It is no wonder then that many particular promises seem
as yet to be unfulfilled: for they were never designed to be accomplished, in a
day, an year, an age, one place, or season, but in a long tract of time during
the continuance of his Kingdom; that is, from his coming unto the end of the
world. And as the care of the accomplishment of those promises is upon, so the
ordering of the time and season of their being effected belongs unto, the
Counsel and Will of the Father; who as unto his Children and Servants, has
engaged unto him, that he should see of the travail of his soul in all
Generations: and as unto his Adversaries has said, Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

two ways whereby Promises may be said to be accomplished by him who gives
them. The one is, when all is done in respect of outward means, helps and
advantages, that is needful for that end, and which if men do not embrace and
make use of, they are left unexcusable, and have none to blame for their coming
short of enjoying the full benefit of the Promises, but themselves alone. And
in this sense all the Promises contended about, are long since accomplished
toward all the world. There is plentiful provision made in the doings and
Doctrine of the Messiah, as to outward means, for the peace of all the Nations
in the world, for the Ruin of all false Worship, for the uniting of Jews and
Gentiles in one body, in Peace and Unity; and that these things are not
actually effected, the whole defect lies in the blindness, unbelief, and
obstinacy of the sons of men, who had rather perish in their sins, then be
saved through obedience to this Captain of Salvation.

2. God does sometimes accomplish his Promises, by putting forth the
efficacious power of his Spirit and Grace, effectually and actually to fulfill
them, by working the things promised in and upon them unto whom they are
promised. And thus are all the Promises of God that concern the Messiah, his
Work, his Mediation, with the effects of them, his Grace and Spirit, at all
Times, in all Ages, absolutely fulfilled in and toward the Elect, that seed of
Abraham, unto whom all the Promises do in an especial manner belong. The
Election obtains the promise, although the rest are hardened. Now if the
Jews, or any other Nation under Heaven, shall at any time, or for a long season
continue to reject the terms of Reconciliation with God, and of inheriting the
promises which are proposed unto them, shall their unbelief make the faith of
God of none effect? God forbid. The Truth of God failed not, when he brought
only Caleb and Joshua into Canaan, the whole body of the people being consumed
in the Wilderness, by reason of their unbelief. God has done, does, and
always will effectually fulfill all his promises in his Elect; and for the
residue of men, they come not short of the enjoyment of them, but upon their
own sin, blindness and unbelief.

Moreover, it is granted, that there shall be a time and season, during the
continuance of the Kingdom of the Messiah in this world, wherein the generality
of the Nation of the Jews all the world over, shall be called and effectually
brought unto the knowledge of the Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ, with which
mercy they shall also receive deliverance from their captivity, restoration
into their own land, with a blessed, flourishing and happy condition therein. I
shall not here engage into a confirmation of this concession, or assertion. The
work would be long and great, because of the difference about the time, season,
and manner of their Call, their following state and condition, and so is unmeet
for us to undertake, in the winding up of these discourses. It is only the
thing its self that I assert, nor have any cause as to the end aimed at; to
enquire into the time and manner of its accomplishment. Besides, the Event will
be the only sure and infallible Expositor of these things, nor in matters of
such importance as those before us, shall I trouble the Reader with
conjectures. The thing it self is acknowledged, as far as I can understand by
all the world, that have any acquaintance with these things. Christians
generally do assert it, look for it, pray for it, and have done so in all Ages
from the days of the Apostles. Mahometans are not without some thoughts of
what shall befall the Jews before the end of the world. As to the Jews
themselves in their false notion of it, it is the life of their hopes and
Religion. What is it then that the Jews plead, what do they expect? What
promises are given unto them? they say, that they shall be delivered out of
their Captivity, restored to their own Land, enjoy peace and quietness, glory
and honor therein. We say the same concerning them also; but by whom shall
these things be wrought for them, by their Messiah they say at his coming: But
shall he do all these things for them, whether they believe in him or no;
whether they obey him or reject him, love him or curse him? Is there no more
required unto this delivery, but that he should come to them? Is it not also,
that they should come to him? Here then lies the only difference between us; we
acknowledge that the Promises mentioned, are not yet all of them actually
fulfilled toward them; this they also plead: the Reason hereof they say, is
because the Messiah is not yet come, so casting the blame on God, who has not
made good his word according to the time limited expressly by himself. We say
the reason of it is, because they come not by faith and obedience unto the
Messiah, which long since came unto them, and so cast the blame, where sure it
is more likely to lie, even on them and their unbelief. They are in expectation
that the Messiah will come to them; we, that they will come unto the Messiah;
and it may be this difference may ere long be reconciled, by his Appearance
unto them, so calling them unto faith and obedience.

Lastly, Suppose there should be any particular Promise or Promises, relating
unto the Times and Kingdom of the Messiah, either accomplished, or not yet
accomplished, the full, clear, and perfect sense and intendment whereof, we are
not able to arrive unto; shall we therefore reject that faith and persuasion,
which is built on so many clear, certain, undoubted Testimonies of the
Scripture its self, and manifest in the event, as if it were written with the
beams of the Sun? As such a proceeding could arise from nothing but a foolish
conceited pride, that we are able to find out God unto perfection, and to
discover all the depths of Wisdom that are in his Word; so it would, being
applied unto other things and affairs, overthrow all assurance and certainty in
the world; even that which is necessary to a man to enable him to act with any
satisfaction unto himself or others. What then we understand of the mind of
God, we faithfully adhere unto; and what we cannot comprehend, we humbly leave
the knowledge and Revelation of, unto his Divine Majesty.

On these and the like Principles, which most of them are clear in the
Scripture its self, and the rest deduced immediately from the same fountain of
truth, it is no hard matter to answer and remove those particular instances
which the Jews produce to make good their general Argument, whereby they would
prove the Messiah not yet to be come, from the non-accomplishment of the
Promises that relate unto his Coming and Kingdom. It were a work endless and
useless to undertake the consideration of every particular Promise, which they
wrest unto their purpose. They are not the words themselves, but the things
promised that are in controversy. Now these, though expressed in great
variety, and on occasions innumerable, yet may be referred unto certain general
heads, whereunto they do all belong. And indeed unto these heads they are
usually gathered by the Jews themselves, in all their disputes against
Christians. These then we shall consider, and show their consistency with that
truth which we have abundantly evinced from the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, the common acknowledged principle between us.

universal peace in the whole world, which they take to be promised in the days
of the Messiah. To this purpose they urge the Prophecy recorded Isa. 2.2, 3,
4. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it; and many people shall go
and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. For out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people,
and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. This Prophecy is in the same words repeated, Micha
4.1, 2, 3, 4. where there is added unto the close of it, But they shall sit
every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them
afraid. And the like things are spoken of, in sundry other places of that
Prophecy.

Jews, that this is a prophecy of the time of the Messiah, of his Kingdom in
this world; and do willingly subscribe to that rule of Kimchi on the place, on
those words, in the last or latter days; (...) In every place where there is
mention of the last days, the days of the Messiah are intended, which we have
formerly made use of. We also consent unto him, that the (...) the teacher that
shall from Jerusalem instruct us in the Law and will of the Lord, is (...)
Messiah the King, which manifests him to be a Prophet no less then a King; and
he also is the Judge that shall judge among the Nations. Only we differ from
them in the Exposition of the Mountain of the house of the Lord, which they
take to be mount Moria, we the worship of God it self. And whereas both of us
are necessitated to depart from the Letter, and allow a Metaphor in the words,
for they will not contend, that the hill Moria shall be plucked up by the
roots, and taken and set on the tops of other mountains they know not where,
nor can they tell unto what purpose any such thing would be; so our
interpretation of the words which admits only of the most usual figurative
expression, the place being taken for the worship performed in it, on the
account whereof alone it was ever of any esteem, is far more easy and natural,
then any thing they can wrest the remainder of the words unto, supposing mount
Moria to be literally understood. And in this sense we affirm the first part of
the Prophecy, to be long since really, and to the full accomplished. For
whereas the worship of God before the coming of Christ, was confined unto the
Temple at Jerusalem, attended unto by one poor, small, enslaved Nation, and
that in such outward contempt and scorn, that it was no way to be compared with
the glory of the false worship of the Nations, and the compliance of multitudes
of people unto it, the mountains being far more visible, conspicuous and
stately then that at Jerusalem, upon his coming and giving out the Law of God
unto the Nations of the world, the most, the greatest, and the most glorious of
them consented unto the acceptance of it, and with one consent gave themselves
up to the worship of the God of Jacob, whereby the worship of the true God was
not only exalted and made more conspicuous, then the lofty hills, and high
places of the world, wherein they worshipped their Idols, but the most eminent
mountains of the whole earth, as that of Diana at Ephesus, and of the Capitol
at Rome, were destroyed and deserted, and the glory of the worship of God was
lifted up above them. So that what the Jews think to plead for themselves, does
indeed in a manifest and open Event wholly evert their unbelief. But avoiding
the consideration hereof, that which they principally insist upon is, the Peace
promised under the Kingdom of the Messiah; which, as it seems to them, is not
accomplished. Yea, says one of them, Men are so far from heating their swords
into Plow-shares, that within a few hundreds of years, new instruments of war,
never heard of in the world before, have been invented among them, who pretend
to believe in the Messiah. And this, as they think, makes it appear, that
really he is not as yet come into the world; the vanity of which pretense may
easily be discovered from our former Rules, which we shall briefly make
application of unto its removal.

For, first, The temporal outward Peace of the world, if any such thing be here
principal part, matter or subject of the Promise, but only an accessory unto
it; the chief part of it which concerns the spiritual worship of God, is
evidently and openly fulfilled. That which is temporal, for the times and
seasons of it, is left unto the sovereign Will and Wisdom of God for its
accomplishment. Neither is it necessary that it should be fulfilled amongst all
Nations at once, but only amongst them who at any time, or in any place,
effectually receive the Laws of God from the Messiah. What ever then of outward
peace is really intended in this promise, as it has in part already received
its accomplishment, as we shall show, so the whole shall be fulfilled in the
time and way of Gods appointment. 2. That the words are not to be understood
absolutely, according to the strict exigence of the letter, is evident from
that complement of the prediction of that in Micah, Every one shall sit under
his own vine and fig tree, there being many, not only persons, but great
Nations in the world, that have neither the one nor the other. 3. The Jews
themselves do not expect such peace upon the coming of their Messiah. War great
and terrible with Gog and Magog they look for, which also the Scripture
mentions; and that with Amillus is their own faith or fancy: only it may be
they would have no body to wage war with but themselves. For whereas they tell
us, that all Nations shall come with their controversies to be ended by the
Messiah at Jerusalem, and by that means prevent war among them: I suppose they
will not do so, until they are subdued, and those Nations broken in pieces
which will not serve them, which what ever expedition they fancy to themselves,
may take up at least half the Reign of their Messiah, if he should live an
hundred years, about which they differ, yea plainly and openly, great wars and
desolation of the enemies of the children of God are foretold under the
Messiah, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 4. I shall not much insist on that universal
peace which God gave unto all the known Nations of the world, at the coming of
Christ, in the Reign of Augustus; though it look more like an accomplishment of
this Prophecy, then what the Jews imagine therein: but because it was only
coincident with, by the Providence of God, and not an effect of his coming, I
shall pass it by only as a diagnostick of the season wherein the Prince of
peace was to be born, and was so accordingly. But I say, 5. That Christ at his
coming wrought perfect peace between God and Man, slaying the enmity and
difference which by reason of sin was between them. This alone absolutely and
properly is peace; without this, all other outward quiet and prosperity is
ruinous and destructive. And where this is, no Wars nor tumults can hinder, but
that the persons enjoying it shall be preserved in perfect peace; and this if
the Jews did believe, they would have experience of. 6. He has also wrought
true spiritual Peace and Love between all that sincerely believe in him, all
his Elect, which, although it frees them not from outward troubles,
persecutions, oppressions, and afflictions in the earth, and that from some
also that may make profession of his Name, (for Judah may be in the siege
against Jerusalem, Zach. 12.2.) yet they having peace with God, and among
themselves, they enjoy the promise unto the full satisfaction of their souls.
And this peace of the Elect with God, and among themselves, is that which
singly and principally is intended in this Prediction, though set out under
terms and expressions of the things wherein outward Peace in this world does
consist. 7. The Lord Christ by his doctrine has not only proclaimed and
offered Peace with God unto all Nations, but also given Precepts of Peace, and
self-denial, directing and guiding all the sons of men, were they attended unto
and received, to live in Peace among themselves; whereas the Jews of old had
express command for War, and destroying of the Nations among whom they were to
inhabit, which gives a great foundation unto the promises of Peace in the days
of the Messiah. 8. Let it be supposed, that it is general outward Peace,
Prosperity and Tranquillity that is here promised unto the world; yet then, 1.
The precise time of its accomplishment is not here limited nor determined. If
it be effected during the Kingdom and Reign of the Messiah in the world, the
word is established, and the Prophecy verefied. 2. Our Lord Jesus Christ and
his Apostles have foretold, that after his Law and Doctrine should be received
in the world, there should a great defection and Apostasy from the power and
purity of it ensue, which should be attended with great persecution, troubles,
afflictions, wars and tumults, which after they are all removed, and all his
Adversaries subdued, he will give peace and rest unto his Churches and People
all the world over; and herein, and in that season which now approaches, lies
the accomplishment of all the promises concerning the glorious and peaceable
estate of the Church in this world* Take then this Prophecy in what sense
soever it may be literally expounded, and there is nothing in it that gives the
the least countenance unto the Judaical pretense from the words.

Idolatry and false worship in the world, with the abundance of the knowledge
of the Lord, taking away all diversity in Religion, that shall be in the days
of the Messiah. Such is that of Jerem. 31. v. 34. They shall teach no more
every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for
they shall all know me from the greatest of them to the least of them, says
the Lord. And Zeph. 3.9. I will turn to the people a pure language, that they
may call on the name of the Lord with one consent. As likewise that of Zach.
14.9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth. In that day shall there be
one Lord, and his Name shall be One. And sundry other predictions there are of
the same importance, all which are to be accomplished at the coming of the
Messiah. But for the present we see, say they, the contrary prevailing in the
world. Idolatry is still continued, and that among the Christians themselves;
diversities of Religion abound, so that there are now more sects and opinions
in the world; nor can the Jews and Christians agree in this very matter about
the Messiah; all which make it evident, that he is not yet come, who shall put
an end to all this state of things.

Answ. It will prove in the issue, that the mention of these, as well as of
other Promises, will turn to their disadvantage. Their accomplishment in the
sense of the Scripture has been so plain, evident and manifest, that nothing
but Prejudice and obstinate blindness can once call it into question. For the
further manifestation hereof, we may observe, 1. That these things are not
spoken absolutely, but comparatively; It is not to be thought, that in the days
of the Messiah, there shall be no means of instruction in the knowledge of the
Lord used; as that Parents should not teach their children; the Officers of the
Church and others, those that stand in need of teaching: for neither do the
Jews indeed imagine any such thing, nor can they do so, without the rejection
of the Precepts of the Law of Moses, and the Predictions recorded in the
Prophets, wherein God promises, that in those days he will give the people
Pastors after his own heart, Priests and Levites, to teach them his mind and
will. But this is that which is signified in these expressions; namely, that in
those days there shall be such a plentiful effusion of the Spirit of Wisdom and
Grace, as shall cause the true saving knowledge of God to be more easily
obtained, and much more plentifully to abound, then it did in the time of the
Law; when the people, by an hard yoke, and insupportable burden of carnal
Ordinances, were darkly, meanly, and difficultly instructed in some part of the
knowledge of God. And that the words are thus to be interpreted, the many
promises that are given, concerning the instruction of the Church, in the days
of the Messiah, and his own Office, of being the great Prophet of the Church,
which the Jews acknowledge, do undeniably evince. 2. That the terms of all
people and Nations are necessarily to be understood as before explained, for
many Nations, those in an especial manner, in whom the Church of Christ is
concerned; neither can any one place be produced, where an absolute
universality of them is intended. 3. That the season of the accomplishment of
these and the like Predictions, is not limited to the day or year of the
Messiah's coming, as the Jews, amongst other impossible fictions, imagine; but
extends it self unto the whole duration of the Kingdom of the Messiah, as has
been showed before. 4. That God sometimes is said to do that, which he makes
provision of outward means for the effecting of, though as to some persons and
times, they may be frustrated of their effect; and this the Jews not only
acknowledge, but also contend for, when they give an account why the promises
which concern themselves are not yet fulfilled, the reason whereof they
suppose, or at least pretend, to lie in their sin and unworthiness.

Jesus of Nazareth, setting aside that knowledge and worship of God which was
in Judea, a little corner of the earth, and that also by their own confession
then horribly defiled and profaned the whole world, especially the greatest and
most potent and flourishing Nations of it; in particular the whole Roman
Empire, especially concerned in these predictions, was utterly ignorant of the
true God, and engaged in the Worship of Idols and Devils, and that from time
immemorial. 2. That although the Jews had taken great pains, and compassed Sea
and Land to make Proselytes, yet they were very few, and those very obscure
persons, whom they could at any time, or in any place prevail withal to
receive the knowledge, or give up themselves unto the Worship of the God of
Israel; of converting People or Nations unto his obedience, they now
entertained the least hopes. 3. It is manifest to all the world, that not only
upon the coming of Jesus, but also by virtue of his Law and Doctrine, all the
Old Idolatry of the world was destroyed, and that whole fabric of
Superstition, which Satan had been so many Ages engaged in the erection of, was
cast to the ground, and those Gods of the Earth which the Nations worshipped
utterly famished. Hence it is come to pass at this day, that no People or
Nation under Heaven does continue to worship those Gods, which the Old Empires
of the World adored as their Deities, and in whose service they waged War
against the God of Israel and his people. And all that knowledge that is at
this day in the world of one true living God, and the reception of the God of
Israel, for that true God, however abused, as it is by some, Mahumetans and
others, it did all originally proceed from the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, whom
these ungrateful people hate and persecute. Had it not been for him and his
Gospel, the true God, the God of their forefathers, had been no more owned in
the world at this day, then he was at his coming in the flesh; and yet these
poor blinded creatures, can see no glory in him or in his Ministry. 4. The Lord
Jesus Christ by his Spirit and Word, did not only destroy Idolatry and false
Worship in the world, but also brought the greatest and most potent Nations of
it to the Knowledge of God, that in comparison of what was past, it covered the
earth; as the Waters cover the Seas. This the Jews saw and repined at in the
flourishing times of the Roman Empire, when the Lord was one, and his Name was
one, in the whole earth, as that Expression is used in the Scripture. 5. The
Way whereby this Knowledge and Worship of the true God was dispersed over the
face of the earth, and spread its self like an mundation of saving waters over
the world, was by such a secret energy of the spirit of Christ accompanying his
Word and the Ministration of it, that it wholly differed from that operous,
burdensome, and for the most part ineffectual way of teaching which was used by
the Priests, Levites, and Scribes of old; there being much more of the efficacy
of Grace, then of the pains of the Teachers seen in the Effects wrought and
produced, according to the Words of the Promise, Jerem. 31.34. 6. In this
diffusion of the knowledge of God, there was way made for the Union, Agreement,
and joint Consent in Worship, of those that should receive it. For both the
partition wall between Jews and Gentiles was removed, and both people did
actually coalesce into one body, worshipping God with one lip and shoulder, and
also an holy and plain way of spiritual Worship was prescribed unto all, that
should, or did embrace the Law of the Messiah. 7. Notwithstanding all that has
been already accomplished, yet there is still room and time left and remaining
for the further accomplishment of these predictions, so that before the close
of the Kingdom of the Messiah, not one Tittle of them shall fall to the ground.
And thus also, the open Event, known to all the world, does manifest the due
and full accomplishment of these Promises, making it unquestionable, that the
Messiah is long since come, and has fulfilled the work that he was designed of
old unto.

Neither are the Exceptions of the Jews of any force to invalidate our
Application Idolatry that is yet in the world; especially among Christians.
Secondly, The differences in Religion that every where abound amongst men. For
1. We have showed already, that these and the like Predictions are to have a
gradual accomplishment, not all at once, in every place. It is sufficient that
there is an everlasting foundation laid for the destruction of all false
Worship, which having had a conspicuous and glorious Effect in the most eminent
Nations of the world, sufficient to answer the intention of the Prophecy, shall
yet further in the appointed seasons root out the remainder of all superstition
and Apostasy from God. 2. For what concerns Christians themselves, it cannot be
denied, but that many who are so called, have corrupted themselves, and
contracted the guilt of that horrible iniquity, which they charge upon them.
But this being the crime and guilt of some certain Persons, and not of the
whole society of the Professors of Christianity, ought not to be objected unto
them. And I desire to know by what means the Jews suppose that themselves and
the Nations of the world shall be kept from Idolatry and false Worship in the
days of their Messiah: if it be, because their Messiah shall give such a
perfect Law, and such full instructions in the mind and will of God, that all
men may clearly know their duty, we say that this is already done, in the
highest degree of perfection that is conceivable, but what if notwithstanding
this, men will follow their own vain, reasonings and imaginations, and fall
from the rule of their obedience into Will Worship and Superstition, what
remedy have they provided against such backsliding; if they have none, but only
the pressing upon them their duty to the Law, Word, and Institutions of God; we
have the same, and do make use of it, to the same end and purpose. If they
shall say, that their Messiah will kill them and slay them with the sword, we
confess that ours is not of that mind, and desire them to take heed, least, in
the room of the holy, humble, merciful Kings promised the Church, they look for
and desire a bloody Tyrant, that should exercise force over the minds of men,
and execute their revenge and lusts on those whom they like not. 3. This
Apostasy of some Professors of Christianity, into false Worship, Idolatry and
Persecution is foretold obscurely in the Writings of the Old Testament it self,
but most plainly in those of the Gospel, or Revelations made by the Lord Christ
unto his Apostles concerning the state of the Church unto the end of the world;
so that from thence no impeachment can arise against our Interpretation of the
predictions insisted on, which have a perfect coincidence therewithal, 4. The
same is the state of things in reference unto what they object about the
variety of Religions that are in the world, and the multitude of Sects which
every where spring up: For 1. Although de facto there are at this time sundry
false Religions in the world, and amongst them that which is professed by the
Jews, yet de jure they ought not to be, there being one true Religion
sufficiently declared and promulgated unto the children of men. For whereas the
Jews and others do wilfully shut their eyes against the light and evidence of
truth, the guilt and misery is their own, the Lord Christ having graciously
provided, and tendered unto them means of better instruction. And 2. It is a
mistake, that the different Opinions and Sects that are amongst Christians
themselves do constitute different Religions. For as they all agree in the
Worship of the God of Israel by Jesus Christ the Messiah, which contains the
sum of their Religion, so their profession its self is not to be measured by
the Doctrines and Conceptions of some amongst them, but by the Scripture which
they all receive and acknowledge. This is the Religion of them all, and it is
one and the same, amongst all that receive Jesus Christ for their Savior. That
there are such pertinacious contests about men's different apprehensions of the
mind of God in the Word, that they labor to impose their private conceptons
one upon another, is the fault of some men, which does not prejudice the
oneness of that Religion which is taught in the Gospel. Upon all which it
appears, that the Promises insisted on, have received a glorious and blessed
accomplishment.

People of Israel shall be brought into a blessed and prosperous condition by
the Messiah at his coming, and in particular, that by him they shall be brought
home into their own Land: And to this purpose, they plead, Isa. 11.13. Chap.
52.54, 60, 61, 62, 63, 66. Jer. 30. and 31. Ezekiel. 36.37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.
whereunto sundry other places of a like importance may be added. But now say
they, instead hereof, that whole people is scattered over the face of the
earth, under great misery and oppression for the most part, without the least
interest in the Country promised unto them. And from hence it is, that they
most obstinately conclude, that the Messiah is not yet come; for until they
are rich, wealthy, and powerful they will not believe that God is faithful.

Answ. It would be too long a work, and not suitable unto our present design,
to go over all the Promises in particular, which seem to have an aspect this
way, or wherein mention is made of Abraham, the seed of Abraham, Jacob, Israel,
and the people of Israel and Judah. Besides, the Exposition of them may readily
be sought from many Learned Commentaries extant in all Languages on the
Prophecies of the Old Testament. I shall therefore only give such general
Answers, as being applied unto the several particular instances, will manifest
the insufficiency of the Jews Argument from Promises of this Nature. 1. Then in
the consideration of these Promises we must carefully distinguish, between
those who had their full, at least principal accomplishment in that return of
the people from the Captivity of Babylon, and those which have a direct respect
unto the days of the Messiah. It is known that the Prophets do very usually
set out that merciful deliverance, in Metaphorical Expressions, so to set off
the greatness of the mercy its self. But the present Jews who now look for the
accomplishing of all the most strained Allegories in a literal sense, supposing
that the deliverance which their forefathers then obtained, because of their
ensuing trouble and poverty, did not answer what is spoken of it, do wrest them
all to the times of the Messiah, when they hope they shall receive them in full
measure. For they reckon of all things according to their outward gain and
profit, and not according to the manifestation of the Love and Glory of God
therein. These Promises then are in the first place to be set apart, as not
concerned in our present business and difference. 2. We have manifested before,
that there is mention of a double Israel in the Scripture; the spiritual
Israel, that is, all the sons of the faith of Abraham in all Ages and places
throughout the world; and an Israel according to the flesh, or the carnal
posterity of Jacob, which the present Jews are. This distinction we have
elsewhere confirmed. Now many of the Promises pleaded, belong to Israel in the
first sense, that is, the Church and people of God, who by faith are admitted
into the Covenant of Abraham, and so made inheritors of the Promises. And these
also which are by far the greatest number, are to be set aside from our present
consideration of them. 3. It has been proved, that oftentimes spiritual things
are expressed metaphorically in the Prophets, by words which in their literal
first sense denote things outward and corporeal. This is sufficiently evident
from the instances formerly given, wherein such things are spoken, as it is
utterly impossible that they should have a literal accomplishment, and of the
like sort there are others innumerable. And thus most of the predictions that
concern Peace and Prosperity, must necessarily intend spiritual peace with God,
because concerning the same seasons, Wars, and Trials are in other places
foretold. 4. Whatever is foretold and promised concerning the Jews themselves,
in the days of the Messiah, doubtless they have no ground nor color of reason
to expect the accomplishment of it, until they receive him, own him, and submit
unto him, which to this day they have not done. When Moses went forth to visit
them of old in their distress, and slew the Egyptian that smote one of them,
because they refused him, and would not understand that it was he whom God
would deliver them by, and endeavored to betray him to death, their bondage
was continued forty years longer, and yet at length by the same Moses were they
delivered: And although they have refused and rejected him who was promised to
be their Savior, and so continue to this day in their captivity spiritual and
temporal, yet it is he, by whom in the time appointed, they shall be delivered
from the one and the other. But this shall not be done until they own and
receive him; which when God shall give them hearts to do, they will quickly
find the blessed success thereof. For, 5. We grant that there are many Promises
on record in the Scripture concerning their gathering together, their return to
God by the Messiah, with great Peace and Glory that shall ensue thereupon. Set
aside their opinion concerning the perpetuity of the Ceremonial Law, and their
return in the observation of it, unto their carnal Ordinances, built on a
supposition that God is pleased with the blood of Bulls and Goats for its own
sake, and not for a signification of that which was infinitely more excellent
and glorious; an apprehension which the whole world has as it were by joint
consent long ago renounced; and cast away the vain and foolish imaginations
about their sensual pleasures, Behemoth, the Wine of Paradise, and literal
accomplishment of professed Allegories, which the wisest among themselves begin
to be ashamed of: and there is nothing in their own expectations, but we
acknowledge that they shall be made partakers of it. Return they shall to their
own Land, enjoy it for a quiet and everlasting possession, their Adversaries
being destroyed: filled they shall be also with the Light and Knowledge of the
Will and Worship of God, so as to be a guide and blessing unto the residue of
the Gentiles who seek after the Lord, and it may be, be entrusted with great
Empire and Rule in the world. The most of these things are foretold concerning
them, not only in their own Prophetical Writings, but also by the Divine
Writers of sundry Books of the New Testament. But all this we say must come to
pass, when the veil shall be taken from before their eyes, and they shall look
on him whom they have pierced, and joyfully receive him whom they have sinfully
rejected for so many Generations. Until this be done, they may wrestle^s they
can with their own perplexities, and comfort themselves as well as they are
able in their miseries, get money in their dispersions by all unlawful Arts
and ways imaginable, and expose themselves to the delusions of Impostors, false
Prophets and pretenders to be their Deliverers, which to their unspeakable
misery and reproach they have now done ten times; deliverance, peace,
tranquillity, acceptance with God and man, they shall not obtain. Here lies the
Crisis of their condition. When they shall receive, acknowledge, and believe in
that Messiah who came so long time since unto them, whom their Fathers wickedly
slew, and hanged on a Tree, and whom themselves have since no less wickedly
rejected; and when by his Spirit and Grace they shall be turned from
ungodliness, and have their eyes opened to see the Mystery of the Grace,
Wisdom and Love of God in the blood of his Son, then shall they obtain mercy
from the God of their forefathers, and returning again into their own Land,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited again even in Jerusalem.

Exercitatio XIX.
Ordinances and Institutions of the Judaical Church respected and unfolded in
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Principal Heads of them mentioned therein. The call
of Abraham, Heb. 11.8, 9, etc. The foundation of the Church in his Posterity.
The name of Abram; signification of it. Changed into Abraham; its
signification. The time of his Birth and Death. Whence called. Ur of the
Chaldees where. And Haran. Extent of Mesopotamia. Moses and Stephen reconciled.
Abraham before his call infected with Idolatry. Time of his call. Institution
of Circumcision. End and use of it. Time of the Israelites sojourning in Egypt,
Genesis 11.13. Exodus 12.40, 41. Act. 7.6. Gal. 3 17. reconciled. The beginning and
ending of the 430 years. The Fatal period of Changes in that Church.
Institution of the Passover. The time of its celebration. The month. Time of
the day. (...) between the Evenings, when. The occasion and nature of this
Ordinance. The matter of it. The manner of its observance. Sundry things suited
to its first celebration, not afterward observed. The number required at the
eating of the Lamb. By whom it was killed. Where. How dressed. Jews traditions
rejected. The Feast of unleavened Bread. Its Rites. Excision to the neglect of
what Ordinances annexed. Jews acknowledge the figurative nature of this
Ordinance. Of Frontlets and Philacteries, Exodus 23.9. Signs and memorials. The
sections of the Law written in the Frontlets. The Jews manner of making their
Phylacteries: deceits therein. Their trust in them: so proved by our Savior.
Of their Fringes, their appointment, making and use. Dedication of the
firstborn males to God. Price of the Redemption of Children: Close of God's
first dispensation toward that Church. The solemn (...). Preparations for it.
Remote. Occasional temporary institutions between the Red Sea and Sinai. Of the
waters of Marah. The giving of Manna. Derivation and signification of the name.
Water brought out of the Rock. That Rock Christ. Immediate preparations for the
receiving of the Law. The time that the people came to Sinai. The Day. The time
of the day that the appearance of God's Glory began. The same time that Christ
rose from the dead. The place. Sinai the name of the mountain, Horeb of the
Wilderness. Of the Monastery there. Moses first Ascent. The ground of it. The
people prepared by the remembrance of Mercies and Promises. Of their washing
their clothes. Not a Baptism of standing use. Bounds set unto the Mount. In
what sense it might be touched: Heb. 12.21. How the Offender was to be
punished. (...) opened. The station and order of the people in receiving of the
Law. The ministry of Angels in the preparations for God's glorious presence.
How the People met God, and God them. When Moses used those words, I
exceedingly fear and quake.

THere are in the Epistle unto the Hebrews, either direct discourses
concerning, Mosaical Economy, and state of the Church and Worship of God
therein under the Old Testament. Yea, there is nothing material from the call
of Abraham, unto the utmost issue of God's dispensations toward his posterity,
that is omitted by him. And if we have not a previous acquaintance with these
things, which he supposed in them to whom he wrote, much darkness and many
mistakes must needs attend us in the consideration of what he treats on, and
the ends which he proposes unto himself. Now because it will no way be
expedient, every time the mention of them does occur, or allusion is made unto
them, to insist upon them as first instituted. I thought meet in the close of
these Prolegomena, to present the Reader with a brief Scheme and delineation of
the whole Mosaical Economy; as also of those other previous concernments of
the Church in the posterity of Abraham, which by the Apostle in this Epistle we
are called and directed unto. And they are these that follow.

1. The call and obedience of Abraham, chap. 11. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17.

2. The institution and observation of the Passover, chap. 11. v. 28.

3. The giving of the Law, chap. 1. v. 1. chap. 2. v. 1. chap. 12. v. 18, 19,
20, 21, 25, 26.

4. The sanction of the Law in Promises and Penalties, chap. 2. v. 2, 21. chap.
3. chap. 4. chap. 10. v. 28.

5. The building of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, and afterward of the
Temple in answer thereunto, chap. 3. v. 3, 4. chap. 9. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. chap.
10. v. 19, 20, 21, 22. with its utensils.

6. The Calling, Succession and Office of the High Priest, chap. 7. v. 16, 17,
21, 23. chap. 8. v. 3, 4, 5.

7. The Sacrifices and Services of them both, chap. 8. v. 3, 5. chap. 9. v. 6,
7, 10, 12, 13. chap. 10. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11. chap. 13. v. 11, 12.

It is plain and evident, that under these heads all the principal concernments
of the ancient Church, with the Worship and Rule of God therein are comprised;
and they are all of them reflected on, most of them explained, and applied unto
Gospel-ends by our Apostle. However I shall not in our present consideration of
them, engage in the exposition of the particular places in the Epistle where
they are treated on, which is to be done elsewhere; but only represent them,
as they are expressed in their institution and transaction in the Old
Testament, so to make way unto a right conception of them, as they are
mentioned and made use of in the New.

Temple, its Fabric, and its Worship, have been so largely discussed by
others, as that I should judge my endeavors, in a review of them, altogether
needless, would the nature of our present design admit of its forbearance. For
besides what has been formerly attempted, with excellent success, with
reference unto the Fabric of Divine Worship, and the Ceremonies thereof from
the Scripture. Josephus, and the latter Jewish Masters, by Ahubensci, Arius
Montanus, Villalpandus, Capellus, Ribera Constantine Emperor, Broughton,
Ainsworth, Weemse, Rivet, and all learned Expositors on these parts of holy
Writ, where these things are recorded, there are also some of la^e, who amongst
our selves have traveled with much diligence in this subject; Persons worthily
skilled in, and industriously improving their knowledge of all that learning
which is needful unto the due and accurate handling of this subject, and that
in discourses. But as things are fallen out, considering the necessity of this
discourse unto my present design, and that most of the things in our proposal
from the Epistle above mentioned, are such as fell not under the consideration
of those learned persons, nor are handled by them; and that I design not an
exact examination of the particular concernments of all these things, with a
discussion of the Reasons and Arguments wherewith various apprehensions of them
are att^st^d, but only to repr^sent such a scheme of them unto the Reader, as
may enable him to judge aright of the references of the Apostle unto them, and
of the use that he puts them unto, I shall proceed in my designed way.

Abraham, which was the foundation whereon all the following Administrations of
God toward his Posterity, and his whole Worship amongst them, were built, is
excellently and fully described by our Apostle, chap. 11. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. By faith Abraham, when he was called, to go out
into a place which he should afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and
he went out, not knowing whither he went, (Genesis 11. v. 4.) By faith he
sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in
tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: for
he looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
(Genesis 12.13, 14.) Through faith also Sarah her self received strength to
conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she
judged him faithful who had promised. (Genesis 17. v. 19. chap. 21. v. 2.)
Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, as the stars of
the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the seashore innumerable.
(v. 13. v. 16. Genesis 15. v. 5.) These all died in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar of, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
(Genesis 23. v. 4. chap. 47.9. 1 Chronicles. 29.15.) For they that say such things
declare plainly that they s^ek a country; and truly if they had been mindful of
that from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have
returned. (Genesis 24. v. 5, 6, 7.) But now they desire a better, that is, an
heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he had
prepared for them a city. By faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac,
and (or even) he that received the promises, offered up his only begotten son,
of whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, (so that he was his
only begotten with respect unto the promise, Genesis 21. v. 12. chap. 22. v. 9.)
Accounting that God was able even to raise him up from the dead, from whence
also he received him in a figure.

The design of the Apostle in this discourse is to set forth and commend the
faith of Abraham, from the fruits and effects of it, in the whole course of his
obedience; but he builds it upon, and resolves it into his call; By faith
Abraham being CALLED. Neither is it my present purpose to open particularly the
discourse of the Apostle, which must be referred to its proper place; only
because what we do now, is in a subserviency unto the right understanding of
this Epistle, I have laid down this account given us therein of the call of
Abraham, and his faith and obedience, shown as the reason of our insisting on
it, and the foundation whereon what we do therein is built. Neither shall I now
at large declare the nature of this Call of Abraham, with the several
occurrencies that accompanied it; partly because it is already touched upon in
a former Exercitation, and partly because I have elsewhere handled it more
largely, and cleared it from the corrupt traditions and opinions of the Jews
concerning it. But because this was the root on which the Judaical Church did
grow, the stock whereinto all Mosaical Institutions of worship were inserted
and grafted, it is necessary that we give a brief Historical account concerning
it.

Abraham; he was first called by his Parents (...) Abram; that is, an High
Father; significant names unto their children, so therein they had respect unto
their present condition, or some prospect they had given them by the Spirit of
God of things future, wherein they or theirs should be concerned. So have we
the reasons given us of the names of Cain, Genesis 4. v. 5. of Seth, v. 28. of
Noah, chap. 5. v. 29. of Peleg, chap. 10. v. 25. and of sundry others. And if
we may not suppose that the Parents of Abraham were directed to give him this
name of an High Father, by the Spirit of Prophecy, yet considering it
suitableness unto what God had designed him for, and its readiness to yield
unto that Change which God made afterward in it, unto a great strengthening of
his faith and significancy in a way of instruction unto future generations, we
must grant that it was done by the designing holy wise Providence of God. For
he was an High Father indeed, as being the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
according to the flesh. In process of time, upon the solemn establishment of
the Covenant with him, God change this name of (...) into (...) Genesis 17. v. 5.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham.
And on the like account did God also change the names of some other persons, or
superadded new names unto those whereby they were called before, as of Israel
unto Jacob, Genesis 33. v. 28. upon his prevalency with God as a Prince; Jedidiah
unto Solomon, 2 Samuel 12. v. 25. because the Lord loved him. And many doubtless
had new names given unto them by themselves or others, or some letter or
syllable changed in their names, withal altering their signification, upon
emergent occasions. Hence have we so many in the Old Testament, whom we find in
several places expressed by diverse names, or varied in one place from another.
Now this change in the name of Abraham was not, as the Jews fancy, to honor
him with the addition of a letter out of the Tetragrammaton; but for the
addition of a new Prophetical significancy unto it; as God himself expressly
declares, Thy name shall be (...) Abraham, for a father of a multitude of
nations have I made thee. According as he said before, v. 3. Thou shall be a
father of a multitude of nations, (...) in his name denoting (...) a multitude,
that is, of Nations, God himself expounding his own intention and design. And
herein is a solemn prefiguration of the implanting of Believers of all Nations,
into the Covenant and Faith of Abraham; for this name he received upon the
solemn establishment of the Covenant with him, as the Apostle explains the
place, Romans 4. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. All then that believe, are taken
into the Covenant of Abraham. And as unto the privileges of it, and
inheritance to be obtained by it, they are no less his children and heirs, then
those who proceeded from his loins according to the flesh, as has been
manifested in our Exercitation concerning the Oneness of the Church. And herein
also God manifested what was his design in his Call, and separation unto
himself, even to make and constitute him, and his Posterity, the means of
bringing forth the promised seed, wherein all Nations were to be blessed.

Abraham being the tenth Generation from Noah, exclusive, was the son of Terah,
of Genesis 11.26. that Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor and
Haran: not doubtless in the same year, but then the eldest of them was born,
who ever he was. If Abraham was the eldest, as he is first expressed, he was
born 292 years after the flood, in the three hundred ninety second year of the
life of Shem, who outlived him thirty five years. And he was the sixth from
Heber, born in the two hundred twenty fifth year of his age, who continuing
longest of all the Postdiluvian Patriarchs, outlived Abraham about sixty four
years. But there is a difficulty in this account. For if Abraham was born in
the seventieth year of the age of Terah: Terah living in all two hundred and
five years, Abraham at the death of Terah must needs be one hundred thirty five
years of age. But the Scripture says expressly that at his departure out of
Haran, upon the death of his Father, he was no more but seventy five years old.
And if he was seventy five years old at the death of his Father who lived two
hundred and five years, he must be born in the one hundred and thirtieth of his
Fathers life, and not before; which carries on his birth and death sixty years
beyond the former account. So that he outlived Shem twenty five years, and dyed
only four years before Heber. Although therefore he be mentioned before Haran,
Genesis 11.26. yet indeed Haran was the Eldest Son of Terah, and born before
Abraham sixty years. And it appears in the Story, that Lot and Sarah who were
the Children of Haran (if Sarah was the Ischa mentioned, as most suppose she
was, Genesis 11.29.) were not much younger then Abraham himself. For when Abraham
was an hundred years old, Sarah was ninety, Genesis 17.17. and Lot may well be
supposed to be Elder then she; so that of Necessity Haran must be many years
elder then Abraham, even no less then sixty, as we have declared.

Vr of the Chaldees, Genesis 11.28, 31. This place is said to be, on the other
side of the flood, (...); or the River, Josh. 24.2. that is, from the Land of
Canaan on the other side of the great River Euphrates eastward. It was so also
of Tygris, on the East of Aram Naharaim, or Mesopotamia, properly so called;
which is not insisted on, because Abraham came over Tygris unto Haran with his
Father Terah. He came out, says Stephen, from the Land of the Chaldaeans, and
dwelt in Canaan, Acts 7.4. he says indeed, that before he came unto Canaan, he
dwelt in Mesopotamia, v. 2. wherein Haran was also. For the name of Mesopotamia
was given of old unto all the adjacent Regions, even unto the Persian Sea. So
does Pliny evidently. lib. 6. cap. 26. Mesopotamia tota Assyriorum fuit vicatim
dispersa, praeter Babylona, and Ninum. All Mesopotamia belonged unto the
Assyrians, and consuled of scattered Villages, unless it were Babylonia and the
Country about Nineveth. And again, Reliqua pars Mesopotamiae
Assyriaeque-Babylonia appellata est. So that he equals Mesopotamia, with
Assyria; which how great a Tract of those Regions it comprehended, is manifest
from Ptolomy, Strabo and others. Eupolemus in Eusebius, praeparat. Evang. l. 9.
places (...), Vra in Babylonia: and there also Pliny mentions Vra upon the
banks of Euphrates, lib. 5. cap. 24. Fertur Euphrates usque ad Vram. But this
seems not to be the Vr where Abraham dwelt. Nor was there any reason that in a
design for Canaan, he should remove from any part of Babylonia upon Euphrates
unto Charan. It is more likely to be the place mentioned by Ammianus lib. 5.
where he says, that the Romans in six days came from Corduena in Armenia, ad
Vr nomine, Persicum Castellum; unto Ur a Persian Castle. And this he places
between Nisibis and Tygris, and was not far from the place, where it is
probably supposed that the Ark rested after the flood; the family of Heber
keeping their first Seat, not accompanying, the (...) or Sons of men, Genesis
11.2, 3, 4. those wicked Apostates who went from the East, to find a place to
fix the Seat of their Rebellion against God. Broughton contendeth, that Vr was
in the Vale of the Chaldaeans, that is in Babylonia, a very little way, or some
few miles from Charan; averring, that Stephen cannot otherwise be defended, who
affirms, that he was in Mesopotamia before he dwelt in Charan. But as this
defense of Stephen is needless, seeing as we have manifested, he took
Mesopotamia in a large sense, as others did also, giving the same Extent unto
it with Assyria, the denomination arising from the most eminent and fruitful of
these Regions: So the removal of a little way, or a few miles, answers not
that decription which the Holy Ghost gives us of journey, Genesis 11.31. And Terah
took Abraham his Son, and Lot the Son of Haran, and they went forth with them
from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the Land of Canaan, and they came unto
Haran and dwelt there. There design was to go unto Canaan: And as the Vra which
was in Babylonia was situated on this side of Euphrates as Pliny testifies: So
that Abraham could not go from thence unto Canaan by Haran, but he must twice
needlessly pass with all his family over Euphrates, so the expression of their
journying to Haran will not suit unto any imaginary Vr within a few miles of
it. Nor is it any weight that it is called Vr of the Chaldees, whose proper
seat was in Babylonia, and not extended much farther Eastward, seeing if the
Chaldees, as is most probable, were called Chasdim, as they are constantly,
from (...) Chesed the Son of Nachor the Brother of Abraham, there must of
necessity be allowed an Hystorical Prolepsis in the words; and that is called
Vr of the Chaldees, from whence the Chaldees were afterward to have their
Original, who in time possessed Babylonia and the parts adjacent.

Whilst Abraham lived with his Progenitors in Vr, there is no doubt but he
Joshua affirms expressly, that they served (...), chap. 24.3. even those, whose
Worship God afterward prohibited in the first Precept of the Law; (...), there
shall not be unto thee other Gods; those, or such as those, whom they served
beyond the flood. Other Gods are all false gods. The Jews imagination about the
discovery made by Abraham of the true God, his renunciation of all Idolatry
thereon, with the breaking of his Fathers Images, and his being cast for that
cause by Nimrod into the fire, all about the forty fourth year of his Age, I
have considered and exploded elsewhere. And all these figments with that of
Harans being consumed by fire in the sight of his Father, they witedraw from
the supposed signification of the name (...); which they would have to signify
fire, Genesis 11.28. but as where it relates unto the Chaldeans (Vr of the
Chaldees) it is apparently the name of a place, a Town, or Country, so it
rather signifies a Valley, then fire. And those words, Isa. 24. v. 3. (...),
which we translate in the Text, Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires,
may be better read as in the Margen, in the Valleys, which better answers unto
the following words: And the name of the Lord God of Israel in the Isles of the
Sea. At what year of his age, he left Vr with his Father is not expressed. But
it is apparent, that it was toward the latter end of the life of Terah; Even
after the death of Haran his Eldest Son; and that Nahor and Abraham were
married to Milcha and Isca his daughters, and Sara had continued barren some
remarkable space of time, Genesis 11.28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

From Vr therefore, with his Father, and the rest of their family, he removed
to Haran with a design for Canaan, Genesis 11.31. Where this Haran was situated,
we before declared. Stephen calls it (...), charran; and so do the Latin
Writers: Assyrias Latio maculavit sanguine Charras; says Lucan, of the
overthrow of Crassus's Army near that place. And it may be pronounced either
way in the Original, from the ambiguous force of the Hebrew Cheth, which seems
best expressed by Charan. How long he stayed here is uncertain, as was said
before. That it was not very long appears, from his marrying and the barrenness
of Sarah, before he came thither. And yet, that they abode there some years is
no less evident, from Chap. 12. v. 5. Abraham took Sarai his Wife, and Lot his
Brothers Son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls or
Servants that they had gotten in Haran, and they went forth to go into the Land
of Canaan. It is not the work of a few days or months that is here described.
This gathering of substance and getting of souls, was a business of some years;
of how many it is uncertain. What was the design of Terah in his attempt to go
for the Land of Canaan is not absolutely certain. The especial Call of Abraham
unto that Country could not be the bottom of it: for it is most probable, yea,
indeed undeniable, that this he had not, until after the death of Terah. It
was therefore an act of theirs in answer to the Providence of God in a
subserviency unto that future call, that he might be in more readiness to yield
obedience unto it, then he could have been in the Land of Vr. Whether Terah did
merely seek a new habitation, in a Country less peopled then that of his
Nativity, which doubtless then was the most populous part of the world, as
being near the place where mankind first planted after the flood; or whether he
might be instructed in the ancient promise, that the posterity of Canaan the
Son of Cham who had then possessed the Country called after his name, should be
servants unto the seed of Shem, from whom he was a principal descendant, I know
not. In answer to the call of Abraham it could not be; for he was called to
leave his Fathers House, Chap. 12.1. and not to bring his Father with his
household with him, and that at the seventy fifth year of his age, when Terah
was dead: But what ever was the occasion of it, the Providence of God used in
it in the serving of its designs toward Abraham. And here in Haran, If I may
be allowed to conjecture, it is probable, that God gave him light into the evil
of those Superstitions wherein he was educated, revealed himself as the only
true God, and so prepared him for his Call unto the tedious journeying, and
long peregrination that ensued thereon.

Terah was dead, and himself seventy five years old, Chap. 12.14. God called
him to himself, and entered into Covenant with him in the promise of the Land of
Canaan, v. 7. And this Call of his, was the great foundation whereon God
afterward built the whole Structure of his Worship under the Old Testament.
For herein he both appropriated the promise of the Messiah unto him, designing
his person as the spring, from whom he should proceed according to the flesh,
and set both him and his posterity apart, to be visibly subservient unto the
great design of his Grace in the accomplishment of the promise of a Deliverer
made unto our first Parents. This we have elsewhere at large declared, and
showed how that after his Call, every thing was disposed unto a significancy of
that which was for to come, and was suited for a continuance unto that season,
and no longer.

Abraham was ninety and nine years old, that is also he had been twenty four
years in the Land of Canaan. The Lord confirms his Covenant with him and his
seed, by the sign and token of Circumcision, Genesis 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. which
Paul calls, the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.12. because God
thereby confirmed and assured unto him an interest in the promised seed, who is
the Lord our Righteousness, Isai. 45.24, 25. Jerem 23.6. And because he had
accepted of the righteousness and salvation which in, and by him, God had
prepared for sinners, in believing the promise, Genesis 15.6. And herein did God
manifest that he took his seed together with him into the Covenant, as those,
who no less then himself, were to be made partakers of the righteousness
exhibited therein, as also to be used for the chanel where the holy seed was to
be carried on; until the Word was to take it and to be made flesh, John 1.14.
Mar. 1.1. Romans 9.5. And by this Ordinance of Circumcision, were his posterity
separated from the rest of the world, and united among themselves. For however
Ishmael, and Esau carried the outward sign of circumcision out of the pale and
limits of the Church communicating it unto the Nations that sprang of them unto
this day, unto whose observance they also adhere, who being of another extract,
have received the Law of Mahomet, who was of the offspring of persecuting
Ishmael, as the Turks and Persians, with very many of the Indians; yet their
observance of it, was never under the Law of God, nor accepted with him, but is
rather accursed by him. But as it was continued in the posterity of Abraham
according unto the promise, it was the fundamental uniting principle of the
Church amongst them, though dispersed into innumerable particular families. For
as there were as many Churches before, as there were families, Ecclesiastical
and Oeconomical or paternal Rule, being the same, now the Covenant being one,
and the token of the Covenant being one and the same, unto all the families
that sprang of Abraham, which in their several generations were as the sands of
the Sea shore, or as the Stars for multitude, were incorporated into one body
among themselves, and separated from all the rest of the world. Not that this
Ordinance alone was sufficient to constitute the whole Nation one
Ecclesiastical Body or Church, which was done by the following Institutions of
Worship, but that the foundation thereof was first laid herein. Neither without
some such general initiation into union could it have been orderly
accomplished. And as it was the Glory of the people of old whilst they walked
in the steps of the faith of Abraham: So it was the carnal boast of their
degenerate posterity. Hence have we so often mention of those who were
uncircumcised, in the way of reproach and contempt; and when they renewed the
administration of it among themselves, upon their first entrance into the Land
of Canaan after its commission in the Wilderness, it is said, that they rolled
away the reproach of Egypt, Josh. 5.9. because they were now no more as the
Egyptians, uncircumcised. And it was their glory, both because God made it the
token of his receiving them to be his peculiar people out of all the Nations of
the Earth, as also because it was the pledge of their obedience unto God, which
is the glory of any person or people. But their posterity being carnal, and
degenerating from the faith and obedience of Abraham, having quite lost the
Grace betokened by it, which as Moses often declares unto them, was the
circumcision of their hearts to hear and obey the voice of God, did yet, and do
yet, to this day, boast of it as a sign of their separation unto God from other
people: not considering that these things were mutual, answering one another,
and that this latter is nothing, where the former is not also attended unto.

And these are the chief heads that are looked I upon by our Apostle in the
Call of Abraham, which also we have been more brief in the explication of,
because its consideration has elsewhere occurred unto us. Now from this Call
of Abraham unto the deliverance of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, was as
Moses assures us, four hundred and thirty years, Exodus 12.40, 41. and so says
our Apostle, Gal. 3.17. But because the Lord tells Abraham, that his posterity
should be afflicted in a strange Land four hundred years, Genesis 11.13. which
words are repeated by Stephen in his Sermon to the Jews, Acts 7.6. the reason
of this different account may be briefly enquired after. Here is a double
limitation of time, 1. of four hundred and thirty years by Moses, and Paul. 2.
Of four hundred years, by God himself unto Abraham, repeated by Stephen: The
words of Moses are recorded, Exodus 12.40.41. Now the sojournings of the
Children of Israel, in Egypt, were four hundred and thirty years; and it came
to pass, at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even on the self same
day, it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord went out of the Land of
Egypt. It is evident that there is an ambiguity in the words of Moses, for if
(...) the sojourning, or dwelling in the beginning of the Verse do relate unto
(...), dwelt in Egypt, it can design no longer space of time then they dwelt
there after the descent of Jacob, which by an evident computation of the times,
contains but half the space limited, of four hundred and thirty years. If it
refer only to the children of Israel, then it takes in all the sojournings and
peregrinations of that People who dwelt in Egypt, from the first day of their
being the people of God. Now this ambiguity is perfectly removed by our
Apostle, Gal. 3.16, 17. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made; and
the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul. The giving of the Law, was, as
we shall see, immediately upon their coming out of Egypt; and says he, the 430
years are to be reckoned from the Call of Abraham, when God first entered into
Covenant with him; Genesis 12.2, 3. From thence unto the departure out of Egypt,
and the giving of the Law that ensued, are 430 years. It is evident then, that
by the sojourning and peregrination of the children of Israel, not their mere
abode in Egypt, which after their going down, Genesis 46. was only 215 years, or
thereabouts; but the whole course of that People, after they were in Abraham
called from their own Country and a certain Habitation therein, until their
leaving of Egypt, in order unto their taking possession of the land of Canaan
as a perpetual inheritance (that is commensurate unto the duration of the
especial Covenant made with them) is intended. It remains then that we consider
the other space of time assigned by God in Vision unto Abraham, for the
affliction of his seed under persecution, namely, four hundred years, Genesis
11.13. Now herein, either the round number of 400 is put for 430, or 30 years
are to be abated out of the latter number, for some special cause and reason.
The former seems not probable, because Moses does so emphatically note that it
was in the four hundred and thirtieth year, that very same day, or night, and
therefore 30 years must be taken of, either from the beginning or end of the
latter number. To detract it from the end there is no reason; nor will Moses
his exact observation of that period allow us so to do. It must therefore be
from the beginning. Now this prediction of God unto Abraham, about the
affliction or persecution of his seed for 400 years, was given him before the
birth of Isaac, who being of his seed according to the promise, was to have his
share in this affliction; yea, it was to begin with him. He was born, as was
proved, 25 ye^rs after the promise; so that the 30 years to be taken off from
the 430 fall out in the fifth year of his life; which was the time when the
persecution began in the mocking of Ishmael, Genesis 21.9. which the Apostle
expressly calls persecution, and that upon the account of Isaac's being the
heir of the promise: Gal. 4.29. There began the 400 years of their affliction,
which ended with the 430 of their peregrination.

In the faith of Abraham, manifested in his obedience to the Call of God,
resting on Circumcision, whereby they were separated unto God, and united among
themselves, did this People continue, without the addition of any new Ordinance
of Worship for the supportment of their Faith, or enlargement of their Light,
or outward profession of their separation unto God to the expiration of 430
years; and this period of time proved afterward fatal unto them, not exactly
and absolutely, but in some kind of proportion. For from hence unto the
building of the Temple by Solomon was 480 years. The duration of that Temple
was 415 years. Of the latter, built in the room thereof, somewhat above 500.
Some peculiar space being given them beyond their former trials, before their
utter destruction.

Heb. 11.28. that By faith Moses kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of
blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. This was the
second Ordinance of common use to the Church, and appropriated unto them, which
God instituted amongst them. The story of its Institution, and manner of its
celebration are at large insisted on, Exodus 12.

Israel out of Egypt, which is thence called (...) Exodus 12.42. a night of
observances, unto the Lord, that is, wherein his Institutions of this Ordinance
were to be observed with great care and diligence. And this night fell in
directly upon the expiration of the 430 years before limited, verse 40, 41. For
the time of the year, it was in the month (...) Abib, as the Hebrews call the
month of the Spring, which in those Eastern parts gave blades unto the corn,
and other fruits of the earth, Exodus 13.4.23.15.34.18. Deuteronomy. 16.1. which
afterward by a Chaldee name was called Nisan, Nehem. 2.1. Esth. 3.7. and it
answered partly to our March, partly to April, beginning before or at the
Vernal Equinox, according to the distance of any year from the Embolisinical
year. And from hence this month was appointed to be (...) the head, chief or
principal of the months, Exodus 12.2. and so consequently the beginning of the
year unto them; for before this, their year began and ended in September, upon
the gathering in of the fruits of the earth, Exodus 23, 16. being the time, as
most of the present Jews suppose, wherein the world was created. Neither yet
was this change absolute unto all ends and purposes, but only as to
Ecclesiastical Observances, and Feasts, that depended on their distance from
this of the Passover. For their Civil Year, as to Contracts, Debts and
Liberties, continued still to begin in September, with their Jubilees, Levit.
25.8, 9, 10. And from that beginning of the year, most probably, are the months
to be reckoned that are mentioned in the continuance and ending of the flood,
Genesis 7.11. See Joseph. liber. 1. chap. 4.

^etween the two evenings of the 14 day, of the first month. Some of the Jews,
as Kimchi, make these two evenings to be, the first declining of the Sun, which
began the evening or afternoon, and the setting of the Sun which closes it,
answering the ancient division of the day, into morning and evening; so that it
might be done by this rule, in any time of the afternoon, though it always
followed the evening Sacrifice, at the 9th hour, or 3 of the clock. Others, as
Aben-Ezra, make the first evening to be the setting of the Sun, the other the
departure of all light. And the Jews have a distinction of the day, wherein
they call this space of it (...) between the two evenings, (...) between the
two Suns. So they express themselves in Talmud. Hieros. Berach. cap. 1. (...)
All the space of time wherein the face of the East is red, is called day; when
it begins to wax pale, it is called between the Suns; (the same with between
the evenings) and when it waxes black, the upper Firmament being like the
lower, it is night.

Exodus and Deuteronomy, that we shall not need to enlarge upon it. In brief,
God being about to accomplish his great work of delivering the people out of
Egypt, he thought meet to conjoyn together his greatest mercy toward them, and
his greatest plague upon their enemies. To this end he gives command unto the
destroying Angel, to pass through the Land, and to slay all the firstborn
therein, from his who sat upon the Throne, unto the meanest person belonging
unto the body of that Nation. And although he might have preserved the
Israelites from this destruction by the least intimation of his will unto the
Instruments used therein, yet having respect unto the furtherance of their
faith and obedience, as also designing their instruction in the way and means
of their eternal salvation, he chose to do it by this Ordinance of the
Passover. The form of this service is given us Exodus 12.27. it is called (...)
Pesach: and the reason of it is subjoyned; for the Lord (...) Pasach passed
over the houses of Israel. (...) is to pass on by leaping, making as it were a
halt in any place, and then leaping over that which is next. Whence he that
goes halting is called (...) Pisseach; one that as it were leaps on, from one
leg unto the other. Some of the Ancients call it Phase; Cheth being only not
pronounced. The Greeks retain the name, but corrupt it into (...), and are
followed by the Latins, who call it Pascha. Hence after the Apostle had
applied this Feast and Sacrifice unto the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. and
Christians began to celebrate the commemoration of the Passion and Suffering of
Christ, at the time of the year when that was observed, many both of the Greeks
and Latins began to think, that the word was derived from (...), Patior, to
suffer, as both Augustine, and Gregory Nazianzen, Sermon. de Pasch. do declare,
who both of them refute that imagination. The general nature of it was (...) a
Sacrifice, v. 22. and (...) a Feast, v. 14. A Sacrifice from the slaying and
offering of the Lamb, which was done afterward for the people by the Levites;
and a Feast from the joy and remission of labor wherewith the annexed
Solemnities were to be observed. The matter of it was (...) Saeh, v. 3. that
is, a young Lamb or Kid; a male without blemish, for either might be used in
this service, v. 5. The manner of the service was, 1. In the Preparation, the
Lamb or Kid was to be taken into custody on the tenth day of the month, and
kept therein four days, v. 6. which, as the Jews say, was partly that they
might discern perfectly whether it had any blemish or no; partly that they
might by the sight of the Lamb be minded of their duty, and the mercy of their
deliverance. Indeed it was, that it might prefigure the imprisonment of the
Lamb of God, Isa. 53.7, 8. who took away the sins of the world. This
preparation, the Jews say, was temporary, and observed only at the first
Institution of the Ordinance in Egypt, and that partly lest in their haste they
should not otherwise have been able to prepare their Lambs. So also was the
sprinkling of the blood on the posts of the doors of their dwelling houses, v.
7. with Hysop, which could not be afterward observed, when by God's
Institution the whole Congregation were to celebrate it in one place; and it
had respect unto their present deliverance from the destroying Angel, v. 12,
and 13. In like manner was their eating it, with their loins girt, their shoes
on their feet, and their staves in their hands, v. 11. that they might be in a
readiness for their immediate departure, which was not afterward observed by
our Lord Jesus Christ, nor any of the Church. For these signs ceased with the
present occasions of them. 2. This Lamb was to be provided for each household,
v. 3, 4. which was the third distribution of that people, the first being into
Tribes, and the second into Families, from the twelve Patriarchs and their
immediate Sons, Josh. 7.16, 17, 18. But because their was an allowance to make
their company proportionable unto their provision of a Lamb, joining or
separating households, v. 4. they ate it afterward in Societies or
Fraternities; as our Savior had twelve with him at the eating of it. And the
Jews require ten at least in Society unto this celebration. Whence the Targum
expressly on this place, Exodus 12.4. If the men of the house be fewer then the
number of ten; for this was a sacred number with them. They Circumcise not,
Marry not, Divorce not, unless ten be present. Thence is their saying in Pirke
Aboth, where ten sit and learn the Law, the divine presence rests on them, as
Psalm. 82.1. 3. The Lamb being provided was to be killed, and it was directed
that the whole Assembly of the Congregation of Israel should kill it, v. 6.
that is, every one for himself and family. But after the giving of the Law, and
the erection of a Priesthood in the Church, this work, as it was a Sacrifice,
was left unto the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 35.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 4. The place where it was
to be killed, was at first in their several houses, or wherever the Assembly
of the people was; but this afterward was forbidden, and the Sacrifice of the
Passover confined expressly to the place where the Tabernacle and Temple were to
be, and not elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 16.6, 7. 5. The preparation of the whole Lamb for
eating, was by roasting it, v. 8, 9. and that was done with bread unleavened,
and bitterness, or bitter herbs, v. 9. and it was all to be eaten that night.
What remained until the morning was to be burned in the fire, as a thing
dedicate, and not to be polluted. The Jews have many Traditions about the
manner of eating and drinking at this Supper, of the Cups they drank and
blessed, of the Cakes they brake, of their Washings, and the like, which as
they have all of them been discussed by others at large, so I shall not labor
about them, as being satisfied that they are most, if not all of them,
inventions of the Rabbis since the destruction of second Temple, and many of
them taken up from what they observed to be in use among Christians, or were
led into by such as from the profession of Christianity apostatized unto them,
which were no small multitude.

Unto this observation of the Passover, was adjoined the Feast of Unleavened
Bread, Paschal Lamb was to be eaten with unleavened bread on the fourteenth, it
was a peculiar Ceremony of that Ordinance, and belonged not unto the ensuing
feast, v. 15, 16. And in this feast, there are considerable: 1. The total
exclusion of all Leaven out of their houses. 2. The time of its continuance,
which was seven days. 3. The double extraordinary Sabbath wherewith it was
begun and ended; for on the first day, and last day of the seven, there was to
be a solemn and holy Convocation unto the Lord, to be observed in a cessation
from all labor, and in holy duties; and here also it were lost labor to
reckon up the Cautions, Rules and Instructions which the Jewish Doctors give
about the nature, kinds and sorts of Leaven, of the search that was to be made
for it, and the like, most of them being vain imaginations of superstitious
minds ignorant of the Truth of God.

Sacrifice of the Passover with its attendant Feast of Unleavened Bread, to be
annually observed on the fourteenth day of the month Abib, unto the end of the
twenty second, was the second solemn Ordinance of that people, as the People
and Church of God. And the Jews observe, that no other positive Ordinances, but
only Circumcision and the Passover had that sanction of the (...), Excision,
or Extermination annexed unto them. Concerning Circumcision, the words are
plain, Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised Man-Child whose flesh of his foreskin
shall not be circumcised, (...), that soul shall be cut off from his People, he
has broken my Covenant. And with reference to the Passover, Exodus 12.15.
Whosoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that
soul shall be cut off from Israel. Whereas they observe, as Aben Ezra upon this
place, that it is annexed to above twenty negative Precepts; intimating that
there is a greater provocation and sin in doing any thing in the Worship of God
against his Commandment, then in omitting what he had commanded, though both of
them be evil. The Observation I acknowledge in general is true, but the
Application of it to the Passover is not so. For although we should suppose
that the words of Exodus 12.15. do relate unto the Passover also, although they
seem to respect only the seven days of the feast of Unleavened Bread, yet they
do not require the observation of the Passover it self under that penalty; but
upon a supposition of the observation of the Passover, they were to eat the
Lamb with unleavened Bread, which was a negative Precept, namely, that they
should have no leaven in their bread, and so was justly attended in its
transgression with this cutting off. And this cutting off, the Jews generally
interpret when it is spoken indefinitely, without a prescription of the manner
how it should be done, or by whom, to respect (...), the hand of Heaven, or the
vindictive Justice of God, which in due time will find out the Transgressor.
But we know that God long bare with them in the omission of this Ordinance of
the Passover its self.

Buxtorfs Synagoga Judaica, and in part in the Annotations of A^sworth; and
they need not here be repeated. This only I shall ob^erve, that all of them in
their Expositions of this Institution, do make the Application of its several
parts unto other acts of God in dealing with them. Such as indeed the Text of
Moses plainly leads them to. And this perfectly overthrows their pretensions,
as to their other Ceremonies and Sacrifices; namely, that they were instituted
for their own sakes, and not as signs of things to come; the figurative nature
of this their greatest Ordinance being manifest, and acknowledged by themselves.

Institutions; the first concerning the Writing of the Law on their foreheads
and Hands, the other of the Dedication unto God of all that opened the Matrix:
The first of these, is prescribed, Chap. 13.9. And it shall be for a sign upon
thine hand, and as a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lords Law may be in
thy mouth: ver. 16. and it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and as
frontlets between thine eyes. Whereunto may be added D^ut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. And
these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up; and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, and thou shall write
them upon the posts of thine house, and on thy gates. In the observation of
sundry things, supposed to relate unto these precepts, consists the principal
part of the Superstition of the present Jews. For they have mixed the
observation of this duty whatever be intended by it, with many foolish and
noisome imaginations. It does not indeed appear to me, that any more is
intended by these Expressions, a sign upon thy hand, and a memorial or frontlet
between thine eyes, but a continual Remembrance, and careful practice of the
Institution it self, and their calling to mind thereby the mercy and goodness
of God in their deliverance; which they were to celebrate when they came unto a
settlement in their own Land, by writing some passages of the Law upon the
doors and posts of their houses. But they are otherwise minded. That which is
prescribed unto them is called v. 8. (...), a sign, as it was to be on their
hand; and (...), a memorial, as between their eyes; both which are very capable
of our interpretation, but v. 16. they are called (...) as also Deuteronomy. 6.8. From
which word, which they know not what it signifies, they draw out all the
mysteries of their present observances. The Chaldee renders it (...) Thephilin;
which word seems to be taken from the Hebrew (...) prayer or prayers, and to be
so called, from the prayers that they used in the Consecration and Wearing of
those frontlets. But because they are rendered in the Greek (...) Philacteria,
some would derive it from (...), to conjoyn, keep, and bind, which has some
allusion at least to the sense of the Greek Word. And this Origination and
denotation of the word the Learned Fuller contends for: Miscelan. l. 5. c. 7.
The manner of their present observation hereof to this purpose is; they write
four Sections of the Law on parchment. And why four? that they gather from the
signification of the word (...), Totaphoth, Tot. says Rabbi Solomon in Pontus
by the Caspian Sea somewhere signifies two, and Poth signifies two in Egypt;
both which make four undoubtedly. Or as they say in the Talmud, Tat in Casphe
signifies two, and Pat in Africa. So that four Sections, must be written.
Scaliger supposes the word to be Egyptian, which is not unlikely; but that it
should signify an Amulet, or a Charm, as Petitus supposes, is not so
probable. For that such amulets were in use among the Heathen, with
inscriptions either ridiculous or obscene, which God would not have his People
to make use of, and therefore appoints them other things, and inscriptions in
their stead, which is the only reason produced for that Opinion, does indeed
overthrow it. For it is abundantly evident, that God in his Laws, does directly
on all occasions command the contrary to what ever was in practice of this sort
among the Nations. So that Maimonides well observes, that the Reason of many of
their Institutions cannot be understood, without a due consideration of the
Superstition of the neighboring Nations.

These four Sections must be these that follow. The first is, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, and these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; and
so onwards as before. The second is, Exodus 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, sanctify unto me all the first born,
whatsoever opens the Womb among the Children of Israel both of Man and of
Beast, it is mine: And Moses said unto the people, remember this day in which
ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand
the Lord brought ye out from this place: there shall no leavened bread be
eaten, this day came ye out in the month Abib: and it shall be when the Lord
shall bring thee into the Land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swear unto thy Fathers
to give thee; a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, that thou shall keep this
service in this month; seven days shall thou eat unleavened bread, and in the
seveth day shall be a Feast unto the Lord, unleavened bread shall be eaten
seven days, and there shall be no leavened bread with thee; neither shall
there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters; and thou shall show thy Son
in that day saying, this is done because of that which the Lord did unto me,
when I came forth out of Egypt; and it shall be for a sign unto thee, upon
thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord Laws may be in
thy mouth; for with a strong hand has the Lord brought thee out of Egypt, thou
shall therefore keep this Ordinance in its season, from year to year. The third
is from the tenth verse of that Chapter unto the end of the seventeenth: And it
shall be, when the Lord, shall bring thee into the Land of the Canaanites, as
he swear unto thee unto thy Fathers, and shall give it thee, thou shall set
apart unto the Lord, all that opens the Matrix, and every firstling that
comes of a beast which thou have, the Male shall be the Lords, and every
firstling of an Ass, thou shall redeem with a Lamb, and if thou will not redeem
it, then thou shall break his neck, and all the first born of Man amongst thy
Children shall thou redeem; and it shall be when thy Son asks thee in time to
come saying, what is this, that thou shall say unto him, by strength of hand
the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage. And it came to
pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the first
born in the Land of Egypt, both the first born of Man, and the first born of
beast, therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that opens the Matrix being
Males, but all the first born of my Children I redeem; and it shall be for a
token upon thine hand, and as frontlets between thine eyes; for by strength of
hand the Lord brought us forth from out of Egypt. The last is Deuteronomy. 11. from
13. to 21. And it shall come to pass, if you shall hearken diligently unto my
commandments, which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God and to
serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul, that I will give you the
rain of your Land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that
thou may gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil, and I will send
grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou may eat and be full, take heed
to your selves that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside and serve
other Gods, and worship them, and then the Lords wrath be kindled against you,
and he shut up the Heaven that there be no rain, and that the Land yield not
her fruit, and lest ye perish quickly from the good Land which the Lord gives
you; therefore shall you lay up these my words in your hearts, and in your
soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, and that they may be as
frontlets between your eyes, and you shall teach them your Children speaking of
them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou shall write them upon the
door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates, that your days may be
multiplied, and the days of your Children in the Land which the Lord swore
unto your Fathers to give them as the days of Heaven upon the Earth.

frontlets or memorials, therefore do they take them out for this use. And
these are to be written on parchment made of the skin of a clean beast, on the
side next the flesh, prepared with a pronuntiation of a form of words both in
the killing of the beast, and in the delivery of the skin unto the Dresser, and
to the Writer: When they are written, they are wrapped up in small rolls, and so
worn upon their foreheads, and left arms, being so rolled and made up, that
none of the writing might be seen. And great art is required in the making of
these Tephilin which few amongst them attain unto. Hence Fagius tells us a
story, of a Master amongst them in his days, who sold many thousands of these
Phylacteries unto his Countrymen, which had nothing in them but Cards, which
served their turns well enough. Their Masters also are curious in describing
what part of the head they must be applied unto, namely, the forepart from ear
to ear; and the hand must be the left hand, whereby yet they will have the arm
above the elbow to be understood; and when they must be worn, namely by day,
not by night, on the Week days, not on the Sabbath, and the like worthy
speculations. The benefit also they receive hereby, is incredible, for by them
are they defended from evil, as some by the sign of the Cross, others by the
first words of the Gospel of John worn about them; They are sanctified in the
Law, and in a word, the Targum on the Canticles, Chap. 8. v. 3. tells us, that
God chose them above all people, because they wore the Phylacteries. So just
cause had our Lord Jesus Christ to reprove their hypocrisy, superstition and
self-justification in the use, abuse, and boasting of these things, Mat. 23.5.
All their works they do for to be seen of Men, they make broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments. This about the borders
of their garments, was an after Institution, yet because of its answerableness
unto this, we may add it in this place. To this purpose, God gives his command;
Number. 15.38, 39, 40. Speak unto the Children of Israel, and bid them that they
make them fringes, in the borders of their garments, throughout their
generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a Ribband of
bl^w, and it shall be unto you as a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and
remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that you seek not
after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring,
that you may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God;
which Law is repeated again, Deuteronomy. 22.12. Thou shall make thee fringes upon the
four quarters of thy Vestures wherewith thou coverest thy self. These (...),
locks, or fringes made of thread fastened unto the wings or skirts of their
garments with a Ribband (...), of a blew color (which how to make at present
the Jews confess they know not, but suppose it was made with the blood of a
Fish called Chalazon mixed with Vermilion) had virtue and efficacy from the
institution of God, who alone is able to bless and sanctify things in
themselves indifferent unto Sacred Use, to the keeping of their hearts in a due
reverence unto himself, and their eyes from wandering after false Worship and
Superstition; which being now removed and taken away, the things themselves are
among the present Jews turned into the greatest superstition imaginable. Their
principal vanities about these things having been represented by others out of
Maimonides his Treatise on that subject, need not here be repeated.

The last appointment of God occasioned by the mercy solemnly remembered in the
Passover, was the dedication of all the firstborn Males unto himself. The Law
of this dedication is recorded, Exodus 13.12, 13. and the manner of its
performance is farther added, Numb. 18, 15, 16, 17. Every thing that opens
the matrix, in all flesh which they bring unto the Lord, whether it be of men
or beast, shall be thine; nevertheless the firstborn of man shall thou surely
redeem, and the first firstling of unclean beasts shall thou redeem; and those
that are to be redeemed from a month old shall thou redeem, according to thine
estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the Sanctuary,
which is twenty Gerahs. But the firstling of a Cow, or the firstling of a
Sheep, or the firstling of a Goat, thou shall not redeem, they are holy, thou
shall sprinkle their blood upon the Altar, and shall burn their fat for an
offering made by fire, for a sweet savor unto the Lord. The whole dedication
of the firstborn Males is, distributed into three parts, 1. Children, who were
to be redeemed with five shekels, twenty Gerahs to one shekel, that is about
twelve shillings of our money. 2. Clean beasts, such as were appointed to be
offered in sacrifice on other occasions, as the Kine, the Sheep and the Goats.
These were to be offered unto God, in a Sacrifice of burnt-offering without
redemption or commutation, after they had been kept a month with the dam. 3.
Unclean beasts, whereof an instance is given in the Ass, which were either to
be redeemed with money by an agreement with the Priest, or to have their necks
broke at the choice of the owner. And all of this to call to remembrance the
mercy of God in sparing them, and theirs, when the firstborn of man and beast,
clean and unclean in Egypt, were destroyed. For hence a peculiar right of
especial preservation arose unto God toward all their firstborn, and this
also not without a prospect toward the Redemption of the Church of the
firstborn by Jesus Christ. Heb. 12.23.

And this gave a period to the first dispensation of God toward the Church in
the Abraham, for the space of 430 years. With the provision and furniture of
these Ordinances of Worship, they left Egypt, and passing through the Red Sea,
came into the Wilderness of Sinai, where they received the Law, and were made
perfect in the beauty of Typical holiness and worship.

Unto these Ordinances succeeded the Solemn (...), or giving of the Law on
Mount Sinai, with the Precepts and Sanctions thereof, mentioned in several
places by our Apostle, as chap. 2.2. For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward. Chap. 1O.28. He that despised Moses Law died without mercy under two
or three witnesses. Chap. 12.18, 19, 20, 21. For ye are not come unto the Mount
that might be touched, and that burned with fire; nor unto blackness and
darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words,
which they that heard entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any
more; for they could not endure that which was commanded; and if so much as a
beast touched the mountain, it shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart.
And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.
ver. 25. They escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth. And in other
places.

Three things must be explained in reference unto this great and solemn
foundation Judaical Church state, which our Apostle treats about in this
whole Epistle. First, The Preparations for it. Secondly, The Manner of the
giving of it. Thirdly, The Law it self. For the preparations for it, they are
either more remote, or immediately preceding it. The former were those
temporary, occasional, instructive Ordinances which God gave them at their
entrance into the Wilderness, before they came to receive the Law on Sinai.

The first mentioned of this nature is Exodus 15.23, 24, 25, 26. And when they
came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were
bitter; therefore the name of it was called Marah. And the people murmured
against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? And he cried unto the Lord, and the
Lord showed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were
made sweet. There he made a Statute and an Ordinance, and there he proved them,
and said, If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and
wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his
commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of those diseases upon
thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that heals
thee. The whole course of God's proceeding with his people, whereof we have
here the first pledge in the Wilderness, was by a constant series of temporal
providential Streights, sinful Murmurings, and Typical Mercies.

The waters being bitter, that they could not drink of them, God showed to
Moses a Tree; that is, say some of the Jewish Doctors, he showed him the virtue
of a Tree to cure and make wholesome bitter waters. And they say it was a Tree,
whose flowers and fruit were bitter; for no other reason, but because Elisha
afterward cured salt waters by casting into them a cruise of salt. The Targum
of Jonathan, and that of Jerusalem say, God showed him (...) the bitter tree
Ardiphne, which is nothing but (...), Daphne, the Laurel. And on this Tree the
Author of that fabulous Paraphrase would have the glorious name of God to be
written, according to the incantations in use amongst them in his days; but
that which is designed in the whole, is, that God preparing them for the bitter
consuming Law that was to be given them, and discovering unto them their
disability to drink of the waters of it for their refreshment, gave them an
intimation of the cure of that curse and bitterness by him, who bare our sins
in his body upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. who is the end of the Law for
righteousness unto them that do believe.

second Preparation for the receiving of the Law, was the giving of Manna unto
them from Heaven. Being come into the Wilderness of Sin, between Elim and
Sinai, called so from a City in Egypt that it extended unto, in the midst of
the second month after their departure from Egypt, the stores they brought with
them from thence being spent and exhausted, the whole Congregation murmured for
food. As still their wants and murmurings lay at the bottom, and were the
occasion of those reliefs, whereby the spiritual mercies of the Church by
Christ were typed out. In this condition God sends them Manna, Exodus 16.14, 15.
In the morning the dew lay round about the host. And when the dew that lay was
gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing,
as small as the hoar frost of the ground. And when the children of Israel saw
it, they said one to another, It is Manna; for they wist not what it was. And
Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the Lord has given you to eat,
ver. 31. And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna, and it was like
Coriander seed, white, and the taste of it like wafers made with honey.

When the children of Israel saw it, they said, (...) Man hu: and ver. 31. the
children of Israel called the name of it (...) Man. The reason of this name is
very uncertain. The calling of it Manna in the New Testament, gives countenance
to the derivation of the word from (...) Manah, to prepare and distribute. For
what some have thought, that it should be an abbreviation of (...) a guist, and
spoken by them in their precipitate haste, is destitute of all probability. If
it be from (...) Manah, it signifies a prepared meat, or portion. So upon the
sight of it, they said one to another, Here is a portion prepared. But the
truth is, the following words, wherein there is a reason given why they said
upon the sight of it (...) Man hu, inclines strongly to another signification,
(...) For they knew not, Ma hu, what it was. They said one to another, Man hu,
because they knew not Ma hu, that is, what it was. So that Man hu is as much
as, What is it? and so the words are rendered by the LXX, (...), What is this?
and by the vulgar Latin, Quid est hoc? But this difficulty remains, that (...)
Man, is not in the Hebrew tongue an interrogative of the thing, no nor yet of
the person, nor does signify what. Aben-Ezra says it is an Arabic word.
Chiskuni, an Egyptian; and it is evidently an interrogative of the Person in
the Chaldee, and sometimes of the thing, as Judge. 13.14. (...) What is thy
name? Yea, it seems to be used toward this sense in the Hebrew, Psalm, 61.8.
(...) where though most take (...) Man, to be the Imperative in Pihel from
(...) Manah, which no where else occurs, yet the LXX took it to be an
Interrogation from the Chaldee, rendering the words (...), Who shall find out?
Being therefore the language of the common people in their admiration of a
thing new unto them that is expressed, it is no wonder that they made use of a
word that had obtained amongst them from some of the Nations with whom they had
been conversant, differing little in sound from that of their own of the same
signification, and afterward admitted into common use amongst them. From this
occasional interrogation, did the food provided for them take its name of Man,
called in the New Testament Manna; such occasional imposition of names to
persons and things being at all times frequent and usual: as in the Chapter
foregoing the place was called Marah, from the bitterness of the water, that
they cried out of, upon their first tasting it. And in the next Massah and
Meribah, from their temptations and provocations. That which alone we have to
observe concerning this dispensation of God toward them, is, that they had
this eminent renewed pledge of the Bread of Life, the food of their souls, the
Lord Christ, given unto them, before they were entrusted with the Law, which by
making their only glory, and betaking themselves unto, without the healing Tree
and heavenly Manna, is become their snare and ruin. See Joh. 6.31, 32, 48, 49,
51. Rev. 2.17.

A third signal preparation for the Law on the like occasion, and to the same
purpose Exodus 17, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And all the Congregation of the children
of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according
to the commandment of the Lord, and pitched in Rephidim; and there was no water
for the people to drink. Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said,
Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with
me? wherefore do ye tempt the Lord? And the people thirsted there for water;
and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou
have brought us up out of Egypt to kill us with thirst? And Moses cried unto
the Lord, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to
stone me. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with
thee of the Elders of Israel, and thy Rod wherewith thou smotest the River take
in thine hand, and go, behold I will stand before thee there upon the Rock in
Horeb; and thou shall smite the Rock, and there shall come water out of it that
they may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the Elders of Israel. And he
called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the chiding of the
children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord
amongst us or not? Marching up farther into the Wilderness, and coming to
Rephidim, their fourth station from the Red Sea, meeting with no waters to
their satisfaction, they fell into an high murmuring against the Lord, and
mutiny against Moses their Leader. And this iniquity, the Jewish Doctors
suppose, aggravated, because they were in no absolute necessity of water, the
dew which fell from the Manna running in some streams. Hereon God leads Moses
to the Rock of Horeb, where himself appeared in the cloud, which he had
prepared for the place of giving the Law, commanding him to take his Rod in his
hand to smite the Rock, whereon waters flowed out for the relief of this sinful
murmuring people. And the holy Ghost has put sundry remarks upon this
dispensation of God toward them.

First, Upon the sin of the people, whence he gave a double name to the place
where they sinned, for a memorial to all generations; he called it Massah and
Meribah; which words our Apostle renders by (...) and (...), chap. 3.9.
Temptation, and provoking Contention. And it is often mentioned again both on
the part of the people, either to reproach and burden them with their sin, as
Deuteronomy. 9.22. And at Massah ye provoked the Lord to wrath; or to warn them of the
like miscarriage, chap. 6.16. You shall not tempt the Lord your God, as you
tempted him in Massah; as also Psalm. 95.8. And on the part of Moses, as to the
signal trial that God had there of his faith and obedience, in that great
difficulty which he conflicted withal; as also of those of the Tribe of Levi,
who in a preparation unto their ensuing dedication unto God, clave unto him in
his straits. Deuteronomy. 33.8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be
with thy holy one, whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did
strive at the waters of Meribah.

The mercy likewise that ensued in giving them water from the Rock, is most
frequently celebrated, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Psalm. 78.15, 16. Psalm. 105.41. Neh. 9.15.
Now all this was done, to bring them to attend and enquire diligently into the
kernel, the pearl of this mercy, whose outward shell was so undeservedly free,
and so deservedly precious. For in this Rock of Horeb lay hid a spiritual Rock,
as our Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 10.4. even Christ the Son of God, who being
smitten with the Rod of Moses, or the stroke and curse of the Law, administered
by him, gave out waters of life freely unto all that thirst and come unto him.

Thus did God prepare this people for the receiving of the Law, by a triple
intimation Redeemer from the Law, and by whom alone the Law that was to be
given, could be made useful and profitable unto them. And all these intimations
were still given them on their great and signal provocations, to declare, that
neither did their Goodness deserve them, nor could their sins hinder the
progress of the counsel of God's will, and the work of his grace. Hereby also
did God revive unto them the grace of the promise, which being given, as our
Apostle observes, four hundred and thirty years before the giving of the Law,
could not be disanull'd or impeached thereby.

And these I call the remote preparations of the people for the receiving of
the Law, consisting in three Revelations of the Grace of God in Christ,
happening and granted unto them, in the three months space, which they spent
between the Red Sea and their coming unto the Wilderness of Sinai, or to the
Mountain where they received the Law.

immediate preparations for giving of the Law are all of them expressed, Exodus
19. and these we shall briefly pass through, the most of them being insisted
on, or referred unto by our Apostle in the places before mentioned.

First, The time of the Peoples coming unto the place where they were to
receive the Law is related, v. 1. it was (...), novilunio tertio, in the third
moneh after their coming up out of Egypt: That is, on the first day of the
month, the month Sivan, on the day of the New Moon. And therefore it is
added, (...) on the same day; on which Aben Ezra observes, Moses went up first
into the Mountain to receive the commands of God, and returning on that day to
the people, he went up again on the third day, that is the third day of the
month to give in their answer unto the Lord, v. 11.16. And this fell out, if
not on the day, yet about the time of Pentecost whereon afterward the Holy
Ghost descended on the Apostles enabling them to preach the Gospel, and therein
our deliverance from the curse of the Law given at that time.

time of the day when God began to give out the appearances of his glory, it is
said, v. 16. (...), whilst it was yet morning. And Jarchi observes that all
Moses's ascents into the Mountain were (...), early in the morning, which he
proves from Chap. 34.4. And Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up
unto Mount Sinai. And (...) Boker properly signifies the first appearance of
the morning, the light that must be enquired and sought after before the rising
of the Sun. So David Psalm 130.6. compares the earnest expectation of his soul
for mercy, unto the diligent watching of men for the morning, that is, the
first appearance of light. And this was the season wherein our blessed Savior
rose from the grave, and from under the curse of the Law, bringing with him the
tidings of peace with God, and deliverance. He rose between the first dawning
of light, and the rising of the Sun, Matthew. 28.1. Mark 16.2. unto that latitude
of time does the Scripture assign it, and the first evidence of it. For whereas
John says, that Mary Magdalen came to the Sepulcher very early whilst it was
yet dark, Chap. 20.1. Matthew, when it began to dawn toward day, Chap. 28.1.
Mark very early in the morning at the rising of the Sun, Chap. 16.2. who
compriseth the utmost abode of the women at the Sepulcher, Luke expresses it
indefinitely (...), profundo mane, that is, (...) in the first appearance, and
dawning of light, at which time the preparation for the promulgation of the Law
began.

Sinai, v. 2. and so was the Mountain also it self whereon the glorious Majesty
of God appeared, v. 20. it was also called Horeb, Exodus 3.1 He came to the
Mountain of God even to Horeb, where they were to serve God, v. 12. and it was
on this account afterward called Horeb the Mount of God, 1 Kings 19.8. And the
whole Wilderness was termed the Wilderness of Horeb, Deuteronomy. 1. It is therefore
generally supposed, that they were several names of the same places; the
Mountain and Wilderness wherein it was, being both called Sinai and Horeb. And
they were both occasional names, taken from the nature of the place, (...)
Sinai from (...) Seneh, a Bush, such as the Angel appeared unto Moses in Exodus
3.2. such whereof a multitude were in that place. And Horeb from its drought
and barrenness which is the signification of the word. But the opinion of Moses
Gerundensis is far more probable, that Horeb was the name of the Wilderness,
and Sinai of the Mountain. That Sinai was the name of the Hill is expressly
affirmed, Chap. 19.18, 20. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because
the Lord descended upon it in fire; and the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai on
the top of the Mount. So Psalm 68.17. And whereas mention is made of the
Wilderness of Sinai, it is no more but the Wilderness wherein Mount Sinai was.
And for those places before referred to, where Horeb seems to be called the
Mount of God, the words in them all, will bear to be read, to the Mount of God
in Horeb; Strabo calls this very Mount (...), lib. 16. And Justin of Moses,
Montem Sinan occupat: The people therefore abode in Horeb, at the foot of the
Mountain, or about it, and the Law was promulgated on the top of Sinai in the
most desert solitude of that Wilderness. And in this place has the
superstition of some Christians in latter Ages built a Monastery for the
Celebration of their devotion by an order of Monks, whose Archimandrite was not
many years since in England. But as the place materially considered, is as
evident an object of Gods displeasure against the lower part of the Creation,
upon the account of sin, as almost any place in the world, a wast and howling
Wilderness, a place left to solitude and barrenness, so in its allusion or
relation to the Worship of God, it is cast by our Apostle under bondage, and
placed in an opposition to the Worship and Church State of the Gospel, Gal.
4.24, 25.

Being come unto this place, it is said, Moses went up unto the Mount unto God.
It Exodus 3.12. wherein it was given him for a token and pledge of their
deliverance, that thereon they should worship God, or receive the Law in that
Mountain; which is also the judgment of Aben Ezra upon the place. And it is
not unlikely, but that God at that time fixed the cloud which went before them,
as the token of his presence, on the top of Sinai, as a new direction unto
Moses for his going up thither.

Being ascended, God calls unto him, (the word of the Lord says Jonathan) and
v. 4, 5. Two things he proposes to their consideration; First The benefits
that they had already been made partakers of hinted out unto them by the mighty
and wonderful works of his power. And Secondly, New Privileges to be granted
unto them. In the first, he minds them that he had born them on Eagles wings.
This Jarchi interprets of their sudden gathering out of all the Coasts of
Goshen unto Ramesis to go away together the same night, Chap. 12.37. But
although it may be allowed, that they had in that wonderful collection of
themselves, some especial Assistance of Providence, besides the preparation
which they had been making for sundry days before, yet this expression,
evidently extends it self unto the whole dispensation of God toward them, from
the first of their deliverance unto that day. Generally they all of them
explain this Allegorical expression from the manner how the Eagles, as they
say, carry their young, which is on their backs or wings because they fear
nothing above them, as soaring over all, whereas other Fowls carry their young
between their feet, as fearing other Birds of Prey above them: But there is no
need to wring the expression, to force out of it such uncertain niceties. There
is no more intended, but that God carried them speedily and safely as an Eagle
is born by its wings in her course.

To this Remembrance of former mercies, God adds Secondly, A treble Promise:
First, That they should be (...). Segullah, a word that has none to declare it
by. We render it here, and elsewhere, a peculiar Treasure, Eccles. 2.8. it is
rendered by our Apostle, Titus 2.14. (...), a peculiar people: and by another
(...), 1 Pet. 2.9. which we translate in like manner. Secondly, That they
should be (...), a Kingdom of Priests, that is, (...), of Princes, says
Jarchi, as David's Sons who were Princes, are said to be (...). And it is not
denied; but that the word is sometimes so used. But whereas here it intends
the special separation and dedication of the people unto God after the manner
of Priests, thence the allusion is taken, the dignity of Princes being included
in that of a Kingdom. And this Peter renders (...); a Kingly Priesthood. And in
the translation of this privilege over unto Believers under the Gospel, it is
said, that by Christ they are made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. it is
added, that they should be an Holy Nation, as expressly, 1 Pet. 2.9.

That which God on the other hand requires of them, is, that they keep his
Covenant, v. 5. Now this Covenant of God with them, had a double expression.
First, In the giving of it unto Abraham, and its confirmation by the sign of
Circumcision. But this is not that which is here especially intended: for it
was the Administration of the Covenant wherein the whole People became the
peculiar Treasure and inheritance of God upon a new account which is respected.
Now this Covenant was not yet made, nor was it ratified until the dedication
of the Altar in the sprinkling of it with the blood of the Covenant, as Aben
Ezra well observes, and our Apostle manifests at large, Chap. 9.19, 20, 21.
Wherefore the People taking upon themselves the performance of it, and all the
Statutes and Laws thereof, of which yet they knew not what they were, did give
up themselves unto the Sovereignty and Wisdom of God, which is the
indispensible duty of all that will enter into Covenant with him.

sanctified and wash their clothes, v. 10. which was done accordingly, v. 14.
The first contained their moral, the latter their Ceremonial significative
preparation for converse with God. The former consisted in the due disposal of
their minds unto that godly fear, and holy Reverence that becomes poor worms of
the Earth, unto whom that glorious God makes such approaches as he did unto
them. The latter denoted that purity and holiness which was required in their
inward man. From this latter temporary, occasional institution, such as they
had many granted to them whilst they were in the Wilderness before the giving
of the Law, the Rabbis have framed a Baptism for those that enter into their
Synagogue; a fancy too greedily embraced by some Christian Writers, who would
have the holy Ordinance of the Churches Baptism, to be derived from thence. But
this washing of their clothes, not of their bodies, was temporary, never
repeated, neither is there any thing of any such Baptism or washing required in
any Proselytes either Men or Women where the Laws of their admission are
strictly set down. Nor are there the l^ast footsteps of any such usage amongst
the Jews, until after the days of John Baptist, in imitation of whom it was
first taken up by some Anti-mishnical Rabbis.

Moses did by the command of God after he returned from the Mount, was to set
bounds unto it, and the people, that none of them might press to go up, until
the Trumpet had done its long and last sounding, a sign of the departure of the
presence of God, v. 12, 13. And thou shall set bounds unto the People, round
about, saying, take heed to your selves, that you go not up into the Mount, or
touch the border of it: whosoever touches the Mount shall be surely put to
death: there shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot
through, whether it be beast or Man it shall not live, when the Trumpet
sounds long, they shall come up to the Mount. The Law, the Sanction; and the
duration of the obedience required, are here represented. The Law expresses an
evil prohibited both in it self, and in the end of it. The evil it self was,
going up into, or so much as touching by any means the Mountain, or the border
of it. The End wherefore this was prohibited was, that they might not gaze, v.
21. Charge the People lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze. The
Sanction is death, enjoined from the hand of Men in these Verses, and threatened
from the hand of Heaven, v. 21, 24. The continuance of the observance was
until the Trumpet sounded long, or had done sounding, the sign of the
departure of Gods special presence which made the place holy only during its
continuance.

Law, it is said expressly, that the Mount was not to be touched: It might not
be touched by Man or Beast. Yet our Apostle treating concerning it, calls it
the Mount that might be touched, Heb. 12.21. For although de jure whilst that
temporary command continued in force, it might not be touched, which seemed to
render it glorious; yet says the Apostle, it was but a carnal thing, that
might de facta be touched by Man or Beast, had they not been severely
prohibited; and so is no way to be compared with that Heavenly Mount Sion which
we are called unto in the Worship of God under the Gospel.

Whosoever touches the Mount, v. 12, 13. there shall not an hand touch it.
(...) it should seem that by it (...) the Mount it self is intended, and that
the Law is reinforced in a particular caution, that so much as an hand should
not touch the Mount. But it is far more probable that by, it, touch it, the
Person, Man or Beast that touched the Mountain is intended. And the words
declare the manner how the offender should be destroyed; being made Anathema
devoted, accursed by his presumptuous sin, no man was to touch him, or to lay
hand on him, to deliver him, lest he also contracted of his guilt. And this
sense the ensuing words with the series of them evinceth. (...), that is, no
hand shall touch it, either to save it, or to punish it, but stoning it shall
be stoned, or thrusting through it shall be thrust through; whether Man or
Beast, it shall not live. Let none think by laying hand on it to deliver it:
whence Aquila renders (...) by (...), He shall be slain or destroyed cum
impetu, and horrore, with force and terror, all being to cast stones at him, or
to shoot him through with arrows, or thrust him through with darts. So Aben
Ezra, (...). The meaning is, Men shall not gather about him to take him, but
those that see him, shall stone him from the place of their Station. And if he
be afar off they shall shoot him through with arrows.

Touching the Mountain, or the border, limit, or bound set unto it by Gods
appointment, to see, to gaze say we, properly; to look with curiosity on the
appearances of Gods glory, for which cause he smote the men of Bethshemesh upon
their looking into the Ark, 1 Samuel 6. God intending by this prohibition, to
beget in the People an awe and reverence of his holy Majesty as the Great
Lawgiver, and by the terror thereof to bring them and their posterity into
that bondage frame of Spirit, that servile awe that was to abide upon them,
until such time as he came, who was to give liberty and boldness to his
Church, by dispencing unto Believers the Spirit of Adoption, enabling them to
cry Abba Father; and to enter with boldness into the Holy Place, even to the
Throne of Grace.

In case the punishment appointed were neglected by the people, God threatens
to Lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish. v.
24. And let not the Priests and the People break through to come up unto the
Lord, lest he break forth upon them. For to make them watchful in their duty,
he lets them know, that their miscarriage in this matter, devolving the
punishment of the Transgressor by their neglect upon him, should be imputed by
him unto the whole People, so that he would in such a cause break forth upon
them with his judgments, and many of them should be consumed to the terror
and warning of the remnant.

The Continuance of this prescription, was from the day before the appearance
of the Glory of God on the Mount, until by the long sounding of the Trumpet
they perceived the presence of God had left the place, v. 13. When the Trumpet
sounds long, they shall come up to the Mount, that is, they had liberty so to
do.

Things thus prepared, the people were brought forth unto their station to
attend And Moses brought forth the people out of the Camp, for to meet with
God, and they stood at the nether part of the Mount. This Station of the People
in Mount Sinai, is amongst the Jews, the most celebrious thing that ever befell
them. And many disputes they have about their order therein, some few things we
may observe from it.

Moses brought forth the people (...) in occursum ipsius Dei, to meet with God
himself: (...), to meet, with or before the word of God, says Onkelos, (...)
says Ben Vzziel, the glorious presence of God, (...), and (...). The essential
Word of God, the brightness of his glory, the Son of God, the Head and
Lawgiver of the Church in all ages.

And they stood at the nether part of the Mount, v. 2. it is said, (...), And
Israel encamped there before the Mount, in the singular number, that is, in
such order, says Jarchi, that they were all as one Man. And says he, they
were on the East side of the Mountain, where also they kept their station at
the giving of the Law: for so he would have the word (...), to denote, though
he give no instance to confirm his opinion. But Aben Ezra expressly rejects this
fancy, and that by a notable instance, where it is said, the People pitched
their Tents before ((...)) the Tabernacle of the Congregation round about. So
that although they were round about the Tabernacle, they are said to be before
it, because of the special regard which they had unto it. And at this Station
in the Wilderness, command was given to set bounds to the Mount (...) round
about, v. 12. which there had been no need of, had not the People been gathered
round about the Mountain.

Now they generally agree, that this was the order wherein they stood. First
stood Priests, mentioned expressly, v. 22. and said there to draw near unto the
Lord; that is, nearer then the rest of the People, though they also are
expressly forbidden to come so nigh as to touch the Mount, v. 24. These Priests
were as yet the first born, before a commutation was made, and the Tribe of
Levi accepted in their room. Next to the Priests stood the Princes or Heads of
the Tribes, attended with the Elders and Officers of the People. The body of
the People, or the Men of Israel as they speak, stood next to them; and behind
them, the Women and Children. The remotest of all in this order being as they
suppose the Proselytes that adhered unto them. Thus Aben Ezra expressly, (...),
First, Were the first born who drew nigh to God. (...); and after them were the
heads of the Tribes, that is the Princes. (...), after them the Elders. (...);
after them the Officers, (...), after them all the men of Israel, (...), after
them the Children, that is, Males: (...), after them the Women, (...), after
them the Proselytes or Strangers.

ver. 16. And it came to pass, on the third day in the morning, that there were
thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and the voice of
the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the People that was in the Camp
trembled, v. 18. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
descended upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. That all these things were the
effects of the Ministry of Angels preparing the place of Gods glorious
presence, and attending upon him in their work, the Scripture elsewhere
testifies, and we have before manifested, so that there is no need here farther
to insist upon it.

Moses brought forth the people (...), to meet with God. He brought them out of
the Camp which was at some farther distance, unto the bounds that by Gods
prescription he had set unto Mount Sinai. And Rashi on the place observes not
unfitly, that this going of the people to meet with God, argues that the Glory
of God came also to meet with them, as the Bridegroom goes out to meet the
Bride; for it was a marriage Covenant that God then took the people into,
whence it is said, that God came from Sinai, namely to meet the people.

nether part of the Mount. The Targum of Jerusalem has a foolish imagination
from this expression, which they have also in the Talmud; namely, that Mount
Sinai was plucked up by the roots, and lifted up into the air, that the people
stood under it, which Jarchi calls a Midrash, that is, though not in the
signification of the word, yet in the usual application of it, an Allegorical
Fable.

In this posture the People trembled, and were not able to keep their station,
but removed from their place, Chap. 20.28. And the whole Mount quaked greatly,
ver. 18. so terrible was the appearance of the Majesty of God in giving out his
fiery Law.

In this general consternation of all, it is added, that Moses himself spoke,
v. 19. And God answered him by a voice. What he spoke is not declared; nor was
there any occasion for his speaking, nor can any account be given why he should
speak to God, when God was solemnly preparing to speak to him and the people;
nor is it said, that he spoke to God, but only, that he spoke. And it is
signally added, that God answered him (...) in, or by a voice. For my part, I
doubt not but that in this general consternation that befell all the People,
Moses himself being surprised with fear, spoke the words recorded by our
Apostle, Chap. 12.21. I exceedingly fear and quake; which condition he was
relieved from by the comforting voice of God, and so confirmed unto the
remainder of his Ministry. These brief remarks being given upon the preparation
for, and the manner of the giving of the Law, we shall summarily consider the
general nature of the Law, and its Sanction, in our next Exercitation.

Exercitatio XX.
What meant by the Law among the Jews. The common distribution of it into
Moral, Ceremonial and Judaical, by them rejected. The ground of that
distribution. 613 Precepts collected by the Jews. Reasons of that number* Of
these, 248 Affirmative. 365 Negative. Twelve Houses of each sort. First House
of Affirmatives, concerning God, and his Worship, in twenty Precepts. The
second, concerning the Temple and Priesthood, in number 19. The third,
concerning Sacrifices, in 57 Precepts. The fourth of Cleanness and Uncleanness,
18. The fifth, of Alms and Tithes, in 32 Precepts. The sixth, about things to
be eaten, in seven commands. The seventh, concerning the Passover, and
Festivals, 20. The eighth, of Rule and Judgment, in 13 Precepts. The ninth, of
Doctrine and Truth, whose commands are 25. The tenth, concerning Women and
Matrimony, in 12 Precepts. The eleventh, of Criminal Judgments and Punishments,
in eight Precepts. The twelfth, of civil Judgments, in 17 Precepts. Censure of
this Collection. Negative Precepts, in 12 Families. 1. Of false Worship, in 47
Prohibitions, etc.

THe Law it self, and its Sanctions, are the next thing that our Apostle makes
Economy of the Judaical Church. By this Law, he especially understands the Law
given on Mount Sinai, or partly there, partly from the Tabernacle, the Type of
Christ, after it was erected. The Jews by the (...) or Law, generally
understand the whole five books of Moses, as they are also called in the New
Testament, and all Precepts that they can gather out of them any where, they
refer to the Law, wherein they are not to be contended withal.

This whole Law is generally distributed into three parts: First, the Moral;
Secondly, Ceremonial; Thirdly, the Judicial part of it. And indeed there is no
Precept but may conveniently be referred unto one or other of these Heads, as
they are usually explained. That which is commonly called the Moral Law, the
Scripture terms (...) Exodus 34.28. The words of the Covenant, the ten words;
from whence is the Greek (...), or the Law of ten words, or precepts: all which
in their substance are moral, and universally obligatory to all the sons of
men. That part of the Law which the Scripture calls (...) Judgments, Exodus
21.1. determining of Rights between Man and Man, and of punishments upon
transgressions, with especial reference unto the interest of the people in the
Land of Canaan, is by us usually termed the Judicial Law. And the institutions
of Ceremonial Worship are most commonly expressed by the name of (...), the
whole system whereof is termed the Law Ceremonial.

The Jews either acknowledge not, or insist not much on this distinction, which
Decalogue, were delivered by God himself to the people, and so come not within
the compass of the word Torah in that place, whence they take this important
consideration, namely, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Moses commanded us a Law, that is, of 611
Precepts; two being given by God himself, compleats the number of 613. There is
none who sees not the vanity and folly of these things, which yet is a part of
their Oral Law, whereunto, as has been showed, they ascribe more oftentimes,
then to the written Word it self.

Of these 613 Precepts, 248 they say are Affirmative Precepts; because there
are, as Anatomists to judge of, so many distinct members or bones in the body
of a man. And 365 Negative Precepts, because there are so many days in the
year; man being bound to keep the Law with his whole body all the year long;
both which numbers make up 613. And lest this observation should not seem
sufficiently strengthened by these arguments, they add that which they suppose
conclusive, namely, that in the Decalogue there are 613 Letters, if you will
but set aside the last two words, which in common civility cannot be well
denied unto them.

twelve Families, according to the number of the Tribes of Israel; that is,
either general part into twelve. First, the Affirmative, and secondly, the
Negative. And although their distribution be not satisfactory for many Reasons,
and has been also represented by others, yet for the advantage of the Reader,
I shall here give a summary account of them.

Family which has Relation to God in his Worship consists of twenty Precepts,
which I shall briefly enumerate as those following, without any examination of
their stating of them, and due fixing to their several stations. 1. Faith, and
acknowledgment of God's divine Essence and Existence. Exodus 20.2. 2. Faith of
the Unity of God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. chap. 32.39. 3. Love of God, Deuteronomy. 6.5. chap.
10.12. 4. Fear of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. 5. Acknowledgment of God's Righteousness in
Afflictions, Deuteronomy. 8.5. 6. Prayer unto God, Exodus 23.25. Deuteronomy. 11.13. 7.
Adherence unto God, Deuteronomy. 10.20. 8. To swear by the name of God, Exodus 6.13.
Deuteronomy. 10.20. 9. To walk in the ways of God, Deuteronomy. 28.9. 10. To sanctify the
Name of God, Levit. 22.32. 11. Twice a day to repeat that Sanction, Hear, O
Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.7. chap. 11.19. 12. That we learn and teach the Law, Deuteronomy. 5.1.
chap. 11 8. 13. To wear Philacteries or Tephilin on the head, Deuteronomy. 6.8. 14. To
wear them on the arm, in the same place. 15. To make Fringes, Numb. 15.38, 39,
40. 16. To put Writings of the Scripture on the posts of our doors, Deuteronomy. 6.9.
17. That the People be called together to hear the Law, at the end of the Feast
of Tabernacles, Duet. 31.12. 18. That every one write him a Copy of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 31.19. 19. That the King moreover write out another for himself as King,
Deuteronomy. 17.28. 20. That at our eating of meat we give thanks, or bless God, Deuteronomy.
8.10. This is the first Family, which though it sometimes fail in educing its
precepts from the Word, yet good use may be made of the observation, in
reducing these things to one certain head.

Family, of the first general Head of Affirmative precepts, contain those which
concern the Sanctuary and Priesthood, being nineteen in number. 1. That a
Sanctuary, Tabernacle, or Temple should be built, Exodus 25.8. 2. That being
built, it should be reverenced, Levit. 19.30. 3. That the Priests and Levites
always keep the Temple, and no others, Numb. 18.2. 4. That the work or ministry
of the Temple be performed by the Levites, Numb. 18.23. 5. That the Priests
wash their hands and feet before their ministry, Exodus 30.9. 6. That the
Priests attend the Lamps of the Sanctuary, Exodus 27.21. 7. That the Priests
bless the people, Numb. 6.^3. 8. That every day the Shewbread be renewed. 9.
That Incense be offered twice a day on the golden Altar, Exodus 30.7, 8. 10.
That the Fire on the Altar be kept always burning, Levit. 6.12, 13. 11. That
the Ashes be removed from the Altar every day, Levit. 6.10. 12. That the
Unclean be separated from the Camp and Temple, Numb. 5.2. Deuteronomy. 23.10. 13. That
Aaron and his Posterity have the principal place and honor in Sacred things,
Levit. 21.8. 14. That the Priests wear the Garments appointed to their special
Ministry, Exodus 28.2. 15. That the Ark be carried on the shoulders of the
Levites, Numb. 7.9. 16. That the Anointing Oil be made to anoint King and
Priest, Exodus 30.25, 26, 27. 17. That the Families of the Priests minister in
the Sanctuary by turns, but that all be present at the great Anniversary
Feasts, Deuteronomy. 18.6. 18. That the Priests mourn and be defiled for their near
Relations, Levit. 21.3. 19. That the High Priest marry a Virgin, Levit. 21.13.

This is the second Family, liable to the same mistakes in many things with the
former, but yet containing a Collection of things suitable to each other, and
belonging for the most part to the same general Head.

third Family relates to Sacrifices, containing fifty seven Precepts. As, 1.
That the (...) Tamid, or continual Sacrifice, be offered every day, Exodus
29.38. Num^. 28.2, 3. 2. That the High Priest offer his Mincha or Corban every
day, Levit. 6.20. 3. That every Sabbath day two Lambs of an year old, be
offered as a Sacrifice morning and evening, Numb. 28.9. 4. That the Sacrifice
of the new Moon be observed, Numb. 28.2. 5 That during the Feast of the
Passover, the especial Sacrifices appointed be added to the continual
Sacrifice, Levit. 23 6, 7. Numb. 28.19. 6. That at the Feast of Pentecost, the
offering of new corn be observed, Numb. 29.1. 7. That it be accompanied with
Alms. 8. Likewise that on the day of Expiation, Numb. 29.7. 9. And that on the
Feast of Tabernacles for seven days, Levit. 23.34. 10. That on the eighth, or
last day of the Feast, Numb. 29.35, 36. 11. That on the second day of the Feast
of the Passover an Homer of meal be offered with a Lamb, Levit. 23. 12. That on
the Feast of Pentecost, two new Loaves be offered, with its especial Sacrifice,
Levit. 23.17. 13. That all things be done aright on the Feast of Expiation,
Levit. 16. (These general things are evidently put in to fill up the number of
Precepts that they had fixed on, there being no special Precept in them.) 14.
That three times in the year an holy Feast be kept unto the Lord, Exodus 23.14.
15. That on these Feasts, all the Males appear before the Lord, Duet. 16.16.
16. That they should rejoice in all their Feasts, Deuteronomy. 16.14. 17. That the
Paschal Lamb be slain, Exodus 12.6. 18. That his flesh be eaten roasted, Exodus
12.8. 19. That on the second month on the fourteenth day, another Passover be
kept. 20. That the Lamb be then eaten with unleavened bread, and sour herbs,
Numb. 19.10, 11. 21. That the sounding of Trumpets be used with the Sacrifice,
in the day of the afflicting their souls, Numb. 10.9, 10. 22. That the
Creatures to be sacrificed should be eight days old and upwards, Levit. 22.27.
23. That every creature to be sacrificed, be perfect, Levit. 22.18. 24. That
Salt be used in all Sacrifices, Levit. 2.13. 25. That Whole burnt offerings be
ordered according to the Law, Levit. 1.3. 26. That so also be the Sin-offering,
Levit. 6.18. 27. And likewise the Trepass Offering, Levit. 7.1. 28. And the
Peace Offering, Levit. 7.2. 29. And the Meat Offering, Levit. 11.1. 30. That if
the whole Congregation offend, a Sacrifice be offered for it, Levit. 4.13. 31.
If a private man sin by ignorance, he must offer his sin-offering, Levit. 4.27.
32. That a sacrifice be offered for an uncertain crime, Levit. 5.17, 18. 33.
That a Sacrifice be offered for sin certain and known, Levit. 6.2. chap. 5.16.
34. That every one's sacrifice be according to his substance or wealth, Levit.
5.7. 35. That whosoever sinned, together with his sacrifice he make Confession
of his sin, Numb. 5.6, 7. 36. That involuntary pollution be cleansed by
Sacrifice, Levit. 15.13. 37. That women do so likewise in the case mentioned,
Levit. 15.28. 38. That the Leper, being cleansed, do offer sacrifice, Levit.
14.10. 39. That a Woman, after childbirth offer sacrifice, Levit. 12.6, 7, 8.
40. That the tenth of every clean beast be separated unto the Lord, Levit.
27.32. 41. That every firstborn Male be sanctified and offered unto the Lord,
Exodus 13.2 Deuteronomy. 15.19. 42. That every firstborn of man be redeemed with a
certain price, Numb. 18.15. 43. That the firstborn of an Ass be redeemed with
a Lamb, Exodus 13.14. 44. That if it be not redeemed, its neck be broken, Exodus
13.14. 45. That any sacred beast, that is firstling or tenth, wherein is a
blemish, be redeemed, Deuteronomy. 12.15. 46. That which is changed, and that which it
is changed for, are to be both the Lord's, Levit. 27.10. 47. That all
offerings, both necessary on legal prescription, and free-will-offerings, be
brought unto Jerusalem on the next Feast, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. 48. That all
sacrifices be offered at the Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 12.14. 49. That sacrifices vowed
out of the holy Land, be offered at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 12.27. 50. That Aaron and
his sons eat the remainder of the meat offerings, Levit. 6.16. 51. That the
Males of the house of the Priests, eat the flesh of the Sin and
Trepass Offering, Exodus 29.33. 52. That holy flesh which has touched any
unclean thing, be burned in the fire, Levit. 7.19. 53. That the flesh of the
sacrifices that remain above the third day, be consumed with fire, Levit. 7.17.
54. That a Nazarite suffer his hair to grow, Numb. 6.5. 55. That he shave his
hair after his vow is accomplished, ver. 9. 56. That every man perform his vows
to God, Deuteronomy. 23.23. Number. 30.2. 57. That judgment be made of the Obligation of
vows according to the Law, Numb. 30.3, 4, 5.

The fourth Family of Affirmative Commands, respects Cleanness and Uncleanness,
eighteen Precepts; as, 1. He that touches that which dies of it self is
unclean, Levit. 11.39. 2. Eight kind of creeping things are unclean; Levit.
11.29. 3. Sundry things that may be eaten, are yet capable of uncleanness,
Levit. 11.34. 4. A woman in her natural disease is unclean. Levit. 15.19. 5.
And she that is delivered of a child, Levit. 13.2. 6. The Leper is unclean, and
defiles other things, Levit. 13.2. 7. A cloth infected with Leprosy is
unclean, Levit. 13.47. 8. And an house likewise, Levit. 14.35. 9. He that has
an issue is unclean, Levit. 15.2. 10. And to the same purpose, Levit. 15.16.
11. And in a woman, v. 25. 12. A dead body is unclean, and defiles, Numb.
19.14. 13. All cleansing must be accompanied with bathing or washing, Levit.
15.16. 14. The cleansing of the Leper must be with Cedar, Hysop, scarlet Wool,
and the other Ceremonies, Levit. 14.2. 15. The Leper must shave all the hair
off his head on the seventh day, Levit. 13.45. 16. The Leper must not go abroad
but with the signs of his Leprosy, Levit. 13.45. 17. That the red Heifer be
burned according to order, Numb. 19.2. 18. That the water of the ashes of a red
Heifer be sprinkled in Purification, Numb. 19.19.

The fifth Family of this sort of commands, concerns Alms and Tithes,
consisting of thirty two Precepts. 1. That Alms be given to the poor, Deuteronomy.
15.8. 2. That he who promises the price of Redemption for the firstborn, pay
it assuredly, Lev. 27.2. 3. That he who is to pay the Redemption price of an
unclean first-ling, pay it accordingly, Lev. 27.11. 4. That the price of a
devoted house be so paid, according to the judgment ot the Priest, Lev. 27.14.
5. The same of a Field, Lev. 27.16. 6. That he who deceives by ignorance, add
a fifth part unto the price of the thing its self, Lev. 15.16. 7. That the
fruits of the fourth year be dedicated to God, Lev. 19.24. 8. That the corners
of the Fields be left unto the poor to cut and gather, Lev. 19.9. 9. That ears
of Corn be left for the poor in Harvest, Lev. 19.9. 10. That a sheaf of corn
forgotten, be left for the poor, not sought for again, Deuteronomy. 24.19. 11. That
the gleanings of the Vine branches, be left to the poor, Lev. 19.10. 12. And
the Grapes that fall to the ground, v. 20. 13. That all first fruits of the
Earth, be brought to the Sanctuary or Temple, Exodus 23.19. 14. That the Words
appointed, Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6, 7. be repeated over the first fruits. 15. That the
Heave Offering, or Terumah for the Priest be observed, Deuteronomy. 18.4. 16. That the
Tithes be separated for the use of the Levites. 17. That a Second Tithe be
taken by the owners, to spend at the Tabernacle, or at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 14.22.
18. That out of the tenth of the Levites, a tenth be taken for the Priests. 19.
That on the third and sixth year, in the room of this second tenth, a tenth be
given to the poor, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. 20. That Confession be made over the
Tithes, Deuteronomy. 26.13. 21. That a Cake of the Dough be separated unto the
Priests, Numb. 15.20. 22. That the whole increase of the Land every seventh
year be common to all, Exodus 23.10, 11. 23. That the seventh year be a year of
rest unto the whole Land, Exodus 24.21. Lev. 25.2. 24. That the year of the
Jubilee be reckoned by the years of rest, or weeks of years, Lev. 25.8, 9, 10.
25. That the year of Jubilee be separated or sanctified, v. 8, 9, 10. 26. That
on the tenth day of the Month Tisri the Trumpet sound for the beginning of the
Jubilee, Lev. 25.10. 27. That a Redemption, or restitution of the Land be
granted in the year of Jubilee, Lev. 25.24. 28. He that sells an House in a
walled Town, may redeem it within an year, Lev. 25.29. 29. That debts be
remitted on the seventh year, Deuteronomy. 15.2. 30. That in all Offerings and
Sacrifices for sin, the Priest have the right shoulder, the breast, and the
cheek for his portion; Deuteronomy. 18.3. 31. That the first fleece of Sheep being
shorn be given to the Priests, Deuteronomy. 18.4. 32. That right Judgment be made of
things devoted, as to the part of God, and that of the Priests.

Family contains seven Precepts about things to be eaten, 1. That all Creatures
to be eaten, Beasts and Birds have their heads taken off, Deuteronomy. 12.2. 2. That
the blood of Beasts and Birds killed to be eaten, be covered with earth or
dust, Lev. 17.23. 3. That the Mother be left free from the Nest, when the young
ones are taken, Deuteronomy. 22.6. 4. That the signs of clean and unclean Beasts be
diligently observed, Lev. 2.25. 5. That signs to the same purpose be observed
in some Birds, Deuteronomy. 14.11. 6. And the same concerning Locusts that may be
eaten, Lev. 11.21. 7. That the signs in Fishes be observed, Lev. 11.9.

Family of Affirmative precepts, respects the Passover, and other Feasts as to
the time of their observation, having twenty commands appertaining unto it. 1.
That the Course of the Sun and Moon, be exactly observed for the right
constitution of the Anniversary Feasts, Deuteronomy. 4.6. 2. That the beginning of the
months be appointed by the House of Judgment, Exodus 12.2. 3. That we rest on
the Sabbath, Exodus 23.12. 4. That the Sabbath be sanctified, Exodus 20.8. 5.
That all Leaven be thrust out of doors on the Feast of the Passover, Exodus
12.15. 6. That on the night of the Passover, the first discourse be about the
deliverance out of Egypt, Exodus 13.8. 7. That unleavened bread be eaten on
that night, Exodus 12.18. 8. That the first day of the Feast of the Passover be
a day of rest. 9. Likewise the seventh day also, Exodus 12.16. Lev. 23.7. 10.
That forty nine days be reckoned to the Feast of Weeks, Lev. 23.15. 11. That
on the fiftieth day rest be declared, Lev. 23.21. 12. That on the first day of
the seventh month, there be rest from all works, Lev. 23.24. 13. That the
Trumpet sound on that day, Numb. 29.1. 14. That every one afflict his own soul
on the tenth day of September, Lev. 23.27, 28, 29. 15. That there be a rest and
ceasing from all works on the day of Expiation, Lev. 23.32. 16. That there be a
rest from labor on the first day of the Feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.35. 17.
Likewise on the eighth day; v. 36. 18. That the people dwell in Booths seven
days, Lev. 23.43. 19. That on the first day of the Feast of Tabernacles,
branches of Palms be carried, Lev. 23.40. 20. That every Israelite that is a
Male, offer every year half a shekel to the Lord, Exodus 30.13.

The Eighth Family, concerns Rule and Judgment, made up of thirteen Precepts.
Prophet speaking in the name of God, Deuteronomy. 18.15. 2. That the people choose a
King, Deuteronomy. 17.15. 3. That Judges and Rulers be appointed in every City of the
people, Deuteronomy. 16.18. 4. That the Laws and Decrees of the great Council be
observed, and obeyed, Deuteronomy. 17.10. 5. That in doubtful Cases the major part of
suffrages is to determine, Exodus 23.1. 6. That all men be judged equally
without respect, Lev. 19.15. 7. That every one who can testify the Truth in
any cause, he is of his own accord to repair to the Judges so to do, Lev. 5.1.
8. That Witnesses be examined strictly and their testimony duly weighed, Deuteronomy.
13.14. 9. That false Witnesses have that done to them, which they would have
done unto others, or brought upon them, Deuteronomy. 19.19. 10. That a Calf be slain
where a dead Body is found, the Murderer not known, Deuteronomy. 21.1. 11. That six
Cities of refuge for the Manslayer be appointed, and the ways to them be
prepared, Deuteronomy. 19.2. 12. That the Levites have Cities and Suburbs granted
them, Numb. 35.2. 13. That the tops of the Houses have a battlement about them,
Deuteronomy. 22.8.

The Ninth Family of Affirmative Precepts, respects truth and Doctrines,
comprehending Idolatry of the Gentiles be extirpated out of the Land, Deuteronomy.
12.2. 2. That the City and Citizens which fall to Idolatry, be utterly
destroyed, Deuteronomy. 13.16. 3. That the seven Nations of Canaan be blotted out,
Deuteronomy. 20.16. 4. That the Israelites remember what Amalek, did unto them, Deuteronomy.
25.15, 16. 5. That the memory of Amalek be blotted out from under Heaven, Exodus
17.14. 6. That War be undertaken and managed according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 20.1.
7. That a Priest be anointed to go forth to the War, Deuteronomy. 20.2. 8. That every
one carry a Paddle with his arms, Deuteronomy. 23.13. 9. That a place be assigned for
covering of ejections of nature, v. 12. 10. That what is stolen be restored,
Lev. 6.4. 11. That an Hebrew servant be well rewarded at the end of his
service, Deuteronomy. 15.14. 12. That we lend freely to the poor and needy, Exodus
22.25. 13. That the pledge be restored unto the owner, Deuteronomy. 24.13. 14. That
the Labourer be paid his hire, or wages the same day, Deuteronomy. 24.15. 15. That the
hire-ling working in the Field, or Vineyard may eat of the fruits to his
satisfaction, Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25. 16. That we help the Beast of our Neighbor
fallen under his burden, Exodus 23.5. 17. That we help our neighbor in leading
his Beast by the way, Deuteronomy. 22.4. 18. That what is lost by one, and found by
another, be restored to the owner, Deuteronomy. 22.1. 19. That we rebuke our neighbor
when he sins, or offends, Lev. 19.17. 20. That we love our neighbor, Lev.
19.18. 21. That we love a Stranger, Lev. 10.19. 22. That weights and measures,
and scales be exact, Lev. 19.36. 23. That Wise Men, or Men skilful in the Law
be honored, or had in reputation, Lev. 19.32. 24. That Father and Mother be
honored, Exodus 20.12. 25. That they be feared, Lev. 19.3.

The Tenth Family concerns Women and Matrimony, in twelve Precepts. 1. That
marriage be entered into by all, Genesis 1.28. 2. That a Contract, or betroathing
precede marriage, Deuteronomy. 24.1. 3. That the new married Man rejoice with his Wife
the first year, Deuteronomy. 24.5. 4. That the Male Children of Israel be circumcised,
Genesis 17.10. Lev. 12.5. 5. That the Widow of a Man dying without Children, marry
unto her Husbands Brother, Deuteronomy. 25.5. 6. That he who refuses so to take the
Widow of one dying without Children, being next of kin, have his shoe pulled
off, and be spit upon, Deuteronomy. 25.7. 7. That he who has violated the Chastity of
a Virgin by force, be compelled to marry her, Deuteronomy. 22.29. 8. That He who has
defamed his Wife without cause, keep her without hope of divorce, Deuteronomy. 22.19.
9. That he who seduceth a Virgin to Fornication, pay fifty shekels, Exodus
22.16. 10. That a fair Woman taken in War be dealt withal according to the
Law, Deuteronomy. 21.11. 11. That divorces be made by a Writing, or Bill of
divorcement, Deuteronomy. 24.1. 12. That a Woman suspected of adultery be dealt
withal according to the Law, Numb. 5.30.

The Eleventh Family concerns criminal Judgments and Punishments, and has
eight Precepts belonging unto it. 1. That criminal persons not guilty of sins
deserving capital punishments be beaten with stripes, Deuteronomy. 24.3. 2. That he
who slew a man at unawares be banished from conversing among the people, Numb.
35.25. 3. That those guilty of it, be hanged, or strangled, Lev. 20.10. 4. That
others as is appointed, be slain by the Sword, Exodus 20.21. 5. Others to be
burned, 20.14. 6. That those who deserve it by the Law, be stoned with stones.
7. That those appointed thereunto be hanged up after death, Deuteronomy. 21 22. 8.
That all who suffer death, be buried the same day, Deuteronomy. 21.23.

Civil Causes contains seventeen Precepts. 1. That the Hebrew servant be dealt
withal according to the Law, Exodus 21.2. 2. That an Hebrew Maid Servant be
married to her Master, or his Son, if humbled by either of them, Exodus 21.8. 3.
That an Hebrew Maid Servant may be redeemed, Exodus 21.8. 4. That only
Canaanites, or Heathens, may be made perpetual Servants, or brought into
bondage for ever, Lev. 25.46. 5. That he who procures the hurt of any one, do
repair it by a pecuniary mulct. 6. That hurt done by a Beast be repaired, Exodus
21.28, 29. 7. That loss or hurt from the not covering or safeguarding of a pit,
be repaired, Exodus 21.23. 8. That theft be judged according to the Law, Exodus
22.1. 9. That the damage done by one Man's Beasts in other Men's Fields, be
repaired, Exodus 22.5. 10. That damage by sire voluntarily be repaired, Exodus
22.5. 11. That judgment be made of any thing deposited or trusted, without
reward, according to the Law, Exodus 22.6. 12. That what is lent or hired for
gain, if lost, be judged according unto the Law, Exodus 22.10. 13. Also what is
borrowed for use, v. 14. 14. That things concerning buying and selling be
judged according to the Law, Lev. 25.14. 15. That the cause of the Plaintiff
and Defendant be judged according to the Law, Exodus 22.9. 16. That a Man
pursued by his Enemy to death, may be delivered with the death of his pursuer,
Deuteronomy. 25.12. 17. That the rights of Inheritances be determined according to the
Law, Numb. 27, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Affirmatively expressed. That some of them are by no means rightly educed from
those Texts which they draw them from, will appear at first view unto him that
shall examine them. It is also justly questionable, whether sundry of them be
indeed Precepts of God or no, especially as by them explained. But that this is
the just number of the Affirmative Precepts of the Law, that there are no more
of that kind, and that these are all so many distinct precepts, is vain to
imagine. Only whereas in general, the most of the particular commands that
belong unto the same things, are gathered by them into certain heads, wherein
they are summarily represented, I thought not unmeet to give them here in their
order.

Negative Precepts also are by them in like manner cast into twelve distinct
Families, which with the same brevity we shall pass through.

False Worship, concerning which they gather up forty seven Prohibitions. 1.
That we have no other God but Jehovah, Exodus 20.3. 2. That we make no Images
for our selves, nor have others make them for us, Exodus 20.4. 3. That we make
no Images for others, or for their use, Lev. 19.4. 4. That we make no Images
for Ornament, Exodus 20.23. 5. That we bow not down to any Idols. 6. Nor serve
them, Exodus 20.5. 7. That none offer his Son or Daughter to Molock in the fire,
Lev. 18.2. 8. That none have a familiar spirit or Ob. 9. That none have a
familiar spirit, or Jideoni, Lev. 19.31. 10. That none consult with Ob. 11.
That none ask counsel of Jideoni, Deuteronomy. 18.11. 12. That we look not toward
Idols, Lev. 19.4. 13. That we set not up a Statua, or Image any where, Deuteronomy.
16.22. 14. That no painted or carved Stone be set to be bowed unto, Lev. 26.1.
15. That no Tree be planted in the Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 16.21. 16. That we swear
not by false Gods, Exodus 33.13. 17. That none lead the Jews to Idolatry. 18.
That none stir up any single Jew to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.6. 19. That we love not
a Seducer. 20. That we hate him. 21. That we aid him not in danger of death.
22. That he whom he would seduce, intercede not for him. 23. That he conceal
nothing which may tend to his condemnation, Deuteronomy. 13.8. 24. That we covet not,
or turn to our use, any things, wherewith Idols have been adorned, Deuteronomy. 27.25.
25. That we make no profit of any thing that belongs to false worship, Deuteronomy.
7.26. 26. That no City seduced to Idolatry and destroyed, be ever built again,
Deuteronomy. 13.26. 27. That nothing of its spoils be turned to private use, v. 17.
28. That none prophecy falsely, Deuteronomy. 18.20. 29. That we fear not to slay a
false Prophet, v. 22. 30. That none prophecy in the name of false Gods, Deuteronomy.
18.20, 31. That none so prophesying, be attended unto, Deuteronomy. 13.2. 32. That we
walk not in the ways and customs of the Heathens, Lev. 20.23. 33. That none
use Divination, Deuteronomy. 18.20. 34. Nor Sorcery, v. 10. 35. That no Southsaying be
used, Lev. 19.26. 36. That no divination by times, or hours, be used, Levit.
19.26. 37. That there be no enchantments or conjuring, Deuteronomy. 18.1. 38. That
none ask counsel of the dead, Deuteronomy. 18.11. 39. That a woman wear not the
apparel of a man. 40. That a man wear not the apparel of a woman, Deuteronomy. 22.5.
41. That no cutting or incision be made in the body, Levit. 19.28. 42. That
clothes made of linen and woolen be not made or worn, Deuteronomy. 22.11. 43. That
the corners of the head be not rounded. 44. That the corners of the beard be
not marred. Levit. 19.27. 45. That none tear their flesh with their nails. Or,
46. Pull off their hair for the dead, Deuteronomy. 14.1. 47. That we walk not after
the thoughts of our hearts, or sight of our eyes, Numb. 15.39.

It is evident that in this Family, many Precepts are distinguished, and the
number

The second Family concerns separation from the Heathen, in thirteen
Prohibitions. Canaan, Exodus 23.32. 2. That none of them be suffered to live,
Deuteronomy. 20.16. 3. That we pity not those Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 7.2. 4. That we suffer
them not to inhabit in the Land, Exodus 23.33. 5. That no marriages be made with
the Heathen, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 6. That no Ammonite or Moabite marry a Jewess, woman,
Deuteronomy. 23.3. 7. That no peace be offered to the Ammonites or Moabites as to
other Nations, Deuteronomy. 23.6. 8. That they separate not from the Edomites beyond
the third generation. 9. Nor from the Egyptians, Deuteronomy. 23.7, 8. 10. That they
never return to dwell in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 17.16. 11. That they destroy not
fruit trees, Deuteronomy. 20 19. 12. That Soldiers in war be not fearful, Deuteronomy. 20.3.
13. That they forget not the wickedness of Amalek, Deuteronomy. 25.20.

The third Family of this sort of Precepts, concerns the due regard that is to
be had S^cred, in twenty nine Precepts. 1. That none blaspheme, Exodus 22.27. 2.
That none swear falsely, Levit. 19.12. 3. That none swear in vain, Exodus 20.7.
4. That the name of God be not profaned, Levit. 22.32. 5. That God be not
contemned, Deuteronomy. 6.16. 6. That holy places be not destroyed, Deuteronomy. 3.4. 7. That
he who is hanged on the tree, abide not all night thereon, Deuteronomy. 21.23. 8. That
the watch about the Sanctuary fail not. Numb. 18.5. 9. That the Priests go not
at all hours into the Sanctuary, Levit. 16.2. 10. That none defiled come to the
Altar, Levit. 21.23. 11. That none defiled serve in the Sanctuary, ver. 17. 12.
That none polluted by accident draw nigh to the holy service, ver. 21. 13. That
the Levites invade not the Priests office, nor the Priests do the work of the
Levites, Numb. 18.3. 14. That none who have drank wine enter the Sanctuary,
Levit. 10.9. 15. That no stranger serve in the Sanctuary, Numb. 18.4. 16. That
no Priest that is unclean draw nigh to it. 17. Nor on that day wherein he
washes from his uncleanness, until it be evening, Levit. 22.23. 18. That no
unclean person enter into any part of the Temple, Numb. 5.3. 19. Nor into the
camp or tents of the Levites, Deuteronomy. 23.10. 20. That the Altar be not built of
hewn stones, Exodus 20.25. 21. That they go not up by steps to the Altar, Exodus
20.26. 22. That no Sacrifices be offered on the golden Altar, Exodus 30.9. 23.
That no Oil or Ointment be made like that of the Tabernacle. 24. That no
stranger be anointed with it, Exodus 30.31, 32, 33. 25. That no incense or
perfume like that prescribed in the Law, be made, Exodus 30.37. 26. That the
fire on the Altar go not out, Levit. 6.12. 27. That the bars or staves be not
pulled out of the sides of the Ark, Exodus 25.14. 28. That the breast plate in
the Priests garment be not loosed from the Ephod, Exodus 28.28. 29. That the
robe of the Ephod be not torn nor rent, Exodus 28.32.

The fourth Family is comprehensive of the prohibitions given about Sacrifices,
and eighty two. 1. That no Sacrifice be used but at the Temple, Deuteronomy. 12.13,
14. 2. That no sacred beast be killed but at the Temple, Levit. 17.3, 4. 3.
That no blemished thing be brought to the Altar, Levit. 22.20. 4. That no
blemished thing be offered in sacrifice, ver. 21.22. 5. That the blood of a
blemished beast be never laid on the Altar, ver. 24. 6. Nor the fat of it, ver.
22. 7. That no beast with an accidental blemish be offered, Deuteronomy. 17.1. 8. That
no blemished beast received of a Heathen or Gentile be offered, Levit. 22.25.
9. That no blemish be in any dedicated beast, or firstling, Levit. 22.21. 10.
That no offering be of leven or honey, Levit. 2.11. 11. That no sacrifice be
without salt, Levit. 2.13. 12. That the price of a dog, or an Whore, be not
offered to God, Deuteronomy. 23.18. 13. That a beast and its young be not killed or
sacrificed the same day, Levit. 22.28. 14. That no Oil be put to the offering
of him that offers the sin-offering. 15. Nor Frankincense, Levit. 5.11. 16.
That Oil be not put to the gift of a woman suspected to have gone astray. 17.
Nor Frankincense, Numb. 5.15. 18. That no devoted beast be changed, Levit.
27.32, 33. 19. That one sacrifice be not changed into another, or for another,
ver. 28. 20. That the firstling of a clean beast be redeemed, Numb. 18.17. 21.
That the tenths of beasts be not sold, Levit. 22.23. 22. That a devoted field
be not sold, 23. Nor redeemed, Lev. 27.28. 24. That the head of the Bird to be
offered on the day of expiation, be not separated from the body, Levit. 5.8.
25. That sacred beasts be not used to labor. 26. Nor be shorn, Deuteronomy. 15.19.
27. That the Paschal Lamb be not slain whilst any leven remains, Exodus 23.18.
28. That nothing be left of the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12.10. 29. That nothing be
left of the Paschal Lamb to be offered on the second month, Exodus 12.46. 30.
That no bone of the Paschal Lamb be broken, Exodus 12.46. 31. That its flesh be
not eaten raw or boiled, Exodus 12.9. 32. That nothing of its flesh be carried
out of the company* by whom it is to be eaten, Exodus 12.46. 33. That no
stranger or hireling eat of it, Exodus 12.45. 34. That no uncircumcised person
eat of it, ver. 49. 35. That no Israelite that has been changed, do eat of it,
Exodus 12.43. 36. That the fat of it abide not one night, Exodus 23.18. 37. That
the flesh of the Peace Offerings be not kept until the morning, Levit. 7.15.
38. That nothing remain of sacrifices to the third day, Levit. 7.16, 17. 39.
That the Priests portion of the sacrifices or meat offerings be not baked with
leaven, Levit. 6.17. 40. That no unclean person eat that which is holy, Levit.
7.20. 41. That the holy things once defiled, be not eaten, Levit. 7.19. 42.
That what remains of that sacrifices above the time appointed be not eaten,
Levit. 19.18. 43. That nothing be eaten which is an abomination, Levit. 7.18.
44. That no stranger eat of holy flesh. 45. Nor the hired servant of the
Priest, Levit. 22.10. 46. Nor he that is uncircumcised. 47. Nor the Priest when
he is defiled, Levit. 22.4. 48. Nor the daughter of the Priest which is married
to a stranger, Levit. 22.12. 49. That the offerings of the Priest be not eaten,
Levit. 6.22. 50. That the inwards of the sin-offering be not eaten, Levit.
6.30. 51. That beasts made holy, that are any ways corrupted, be not eaten,
Deuteronomy. 14.3. 52. That the second tenths of fruits be not eaten out of Jerusalem.
53. That the tenth of the Wine be not drank. 54. That the tenth of the Oil be
not eaten elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 12.17. 55. That the Priests eat not the firstlings
out of Jerusalem, chapter 7.17. 56. That they eat not the sin-offering out of the
holy place, ver. 17. 57. That none of the flesh of the burnt-offering be eaten,
ver. 17. 58. That the flesh of the free-will-offering be not eaten, before the
blood of the sacrifice be poured upon the Altar. 59. That the Priests eat not
the first fruits before he have laid it up in the Temple. 60. That no stranger
eat that which is most holy, Exodus 29.33. 61. That the second ten^hs be not
eaten in mourning. 62. Nor in uncleanness. 63. That the money it is sold for be
not laid out in any thing, but what is to be eaten or drunken, Deuteronomy. 26.14 64.
That no meat be eaten before the things to be separated from it be taken away,
Levit. 22.25. 65. That the order of tenths, and first fruits or
heave-offerings, be not perverted, Exodus 22.29. 66. That vows be not deferred,
Deuteronomy. 23.22. 67. That none go up to the Passover without a sacrifice, Exodus
23.15. 68. That none break his vows Numb. 30.3. 69. That the High Priest marry
not an Whore. 70. Nor one any way corrupted. 71. Nor one divorced. 72. Nor a
widow, Levit. 21.7. 73. Nor defile himself with a widow, Levit. 21.14, 15. 74.
That the Priests enter not the Sanctuary with long hair. 75. Nor with torn
garments, Levit. 10.6. chap. 21.10. 76. That the Priests go not forth of the
Temple at the time of divine worship, Levit. 10.7. 77. That no inferior Priest
defile himself for the death of strangers, Levit. 21.1. 78. That the
High Priest defile not himself, no not for his Parents, ver. 11. 79. That he go
not in where is any dead, ver. 11. 80. That the Tribe of Levi have no lot in
the land. 81. That they have no lot in the spoils of war, Deuteronomy. 18.2.

Family of Negative Precepts compriseth thirty eight prohibitions about meats,
or what may be eaten. 1. That no unclean beasts be eaten, Levit. 11.4. 2. That
no unclean fish be eaten, ver. 11. 3. That no unclean bird or foul be eaten,
ver. 13. 4. That no creeping thing that also flies be eaten, ver. 41. 5. That
no creeping things of the earth be eaten, ver. 41. 6. That no creeping thing of
the waters be eaten, ver. 41. 7. That no worms of the earth be eaten, ver. 44.
8. Nor the worms of fruit, ver. 42. 9. That what dies of it self be not eaten,
Deuteronomy. 14.21. 10. Nor that which is torn, Exodus 22.31. 11. No blood be eaten,
Levit. 7.26. 12. That the fat be not eaten, ver. 23. 13. That no member taken
from a living creature be eaten, Deuteronomy. 12.23. 14. That the sinew which shrank
be not eaten, Genesis 32.32. 15. That flesh be not boiled in the Milk of the
Beast, whose it is. 16. That the flesh be not eaten with milk, Exodus 23.19. 17.
That the flesh of an Ox stoned for pushing or goring, be not eaten, Exodus
21.28. 18. That new bread be not eaten until after the offering of the Homer.
19. That parched corn. 20. That green ears be not eaten until an Offering be
first given, Lev. 23.14. 21. That the fruit of a young Tree be not eaten until
it has born three years, Lev. 19.23. 22. That a mixture of fruits from the
Vineyard be not eaten, Deuteronomy. 22.10. 23. The Wine of Drink Offerings offered to
Idols be not drank, Deuteronomy. 32.38. 24. That none eat as a Glutton, Lev. 19.26.
25. That none eat on the day of Expiation, Lev. 23.27.28. 26. That no leaven,
be eaten on the Passover, Exodus 12.15. 27. Nor any thing mixed with leaven, v.
20. 28. That no leaven be eaten on the even of the Passover, Deuteronomy. 16.3. 29.
That no leaven be found in our houses after that time, Exodus 12.19. 30. That no
leaven be found in any place under our power, Exodus 13.7. 31. That the Nizarite
drink no Wine, not any thing that comes of it. 32. That he eat no green Grapes.
33. Nor pressed Grapes. 34. Nor the kernels of the Grapes. 35. Nor the husks of
them, Numb. 6.2, 3, 4. 36. That he shave not his head: 37. That he defile not
himself for the dead. 38. That he enter not an house where any is dead, v. 5,
6, 7.

The Sixth Family compriseth eighteen Prohibitions, about Fields and Harvest.
whole Field be not mowed or reaped. 2. That the ears which fall in reaping be
not gathered up. 3. That the Grapes left by Vine Gatherers be not sought after.
4. That the unripe Grapes be not gathered, Lev. 19.9, 10. 5. That men return
not for a sheaf forgotten, Deuteronomy. 24.9. 6. That mixed seeds be not found in the
same Field, Lev. 19.19. 7. That Plants of several kinds be not set in the same
Vineyard, Deuteronomy. 22.10. 8. That there be no mixture of Beasts of several sorts,
Lev. 19.19. 9. That we plough not with an Ox and an Ass, Deuteronomy. 22.11. 10. That
the mouth of a Beast laboring in that which may be eaten, be not muzled, Deuteronomy.
25.4. 11. That in the seventh year, the Land be not ploughed. 12. Nor the Trees
dressed. 13. Nor things moved, that grow on their own ground. 14. Nor the
fruits gathered as in other years, Lev. 25.4. 15. That the Earth be no tilled
in the year of Jubilee. 16. Nor things cut down growing on their own Field. 17.
Nor the fruits of that year be gathered, Lev. 25.11. 18. That no field in the
Holy Land be sold for ever.

The Seventh Family, they call the House of Doctrines, under which head they
refer Levites be not forsaken, Deuteronomy. 12.19. 2. That the Fields of Suburbs of
the Levites be not changed. Lev. 25.34. 3. That no Debt be claimed after the
year of release, Deuteronomy. 15.2. 4. That we forget not to give to the poor, what he
wants, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. 5. That we omit not to lend to the poor, because the year
of release draws nigh, v. 9.10. 6. That a Jew Servant be not set at liberty
empty, ver. 13. 7. That Debt be not exacted of the poor, Exodus 22.25. 8. That
no money be lent unto an Israelite on usury, Lev. 25.37. 9. That what is lent
be not received again with usury, Deuteronomy. 13.19. 10. That we be not Arbitrators
between Lenders and Borrowers on usury, Exodus 22.25. 12. That a pledge be not
taken of a Borrower with rigor or violence, Deuteronomy. 24.10.11. 13. That the pledge
of a poor Man that wants it, be not detained, v. 12. 14. That a pledge be not
taken of a Widows garments, v. 17. 15. That things necessary to sustain humane
life, be not taken to pledge, v. 6. 16. That none steal, Exodus 20.13. 17. Nor
take the goods of any by Robbery, Lev. 19.11. 18. That we oppress not our
Neighbor. 19. Or take his goods by violence, v. 13. 20. That no Man deny his
Neighbors goods that are with him. 21. That none swear falsely concerning any
thing deposited, with him, Lev. 19.13. 22. That we straiten not the bounds of
our Neighbor, Deuteronomy. 19.14. 23. That none deceive his neighbor in buying and
selling, Lev. 25.14. 25. That we deceive him not in words, 7.17. 26. That no
stranger be deceived in words. 27. Nor in buying or selling, Exodus 22.21. 28.
That the Widow and Orphan be not oppressed, v. 22, 23, 24. 29. That a Servant
flying from his Master, unto the Holy Land, be not given up to him. 30. That he
be not defrauded in any thing, Deuteronomy. 23.15. 31. That an Hebrew Servant be not
used as a Bondman. 32. That he be not sold for a slave. 33. That service be
not exacted of him with bitterness. 34. That no Heathen be suffered to treat
him hardly, Lev. 25.39.42, 43, 46, 47. 35. That a Jewish Maidservant be not
fold to another. 36. That the three things required in the Law be not denied to
such a Servant, Exodus 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 37. That a fair Woman taken in War be
not sold. 38. That she be not used as a Bondwoman, Deuteronomy. 21.24. 39. That we
covet not, Exodus 20.17. 40. That nothing of other men's be desired, Deuteronomy. 5.21.
41. That the hire-ling eat not whilst he is in the field. 42. That he take no
more out of the field, then what he can eat, Deuteronomy. 23.24. 43. That what is
lost, be not hidden, Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3. 44. That we leave not a Beast under his
burden, v. 4. 45. That there be no deceit in weights and measures, Lev. 19.35.
46. That we keep no false weights or measures in our Houses, Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14.

Family relates unto Justice and Judgment in forty six Prohibitions. 1. That
Justice be not violated, Lev. 19.15. 2. That gifts be not received in
Judgment, Exodus 23.8. 3. That none be respected in Judgment, Lev. 19.15. 4.
That none fear a wicked man in Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 5. That we pity not a
poor man in Judgment, Exodus 23.3. 6. That we have no pity for a Manslayer, or
other criminal person, Deuteronomy. 19.13. 7. That the Judgment of the poor be not
perverted, Exodus 23.6. 8. Nor of the stranger, Widow, or Orphan, Deuteronomy. 24.17.
9. That one party be not heard in the absence of another, Exodus 23.1. 10. That
we decline not after many in the Judgment of Law. 11. Nor shall a Judge
condemn according to the opinion of another, but his own, Exodus 23.2. 12. That
none be chosen a Judge, that is not learned in the Law, though he be wise in
other things, Deuteronomy. 17.17. 13. That none bear false witness, Exodus 20.14. 14.
That no Offender be justified, Exodus 23.1. 15. That Kinsmen be not Witnesses,
Deuteronomy. 24.16. 16. That none be condemned upon one witness, Deuteronomy. 19.15. 17. That
none be condemned to death on conjecture, opinions, or thoughts, but upon clear
witnesses, Exodus 23.7. 18. That we kill not, Exodus 20.13. 19. That a guilty
person be not put to death, before he appear in Judgment, Numb. 35.12. 20.
That no reward be taken for the life of a Murderer. 21. Nor for him that
commits Manslaughter by error, Numb. 35.31. 22. That none be Judge and Witness
in a Criminal Cause, v 30. 23. That none pity the Woman mentioned, Deuteronomy. 25.12.
24. She that is forced, is not to be punished, Deuteronomy. 22.26. 25. That none
appear against, the blood of his Neighbor, Lev. 19.16. 26. That no cause of
offense, or falling be left in an house, Deuteronomy. 22.8. 27. That none lay a
stumbling block before an Israelite, Lev. 19.14. 28. That the beating with
stripes exceed not the number of forty, Deuteronomy. 25.3. 29. That none calumniate or
accuse falsely, Lev. 19.16. 30. That we hate not our Neighbor in our heart v.
17. 31. That none put an Israelite to reproach, v. 17. 32. That none exercise
revenge on his Neighbor. 33. That none bear ill will in their mind, v. 18. 34.
That the Mother and its young be not taken together, Deuteronomy. 22.6. 35. That a
Scall be not shaven, Lev. 13.33. 36. That the signs of Leprosy be not removed,
Deuteronomy. 27.8. 37. That the place where the Heifer is beheaded, be not tilled,
Deuteronomy. 21.4. 38. That a Sorcerer be not suffered to live, Exodus 22.18. 39. That
a new Married Man, be not bound to go forth to War* Deuteronomy. 24.5. 40. That none
be rebellious against the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, and their Doctrine, Deuteronomy.
17.11. 41. That nothing be added to the precepts of the Law. 42. That nothing
be taken from them, Deuteronomy. 4.2. 43. That we speak not evil of the Judge, nor of
the Prince of the People, Exodus 22.28. 44. That none speak evil of any in
Israel, Lev. 19.14. 45. That none curse Father or Mother. 46. That none strike
Father or Mother, Exodus 21.17.

Family of Negative Precepts, concerns Feasts, and contains Ten Prohibitions.
1. That no work be done on the Sabbath, Exodus 20.10. 2. That none go out, or
beyond the bounds of the City on the Sabbath, Exodus 16.29. 3. That no
punishment be inflicted on the Sabbath, Exodus 35.3. 4. That no work be done on
the first day of the Passover. 5. That no work be done on the seventh day of
the Passover, Lev. 23.7, 8. 6. That no work be done in the Feast of Weeks, v.
21. 7. That no work be done on the first day of the seventh month, v. 24, 25.
8. That no Work be done on the day of Expiation, v. 30. 9. That no work be done
on the first day of Tabernacles. 10. That no work be done on the eighth day of
release, v. 34, 35, 37.

The Tenth Family of Negative Precepts is concerning Chastity and affinity; and
purity, in twenty four Precepts. 1. That none uncover the nakedness of his
Mother. 2. Of his Fathers Wife. 3. Of his Sister. 4. Of the Daughter of his
Fathers Wife, Lev. 18.7, 8, 9, 11. 5. Of the Daughter of his Son. 6. Of the
Daughter of his Daughter. 7. Of his own Daughter v. 10. 8. Of a Woman and her
Daughter. 9. Of a Woman and the Daughter of her Son. 10. Of a Woman and the
Daughter of her Daughter, v. 17. 11. Of a Fathers Sister. 12. A Mothers Sister,
v. 12.13. 13. Of an Uncles Wife, v. 19. 14. Of a Daughter in Law, v. 15. 15. Of
a Brothers Wife, v. 16. 16. Of a Wifes Sister, she being living, ver. 14. 17.
Of a married Woman, Exodus 20.13. 18. Of a separated Woman, Lev. 18.19. 19. That
none commit the sin of Sodomy, v. 22. 20. That none uncover the nakedness of
her Father. 21. Nor of the Brother of her Father v. 7.14. 22. That filthiness
be not committed with any Beast by a Man. 23. Nor by a Woman, Lev. 18.23. 24.
That none draw nigh to a prohibited Woman, Lev. 18.6

The Eleventh Family concerns Marriages in eight Prohibitions. 1. That a
Bastard Israelitess to Wife, Deuteronomy. 23.2. 2. That no Eunuch take a Daughter of
Israel, v. 1. 3. That no male be made an Eunuch, Lev. 22.24. 4. That there be
no Whore in Israel, Deuteronomy. 23.17. 5. That he who has divorced his Wife, may not
take her again, after she has been married to another, Deuteronomy. 24 4. 6. The
Brothers Daughter marry not with a stranger, Deuteronomy. 25.5. 7. That he divorce not
his Wife who has defamed her in her youth, Deuteronomy. 22.19. 8. He that has forced
a Maid, shall not divorce her, Deuteronomy. 22.29.

The Twelfth Family concerns the Kingdom and is made up of four Precepts. King
be chosen or a strange Nation, Deuteronomy. 17.15. 2. That the King get not himself
many Horses, v. 16. 3. That he multiply not Wives. 4. That he heap not up to
himself Treasures of Silver and Gold, v. 17.

This is the Account that the Jews give of the precepts of the Law, and both
the Oral Law; which may easily be improved unto a conviction of the vanity of
it. For whereas it* is evident, that many of these precepts are coincident,
many pretended so to be, are no precepts at all, and sundry of them are not
founded on the places from whence they profess to gather them; yea, that in
many of them the mind of the Holy Ghost is plainly perverted, and a contrary
sense annexed unto his words, so it is most unquestionable, that there are
sundry Commands and Institutions, especially in, about and concerning
Sacrifices, that are no way taken notice of by them in this collection, as I
could easily make good by instances sufficient, it is evident that that Rule
cannot be of God, whereof this collection is pretended to be a part. But as I
have said before, because there is a Representation in them of no small
multitude of commands, especially in things concerning their carnal Worship, it
was necessary that they should be here represented, though they have been
before transcribed from them by others. My principal design herein, is to give
light into some passages of our Apostle, as also to other expressions
concerning this Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, in other places of
the Scripture.

The Censure our Apostle gives of this whole System of Divine Worship, Chap. 9.
The first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly
Sanctuary, which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and
carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation, is very
remarkable. Let any one cast an Eye upon this multitude of commands about meats
and drinks, washings and outward carnal observances, which are here collected,
and he will quickly see how directly and pertinently the description given by
our Apostle, is suited to their services. And that not only as to the manner
and multitude of them, but also as to their natures. They are carnal things,
and could by no means effect the great, spiritual, glorious and eternal ends,
which God had designed, proposed and promised in that Covenant unto whose
administration they were annexed, until the time of Reformation should come.
Hence elsewhere, as Coloss. 10.20. He calls them the rudiments of the world,
Ordinances about touching, tasting, and handling, about meats, and drinks,
things outwardly clean, or unclean, all which perish with their using.

multiplicity of these precepts, and the scrupulous observances required about
them, and their circumstances, will give light into that of another Apostle,
Acts 15.20. Calling the Law, a yoke which neither their Fathers, nor themselves
were ever able to bear. For although the weight of this yoke did principally
consist in the matter of it, and the performance of duties required in it, yet
it was greatly increased and aggravated by that multitude of commands wherein
it consisted. Whence our Apostle calls it, the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. Consisting of an endless number of commands,
concerning which their minds could never attain any comfortable satisfaction
whether they had answered their duty aright in them or no.

Exercitatio XXI.
The Sanction of the Law in Promises and Threatenings. The Law considered
several ways. As the Rule of the old Covenant. As having a new end put to it.
As it was the Instrument of the Jewish Polity. The sanction of it in those
senses. Punishments threatened to be inflicted by God himself. By others.
Promises of three sorts. To be fulfilled by God himself. By others. Parents how
they prolong the lives of their children. Punishment (...) what. Providential
punishments. Partial. Total. Persons entrusted with power of punishment. The
original distribution of the people. Taskmasters and Officers in Egypt, who.
The authority of Moses. The distribution of the people in the Wilderness.
Institution of the Sanhedrin. Judges. Kings. Penalties Ecclesiastical. The
three degrees of it explained and examined. Causes of Niddui. Instance, Joh.
9.20. Of Cherem. And Shammatha. Forms of an Excommunication. The Sentence, Ezra
10.7, 8. explained. Civil Penalties and Capital. The several sorts of them.

BY the Sanction of the Law we intend the Promises and Penalties wherewith, by
Apostle has respect unto in sundry places of this Epistle, the principal
whereof are reported in the foregoing Dissertation. To represent this
distinctly, we may observe, that the Law falls under a threefold
consideration: First, As it was a Repetition and Expression of the Law of
Nature, and the Covenant of Works established thereon. Secondly, as it had a
new End and design put upon the Administration of it, to direct the Church unto
the use and benefit of the Promise given of old to Adam, and renewed unto
Abraham four hundred and thirty years before. Thirdly, As it was the Instrument
of the Rule and Government of the Church and People of Israel, with respect
unto the Covenant made with them in and about the Land of Canaan. And in this
threefold respect it had a threefold Sanction.

First, As considered absolutely, it was attended with promises of life, and
threatenings death, both Eternal. The original promise of life upon obedience,
and the curse on its transgression were inseparably annexed unto it; yea, were
essential parts of it, as it contained the Covenant between God and Man. See
Genesis 2. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Romans 6.23. Romans 4.4. Romans 10.5. Romans 11.6. Lev. 18.5.
Ezekiel. 29.11. Gal. 3.12, 13.

Now in the Administration of the Law, the Church was thus far brought under
Life and Death eternal, so far interested in the one, and made obnoxious unto
the other, as that if they used not the Law according to the new dispensation
of it, wherein it was put into a subserviency unto the Promise; as Gal. 3.19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. that they were left to stand and fall according to the
absolute tenure of that first Covenant and its ratification, which by reason of
the entrance of sin proved fatally ruinous unto all that cleaved unto it, Romans
8.3. chap. 9.31.

Secondly, The Law had in this Administration of it, a new End and design put
three things. First, that it was made directive and instructive unto another
End, and not merely preceptive as at the beginning. The Authoritative
Institutions that in it were super-added to the Moral commands of the Covenant
of works, did all of them direct and teach the Church to look for Righteousness
and Salvation, the original ends of the first Covenant, in Another, and by
another way; as the Apostle at large disputes in this Epistle, and declares
positively, Gal. 3. throughout. Secondly, In that it had a dispensation added
unto the commands of obedience and interpretation, (...), by condiscension,
given by God himself, as to the perfection of its observance, and manner of its
performance, in reference unto this new end. It required not absolutely perfect
obedience, but perfectness of heart, integrity and uprightness in them that
obeyed. And unto the Law thus considered, the former promises and threatenings
are annexed. For the neglect of this use of it left the Transgressors obnoxious
to the Curse denounced in general against them that continued not in the whole
Law to do it. Thirdly, It had merciful relief provided against sin, for the
supportment and consolation of sinners, as we shall see in the consideration of
their Sacrifices.

Instrument of the Rule and Government of the People and Church of Israel,
according to the tenure of the Covenant made with them about the Land of
Canaan, and their living unto God therein. And in this respect it had four
things in it. First, That it represented unto the people the Holiness of God,
the Effects whereof are implanted in the Law according to its Original
constitution; whereupon in it they are so often called to be holy, because the
Lord and Lawgiver was holy. Secondly, A Representation of his Grace and
Condiscention, pardoning of sin in the Covenant of mercy, in as much as he
allowed a Compensation by Sacrifices for so many transgressions, which in their
own nature were forfeitures of their interest in that Land. Thirdly, That it
was a righteous Rule of obedience unto that People, as unto their especial
Covenant condition. Fourthly, That it fully represented the severity of God
against wilful transgressors of his Covenant, as now renewed in order to the
Promise, seeing every such transgression was attended in their Administration
of Rule, with death without mercy.

third consideration, though not absolutely as the Instrument of the Government
of the People in Canaan, but as it had a Representation in it of that
Administration of grace and mercy which was contained in the Promises whereof
we treat. Concerning this, or the Law in this sense, we may consider; first,
the Promises, then the Threatenings of it. And the Promises are of two sorts.
First, such as God took immediately upon himself the accomplishment of;
Secondly, such as others, by his institution and appointment were to
communicate the benefit of unto the obedient.

three sorts. First, of Life Temporal, as it was an Instrument of their
Government, and eternal with God, as the Promise or Covenant of grace was
exemplified or represented therein. Levit. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.11. Romans 10.5. Gal.
3.12. Secondly, Of a Spiritual Redeemer, Savior, Deliverer, really to effect
what the Ordinances of Institution did represent, so to save them eternally, to
be exhibited in the fullness of time, as we have at large already proved.
Thirdly, There are given out with the Law various Promises of intervenient and
mixed mercies to be enjoyed in earthly things in this world, that had their
immediate respect unto the mercy of the Land of Canaan, representing spiritual
Grace, annexed to the then present Administration of the Covenant of Grace.
Some of these concerned the collation of good things; others, the preventing
of, or delivery of them from Evils, both expressed in great variety.

Promises, whose accomplishment depended on the Institution of God by others,
that is the principal and comprehensive of the rest, which is expressed, Exodus
20.12. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolon^ed. This,
says our Apostle, is the first commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. Not that
the foregoing Precepts have no Promises annexed to the observation of them,
nor merely because this has a Promise literally expressed, but that it had the
special kind of Promise, wherein Parents, by Gods institution, have power to
prolong the lives of obedient Children, (...) They shall prolong thy days; that
is, negatively, in not cutting of their life for disobedience, which was then
in the power of natural Parents; and possibly by praying for their prosperity,
blessing them in the name of God, and directing them into the ways and means of
universal obedience, whereby their days might be multiplied: and on sundry
other accounts.

penalties annexed unto the transgression of the Law, which our Apostle
principally has respect unto in his discourses on this subject, they will
require somewhat a larger consideration; and they were of two sorts: First,
such as God took upon himself to inflict; and secondly, such as he appointed
others to see unto the execution of.

The first are of three sorts. First, That Eternal punishment which he
threatened unto them that transgressed, and disannulled his Covenant, as renewed
and ordered in the Administration of the Law, and the Ordinances thereof. This
we have manifested elsewhere to be the importance of the Curse, which every
such transgressor was obnoxious unto. Secondly, The punishment which the Jews
express by (...) and (...) Excision, or cutting off. It is first mentioned,
Genesis 17.14. in the matter of Circumcision. Sometimes emphatically, Numb. 15.31.
(...) Cutting off that soul shall be cut off from among his people; and
frequently afterward, Exodus 12.15, 19. chap. 31.14. Levit. 7.10. chap. 20.3,
5, 6. It is rendered by the Apostle, (...), Act. 3.23. shall be destroyed from
among the people, that is, by the hand of God, as is declared, 1 Cor. 10.10.
Heb. 11.28. Twenty five times is this punishment threatened in the Law, still
unto such sins as disannul the Covenant, which our Apostle expressly respects,
chap. 2.2. as shall be declared on that place.

Now this punishment the Jews generally agree to be (...) by the hand of
Heaven, or that which God himself would immediately inflict; and it is
evidently declared so to be in the interpretation given of it, Levit. 17.10.
chap. 20.4, 5, 6.

But what this punishment was, or wherein it did consist, neither Jews nor
Christians are absolutely agreed; the latter on this subject doing little more
then representing the opinions and judgments of the other, which course also we
may follow. Some of them say, that Untimely Death is meant by it, so Abarbinel
on Numb. 5.22. (...) It is the cutting off the days of the sinner, and his
death before the natural term of it inflicted by the hand of Heaven. This
untimely death they reckon to be between the years of twenty and sixty; whence
Schindler, (...) exterminium; cum quis praematura morte inter vigessimum and
sexagessimum annum a Deo e medio tollitur; ita tamen ut relinquat liberos:
Cutting off, is, when any one is taken away by untimely death, between the
twintieth and sixtieth year of his age; yet so, as that he leave children. That
clause or condition, so that yet he leave posterity or children behind him, is,
as far as I can find, no where added by them, nor does any thing in the
Scripture give countenance thereunto. Yea, many of the Hebrews think, that this
punishment consisted in this, that such a one should leave no children behind
him, but that either he should be wholly (...), without children, or if he had
any before his sin, they should all die before him, and so his name and
posterity be cut off, which, say they, is to be cut off from among his people.
So Aben-Ezra on Genesis 17.14. And this opinion is not without its countenance
from the Scripture it self. And therefore Jarchi on the same place, with much
probability, puts both these together, He shall be cut off by untimely death,
and leave no children behind him to continue his name or remembrance amongst
the people, (...) as they speak. He that has no children is accounted as dead;
but he that has, is as if he lived, and his name is not cut off.

They have a third opinion also, that by this cutting off, the death of the
soul is intended, ingemminated, Cutting off he shall be cut off, as Numb.
15.31. So Maimonides, (...) that soul shall perish, it shall not live or
subsist any more for ever. Few embrace this opinion, as being contrary to their
general persuasion of Eternal punishments for the transgressions of the
Covenant. Wherefore it is disputed against by Abarbinel on Numb. 15. who
contends, that the death of the soul in everlasting separation from God, is
intended in this threatening. And both the principal parts of these various
opinions, namely, that of immature corporal death, and eternal punishment, ate
joined together by Jonathan, in his Targum on Numb. 15.31. He shall be cut off
in this world, and that man shall be cut off in the world to come, and bear his
sin in the day of Judgment. For my part, as I have showed, that eternal death
was contained in the curse of the Law, so this especial (...) or extermination
from among the people, seems to me to intend some especial judgment of God, in
taking away the life of such a person, answering unto that putting to death by
the Judges and Magistrates in such cases, when they were known, which God did
appoint. And herein also was an eminent Representation of the everlasting
cutting off of obstinate and final transgressors of the Covenant.

Thirdly, In Judgments to be brought providentially upon the whole Nation by
Pestilence, Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.

Fourthly, Total Rejection of the whole body of the people, in case of unbelief
and disobedience, upon the full and perfect Revelation that was to be made of
the will and mind of God upon the coming of the Messiah, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Acts 3.32
Hos. 2.23. Isa. 10.22, 23. Romans 9.

These are the Heads of the punishments, which God took upon himself to inflict
in an extraordinary manner, on the transgressors of the Law, that is, those who
proceeded to do it so with an high hand, as that his Covenant was made void
thereby as to all the ends of its re-establishment in the administration of the
LaW.

The second sort of penalties annexed unto the transgression of the Law, were
such as Men, by God's institution and appointment, were enabled to inflict;
concerning who, and what the Persons were, who were enabled and authorized to
inflict these penalties. Secondly, of what sort these penalties were, and for
what transgressions necessarily inflicted.

original division of the people after the days of Jacob was into (...),
Tribes, whereof at first there were Twelve, which by dividing the Tribe of
Joseph into two, were increased into Thirteen, and upon the matter reduced
again unto Twelve by the special Exemption of the Tribe of Levi from
Inheritances, and their separation to the Worship of God. Secondly, (...),
Families, or (...), Houses of Fathers, which on many probabilities may be
supposed to have been seventy, the number of them who went down with Jacob into
Egypt, each of which constituted a particular Family. And (...) particular
Households, all which are enumerated, Josh. 7.14. This distribution continued
amongst the people whilst* they were in Egypt; and this only, they being not
capable to cast themselves into any Civil Order there, by reason of their
Oppressions, and therefore contented themselves with that which was natural.
Accordingly there were three sorts of persons that were in some kind of Dignity
and pre-eminence among the people, although it may be after their Oppression
began, they were hindered from exercising the Authority that belonged unto
them. First, As to the Tribes there were some who were (...), The Princes, or
Heads of the Tribes, Numb. 1.16. Twelve in number according to the number of
the Tribes, Secondly, For the Families or principal Houses of the Fathers there
were (...). the Elders who presided over them. These Moses and Aaron gathered
together at their first coming into Egypt, Exodus 4.29. And these, as I said
before, being the Rulers of the first Families, were probably in number
seventy; from whence afterward was the constitution of seventy Elders for
Rule, Exodus 24.1. Thirdly, (...) or Priests, it may be in every private
Household, the first born, which are mentioned, and so called before the
constitution of the Aaronical Priesthood, Exodus 19.21. Besides these, there
were Officers who attended the service of the whole People, as to the Execution
of Justice and order, called (...), Shoterim, which we have rendered by the
general name of Officers, Exodus 5.14. And they are afterward distinguished
from the Elders and Judges, Deuteronomy. 16.18. For there are two sorts of persons
mentioned, that were over the people in respect of their works, even in Egypt,
(...) and (...), Exactors or Taskmasters, and Officers, Exodus 5.6. the former,
or the Nogheshim the Jews say were Egyptians, and the latter, or the Shoterim,
Israelites, which occasions that distinct expression of them: Pharaoh commanded
the same day the Taskmasters of the People, and their Officers: and v. 13, 14.
And the Taskmasters hasted them, saying, fulfill your works, and the Officers
of the Children of Israel were beaten. And they tell us in Midrash Rabba, on
Exodus Sect. 1. that one of these Nogheshim was over ten of the Israelitish
Officers; and one of them over ten Israelites; whence was the following
division of the people into tens and hundreds, and unto this in the same place,
they add a putid Story of an Exactor killed by Moses.

Egypt nothing is recorded. Probably, at the beginning of their works and
Afflictions they were made use of only to answer for the pretended neglects or
miscarriages of the multitude of their Brethren, as Exodus 5.14.

After their coming up out of Egypt, during their abode in the Wilderness,
Moses presided over them with all manner of Authority, as their Lawgiver, King
and Judge. He judged and determined all their causes, as is frequently
affirmed, and that alone, until by the advice of Jethro, he took in others
unto his assistance, Exodus 15.16.25. And there is mention of four particular
cases that he determined. One Religious, one Civil, and two Capital relating to
Religion; in these he made especial enquiry of God. The first was about the
Unclean that would keep the Passover, Numb. 9.7, 8. The second about the
daughters of Zelophead, who claimed their Inheritance, Numb. 27. 4, 5. The
third about the Blasphemer, Lev. 24. The last about him that profaned the the
Sabbath, Numb. 15.32, 33, 34. In which also, as the Jews say, he set a pattern
to future Judges, as determining the lesser causes speedily, but those wherein
blood was concerned, not without stay and much deliberation.

Officers or Rulers chosen from amongst themselves, Exodus 18.25. Deuteronomy. 1.13,
14. And Moses is said to choose them, because being chosen by the People, he
approved of them, as the places foregoing compared, do manifest. The principal
distributions of these, planting themselves together in the Cities or Towns of
Canaan, however afterward they multiplied or were decreased, continued to be
called by the names of the thousands of Israel, or Judah. So Bethlehem Ephratah
is said to be little among the thousands of Judah, Micah 5.2. One of those
thousands that had their especial Head and Ruler over them, and their distinct
Government, as to their own concernments among themselves, sat down at
Bethlehem, which Colony afterward variously flourished or drew toward a decay.

After these things, by Gods appointment was constituted the great Court of the
Sanhedrin, which because we have treated of apart elsewhere, with those lesser
Courts of Justice which were instituted in imitation of it, sufficiently to our
purpose, I shall here wholly omit. Neither shall I need to mention their Judges
raised up extraordinarily of God, for the general Rule of the whole People. Nor
of their Kings continued by Succession in the Family of David, because their
story in general is sufficiently known, and the especial consideration of their
power, with the manner of the Administration of it, would draw us too far out
of the way of our present design. And these are they unto whom the Lord in
their several Generations committed the execution of those punishments that he
had allotted unto the transgression of the Law.

The Penalties themselves with the especial causes of them are lastly to be
considered. Ecclesiastical: Secondly, Civil. Ecclesiastical penalties were the
Authoritative Exclusion of an offending Person from the society of the Church,
and the Members of it. That such an Exclusion is prescribed in the Law in
sundry cases, has in several instances been by others evidenced. Many Disputes
also have been about it, both concerning the causes of it, the Authority
whereby it was done, with its ends and effects. But these things are not of our
present consideration, who intend only to represent things as they are in Facto
instituted or observed.

Of this Exclusion, the Jews commonly make three Degrees, and that not without
Niddui. The second (...), Cherem: and the Third (...) Shammatha. That which
they call Niddui, from (...), to expel, to separate, to cast off, is with the
most of them the first and lowest degree of this separation and exclusion. And
Persons who are to pronounce this sentence and put it into execution, are
according to the Jews, any Court from the highest Sanhedrin of seventy one at
Jerusalem, to the meanest in their Synagogues. Yea any Ruler of a Synagogue, or
Wise Man in Authority, might accorcording unto them, do the same thing. And
many ridiculous stories they have about the mutual Excommunication and
Absolution of one another by consent. The time of its continuance, or the first
space of time given to the Persons offending to repent, was thirty days, to
which on his neglect he was left unto sixty, and then to ninety, when upon his
obstinacy he was obnoxious to the Cherem. As the Causes of it they reckon up in
Jerusalem Talmud, moed Katon, twenty four crimes, on the guilt whereof any one
may be thus dealt withal. 1. He that despises a Wise Man, that is, a Rabbi,
Master, or Doctor, even after his death. 2. He that contemns a Minister or
Messenger of the House of Judgment. 3. He that calls his Neighbor, Servant
or Slave. 4. He to whom the Judge sends and appoints him a time of Appearance,
and he does not appear. 5. He that despises the words of the Scribes, much
more, the words of the Law of Moses. 6. He that does not obey, and stand unto
the sentence denounced against him. 7. He that has any hurtful thing in his
power, as a biting Dog, and does not remove it. 8. He that sells his Field to a
Christian, or any Heathen. 9. He that gives witness against an Israelite in the
Courts of the Christians. 10. A Priest that kills Cattle, and does not
separate the gifts that belong to another Priest. 11. He that profaneth the
second Holy Day in Captivity. 12. He that does any work in the afternoon before
the Passover. 13. He that takes the name of God in vain on any account. 14.
He that induces others to profane the name of God. 15. He that draws others
to eat of holy things without the Temple. 16. He that computes the times, or
writes Kalendars, or Almanacks, fixing the Months out of the Land of Israel.
17. He that causes a blind man to fall. 18. He that hinders others from
doing the work of the Law. 19. He that makes profane the killing of any
Creature by his own fault. 20. He that kills and does not show his Knife
before hand before a Wise Man, whereby it may appear to be fit. 21. He that is
unwilling to, or makes himself difficult in learning. 22. He that puts away
his Wife, and afterward has commerce with her in buying and selling, which
may induce them to cohabitation. 23. A Wise Man of evil Fame and Report. 24. He
that excommunicateth him who deserves not that sentence.

A^ instance of this exclusion, we have expressly in the Gospel, John 9.20. The
Jews had a^ready agreed, that if any Man should confess He was Christ, (...),
he should be put out of the Synagogue. He should be (...), Menuddeh; put under
the sentence of Niddui. And according to this sentence they proceeded with the
blind man, whose eyes were opened by the Lord Christ, v. 34. (...), that is,
says the Margin of our Translation, they excommunicated him. But that is not
the signification of the word; it denotes only their causing him to be thrust
out of the Synagogue by their Officers, although there is no doubt, but that at
the same time they pronounced sentence against him.

dyed under this sentence, they laid a stone upon his Beir, intimating that he
deserved Lapidation if he had lived. Howbeit they excluded him not from
teaching or learning of the Law, so that he kept four paces distant from other
persons. He came in, and went out of the Temple at the contrary door to others,
that he might be known. All which with sundry other things were of their
Traditional Additionals, to the just prescriptions of the Word.

Cherem was to be proceeded unto.

This is an high degree of Authoritative Separation from the Congregation, and
is made use of either when the former is despised, or as was said upon greater
provocations. This sentence must not be denounced, but in a Congregation of ten
at least, and with such a one that is (...), thus Anathematized, it is not
lawful so much as to eat.

The third and last sentence in this kind which contains a total and
irrecoverable Exemption of a person from the Communion of the Congregation, is
called (...), Shammatha. Some of the Talmudical Rabbis in moed katon give the
Etymology of this word, as if it should be as much as (...), Sham metha, death
is the^e. But it is generally agreed, that it is from (...), to exclude,
expel, cast out, that is, from the Covenant of Promise, and Commonwealth of
Israel. And this the most take to be total and final, the Persons that fall
under it being left to the judgment of God without hope of Reconciliation unto
the Church. Hence it is called in the Targum, Numb. 21.25. Deuteronomy. 7.27. The
Curse, the Execration of God; and by the Talmudists, (...), the anathema of the
God of Israel. But yet it cannot be denied, but that in many places, they speak
of it as the general name for any Excommunication, and so as not at all to
difference it from Niddui, which is taken to be the least degree thereof. The
most learned Buxtorf has given us out of an ancient Hebrew Manuscript, a form
of this Excommunication which is truly ferale carmen, as sad and dismal an
imprecation, as according to their principles could well be invented. It is
indeed by him applied unto the Cherem, but as L'Empereur has observed in his
Annotations on Bertram, it was doubtless only made use of in the last and
greatest exclusion, which is supposed to be the Shammatha. The form of the
Curse is as ensues.

By the Sent^nce of the Lord of Lords, let such a one, the Son of such a one,
((...)) be in anathema, or be accursed in each house of Judgment, that above,
and that below, (that is, by God and his Church) in the curse of the holy Ones
on high; In the curse of the Seraphims and Ophannim, (the Wheels or Cherubims
in Ezekiel's Vision) In the curse of the whole Church from the greatest to the
least; Let there be upon him strokes great and abiding; Diseases great and
horrible: Let his house be an habitation of Dragons, ((...)) or Serpents. Let
his Star, or Planet, be dark in the Clouds; Let him be exposed to Indignation,
anger and wrath; And let his dead Body be cast to Wild Beasts and Serpents; Let
his Enemies and Adversaries rejoice over him: And let his Silver and Gold be
given to others: And let all his Children be cast at the doors of his
Adversaries: And let Posterity be astonished at his day: Let him be accursed
out of the mouth of Addiriron, and Athariel; from the mouth of Sandalphon, and
Hadraniel; from the mouth of Ansisiel, and Pathiel; from the mouth of
Seraphiel, and Sagansael; from the mouth of Michael, and Gabriel; from the
mouth of Raphiel, and Mesharethiel; Let him be accursed from the mouth of
Zazabib, and from the mouth of Havabib, who is the great God; and from the
mouth of the seventy names of the great King; and from the mouth of Tzorlak the
great Chancellor (these names partly significant, and partly insignificant,
coined to strike a terror into the minds of weak and distempered Persons, they
invent and apply at their pleasure to Angels, good and bad; not unlike the
monstrous names which the Gnostics gave to the Aeons who borrowed many things
from the Tradition of the Jews, and returned them again unto them with an
improvement, but they proceed) Let him be swallowed up as Corah and his
Company; and let his soul depart with fear and terror: Let the rebuke of the
Lord slay him, and let him be strangled like Achitophel: Let his leprosy be as
the leprosy of Gehazi; neither let there be any restoration of his ruin; Let
not his burial be in the burials of Israel; Let his Wife be given to strangers;
and let others humble her in his death. Under this curse, let such a one the
Son of such a one be, with his whole Inheritance. But unto me, and all Israel,
let God extend his peace and blessing. Amen.

Now, Because it is certain, that this is a form of the greatest and last
Anathema, of a Muchram, and under the Cherem, it is almost evident, that these
three degrees are not distinguished as is commonly supposed, namely, that the
Shammatha should exceed the Cherem, and that only the Niddui, the highest and
extremest sentence in this solemn form, being so often called the Cherem.
Shammatha therefore is only a general Name for the Expulsion of a Person,
sometimes with the Niddui, and sometimes with the Cherem, which yet I do not
suppose was always thus horrid and fierce.

To add unto the terror of this Sentence, they used to accompany the
pronouncing sound of Trumpets and Horns, as the Targum says Barak did in his
cursing of Mezoz, Judges 5.23. He shammatized him with four hundred Trumpets.
And herein have they been imitated by the Church of Rome, in their shaking of
Candles, and ringing of Bells on the like occasion.

I have not reported these things, as though for matter and manner, they wholly
belonged unto the penalties of the Law that were of Divine Institution. Many
things in the manner of their performance, as they are now expressed by the
Rabbis, were certainly of their own arbitrary invention. When their use
amongst them first began, is unknown; though it be not improbable, that sundry
things of this nature were practiced by them before the destruction of the
Second Temple, when they had mixed many of their own Superstitions with the
Worship of God, as is evident from the Gospel.

But this also is certain, that God in sundry cases had appointed that some
Transgressors separated from the Congregation, devoted to destruction, and be
cut off. An instance of the Execution of which Institution we have, Ezra 10.7,
8. They made a Proclamation throughou^ Judah and Jerusalem unto all the
Children of the Captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto
Jerusalem, and that whosoever would not come within three days, according to
the counsel of the Princes, and the Elders, all his substance should be
divided, and himself separated from the Congregation of those that had been
carried away. A double penalty is here threatened upon disobedient Persons; the
one concerned the Person of such a one, (...), He shall be separated from the
Congregation of the Captivity; that is, of Israel then returned out of
Captivity: and this was the Niddui or expulsion from Sacred communion which we
before described: He should be esteemed as an Heathen.

Secondly, As to his substance (...), All his substance his goods and
possessions should be anathematized, devoted, put under Cherem, taken away for
Sacred Uses. Hence some have made this distinction between the three degrees of
excommunication.

First, The Niddui concerned only the Person, and his separation from Sacred
Offices: Cherem had also Confiscation of Goods attending of it; the substance
of the Transgressor being devoted; and Shammatha was accompanied with the death
of the devoted Person; Which carnal penalties under the Gospel being removed,
that great and sore revenge which disobedient sinners are to expect from the
hand of God at the last day, is substituted by our Apostle in the room of them
all, Heb. 10.28, 29.

Civil Punishments next succeed, and they were of three sorts. First,
Corporeal: Outward Estate and Condition of the Offender: Thirdly, Capital.

First, Corporeal punishment was that only of Stripes, not exceeding the number
of forty, Deuteronomy. 25.23. An account of the Jews Opinions, and the manner of their
execution of this punishment, is given us by many; in particular, exactly by
Buxtorf in his Preface unto his Bibliotheca Rabbinica, whither I refer the
Reader. They call it (...), or beating by strokes, and sometimes (...), the
beating of forty, or with forty. And he that was liable unto it, was (...),
filius plagarum. Many Crimes doubtless rendered Persons obnoxious to this
penalty; but they are not directly expressed in the Law. The Jews now reckon up
seven instances of unlawful copulation with Women, free and unmarried, for
adultery, as is known, was capital by the express sentence of the Law. As 1.
With a Sister. 2. A Fathers Sister. 3. A Mothers Sister. 4. A Wifes Sister. 5.
A Brothers Widow. 6. An Uncles Widow. 7. A Woman separated. Many other Crimes
also they reckon up with reference unto Ceremonial Institutions, as eating of
fat, and blood, and leaven on the Passover, making an Oil like the holy Oil;
even all such trangressions as are threatened with punishment, but have no
express kind of punishment annexed unto them.

State and Condition, were of two sorts. First; Pecuniary in a quadruple
restitution in case of Theft. Secondly, Personal in banishment, or confinement
unto the City of Refuge for him that had slain a Man at unawares, Numb. 35.25.

Capital punishments they inflicted four ways. First, By Strangulation which
was inflicted on six sorts of Transgressors. 1. Adulterers. 2. Strikers of
Parents. 3. Men-stealers. 4. Old Men exemplarily rebellious against the Law. 5.
False Prophets. 6. Prognosticators by the Names of Idols. Secondly, Burning,
Lev. 20.14. And this the Jews say, was inflicted by pouring molten Lead into
their mouths; and the Crimes that this punishment were allotted to, were 1. The
Adultery of the Priests Daughter. 2. Incest; 1. With a Daughter. 2. With a Sons
Daughter. 3. A Wises Daughter. 4. A Wises Daughters Daughter. 5. A Wises Sons
Daughter. 6. A Wifes Mother. 7. The Mother of her Father. 8. The Mother of her
Father in Law. Thirdly, Death was inflicted by the Sword, Deuteronomy. 20.21. 1. On
the voluntary Manslayer. 2. On the Inhabitants of any City that fall to
Idolatry. Fourthly, By Stoning: Which was executed for Incest: 1. With a
Mother: 2. A Mother in Law: 3. A Daughter in Law: 4. Adultery with a betroathed
Virgin: 5. Unnatural uncleaness with Men: 6. With Beasts by Men: 7. With Beasts
by Women: 8. Blasphemy: 9. Idolatry: 10. Offering to Moloch: 11. A Familiar
Spirit of Ob: 12. Of Jiedeoni: 13. On Impostors: 14. On Seducers: 15. On
Enchanters or Magicians: 16. Prophaners of the Sabbath: 17. Cursers of Father
or Mother: 18. The dissolute and stubborn Son: Concerning all which it is
expressly said, that they shall be stoned.

Cautionary Laws. First, That they that were put to death for the increase of
their ignominy, and terror of others, should be hanged on a Tree, Deuteronomy. 21.21.
Secondly, That they should be buried the same day, v. 23: And this is a brief
abstract of the Penalties of the Law, as it was the Rule of the Polity of the
People in the Land of Canaan:

Exercitatio XXII.
The Building of the Tabernacle. Moses Writing and Reading the Book of the
Covenant. Considerations of the particulars of the Fabric and Vtensils of the
Tabernacle. Omitted. One Instance insisted on. The Ark. The same in the
Tabernacle and Temple. The Glory of God in what sense. The principal Sacred
Vtensil. The matter whereof it was made. The Form of it. The End and Use of it.
The Residence and Motions of it. The Mercy-Seat that was upon it. The matter
thereof. Of the Cherubims. Their Form and Fashion. The Visions of Isaiah and
Ezekiel compared. Difference in them, and Reason thereof.

THe People having received the Law in the Wilderness, and therein a Foundation
unt^^ the Times of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. they had also by Gods direction a
place and Building for the seat of that Worship assigned unto them. This was
the Tabernacle erected in the Wilderness, suited to their then moving state and
condition; into the Room whereof, the Temple built afterward by Solomon
suceeded, when they had attained a fixed station in the Land of Promise. Our
Apostle respecting the Ordinances of that Church, as first instituted by Moses,
which the Hebrews boasted of as their privilege, and on the account whereof,
they obstinately adhered unto their observation, insists only on the
Tabernacle; whereunto the Temple and its services were referred and conformed.
And this he does principally, Chap. 9 v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Then verily the first
Covenant had also Ordinances of divine Service, and a worldly S^^ctuary. For
there was a Tabernacle made, the first wherein was the candlestick, and the
Table, and the Shewbread; which is called the Sanctuary. And after the second
Veil, the Tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all, which had the Golden
Censor, and the Ark of the Covenant, overlaid round about with Gold, wherein
was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod that budded, and the Tables
of the Covenant: And over it the Cherubims of Glory shaddowing the Mercy Seat.

The Preparation for the Directions which God gave for the building of this
Tabernacle Exodus 24. The Body of the people having heard the Law, that is, the
ten Words or Commandments, which was all they heard, Deuteronomy. 9.10. (what God
spoke to them was written in the Two Tables of stone) they removed unto a
greater distance from the Mount, Exodus 20.18, 19. After their Removal, Moses
continued to receive from the Lord, that summary of the whole Law which is
expressed, Chap. 21.22, 23. And all this as it should seem, at the first
hearing, he wrote in a Book from the Mouth of God. For it is said, Chap. 24. v.
4. that he wrote all the words of the Lord. And v. 7. that he, took the Book of
the Covenant, and read in the audience of the people.

The Jewish Masters suppose that it was the Book of Genesis that is there
intended. For Ten Words on the Two Tables of Stone. But this is a fond
imagination; seeing the Book which Moses read contained the form and tenor of
the Covenant made with that people at Horeb, and is expressly so called, and as
such, was then solemnly confirmed and ratified by Sacrifice. It may therefore
be supposed, that there is a Prolepsis used in the recording of this story, and
that indeed the confirmation of the Covenant by Sacrifice, which was
accompanied with the Reading of the Book, was not until after the third return
of Moses from the Mount, with the renewed Tables. But this also may well be
doubted, seeing this Sacrifice was prepared and offered by the young Men of the
Children of Israel, v. 5. that is, the First Born, whose Office was superseded
upon the Separation of Aaron and his Sons unto the Priesthood, which God had
designed before that last descent of Moses from the Mount. We must therefore
leave things in the order wherein they are set down and recorded. It appears
therefore that Moses wrote the Law as he received it from God. This being done,
he came down and read it in the ears of the people. And he proposed it unto
them, as containing the Terms of the Covenant that God would have them enter
into. This they solemnly engaged to the performance of, and thereby had their
admission into a New Church State. This being done, the whole was confirmed by
Sacrifice, and the sprinkling of blood, to prefigure the great confirmation of
the New Covenant by the blood of Christ, as we shall see afterward.

Moses goes up again into the Mount, to receive directions for that Worship of
God, which he appointed and enjoined unto them, in that Church State whereunto
they were newly admitted. And here in the first place, the Lord instructs him
in the frame and whole fabric of the Tabernacle, as that which was an eminent
Type of the Humane Nature of Christ, and so indispensibly necessary unto the
solemn Worship then ordained, as that no part of it could be rightly performed
but with respect thereunto. This therefore with all the Parts and Vtensils of
it should now come under consideration. But there are sundry Reasons for which
I shall omit it in this place. As 1. The most material things belonging unto
it, must necessarily be considered in our Exposition of those places in our
Apostle, where they are expressly insisted on. 2. Many things relating unto it,
as the measures of it, some part of the matter whereof it was made, diverse
Colors used about it, are very dubious, and some of them so absolutely
uncertain, that the Jews themselves can come to no agreement about them; and it
is not meet to enter into the discussion of such things, without more room and
liberty, then our present design, will allow unto us. 3. Many Learned Men have
already travailed with great diligence and skill in the discovery of all the
several concernments of the Tabernacle and Temple, from whom the Reader may
receive much satisfaction, who has a mind to enquire into these things. Add
unto all this, that the Writing of this part of these Discourses, is fallen
upon such a season, as affords me very little encouragement, or assistance to
enlarge upon them. Only that the Reader may not go away without a taste in one
instance of what he might have expected in the whole, I shall choose out one
particular Vtensil of the Tabernacle, and give an account of it unto him. And
this shall be the Ark and its Attendencies.

furniture of the most Holy Place; the most sacred and holy of all the Vtensils
of the Tabernacle and Temple. And it was the same in them both, as is evident,
1 Kings 8.4.6. It was the Repository of the Covenant; for so the Law written by
the finger of God in Tables of stone, is often called Metonymically, and being
anointed, Exodus 40.9. became (...), holiness of holinesses, or most holy, a
Type of him who was to fulfill the Law, and establish the Covenant between God
and Man, being thereunto anointed as the most holy, Dan. 9.26. It was also the
great pledge of the presence of God in the Church; whence it is not only
sometimes called his Glory, Psalm. 78.61. he gave (...), his Glory, Beauty,
Majesty into the hand of the Enemy, when the Ark was taken, whereon the Wife of
Phineas cried, (...), Where is the Glory? 1 Samuel 4.21. because therein the
Glory departed from Israel, v. 22. but in its presence also, Glory was said to
dwell in the Land, Psalm. 85.9. (...) because therein the Shechina, or Chabod,
or Glorious Presence of God, dwelt and abode among his People. Yea, it has the
name of God himself attributed to it, by reason of its representation of his
Majesty, Psalm 24.7, 9, 10.

We call it by the same name with the great Vessel wherein Noah, and the seed
of all living Creatures were preserved. But their Names are far distant in the
Original both in sound and signification, this was (...), Aaron, a Chest, it
may be from (...), a certain Wood whereof such Chests were made; that was
(...), Tebah, the name of any Vessel in the water great or small, though made
with Bulrushes, Exodus 2.3.

Vtensil of the Tabernacle that God appointed to be made, Exodus 25.10. and
therein was as the heart from which, by a communication of sacred holiness from
the presence of God, all other things belonging unto the Worship of the whole
were spirited and as it were enlivened. And immediately upon its entrance into
the Temple, the visible pledges of the presence of God therein appeared to all,
and not before, 1 Kings 8.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Exodus 25.10. Shittim wood, or boards of the (...) Tree, mentioned Isa. 41.18.
What wood it was, it altogether uncertain, although it seems sure enough to
have been none that grew in the Wilderness where the people were at the
erection of the Tabernacle. For these Shittim boards were reckoned amongst the
stores of silver and brass, and such other things as they had brought with them
into the Wilderness, Exodus 35.25. and that expression, (...) Every one with
whom was found Shittim-wood, intimates the rarity of it, and that it may be, it
had been preserved by them for sundry Generations. There is indeed a place
called Shittim, and Abel Shittim, mentioned, Numb. 25.1 and chap. 33.49. not
probably from these trees. However it was in the plains of Moab whereunto the
Israelites came not until forty years after the making of the Ark. Farther
then, we know nothing of the Shittim-tree, or of this wood; for what ever is
discoursed of it, as it has been discoursed by many, is mere conjecture,
ending in professed uncertainty. Only it seems to have been notable for
firmness and duration, as continuing in the Ark apparently 900 years, even from
the making of it unto the destruction of the Temple by the Caldeans. And it may
be was returned to the second Temple, not perishing absolutely until the
Covenant with that people expired 600 years after the Captivity. But herein it
had the advantage of preservation from all external causes of putrefaction, by
its enclosure on all parts in a covering of gold.

The form of the Ark was of a long square chest, of small dimensions, two
cubits and Exodus 25.10. that is, according to the most approved estimation of
their measures, near four foot long, and two foot and some inches broad and
high; and farther exactness or accuracy about these measures is of little
certainty, and less use. How the boards of it were joined is not mentioned.
Over-laid it was with pure Gold, beaten gold, pure and immixed, (...) intus and
extra, undequaque, on all the boards of it, both within and without, so that no
part of the wood was any where to be seen or touched. Round about it, that is,
on the edge of the side upwards, it had ((...) upon it round about) (...) a
Diadem, or a fringe of Gold-work, such as encompassed Diadems or Crowns. And
this (...) or Diadem, was put only on the Ark, the Mercy-seat, and the Altar of
Incense, intending expressions of Rays of Gold, as coming from (...) to scatter
abroad in the manner of rays and beams, which, Heb. 1.3. is called (...), the
brightness of glory. And hence the Rabbis speak of a threefold Crown, of the
Ark, Altar and Table; of the last for the King, of the midst for the Priest, of
the first for they know not whom, as Rabbi Solomon expressly. Indeed all
representing the threefold Offices of Christ, for whom the Crowns were laid
up, Zach. 6.

At the four corners, on the outside, were annexed unto it four Rings of Gold,
on two staves or bars, wherewith the Ark was to be carried on the shoulders of
the Levites, Exodus 25.11, 12. for the negl^ct of which service strictly
enjoined them, Numb. 7.9. God made a breach on Vzza in the days of David, 2 Samuel 6.7.

The end wherefore God appointed the making of this Ark, was to put therein
Testimony, Exodus 25.16. that is the two Tables of stone engraved on all sides
with the ten Commandments, pronounced by the Ministry of Angels, written with
the finger of God. Besides this, there was in it nothing at all, as is expressly
affirmed, 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 5.10. Deuteronomy. 10.2, 5. The appearance of a
dissent from hence in an expression of our Apostle, chap. 9. shall be
considered in its proper place.

This Ark made at Horeb, 1 King. 8.9. that is, at the foot of the mountain
where the People encamped, finished with the rest of the Tabernacle on the
first day, of the first month, of the second year of the coming of the
Israelites out of Egypt, Exodus 40.13. being, as we have showed, the visible
pledge of the presence of God amongst them, as it was placed with its
Tabernacle in the midst of the People whilst they were encamped in the
Wilderness, the body of them being distributed into four Hosts to the four
quarters of Heaven, ( Numb. 2.) that a blessing from thence might be equally
communicated unto them all, and all might have an alike access to the worship
of God; so it was carried in their marching in the midst of their Armies, with
a pronunciation of a solemn Benediction when it began to set forward, and when
it returned unto its Repository in the most holy place, Numb. 10.35, 36. This
was the ordinary course in the removals of the Ark. In an extraordinary manner,
God appointed it to be carried before all the people, when the waters of Jordan
were divided by his power, whereof that was a pledge, Josh. 3.15. which the
people on their own heads going afterward to imitate in their wars with the
Philistines, received a sad reward of their temerity and boldness, 1 Samuel 4.

From the Wilderness the Ark was carried to Gilgal, Josh. 5.10 thence removed
with the Tabernacle to Shilo, Josh. 18.2. Some suppose that after this it was
occassionally removed to Mizpeh, as Judge. 11.11.20.1, 27.21.1, 2. because it is
said in those places, that such things were done before the Lord in Mizpeh: but
that expression does not necessarily inter the presence of the Ark and
Sanctuary in that place. Yea, the context seems to intimate, that it was at
another place distant from thence, as v. 26. they went up from the place of the
Assembly in Mizpeh to the house of God, where the Ark was. In Shechem also it
is supposed to have been, from the Assembly that Joshua made there, chap. 24.1.
upon the close whereof, he fixed a stone of memorial before the Sanctuary, v.
26. But yet neither does this evince the removal of the Ark or Sanctuary. For
Shechem being not far from Shilo, the people might meet in the Town for
convenience, and then go some of them with Joshua unto Shilo, as is most
probable that they did. From Shilo it was carried into the field of Aphek
against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.2. and being taken by them, was carried first
to Ashdod, then to Ekron, then to Gath, 1 Samuel 5. thence returned to
Kiriath-jearim, 1 Samuel 6. to the house of Abinadab, 1 Samuel 6. thence to the
house of Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel 6. thence to mount Sion in Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 6. into
a place prepared for it by David. And from thence was solemnly introduced into,
and enthroned in the most holy place of the Temple, built by Solomon, 1 King.
8.6, 7. In the mean time, whether occasionally, or by advice, the Tabernacle
was removed from Shilo, and that first place of the solemn Worship of God
altogether deserted, and made an example of what God would afterward do unto
the Temple, when his Worship therein also was neglected and defiled Jer. 7.12,
14.26.6, 9. In the Temple of Solomon it continued either unto the captivity of
Jeboiakim, when Nebuchadnezzar took away all the goodly vessels of the house of
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.10. or unto the captivity of Zedekiah, when he carried
away all the remaining vessels, great and small, v. 18. Of the Talmudical fable
concerning the hiding of it by Josiah, or Jeremiah, with the addition of its
supposed restoration at the last day, in the second Book of Machabees, I have
spoken elsewhere. Whether it were returned again with the vessels of the house
of the Lord, by Cyrus, is uncertain. If it were not, it was an intimation that
the Covenant made with that people was waxing old, and hasting unto an
expiration.

upon it the Mercy-seat; on the ends of it two Cherubims. The Mercy-seat as to
its making, form, use, and disposition, is declared, Exodus 25.17. it is called
(...) Cipporeth; (...) signifies to hide, to cover, to plaster over, to shut,
to plaster with Bitumen or pitch. In Pihel, to expiate sin, Exodus 30.10.
Levit. 4.10. If the name of the Mercy-seat be taken from the word in Kal, it
signifies only Operimentum, tegumentum, tegmen, a covering, and so ought to be
rendered. If it be taken from the sense of the word in Pihel, it retains the
signification of Expiation, and consequently of pardon and mercy. So it is by
ours rendered a Mercy-seat, and that with respect unto the rendering of it by the
Apostle, (...), Heb. 9. as by the LXX in this place (...), the Propitiatory
placed on the Ark, wherein what r^spect was had to the Lord Christ, the Apostle
declares, Romans 3.25. and largely in our Epistle, chap. 9.

broad and long as the Ark whereon it was laid, chap. 32.17. And this
Mercy-seat or covering of Gold seems to have lain upon the Ark within the verge
of gold or Crown that encompassed it, being its self plain without any such
verge or Crown; for it was placed (...) upon the Ark just over it, v. 20. and
so was encompassed with its Crown, the Glory both of Justice and Mercy, of Law
and Gospel, being the same in Christ Jesus.

Mercy-seat were placed two Cherubims, one at the one end, the other at the
other; both of Gold, and, as it should seem, of one continued work with the
covering it self. The name of Cherubims has prevailed for these Figures or
Images from the Hebrews; partly because it is retained by our Apostle, who
calls them Cherubims of glory, (...), Heb. 9.5 and partly because the
signification of the word being not well known, it cannot properly be otherwise
expressed; for which reason it was retained also by the LXX. They were of those
things which our Apostle, chap. 9.23. terms (...); Examples, expressions, or
similitudes of things in Heaven, whose framing and erection in reference unto
the worship of God is forbidden under the name of (...) Exodus 20.3. The
likeness of any thing in the heavens above. The first mention of Cherubims is
Genesis 3 24. God placed Cherubims; which seems to intimate, that the proto-types
of these figures, were heavenly Ministers, or Angels, though Aben-Ezra suppose,
that the word denotes any erected figures or appearances what ever. Others of
the Jews, as Kimchi, think the word to be compounded of (...) caph, a note of
similitude, and (...) a child, to signify, like a child, being so called from
their form and shape. But this answers not unto the description given
afterward of them in Ezekiel, much less with the same appellation given to the
winds and clouds, Psalm. 18.10. The word has a great affinity with (...) a
Chariot; so are the Angels of God called his Chariots, Psalm. 68.17. and David
so calls expressly the Cherubims that were to be made in Solomon's Temple, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. gold for the pattern, (...) hammercheba hacherubim, where the
allusion is open; the Chariot of the Cherubims, and Ezekiel describes his
Cherubims as a triumphant Chariot, chap. 10. It is not therefore unlikely that
their name is derived from (...) which signifies to ride, or to be carried, to
pass on swiftly, expressing the Angelical Ministry of the blessed Spirits
above; if they were not rather mere emblems of the power and speed of God in
his works of grace and providence.

These Cherubims are said to be (...) that is, not molten, but beaten, even and
Mercy-seat, beat out with it and from it. There is no more mention of their
form but only that they had faces and wings. Of what sort those faces were, or
how many in number were their wings, is not expressed.

In Ezekiel's Vision of the living creatures, which he also calls Cherubims,
chap. shape of a man ascribed unto them, they had the likeness of a man, chap.
1.5. faces, ver. 6. feet, ver. 7. hands, ver. 8. sides, or body, ver. 8, 11.
each of them also had four faces; of a Man, a Lion, an Ox, and an Eagle, ver.
10. and each had four wings, ver. 23. In John's vision in the Revelation,
seeming to answer this of Ezekiel's Cherubims, from the eyes that his living
creatures were full of, and the appearance of their faces, they had each of
them six wings, answering unto those of the Seraphims in the Vision of Isaiah,
chap. 6.2.

The Jews generally affirm, that these visions of the glory of God by Isaiah
and Ezekiel Ezekiel saw nothing but what Isaiah saw also; only they say, that
Ezekiel saw the glory of God and his Majesty, as a country man who admires at
all the splendour of the Court of the King, Isaiah as a Courtier, who took
notice only of the Person of the King himself. But there are many evident
differences in their visions. Isaiah calls the glorious Ministers of God (...)
Seraphims, from their nature, compared to fire and light; Ezekiel (...)
Cherubims, from their speed in the accomplishment of their duty. Isaiah saw his
vision as in the Temple; for although from those words, I saw the Lord sitting
upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the Temple. Aben-Ezra
and Kimchi suppose, that he saw the Throne of God in Heaven, and only his train
of Glory descending into the Temple; yet it is more probable that he saw the
Throne it self in the Temple, his train spreading abroad to the filling of the
whole house. For he calls the Temple, the Throne of his Glory, Jer. 14.21. and
a glorious high Throne, chap. 17.12. that is, a Throne high and lifted up, as
in this place. Ezekiel saw his vision abroad in the open field, by the River of
Chebar, chap. 1.3. Isaiah first saw the Lord himself, and then his glorious
attendants; Ezekiel first the Charist of his glory, and then God above it.
Isaiah's Seraphims had six wings, with two whereof they covered their faces,
which Ezekiel's Cherubims had not; and that because Isaiah's vision represented
Christ Joh. 12.41. with the mystery of the calling of the Gentiles, and
rejection of the Jews, which the Angels were not able to look into, Ephesians. 3.9,
10. and were therefore said to cover their faces with their wings, as not being
able to look into the depths of those mysteries; but in Ezekiel's vision, when
they attended the Will of God in the works of his Providence, they looked upon
them with open face. Wherefore from the diversity in all these Visions, it
appears, that nothing certain concerning the form or wings of the Cherubims
made by Moses can be collected. Most probably they had each of them only one
face directly looking one toward the other, and each two wings, which being
stretched out forward over the Mercy-seat, met each other, and were mere
Emblems of the Divine presence and care over his Covenant, People and Worship.

And this was the whole furniture of the most holy Place in the Tabernacle of
Moses. In that of the Temple of Solomon, which was more August and spacious,
there was by God's direction two other Cherubims added. These were great, and
large, made of the wood of the Olive tree, over-laid with Gold, and they stood
on their feet behind the Ark Westward, with their backs toward the end of the
Oracle, their faces over the Ark and Mercy-seat Eastward, toward the Sanctuary;
their wings extending twenty cubits long, even the whole breadth of the house,
and meeting in the midst, their inward wings were over the Ark, 1 King. 6.23,
28. 2 Chronicles. 3.11, 12, 13.

Israel granted unto his Church of old; which though it were beautiful and
excellent, as appointed by himself, yet was it but carnal and worldly, in
comparison of the Heavenly and glorious mysteries of the Gospel; especially of
him, who being obscurely shadowed out by all this preparation of Glory, was in
himself the real brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his Person,
as shall further be declared on chap. 1.3.

Exercitatio XXIII.
Of the Office of the Priesthood; the High Priest in particular. The most
illustrious Type of Christ. The Call of Aaron unto the Priesthood. Things
concurring unto his Call, and Separation unto his Office. The Garments
prescribed unto him. Ordinary. Extraordinary. The Nature of the Office of the
High Priest. What he performed himself alone. What with the Assistance of other
Priests. What with the Assistance of Priests. and Levites. His blessing the
people. His judging of them. The succession of these Priests. How many served
under the Tabernacle. How many under the First Temple. How many under the
Second Temple. The disturbance of this Succession. Fatal End of the Aaronical
Priesthood.

THe principal Glory or all Mosaical Worship consisted in the Person and Office
High Priest. The Scripture calls him, (...), the Great Priest, (...), or (...).
This Priest with his Attendants of the same Family was the hinge, whereon the
whole Worship of the Judaical Church depended and turned. And therefore our
Apostle does undeniably prove, that the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances was to be changed, because there was a promise of raising up a
Priest that was not of the House of Aaron, nor of the Tribe of Levi, which the
observation of the Law in the Worship of God could not consist withal, Heb.
7.11, 12. Now this High Priest being in his Person and his Office, the Most
Illustrious Type of the Messiah and his Office, and the principal means whereby
God instructed his Church of Old in the Mystery of the Reconciliation and
Salvation of sinners, most things concerning him, are expressly and at large
handled by our Apostle, and must, God assisting, come under our consideration
in the several places wherein by him they are insisted on; I shall therefore
here only in these previous discourses give a brief account of some such
concernments of his Person and Office as will not directly again occur unto us.

What was the state and condition of the Priesthood in the Church from the
Priesthood in the Church of Israel, is laid, Exodus 28. v. 1. Provision being
made of Holy Things, God proceeds to supply the Church with Holy or Dedicate
Persons for their Administration. The first thing expressed is the Call of the
High Priest. Hereof there are two parts. First, Gods Revelation and
Authoritative Constitution concerning it. Secondly, His actual Consecration.
The former is expressed, Exodus 28.1. And take thou unto thee Aaron thy Brother
and his Sons, that they may Minister unto me in the Priests Office. Aaron was
the Elder Brother of Moses, born three years before him, Exodus 7.7. and was now
eighty four or eighty five years of Age, when God thus calls and appoints him
to the Office of the Priesthood. With him all his Sons, all the Males of his
Family were dedicated unto the Service of God in their successive Generations.
And in this Call unto his Office, he was a Type of Christ, who entered not on
his Priesthood, but by the Designation and Authority of the Father: Heb. 5.4, 5.

Secondly, Unto the completing of his Call, there concurred his Consecration
or Separation Exodus 29. In general it is expressed, v. 1. by (...), which we
render to Hallow, that is, to sanctify, to separate unto God in the Work of
the Priesthood. This is general expression of his Consecration, for what we
afterward translate to consecrate, v. 9.29. respects only one particular Act
of the whole work or Duty. Now the parts hereof were many, which may briefly be
enumerated.

First, There was their Manuduction, their bringing to the Door of the
Tabernacle, chap. 29. v. 4. (...); thou shall bring them nigh, the Word used in
all sacred Approaches and Dedications to God. The Priests themselves were made
a Corban.

Secondly, They were washed with water. v. 4. Thou shall wash them with water.
After this the Priests on all occasions were to wash themselves; at present
this being a sacred action, and they being not as yet consecrated, it was
performed toward them by Moses, who at this and other times discharged the
Office of an Extraordinary Priest.

Thirdly, Being washed, they were clothed with the Holy Garments, v. 5, 6. of
which afterward.

Fourthly, The High Priest being clothed, was anointed with the Holy Oil
poured on his Head, and running down over all his Garments, v. 7. Psalm 132. v.
2. The making, and use of this Ointment, prefiguring the Unction of the Lord
Christ with all the Graces of the Spirit, Heb. 1.6. are declared, Chap. 30. v.
25.

Fifthly, Sacrifices of all sorts were offered unto God. 1. The Mincha or
Meat Offering. 2. The Chataath or Sin-Offering, v. 13, 1, 4. 3. The Hola, or
whole Burnt Offerings, v. 18.25. 4. Shelamim or Peace Offerings, v. 25. 5.
Tenumoth, and Tenuphoth, Heave, and Wave-Offerings, v. 25, 26. 6. Nesek or the
Drink Offerings; v. 40. So that in the Consecration of the Priest, all
Sacrifices also were as it were anew consecrated unto God.

Sixthly, In the use of this Sacrifice there were five Ceremonies used
belonging in a peculiar manner unto their Consecration. 1. The Filling of their
Hand, Ver. 9. (...). This we have rendered, Thou shall consecrate them, as
though their Consecration was some peculiar Act distinct from these prescribed
Ceremonies. But that which is thus expressed, is only one of them; or the
putting of some parts of the Sacrifice into, or upon their Hands to bear to the
Altar, which being the first Action in them belonging to the Sacerdotal Office,
(for in all the former passages they were merely passive) is sometimes by a
Synecdoche used for Consecration its self. 2. The putting of Blood, upon the
Tips of their right Ears, and upon the Thumbs of their right Hands, and the
great Toes of their right Feet, v. 20. intimating their readiness to hear, and
perform the Will of God. And this blood was taken from one of the Rams that was
offered for a Burnt-Offering. 3. The sprinkling of them with blood from the
Altar, and the Anointing Oil together, upon all their Garments, v. 21. The
Imposition, or laying of their hands on the Head of the Beast to be sacrificed
for a Sin-Offering, v. 10.15. denoting the passing away of their sin from them,
that they might be fit to Minister before the Lord. 5. The delivery of the
Wave-Offering into their Hands as a pledge of their future portion, v. 24, 28.

Seventhly, The continuance of all this Ceremony is observed, v. 30. By the
Repetition of the Sacrifices mentioned it was continued seven days. During
this time Aaron and his Sons, abode night and day at the door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation; after all which they were admitted unto, and administered
in their Office. Now all this Solemnity was used by the appointment of God,
partly, to beget a Reverence in the Priests themselves unto his Worship, and in
the Administration of it; partly, to teach and instruct the whole Church in the
Mysteries of their Redemption by the true High Priest, whose Person and Office
was shadowed out hereby, as afterward will more fully appear.

Aaron to the Priesthood, He prescribes the Garments that he was to use in the
discharge of the Duties of his Office. For the Worship now instituted, b^ing
outward and carnal, that which made an Appearance of Glory and Beauty as these
Vestments did, was of principal consideration therein.

These Garments of the High Priest were of two sorts. First, Those of his
ordinary and constant Ministration in the Sanctuary: Secondly, Those of his
annual and extraordinary Ministry in the Most Holy Place. The first are
appointed, Exodus 28. consisting of eight Parts.

First, (...): Breeches of Linen for to cover the flesh of his nakedness,
Exodus 28.42, 43. that is, to wear next unto him on his loins.

Secondly, (...), Exodus 39. v. 27. A Coat of fine Linen, or Silk, which was
next them over the Breeches, from the shoulders unto the Ancles.

Thirdly, (...), Exodus 39.29. A Girdle of Silk, or twined Linen, with Purple,
Blew and Scarlet, wherewith they girt the Coat under the Paps or Breast.

Fourthly, (...), Exodus 28.4. A Robe, all of Blew with Bells of Gold, and
Pomegranats, hanging interchangably at the Fringes of it, in number, as the
Jews say, seventy two of each sort; this Robe covered the Coat and Girdle.

Fifthly, Upon the Robe was (...) the Ephod, which name we have retained, as
not finding any garment in use elsewhere that should answer unto it. It was a
covering for the shoulders, made of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine
linen, curiously wrought. In the top hereof, on the shoulders of the Priest,
were two precious stones, Onyx say some, Beril say others, with the names of
the Tribes of the children of Israel engraven on them, six on one stone, and
six on the other, Exodus 28.9, 10, 11.

Sixthly, (...) which we render a Breast Plate, wrought as the Ephod, and of
the same materials. Herein were fastened in ouches of gold, twelve precious
stones, with the names of the Tribes engraven on them: which Jewel, because of
its use in Judgment, was called, as I suppose, Urim and Thummim, Exodus 28.15,
16, 17, 18, 30.

Seventhly, (...) or a Miter for the head, made of fine linen, after the
fashion of an Eastern Turban, sixteen cubits long, wreathed about his head,
Exodus 28.

Eighthly, (...) a plate, a flowring of gold, fastened with a lace of blue on
the forefront of the Mitre, wherein was engraven, (...) Holiness to the Lord.

I have only named these things, without farther consideration of them; partly,
because colors which we render blue, purple and scarlet, with the substance of
that which we after translate fine linen, cannot be clearly manifested what
they were. The stones of the Breast Plate and Ephod, for the most part are
unknown, and their names are applied only by conjecture, unto such whose names
are known to us. Concerning these things, the Jews themselves are at a loss,
and give us only various rumors and surmises; and I shall not add to the heap
of conjectures which have already been cast into this treasury.

The extraordinary Garments of the High priest I call them, which he wore only
Atonement, because they were worn but once only. And these he used not in the
whole service of that day, but only when he entered into the most holy place.
Now these, though for the kind of them they were the same with the linen
garments before mentioned, yet they were made particularly for that day. For
after the service of that day, they were laid up in some of the Chambers
belonging unto the Sanctuary: and they were four, linen Breeches, a linen
Coat, a linen Girdle, and a linen Mitre, Levit. 16. v. 4. v. 25. These the
Jews call the (...) white garments as the other his (...) garments of gold.

The High priest being thus arraied, was prepared for the work of his Office,
which offer Sacrifices to God for the people. 2. To bless the people in the
name of God. 3. To judge them. For the first, our Apostle declares it, and
insists upon it frequently in this Epistle, chap. 8.3. chap. 9.3, 4. chap. 7.2.
chap. 10.1. And his work in the business of sacrifices was threefold.

First, That which he performed himself alone, none being admitted to assist
him, or to be present with him, or so much as to look upon him. This was that
which he performed when he carried the blood into the most holy place on the
day of Atonement, Levit. 16. Heb. 9.7. The sacrifice before the Ark, Mercy-seat
and Cherubims was peculiar to himself alone. And in case of any occasional
hinderance or impediment that might befall him, there was always a second
Priest who was substituted in his room, that the great service of that day
might not be omitted.

Secondly, That which he performed assisted by other Priests. Such was the
whole service of the Sanctuary, Heb. 9.6. about the daily Incense, the
Shewbread, the Candle-sticks and Lamps, even all the service of the Holy place.

Thirdly, That wherein he had the assistance of the other Priests, and the
service of the Levites. Such were all the services of the Court at the Brazen
Altar, where the Levites assisted in the killing, slaying, and removal of the
bodies of the beasts that were sacrificed.

The especial season of these services, Diurnal, Sabbatical, Monthly and
Annual, are of too great variety and extent to be here insisted on.

Secondly, His blessing of the people was twofold. First, Solemn, at stated
seasons, Form prescribed unto him, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Secondly,
Occasional, with respect unto particular seasons, as Eli blessed Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.17.

Thirdly, His work also was to Judge the people. 1. In things concerning the
House and Worship of God, Zech. 3.7. 2. In hard and difficult cases, he joined
with the Judge or Ruler, in judging between men according to the Law, Deuteronomy.
17.12. 3. He was always a member of the Sanhedrim. This, I know, is denied by
some of the Jews, but it seems to be warranted from Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.

Succession also therein was designed, namely, by the Firstborn Male of the
eldest Family or Branch of the Posterity or House of Aaron. But the tracing of
this succession in particular, is greatly perplexed, for it is no where
directly given us in the Scripture; for that space of time wherein the story of
the Church is recorded therein. Different names are also in several places
given unto the same persons, as seems most probable. Besides, Josephus, who is
the only approved Writer of the Jews in things of this nature, is either
corrupted in some passages on this subject, or does palpably contradict
himself. The Postalmudical Masters are so far from yielding any relief in this
matter, that by their jarrings and wranglings they render it more perplexed.
Neither have those amongst our Writers, who of old or of late have labored to
trace this Succession, been able to agree in their computations. Four or five
differing Catalogues I could give in, that are contended for with some
earnestness. I shall not therefore hope, in this brief account of things which
I am confined unto, to give light unto a matter of such intricacy and
perplexity.

I shall therefore content my self to give the most passant account among the
Jews of this Succession in general, with some few observations upon it, and so
close this discourse.

Josephus, that the whole number of High priests from Aaron inclusively to the
destruction of the second Temple, was eighty and three. For though in the
Babylonian Talmud, some of them reckon up above eighty High priests under the
second Temple alone, yet the more learned of the later Jews, as the Author of
Tzemach David ad Millen. 4. An. 829. expressly prefer the authority of Josephus
above them all.

Of these eighty three, thirteen administered before the Lord under the
Tabernacle, or whilst the Tabernacle built by Moses in the Wilderness, was the
sacred seat of divine Worship and Ordinances. Of these, the first was Aaron,
the last Abiathar, who was put by the Priesthood by Solomon, a little before
the building of the Temple. And in this Succession there was but one
interruption; namely, when Eli of the House of Ithamar, the younger son of
Aaron, was preferred to the Priesthood. It is probable that he had been second
Priest in the days of his Predecessor, and was doubtless admitted unto the
Office upon the reputation of his Holiness and Wisdom. And it may be that he
whose right it was to succeed of the House of Phineas, was either incapable, or
judged unworthy.

Solomon's Temple, there administered eighteen High Priests, whose names are
recounted by Josephus, lib. 11. cap. 4. lib. 20. cap. 9. Of these, the first
was Zadock; the last Jehozadeck who was carried into captivity by
Nebuchadnezzar, 1 Chronicles. 6.14. though I question whether ever he administered as
High Priest, only he was left at the destruction of the City and Temple, after
the death of his father Seraiah. Nor was there any known interruption in this
Series of Succession, being carried down in a right line from the House of
Phineas by Zadock.

second Temple, being multiplied by the tumults and disorders which the people
then fell into. The first of them was Joshua the son of Josedech; the last one
Phineas, or Phananias, made High Priest by the seditious Villains, a little
before the last Siege and destruction of the City.

And this succession, or that during this season, had interruptions many and
great. The first mentioned by Josephus was after the death of Onias, the
fourteenth High Priest from the building of the Temple, when Antiochus first
put in Joshua, who was called Jason, the brother of Onias, and afterward
displacing him, thrust in Menelaus into his room. After a while he puts out
this Menelaus, and places one Alcimus, of another Family, in his steed.

After this Alcimus, the Family of the Machabees, or Hasmoneans, took on them
the office of the High priesthood. Their race being extirpated by Herod, Ananus
a private Priest, was by force and power put into the place. And from this time
forward, to the destruction of the Temple, there was no order observed in the
Succession of the High Priest, but persons were put in and out at the pleasure
of the Rulers, either the Romans or the Herodians. For Hyrcanus being taken
prisoner by the Parthians, and Antigonus, the son of Aristohulus his brother,
being taken by Herod and Sofia, and crucified at Antioch by Marc. Antony, in
whom the race of the Hasmonaeans ended, vile persons were put in and out at
pleasure, some for a year, some for a month, one for a day, some for a longer
season; until the whole Nation, Church and State, rushing into its final and
fatal ruin, in their Rebellion at Jerusalem they thrust out Matthias put in
by Agrippa, and chose one by lot to succeed him; when God, to manifest his
disapprobation of them, caused the lot to fall upon one Phananias, a mere
Idiot, who knew nothing of the place or office which they called him unto, with
whom ended the Church and Priesthood of the Jews.

Exercitatio XXIV.
Sacrifices the principal Worship of God. Three sorts of them. 1. Of the Brazen
Altar. 2. Of the Sanctuary. 3. Of the most Holy place. Respected by the
Apostle. All sacrifices of the Altar. (...) Every Corban, either Isha, or
Terumah. (...) of six sorts. 1. Hola. 2. Mincha. 3. Chataath. 4. Asham. 5.
Milluim. 6. Shelamim. A second distinction of fire Offerings. Either Zebach or
Mincha. These distinctions and differences explained at large. The matter of
all sacrifices. (...) the first particular sacrifice. The rise, use and
direction of it. Use of it among the Heathen. What of ancient tradition, what
of their own invention. The manner of their sacrifice. The end of it. To make
Expiation or Atonement, what. Seasons and occasions of this sacrifice. (...) A
meat offering. The use of that name; general, particular. The matter of this
offering. (...) the drink offering. The matter of it. (...) Peace offerings.
Reason of the name. Things peculiar to this kind of sacrifice. The use of it
among the Heathen. (...) The sin-offering. The name and causes of it. Sins
(...) what. The persons to offer this sacrifice. The anointed priest, who,
Levit. 4.3. The whole Congregation. The Ruler. A private person. The time and
manner of this sacrifice. The sprinkling of blood in it. (...) The
trepass offering. Its difference from the sin-offering. (...) Consecration
offerings. Second sort of Corbans. Terumoth.

Offerings and Sacrifices. For these did directly represent, and in their
general nature answered that which was the foundation of the Church, and all
the Worship thereof; namely, the Sacrifice of the Son of God: and he is called
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1. v. 29. because
he fulfilled and perfectly accomplished what was prefigured by the sacrifice of
Lambs, and other creatures, from the foundation of the world. Neither were
these Offerings and Sacrifices any thing, but means of Gods institution, for
men to express by them their faith in the first promise. Nor were Sacrifices in
general now first instituted, nor the kinds of them first appointed; but the
most of them were observed upon Divine Revelation and command from the entrance
of sin, and giving of the Promise; only they were rescued in the repetition of
them unto Moses, from the superstition that was grown in their observance, and
directed unto a right Object, and attended with suitable instructive Ceremonies
in the manner of their performance.

Brazen Altar, by blood and fire. Secondly, those of the Sanctuary at the Altar
of Incense, and table of Shewbread. Thirdly, those of the most holy place
before the Ark, Mercy-seat and Oracle. The first of these represented the
bloody death of Christ, and sacrifice on the Cross: the second his Intercession
in Heaven: and the third, the (...), or effects of both, in Atonement and
Reconciliation. And these our Apostle mentions, chap. 8. v. 3, 4. Every high
priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: and there are priests that
offer gifts according to the Law. Chap. 9. v. 7. Into the second went the high
priest alone once every year; not without blood, which he offered for himself
and the errors of the people. v. 12. By the blood of bulls and calves. v. 13.
The blood of bulls and calves, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkled. v. 22.
Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood. chap. 10. For the Law
having a shadow of good things to come, not the very image of the things, can
never with those sacrifices which they offer year by year continually make the
comers thereunto perfect. For then would they not have ceased to be offered;
because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of
sins. But in those sacrifices there is remembrance again made of sins every
year. For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away
sins. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering
thou would not. v. 11. And every priest stands daily ministering and
offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sin. Chap.
13. v. 11. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burnt without the camp.

Evident it is, that these and the like passages, wherein our Apostle refers to
the institution, sacrifices, cannot be rightly understood, without some
distinct notion of them, as prescribed by God unto Moses, and observed by the
people under the Old Testament. I shall therefore here give a brief system of
them, and account concerning them.

Sacrifices of the Altar in general were (...) Corbanim. The name it may
brought nigh to dedicate or offer unto God, was thence (...), we may allow it
to be the general name of all sacrifices. And therefore on the close of the
annumeration of all Fire-offerings, it is added, This is the Law which the Lord
commanded Moses in Mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of
Israel to offer, or bring nigh (...), their Corbans, that is, offerings or
sacrifices of all sorts.

Now every (...) was either (...) Isha, a Firing, or (...) Terumah, an
heave offering, Tenupha, a wave-offering; the (...) Ishim were (...) kodesh
kodashim; holiness of holiness, or most holy; all but one; the other were (...)
kodesh hi^^ulim, holiness of praises, Levit. 19.24.

The (...) or Fireings, Fire offerings, were expressly of six sorts, as they are
distinctly Levit. 7. v. 37. 1. (...) hola, the Burnt offering; 2. (...) Mincha,
the Meat offering: 3. (...) Chataath, the Sin-offering; 4. (...) Ascham the
Trepass Offering; 5. (...) Milluim, Consecration; 6. (...) Zebach Shelamim,
Peace-off^rings; so are they rendered by ours, how rightly, we shall see
afterward. Besides, the (...) Mincha contained that, properly so called, the
Meat Offering; and (...) Nesek, the Drink Offering. The LXX render the verse,
(...). This is the Law of whole Burnt offerings, and of sacrifices, and for
sin, and trespass, and of perfection, or consummation, and of the sacrifice of
salvation. The particulars shall be examined as they occur. The Vulgar Latin
reads the words, Lex holocausti, and sacrificii pro peccato, and delicto, and
pro consecrasione, and pacific^rum victimis; This is the Law of the
whole-burnt-offering, and of the sacrifice for s^n, and trespass; and for
consecration, and for the sacrifices of peacemakers. And herein either the
Mincha is wholly left out, or the words should be read, and sacrificii, and pro
peccato; and so answer to the Greek, expressing (...) by (...) sacrifi^ium,
though improperly.

These (...), Fire offerings are moreover distinguished into (...) Zebach, and
(...) Mincha in a large sense. For it is evident that (...) Mincha is used very
variously. For, 1. Sometimes it is of as large a signification as (...) Corban
it self; and is frequently applied unto offerings of blood, as well as of meat
and drink, Genesis 4. v. 4. 2* Sometimes it is contra-distinguished to (...), and
denotes all sacrifices by fire, not of beasts and blood; Psalm. 40. v. 6. Dan.
9. v. 27. Levit. 7. v. 34. 3. Sometimes it signifies that peculiar offering,
which being made of flower or meal with oil, we call the Meat Offering, Levit.
2.1. Wherefore in this distribution, (...), victima, sacrificium mactatum, a
slain sacrifice; compriseth, (...) hola, (...) chataath, (...) Ascham, and
(...) Sh^lamim; (...), that which was peculiarly so, Mincha; and (...) Nesek,
(...) Milluim partook of both. And these things must be a little further
explained.

First, (...) Corban, the general name of all sacrifices, taken from the
general nature, vulgar Latin, Oblatio, and by us suitably an Offering; is
properly appropinquatio, a drawing nigh, from (...) to approach, to draw near.
The LXX render it constantly by (...), a gift; unless it be, Nehem. 10.34.
chap. 13.30. (...), is munus, donum. And so is it rendered by the Evangelist,
Matthew. 5.23, 24. and chap. 15.5. Usually it is such a gift, as is presented to
appease, reconcile, or obtain favor; which amongst men the Hebrews call (...)
shocad. So Plato, (...); which the Poet translates.

Munera (creed mihi) placant hominesque deosque
Placatur donis Jupiter ipse datis.
And this Joash in his Parable seems to allude unto, Judge. 9. v. 13. where he
brings in the Vine saying, Shall I leave my Wine, (...) delighting God and man;
namely, in sacrifices and gifts, which are a great propitiation, which always
arises from a savor of rest. Corban then is any Gift brought nigh and offered
unto God in any sort.

Of these Offerings or Gifts, some were (...) Ishim. (...) is first mentioned,
Exodus 29.18. Thou shall burn the whole Ram upon the altar, it is a
burnt-offering unto the Lord, (...) a savor of rest, a firing unto the Lord;
ignitio. Thus all sacrifices were called that were burned on the Altar, either
wholly or any part of them. The Greeks thought they had no proper word to
express this by, (as frequently in all their abundance they are straightened in
expressing the signal emphasis of the divine Hebrew) have variously rendered it;
not once properly, or with any intimation of the native importance of the word.
Sometimes they translate it (...), Exodus 29.18. sometimes (...), to the same
purpose. Levit. 11.13. chap. 2.2. a Sacrifice; sometimes (...), Levit. 2.9.
that is, an Oblation, an Offering; thus most frequently. But whereas that word
signifies primarily the seed of fruit, or the profit made by it, and is but
tralatitiously accommodated unto Oblations, it does most improperly express
(...), which principally intended the sacrifices of beasts, as burnt in the
fire. It is then the general name of all Sacrifices or Gifts burnt on the
Altar, in part or in whole.

Every (...) or fire offering, was either (...) or (...). Sebach the Greeks
render constantly by (...), and words of the same original; that is, a
sacrifice of slain beasts. Victima, H^stia Mactata. (...) is to sacrifice by
killing; though I know that Eustathius thinks that Homer uses (...) only for
(...); but its constant use in all Authors is to kill in sacrifice. And (...)
is properly a slain sacrifice; though it be often used in the Scripture
metaphorically. So does (...) signify, properly the same with (...), Teth and
Zain b^ing easily and often changed; that is, to kill and slay. And Elias
Levita observes, that it is but twice used when it does not directly denote
killing. And from this kind of sacrifices had the Altar its name. (...)
misbeach; and so in the Greek (...). Now of the sacrifices that were (...)
there were four sorts; 1. (...) the Burnt-offering; 2. (...) the Sin-offering;
3. (...) the Trepass Offering; 4. (...) Peace Offerings; and in part also the
(...) or Consecration-offerings, etc. as was before observed.

species of the (...); the word is of an uncertain original, and various
signification. Those who suppose that it respected only offerings of the fruits
of the earth, are greatly mistaken. Instances have been given already to the
contrary, and more shall be added. Generally learned men deduce the word from
(...), that mem may be esteemed a radical letter, whence in the plural number
it is read (...) in the misna; which yet is but a feigned radix, no where used
in the original, or the Targum: and it is read (...) in the Scripture, as Psalm.
20.3. Hence some deduce it from (...), to lead or bring to, making it agree in
its general signification with (...) cor^an. Some think it may rather be
deduced from (...) to refresh, recreate, give rest; and that because it is
called emphatically a savor of rest unto the Lord, Levit. 2. v. 2. The LXX
sometimes render it (...), manifesting that they knew not the precise
importance of the word, and therefore left it untranslated. It comprised, as
was said, the mincha properly so called, and the (...) or Drink Offering, and
had a place also in the offerings of Consecration. And these were the Corbanim
or oblations, that were Ishim, or Fire-offerings, and (...) most holy to the
Lord.

holiness of praises, there was no general name; but they were either (...)
Terumah, the Heave Offering, or (...) Tenuphah, the Wave-offering, whereof we
shall speak afterward.

matter of all these Sacrifices was of three sorts. 1. Beasts. 2. Fowls, or
Birds. 3. Fruits of the earth; all accompanied with Salt and Incense. Of Beasts
there were also three sorts designed to this use and service; one of the Herds,
namely, Bullocks; and two of the Flocks; 1. Sheep, 2. Goats. Of Fowls or Birds,
two sorts were used; 1. Turtles, 2. Pigeons, and it may be Sparrows, in the
singular case of the sacrifice for the cleansing of the Leper, Levit. 14.4. In
all of these (that is, of the Beasts) it was required that they should be, 1.
Males, unless in the Sin and Trespass offering. 2. Without blemish. The fruits
of the earth were of all sorts, useful to the life of man. And all these
sacrifices from their general ends may be reduced unto three heads. For they
were all of them either, 1. Propitiatory, as designed to make atonement for
sins; or, 2. Euctical, to impetrate mercies from God; or, 3. Eucharistical, to
return praises unto him.

Israel, regulated and directed, Levit. 1. was the (...), the Burnt-offering. I
say it was then first prescribed unto that Church, after the rearing of the
Tabernacle, and regulated as to the times, occasions, and seasons of its
celebration; for as to the nature of it, it was instituted and observed from
the foundation of the world. And it seems to have been the first acceptable
sacrifice, namely, that which Abel offered, Genesis 4.4. For whereas it is
expressly said of the offering of Cain, not only that it was mincha, but that it
was of the fruits of the earth, that is, a meat offering; it is said only of
Abel, that he brought (...) of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat
thereof; that is, either with their fat, or the fat firstlings, the proper
matter of this sacrifice. Our Apostle calls it his (...), his gift, that is,
his (...), or free-will-offering, as all were before the Law; and his (...),
Heb. 11.4. the sacrifice that he slew to the Lord. But the name is first
expressed, Genesis 8.20: where both the matter and nature also of it is set down;
Noah builded an altar, and took of every clean beast (Bullocks, Sheep and
Goats) and of every clean fowl (Turtles and Pigeons) (this God had instructed
him in) (...) and offered burnt offerings on the altar. So did Job, before the
giving of the Law, chap. 1.5. which God also prescribed unto his friends, chap.
42.8. as did Jethro also in the Wilderness Exodus 18.12. For from that sacrifice
of Noah, was this Rite of whole-burnt-offerings derived by tradition unto all
Nations of his posterity: but the end and use of it being lost, it was in
process of time, by the craft of Satan, turned into the chiefest way of
exercising their idolatry.

The matter therefore of this sacrifice was preserved among the Heathen;
although Moses, or applied unto that purpose by any who were guided by divine
direction. Their principal solemn sacrifices were of the Herd, which therefore
they called (...), or buthysia, the sacrifice of Oxen, and that of all sorts of
Kine.

Taurum Neptuno, taurum tibi pulcher Appolo, as Virgil. And he also expresses
the way of offering these Bulls or Oxen to Neptune, Apollo, and of their
feigned Deities.

Et solida imponit taurorum viscera flammis. They committed their whole inwards
unto flames on the Altar; which expresses this Holocaust. And they offered
Kine of all sorts. So Homer tells us, that Nestor sacrificed (...), that is, an
Heifer or a Bullock of one year old, (...), says Eustathius; as in many cases
the Law directed. And the Poet adds, (...). Which none had brought to the yoke,
as the same was required in the sacrifices of the Law. To the Moon they
sacrificed a Bullock, whose horns turned into the likeness of her first
appearance: -- sterilemque tibi Proserpina vaccam. And a barren heifer to
Proserpina. And Plutarch tells us, that some of the old Egyptians offered a
Red Heifer in sacrifice, which I much doubt; and suppose rather the report to
have risen from the Ceremonies of the Red Cow instituted in the Wilderness,
when the People came out of Egypt. But whereas an Ox was an harmless and useful
creature, some of them began at length to suppose that it was not meet to use
them in sacrifice. But to keep up the old tradition of this kind of offering,
they made a Cake, which they called Papanon, and fashioned it into the
similitude of an Ox, and termed it an Ox, as Hesychius in (...). So the images
of idolatrous Groves, placed by Idolaters in the Temple of old, are called
Groves in the Scripture; and the small Shrines made for Diana, are called
Temples.

Sheep also they sacrificed, especially Lambs, to Jupiter, Minerva, and Diana;
and Goats or Kids to Bacchus. Whence is that of the Poet.

Rode caper vites, tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras,
In tua quod spargi cornua, possit, erit.
The Vines cropped by the Goat, yet Wine suffice
To sprinkle him when made a sacrifice.
Which as Suetonius testifies, was bitterly reflected on Nero Caesar upon his
foolish Edict for the cutting down of Vines in Italy. Birds or Fowls also they
offered or sacrificed, but without distinction; Cocks, Geese, Turtles, and the
like.

matter of their Sacrifices all sorts of living Creatures, even such as the Law
of nature refused, and such as among the Jews were in an especial manner
forbidden; neither ever were they in use amongst the first Fathers of the
world, until after the Babylonian dispersion. Of the first sort was their
sacrificing of men, which I have elsewhere showed to have been Catholic in the
world. Of the latter, to omit Horses, Dogs, and the like, we may take an
instance in that of Swine. (...), the Offerings of Swine, was the principal,
and as the most of them judged the most ancient kind of Sacrifice amongst them.
This they constantly used, whether in Consecrations, or Lustrations, or
Confirmations of Covenants, the most solemn occasions of their Sacrifices. So
in the first way he speaks in Aristophanes,

(...),
(...).
Money I want, a sacred Swine to buy;
I would be consecrate, before I dye.
And in case of Lustration or Expiation, Plautus speaks to the same purpose in
his Maenechmi,

Adolescens quibus hic pretiis porci voeneunt sacres sinceri?
Nummum unum en a me accipe; jube te piari mea pecunia;
Nam ego quidem insanum esse te certe scio.
Young man, what is here the price of Swine fit for sacrifice? take a piece of
Silver of me, and get thy self expiated, (or freed from thy malady by
Sacrifice) with my money; for I (...) certainly that thou art mad.

And another concerning Covenants.

Caesa jungebant foedera por^a. They ratified their Covenants by the Sacrifice
of a Female Swine. But this by the way; we return.

Israel, is directed, Levit. 1: In general, as was said, it was (...), Corban,
a Gift brought nigh to God: ver. 3. (...); if his Corban be Hola. From (...),
Hala, ascendit, to go upward, it was so called. The LXX. render it for the most
part by (...), or (...), as does our Apostle, Chap. 10.6. that which is wholly
consumed or burnt, as this was all but the skin. For the (...) mentioned, v. 8.
and Chap. 8. v. 20. and no where else in the Scripture, rather signifies the
whole trunk of the body after the head was cut off, then the fat of the Cawl,
as we render it. And it is not unlike, but they might make use of the word
(...), because the beginning of it answers in sound unto the Hebrew (...), for
that they were at a loss in expressing the names of the particular Sacrifices,
has been declared. But (...) signifies to ascend; and because things that do
so, do disappear, and seem not to be, it denotes also to consume, or to be
consumed; and from either of these significations, this Sacrifice which was
wholly burnt, may take its name.

Manner of this Sacrifice, it is observable; that he who brought it was to put
his hand on the head of it, v. 4. (...), and put his hands upon the head of the
Burnt-Offering; lay them on, that the Beast might seem to bear and sustain
them; so we, after the Vulgar Latin, Manus suas, his hands, in the Original his
hand. And the Hebrews are divided, whether he laid on only one hand, his right
hand, or both. Chap. 16. v. 21. Where the High Priest was to perform this duty
in the name of the people, it is said expressly, that he shall put (...), both
his hands on the head of it: whence most conclude; that both the hands are here
also intended. But this seems rather to be an Argument unto the contrary. For
in saying that the High Priest (who was to offer for himself as well as the
people) in his performance of this work, shall lay both his hands, and when a
private person did it, he shall lay on his hand, the Holy Ghost seems to
intimate a difference between them in this action. And this Ceremony was
observed only when the Offerings was of Beasts; not so when it was of Fowls or
Birds. And when the season of the Sacrifice was stated by Gods prescription for
the use of the People, the Priest was to perform this duty. The meaning of the
Ceremony was, quod illorum capiti sit; typically and representatively to impose
the sin of the Offerer, on the head of the Offering, to instruct us in the
bearing of our sin by Christ, when through the eternal spirit he offered
himself unto God.

Secondly, The Beast, now a Corban, by being brought unto the Altar, was to be
He shall kill the Bullock; that is, say some, he that brought the Offering, was
to kill it. For say they, those that killed the Offering, are distinguished
from them that took the blood of it, and sprinkled it on the Altar, 2 Chronicles.
29.22. So they killed the Bullocks, and the Priests received the blood, and
sprinkled it on the Altar. But those slayers seem not to have been the People,
but the Levites, who were to assist the Priests in their Service, Numb. 8.19.
and who in all greater Sacrifices, did the outward work of killing, and
slaying. See 2 Chronicles. 35. 10, 11. as also it is said expressly, that they slew
the Paschal Lamb, 2 Chronicles. 30. And unto this killing of the Bullock, or Kid, or
Lamb, answered the wringing off of the head of the Bird, if the Burnt Offering
were of Fowls, which is expressly said to be done by the Priest, v. 15. And of
him that kills the Offering, v. 5. it is said, he shall flay it, and cut it
into its pieces, v. 6. which was the work of the Priests and their Assistants.

The place where it was to be killed, was on the North side of the Altar, v.
11. And when it was killed, the blood was taken, or wrung out and sprinkled
about the Altar, v. 5. which sprinkling of blood was used in all Sacrifices of
living Creatures, as eminently prefiguring our sanctification, or purifying of
our hearts from an evil conscience by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ,
Heb. 9.14. Chap. 12.24.

The Beast being killed, was slayed and opened; made (...), naked, and opened,
which our Apostle alludes unto, Chap. 4.13. Afterward it was cut into pieces,
v. 6. which pieces were salted, Chap. 2.13. and then laid in order on the wood
upon the Altar, v. 8. as also were the legs and inwards, after they were
washed, v. 9. As our bodies in our approach unto God are said to be washed with
pure water, Heb. 10.22. The everlasting fire, typing out the eternal Spirit,
through which Christ offered himself unto God, Heb. 9.14. being applied by the
Priest unto the Wood, the whole was incinerated, Psalm 20.3. continuing to burn
it may be all night long; though no Sacrifice was to be offered but by day,
which made them watch for the morning, Psalm 130.6. The differing Ceremonies in
killing and offering of the Fowls are clearly expressed in the same Chapter.

The End of this Offering was always to make Atonement. So the Text; v. 4. It
shall be accepted for him to make Atonement for him: (...), says One, Quod
latin vertitur expiare, hoc est, Deo aliquem commendare; it is to commend any
one to God. A sense which neither will the word bear, nor the nature of the
thing admit: (...) is always, to be accepted; and for what end shall the
Sacrifice be accepted? (...), to appease, atone, to make atonement for him,
as we shall show elsewhere; not absolutely; this it could not do, Heb. 10. 1,
2, 3. but in a Representation, as they were a shadow of good things to come, v.
11.

There are reckoned up eighteen times wherein this kind of Offering was to be
made Nine of them refer unto particular occasions and emergencies, the other
nine had their fixed seasons, occurring daily, monthly, or annually. Only we
may observe that of this kind of Offering was the (...), the juge sacrificium,
or continual Sacrifice which was offered Morning and Evening, with whose final,
removal, or taking away, the Church and Worship of the Jews utterly ceased,
Dan. 9.27. And as it had a precise command, for its being offered Morning and
Evening continually, so in the constant acknowledgement of God therein, in the
vicislitudes of Night and Day there was such a suitableness to the Light and
Law of Nature in it, that it prevailed among the Heathen themselves in their
Idolatrous Services; witness that of Hesiod,

(...)
(...).
Let Offerings and Sacrifices burn,
At Evening, and at Sacred Lights return.
And so at Rome, the Pinarii and Potitii sacrificed to Hercules, in Ara Maxima,
Morning and Evening, as Livy, Plutarch, and Dionysius testify. The Custom also
of Feasts at this Sacrifice, to testify mutual Love and Peace amongst men, was
common with the Jews unto the Gentiles. Thus when Jethro, Moses his Father in
Law offered a Burnt-Offering and Sacrifices, Aaron and all the Elders of Israel
came to eat Bread with him before God, Exodus 18.12. And so also in the
Sacrifices that Agamemnon offered in Homer Iliad B. he called the Ancients and
Princes of the Graecians to a Banquet at it with him; as did Nestor likewise
with those about him, at his great Sacrifice. Od^ss. G.

The next sort of Offerings that was regulated in the Law, was the (...), which
as it denoted an especial kind of Sacrifice we have from the matter of it,
rendered a Meat Offering, Levit. 2.1. And this, as was said of the whole
Burnt-Offering before, was not then first instituted and appointed, but only
regulated and solemnly approved. For it had been observed from the beginning,
and consisting in the fruits of the earth, had a great foundation in the Law of
Nature. Thus Cain brought his (...) Mincha of the fruits of the earth to offer
unto God, Genesis 4.3. And there is no doubt but that as to the kind of it, it was
acceptable unto God, as of his own Institution, though the Person that offered
it, for want of faith was not approved Heb. 11.3.

Original, so variously used and applied. Sometimes it is used for a Civil Gift
of men one to another; or a present, 1 Samuel 10.27. Sometimes for any Offering
or Sacrifice. So Abels Sacrifice which was in especial a Burnt-Offering, is
called his Mincha, Genesis 3. Hence it is sometimes rendered in the New Testament
by (...), a Sacrifice, a bloody Sacrifice, Matthew. 9.49. Acts 7.42. And our
Apostle from Psalm. 40.6. renders (...), Sebach and Mincha, by (...), Heb. 10.5.
Sacrifice and Offering; by both a which terms Sacrifices only of Atonement and
Propitiation were intended, and not the especial Meat Offering, which was
properly Eucharistical, and not Propitiatory. And the expression in that of the
Psalmist, answers directly unto what God speaks concerning the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.14. The sin of the house of Eli shall not be expiated, (...), neither by
Sebach, nor by Mincha: that is, by no sort of Sacrifices appointed to make
Atonement, or to expiate sin. So also is the word used, 1 Samuel 26.19. But as
it denotes the especial Offering now under consideration, it was not ordinarily
appointed to make Atonement. I say not ordinarily, because there was an
especial dispensation in the case of the Poor man, who was allowed to bring
Flower and Oil, the matter of the Mincha, instead of the (...), Ascham, or
Trepass Offering, Levit. 5.11, 12. And yet Atonement properly was not made
thereby; only in it, or the appointment of it, there was a testification of
Gods acceptance of the Person with a non obstante for his Trespass. And hence
does our Apostle use his (...), his almost in this business, Heb. 9.22. Almost
all things are purged with blood. The like allowance was in the Offering of the
jealous Person: It was to consist of Barley Meal, the matter of the
Meat Offering; but it made no Atonement; for it is expressly said, That it was
to bring sin to remembrance; Numb. 5.15. Whereas every Sacrifice of Atonement,
was for the covering of sin, and the casting of it out of Remembrance.

Mincha denotes a peculiar Offering, whose Laws and Ordinances are recorded,
Levit. 2.1, 2, etc. the matter of it, was 1. (...), Soleth, simila, v. 7. that
is, the flower of Wheat. So it is expresed, Ezekiel. 45.13, 15. In one case (...),
farina hordacea, Barley meal (so we render the word) was used, Numb. 5.15. But
(...) Kemach is properly, Bran, Barley bran. This was the Offering in the case
of jealousy, God appointing therein the use of Barley, the worst of Bread-corn
and the bran of it, the worst of that grain, prohibiting the addition of Oil
and Frankincense, to testify his dislike of the matter either in the sin of
the Woman, or the causeless jealousy of the man. 2. (...), biccurim, primae
fruges, frugum primitiae, first fruits; that is, (...), corn newly ripened in
the ear. 3. Oil. 4. Frankincense. 5. Salt, v. 1, 2, 3, etc. And the use of two
things are expressly forbidden, namely Leaven and Honey, v. 11. Hereunto also
belongs the (...), Nesec, or Drink Offering, which was an addition of Wine
unto some Sacrifices, never used separately. And the Psalmist shows how this
degenerated amongst Idolaters, who in their superstitious rage, made use of the
blood of living creatures, it may be of men, in their libamina. They had (...),
drink offering of blood, which he abhorred, Psalm. 16.3.

Now this Offering was sometimes offered alone by its self, and then it was of
the free will offering, whose Law and Manner is prescribed, Levit. 2. For the
most part it was annexed unto other Sacrifices; and it was either stated and
general* or occasional and particular. The stated Meat Offerings say some,
concerned the whole Congregation, and they reckon up three of them; 1. The Wave
sheaf, Levit. 23. 10, 11. 2. The two wave loaves, v. 17. 3. The daily
shewbread, Levit. 24.5. But whereas we have showed that the (...) Mincha was
one of the (...), or a Fire-Offering, and also it was (...) most holy, Levit.
2.10. these being neither of them, they belonged unto the Terumah, of which
afterward, and were none of them Mincha, or the Meat Offering properly so
called. It is true at the offering of the Wave-sheaf, and the Wave-loaf, there
was a Meat Offering offered unto God, consisting of two tenth deals of Soleth,
or wheat flour mingled with Oil, and the fourth part of an Hin of Wine for a
Drink Offering, which were burned in the Fire; Lev. 23.13. but themselves were
a Terumah, and not a Mincha. The particular and occasional offerings of this
nature, are reckoned to be, 1. The poor man's Offering, Levit. 5.11. 2. The
Jealousie-offering, Numb. 5.15. 3. The Offering of the Priests at their
Consecration, Levit. 8.26, 28. 4. The High Priests daily, Meat Offering, Levit.
6.20. 5. The Leaper offering, Levit. 14.10. 6. The Dedication offering
mentioned, Numb. 8. But some of these, have a participation in the matter, but
not in the nature of the especial Mincha. The principal signification of this
Offering is expressed, Isa. 66.20. compared with Romans 15.16. Mal. 1. 10, 11.
compared with 1 Timothy 2.8. And two things in it express the Grace of the
Covenant; First, The handful that was for a memorial; that is, to bring to
memory the Covenant of God; and Secondly, The Salt, which declared it firm and
stable.

Hereunto, as we have said, belongs the (...), nesek, which as directed in the
Law, was Mincha, and is not reckoned among the distinct species of Offerings,
as they are summed up, Lev. 7.37. And the Reason is, because under the Law it
was never offered alone by its self, but as an Appendix unto Burnt-offerings,
Sin Offerings, and Peace Offerings, to complete the Mincha, or Meat Offering
that accompanied them. But of old before the Reformation of Sacrifices by
Moses, it was a distinct Offering by its self, Genesis 35.14. Jacob offered a
Drink Offering, that is of Wine, which was its primitive Institution and
Practice. And it was always to be of Wine; Numb. 15. This, Chap. 28. v. 7. is
called (...), Shechar, which although we generally translate strong drink, yet
it appears from hence to have been a strong inebriating Wine; and so the most
learned of the Jews suppose. We call this Nesek, a Drink Offering, in answer to
the name we give unto the Mincha, a Meat Offering, that is, Offerings whose
matter was of things to be eat and drunk. It may be otherwise called a Pouring,
an Offering poured out; Libamen, a sacred effusion. And these Offerings were
most holy also, Lev. 2.10.

These Offerings of the fruits of the earth as they were in use among the
Heathen, so ancient kind of Sacrifices amongst men, as Plato expressly, lib. 6.
de Legib. but we know the contrary from Genesis 4. where the first Sacrifices in
the world are recorded. The latter Pythagoraeans also condemned all other
Offerings, all that were (...), of living creatures; as I have elsewhere showed
out of Porphyrie; though Cicero testify of Pythagoras himself that he
sacrificed an Ox. And whatever was appointed in this Meat Offering, they also
made use of. Their Far, Mola salsa, (...), that is flower of Wheat, or Barley
mingled with water and salt, is of most frequent mention amongst their sacred
things. So also were their placentae and Liba adorea, their Cakes made with
Flower, Oil, and Honey. What was their use to the same purpose of Wine and
Frankincencense, the Reader may see at large in the seventh Book of Arnobius
advers. Gentes.

The next solemn Sacrifice in the Order of their Appointment under the Law, is,
Sebach Shelamin, which we render Peace Offerings, Levit. 3.1. It is by
Translators rendered with more variety than any other Word used in this matter.
By the Greeks (...), and (...), and (...), and (...), a Sacrifice of Salvation,
of Expiation, of Praise, of Perfection. And the Latins have yet more varied in
their expression of it; Sacrificium pacium, perfectionum, gratulationum,
salutis, retributionum, integrorum, mundorum, sanctisicatorum, immaculatorum; A
Sacrifice of Peace, of Perfection, of Thanksgiving, of Safety or Salvation, of
Retribution, of them that are clean, or sanctified, or unspotted. Most of these
various expressions also arise from the different signification of the word
(...), whence most suppose that (...) was taken. But others think that it comes
from (...) Peace, which of late is almost generally received. In general this
Sacrifice was Corban, a Gift or Offering brought nigh and dedicated unto God;
and (...), a firing, or an offering by Fire; and in specie (...), a Sacrifice
from the slaying and killing of the Beast that was offered. But it is no where
said to be (...), or most holy, as being merely expressive of Moral duties, in
a way accommodated to the present Economy of Divine Worship; see Heb. 13.15.
but it is usually reckoned amongst them that were so.

Peace Offerings, as was observed, is the name that has prevailed, though it
respected Vows of thanksgiving, or for the impetration of Mercies: see Chap. 7.
v. 12, 17. The Reason given by Jarchi for this Appellation, namely, because it
brought Peace unto the world, is like much of what they say in such Cases, a
sound of words without any meaning. Kimchi gives a more sober and rational
account of it. The (...), says he, or Burnt-offering was all of it burned,
only the skin was the Priests. The (...) and (...), Sin and Trepass Offering
were burned in part; the Breast and Shoulder were the Priests, and all the
flesh that was not burned, as also the skin. But in this Sacrifice (...), the
fat ascended on the Altar, the Breast and Shoulder were the Priests, the
residue of the flesh belonged unto the Offerers, or them that brought it, to
eat themselves; and so it was a Sacrifice of Peace among all Parties. If this
Reason please not, we may choose one of the other significations of the Word,
as of Perfections or Retributions, which latter the nature of it inclines unto.

Matter of this Sacrifice was the same with that of the Burnt-offering; namely,
as to Beasts of the Heard, Bullocks or Heifers; of the Flock, Goats, Rams,
Lambs or Kids: of Fowls the same with the former, v. 6, 7. In the Causes of it;
it was either a Free-will-offering for impetration, or from a Vow for
Thanksgiving or Retribution. The appointed seasons and occasions of it were; 1.
At the Consecration of a Priest, Exodus 29. 2. At the Purification of a Leper,
Levit. 14. 3. At the Expiration of a Nazaretical Vow, Numb. 6.14. 4. At the
solemn Dedication of the Tabernacle and Temple. The manner of its Offering is
peculiarly described, Levit. 3. and the Jews observations about it, the Reader
may see in the Annotations of Ainsworth on the place.

v. 5. And Aarons sons shall burn it on the Altar, (...); that is, says the
Vulgar Latin in holocaustum, for a Burnt-offering; as though its self were so,
or substituted in the room of the whole Burnt-offering. The LXX. (...), upon
the Burnt-offerings. So we, upon the Burnt-sacrifice. But what is the
intendment of that expression; is not so evident. The Jews say, that the daily
Burnt-offering is intended, which was always first to be offered, and then
immediately upon it, or whilst it was yet burning, the Peace Offering was to
be added thereunto. It is not indeed declared whether the Hola mentioned, were
the daily Burnt-offering or no. Most probably it was so, and that being a
Sacrifice of Atonement rendered this of Thankfulness acceptable unto God; see
Heb. 13.15, 16.

Parts of the Beast in this Sacrifice that were to be burned on the Altar are
enumerated; namely the Suet and Fat of the inwards, the Kidneys and their fat,
the fat on the Flanks, and the Caul of the Liver, or the Midriff. Hence it is
laid down as a general Rule, that all the fat is the Lords, v.16. And it is
called a perpetual Statute for all their Generations through all their
dwellings, that they should eat no fat, v. 17. But yet this general Precept had
a double limitation. First, That only that fat which was to be offered, was
excepted from eating. Of the other fat diffused through the rest of the flesh,
they might eat. Secondly, It was only the fat of Beasts appointed to be offered
in Sacrifice that was forbidden, as it is directly exppressed, Levit. 7.25. Of
the fat of other clean Beasts they might eat. And this offering of the Fat,
seems to denote our serving of God with the best that we have; which yet is not
acceptable, but by virtue of the Blood of Christ, as the fat was to be burned,
in the Burnt-offering, or Sacrifice of Atonement.

Shelamim were the Offerings among the Heathen, which they sacrificed either
upon any great undertaking which they called (...), in a way of Vow, or upon
any success. So Cyrus Minor, Xenophon, and Arianus in their Expeditions,
sacrificed, Sacrificia Votiva; and the latter sort were in an especial manner
provided for in the Pontifical Law, as it is reported by Festus. Cujus auspicio
class procincta opima spolia capiuntur, Jovi feretrito darier oportet, and
bovem caedito qui caepit aeris ducenta. Secunda spolia in Martis aram in Campo,
solitaurilia utra voluerit caedito. Tertia spolia Jano Quirino agnum Marem
caedito centum, qui caeperit ex aere dato.

The next sort of Sacrifice was the (...), Chataath or Sin-offering, whose Laws
and Levit. 4. This Sacrifice is not expressly called a Corban, or a Gift, it
being wholly a Debt, to be paid for Expiation and Atonement; but being brought
nigh unto God, it partook in general of the nature of the (...), Corbanim. It
was of the (...), Fireings, or Fire-offerings, expressly, v. 12. because of the
burning of the Fat on the Altar; and of the (...), or slain Sacrifices. And
also it was of the (...), or most holy things from its Institution and
Signification. The name of it is (...), Chataath, that is, sin. He shall do to
the Bullock, as he did, (...) to the Bullock of the Sin; that is, of the
Sin-offering, Levit. 4.20. So Ezekiel. 45.1. The Priest shall take (...), of the
blood of the sin; that is, the Sin-offering. (...) Chata in kal is to sin, to
offend, to err from the way, to contract the guilt of sin. Hence (...),
Chataim, are men given up unto, and wandering in the ways of sin, Psalm. 1.1. In
Pihel it has a contrary signification; namely, to purge, to expiate, to
cleanse, to make Atonement, to undergo penalty, to make satisfaction, Genesis
31.39. That which was torn, says Jacob to Laban, I brought it not to thee,
(...), achatennah, I answered for it; I paid for it, I went by the loss of it.
See Exodus 29.36. Numb. 19.19. Levit. 6.26. According to this signification of
(...) is used to denote an Offering for sin; that whereby sin is expiated,
pardon of it is procured, Atonement is made: So prays David, Psalm. 51. (...),
thou shall purge me, with Hysop, as Numb. 19. that is, clear me, free me, as by
an Offering for sin. And this kind of expression, our Apostle retains, not only
where he reports a Testimony of the Old Testament, as Heb. 10. v. 6. (...),
Burnt-offerings, and for sin, that is, (...), Sin-offering; but also where he
makes Application of it unto the Lord Christ and his Sacrifice which was
typified thereby, Romans 8.3. God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and (...), that is, (...), an Offering for sin, a Sin-offering, as the word
should have been translated. And 2 Cor. 5.21. Him who knew no sin; (...), he
made sin, (...) a Sin-offering for us.

The general cause of this Sacrifice was sin committed (...), Levit. 4.2. say
we, through ignorance. So the LXX. (...); and the Vulgar Latin, per
ignorantiam; through ignorance. Some old Copies of the Greek have (...); not
voluntarily; not wilfully; For it had respect unto all sins, as were not
committed so (...), willingly, wilfully, presumptuously, as that there was no
Sacrifice appointed for them, the Covenant being disannulled by them, Heb.
10.26. And there is no sort of sins, no sin whatever, that is between this
(...), this sin of ignorance, or error, and sin committed (...), with an high
hand, or presumptuously. See expressly, Numb. 15.28, 29, 30. Hence this (...),
this Sin-offering was the great Sacrifice of the solemn Day of Expiation,
Levit. 16. whereby Atonement was made, for all the uncleanness of the children
of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins, v. 16. And
upon the head of the live Goat, which was a part of the Sin-offering on that
day, there was confessed and laid, all the iniquities of the children of
Israel, and all their transgressions, in all their sins, v. 27. That is all
iniquities not disannulling the Covenant, which had (...), a revenging
Recompense allotted unto them, Heb. 2.2. And accordingly are those words to be
interpreted where the cause of this Sacrifice is expressed, Levit. 4.2. If a
soul sin (...), by Error, Ignorance, imprudently against any of the
commandments of the Lord, as it ought not to do, and shall do against any of
them. And an instance is given in him who killed his neighbor without propense
malice, Deuteronomy. 9.4. Any sin is there intended whereinto men fall by Error,
Ignorance, Imprudence, Incogitancy, Temptation, Violence of Affections, and the
like. For such was this Sacrifice instituted. And the End which it typically
represented is expressed, 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our
sins; namely, in the room of, and as represented by the Sin-offering of old,
whereby Atonement and Propitiation was typically made for sin. Only there was
this difference, That whereas the Law of Moses was appointed to be the rule of
the Political Government of the People, wherein many sins, such as Adultery and
Murder were to be punished with Death, and the sinner cut off, there was in
such cases no Sacrifices appointed, nor admitted; but in the Sacrifice of
Christ there is no exception made unto any sin, in those that repent, believe
and forsake their sins; not unto those in particular which were excepted in the
L^w of Moses, Acts 13.39. So that as the Sin-offering was provided for all sin
that disannulled not the Covenant made at Horeb, which allowed no life or
interest unto Murderers, Adulterers, Blasphemers, and the like in the Typical
Land; so the Sacrifice of Christ is extended unto all sinners, who transgress
not the terms and tenor of the New Covenant, for whom no place is allowed
either in the Church here, or Heaven hereafter.

Matter of this Offering, see Levit. 4.2. which because it differed very little
from the Matter of the Burnt-offering, I shall not particularly insist upon it.

As to the Persons that were to offer it, there is a general distribution of
them in the Text comprehensive of all sorts of Persons whatever. For it is
applied, to 1. The Priest: 2. The whole Congregation jointly: 3. The Ruler: 4.
Any of the People of the Land; so that none were excluded from the Privilege
and Benefit of this Sacrifice.

The first Person mentioned, is (...), the Anointed Priest, Chap. 4.3. that is,
say the Jews generally, and our Expositors also, (...), the High Priest, Aaron
and his Sons that ministered in his room in their succession. For those only say
they, were anointed. But this seems not to be so; For if the High Priest alone
be intended, there is no provision made for any other Priest to have an
interest in this Sin-offering. For the Priests are not comprised in any other
member of the distribution before mentioned, particularly not in that wherein
with any color they might be looked after, namely, the (...), v. 27. The
people of the Land, that is, the common people, from whom the Priests were
always distinguished. Any Priest therefore is intended; and (...), anointed,
is no more but dedicated, separated unto the Office of the Priesthood, or it
respects that Original anointing which they had all in their forefathers the
Sons of Aaron, when they were first set apart to God; Exodus 24.

if he sin according to the sin of the people, so we; Castalio renders the
passage, si Sacerdos inunctus deliquerit in noxiam populi; if the Anointed
Priest so sin, as to bring guilt upon, or damage unto the people. As Achan
did, and David also. Vulg. Lat. delinquere faciens populum; causing the people
to sin; which is another sense of the words. And this sense the Jews generally
embrace. For they apply this sinning of the Anointed Priest, unto his teaching
the people amiss; causing them to err thereby, so Aben Ezra, and others on the
place, who are followed by many of ours. But if this be so, the Priest was not
allowed the benefit of this Sacrifice of the Sin-offering, for any sin of his
own, but only when he caused the people to sin also, which would render his
condition worse than theirs, and is contrary unto that of our Apostle; that the
Priest was to offer for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. I
would there, in (...) take (...) for (...) and render it with our Translators,
according to; when he sinned as another man of the people; their Place and
Office, not freeing them from the common sins of other men. And so our Apostle
seems to expound this place; Heb. 5.2, 3. The Priests of the Law were compassed
with infirmities, and by reason thereof, had need to offer Sin Offerings for
their own sin, as well as for the sins of the people; seeing he also sinned
(...), according to the sin of the people. But it is otherwise now says he,
with the people of God, Chap. 7. v. 26, 27. Our High Priest being holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, that is, not sinning according
to the sins of the people, as the Priests did of old.

whole Congregation jointly had an interest in this Sacrifice, when any such
sin was committed as might reflect guilt upon it, v. 13. For the observation of
the Law being committed in an especial manner unto the whole Congregation,
there were many Transgressions in the guilt whereof the whole Body of it might
be involved. Thirdly, The Ruler or Rulers had this privilege also, v. 22. with
respect as appears by this peculiar institution unto his miscarriages in his
Office, God graciously providing a relief against the sins of men in their
several conditions, that they might not through a consciousness of their
infirmities be deterred from engaging in any necessary employment among the
people, when called thereunto. Fourthly, Any one of the common people had the
same liberty, and were obliged unto the same duty, v. 27. And this Distribution
of the people, as to their interest in this Sin-offering, comprizing them all,
even all that belonged unto the Congregation of Israel, of all sorts and ranks,
had its accomplishment in the Sacrifice of Christ, from which none is excluded
that come to God by him, for he will in no wise cast them out.

For the Time and Season of this Sacrifice, it may briefly observed, that there
were Monthly, some Annual, wherein it was to be offered for the whole
Congregation by especial Command and Institution. As 1. On every New Moon; 2.
On the fifteenth day of the first Month, and seven days together dureing the
Feast of unleavened bread: 3. At the Feast of First Fruits: 4. At the Feast of
Trumpets: 5. On the Day of Expiation: 6. On the fifteenth day of the seventh
Month, and for eight days together during the Feast of Tabernacles. And the
frequent Repetition of this Sacrifice was to intimate that nothing was accepted
with God, but on the account of what was prefigured thereby, namely, that
Perfect Sacrifice which took away the sin of the world. There were also
especial Occasions of it, with reference unto the persons before enumerated,
which have been collected by others.

The Principal Ceremony in the Manner of its Oblation, was the disposal of the
Blood. For the Blood of this Sacrifice had a triple disposal. The main of the
Blood was poured out at the bottom of the Altar of Burnt-offerings, in the
Court before the door of the Tabernacle, v. 7. A part of it was taken and
carried by the High Priest into the Sanctuary, and put upon the horns of the
Altar of Incense, that was therein, v. 7. The third part, (which was first
disposed of) was to be carried into the Most Holy Place, as it was done
accordingly on the day of Expiation, Levit. 16. But because it was not lawful
for him to enter in thither but once in the year, namely, on that Day, at all
other times he dipped his Finger in the blood, and sprinkled it seven times
toward the Veyle, that parted the Most Holy Place from the Sanctuary, v. 6. So
that every place of the Tabernacle, and all the concernments of it, were
sanctified with this Blood; even as Jesus Christ who was represented in all
this, was dedicated unto God in his own Blood, the Blood of the Covenant, Heb.
10.29. That seven is the number of Perfection, greatly used and variously
applied in the Scriptures many have observed. And the perfect cleansing of sin
by the Blood of Jesus, was evidently represented by this sevenfold sprinkling;
Heb. 9. 13, 14. and therefore in Allusion hereunto, it is called the Blood of
sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Even that which was prefigured by all the Blood of the
Sacrifices, that was sprinkled toward the Most Holy Place, and the Mercy seat
therein.

The next sort of Fire-offerings, was the (...), Asham, whose Laws and
Ordinances are directed, Levit. 5. and the particular occasion of it, Chap. 7.
We call it, the Trepass Offering. And it differed very little from that next
before described. For it is not only said concerning them; (...); as is the
Chataath, or Sin-offering, so is the Asham, or Trepass Offering, there is one
Law for them, Chap. 7. v. 7. but also that he who had sinned or trespassed,
should bring his (...), his Trepass Offering unto the Lord, for his sin which
he had sinned, a female from the flock, or a kid of the Goats, (...), for a
Sin-offering. Some think that there was a difference between them, and that it
lay in this, that the Chataath respected sins of Omission, and the Asham, sins
of Commission. But that this will not hold, is openly evident in the Text. Some
think that whereas in both these Offerings there was respect unto ignorance,
that that in the Chataath, was Juris, of the right or Law, that in the Asham
was Facti, of the particular fact. But this opinion also may be easily
disproved from the Context. This to me seems to be the Principal, if not the
only difference between them; that the Asham provided a Sacrifice in some
particular instances, which seem not to be comprised under the general Rules of
the Sin-offering. And hence in a peculiar manner it is said of Jesus Christ,
that he should give (...), his Soul, an Asham, or piacular Sacrifice, as for
all, so for such delinquencies and sins, as seem to bring a destroying guilt on
the soul, Isa. 53.10. And this kind of offering also was (...), Most Holy,
Levit. 6.20.

The last sort of Fire-Offerings were the (...), which are reckoned as a
distinct species of Sacrifices, Levit. 7.36. that is, plenitudinum,
impletionum, consecrationum, Sacrifices of Consecration, or that were
instituted to be observed at the Consecration of Priests. Its name it seems to
have taken from the filling their hands, or their bringing their Offering in
their hands, when they approached unto the Lord in their setting apart unto
Office. And thence was the expression of him that came to be consecrated a
Priest; (...), 2 Chronicles. 13. v. 9. He that came to fill his hand with a bullock.
The rise of this Expression we have marked before, on Exodus 28.41. The Lord
giving directions unto Moses for the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, he
tells him, (...), thou shall fill their hand, that is, put the flesh of the
Sacrifice, with the Bread and its Appurtenances into their hands, which being
the initiating Ceremony of their investiture with Office, gave name afterward
unto the whole. And hence the Sacrifices appointed then to be offered, although
they differed not in kind from those foregoing; yet are accounted to be a
distinct Offering, and are called (...), or fillings. And this may suffice as a
brief account of the fire Offerings of the Law of Moses, whose Use and End we
are fully, instructed in, in this Epistle to the Hebrews.

Corbans, or offerings unto God, under the Law, which were of things, or parts
of things not burned on the Altar, but one way or other devoted or consecrated
to God and his service. These were the (...), Terumoth, which we have rendered
sometimes offerings in general, and sometimes Heave-offerings, under which kind
the (...), or Wave-offerings also were comprised. Concerning these, because the
handling of them is not without its difficulties, being diffused in their use
throughout the whole Worship of God, and that some things not vulgarly known
might have been declared concerning them, I thought to have treated at large;
but whereas they are not directly referred unto by our Apostle in this Epistle,
and these discourses being increased much beyond my first design, I shall here
wholly omit all farther disquisition about them.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE TWO FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE EPISTLE OF PAUL the APOSTLE
UNTO THE HEBREWS.

WHEREIN The Original Text is Opened and Cleared.

Ancient and Modern Translations are compared and examined.

The Design of the Apostle, with his Reasonings, Arguments and Testimonies are
unfolded.

The Faith, Customs, Sacrifices, and other Usages of the Judaical Church are
opened and declared;

The true sense of the Text is Vindicated from the wrestings of it by Socinians
and others.

And lastly, Practical Observations are Deduced and Improved.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

By J. Owen, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the
Peacock in Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet. 1668.

THE PREFACE.
THE general concernments of this Epistle have all of them been discussed and
cleared in the preceding Exercitations and Discourses. The things and matters
confirmed in them, we therefore here suppose, and take for granted. And they
are such some of them, as without a Demonstration whereof, a genuine and
perspicuous Declaration of the Design of the Author, and sense of the Epistle
cannot be well founded or carried on. Unto them therefore we must remit the
Reader who desires to peruse the ensuing Exposition with profit and advantage.
But yet because the manner of the handling of things in those Discourses, may
not be so suited unto the minds of all who would willingly enquire into the
Exposition its self, I shall here make an entrance into it, by laying down some
such General Principles and Circumstances of the Epistle, as may give a
competent prospect into the design and Argument of the Apostle, in the whole
thereof.

1. The first of these concerns the Persons whose instruction and edification
in the Faith is here aimed at: These in general were the Hebrews, the Posterity
of Abraham, and the only Church of God before the promulgation of the Gospel;
who in those days were distributed into three sorts, or parties.

1. Some of them believing in Christ through the Gospel, were perfectly
instructed in the Liberty given them from the Mosaical Law, with the foundation
of that Liberty in its accomplishment in the Person, Office and Work of the
Messiah, Acts 2.41, 42.

2. Some with their Profession of Faith in Christ as the Messiah promised,
retained an opinion of the necessary observation of Mosaical Rites; and these
also were of two sorts.

(1.) Such as from a pure Reverence of their Original Institutions, either
being not fully instructed in their Liberty, or by reason of prejudices not
readily admitting the consequences of that Truth wherein they were instructed,
abode in their observation, without seeking for Righteousness or Salvation by
them. Acts 21. v. 20.

(2.) Such as urged their observation as indispensably necessary to our
Justification before God, Acts 15.1. Gal. 3.4. The first sort of those the
Apostles bare with in all meekness; yea, and using the Liberty given them of
the Lord, to avoid offending of them, joined with them in their practice as
occasion did require, Acts 16.3. Chap. 21.23, 24, 26. Chap. 27.9. 1 Cor. 9.20.
whence for a long season, in many places, the Worship of the Gospel, and
Synagogue Worship of the Law were observed together, James 2.2. though in
process of time, many disputes and differences were occasioned thereby, between
the Gentile and Jewish Worshippers, Romans 14. The other sort they opposed, as
perverters of the Gospel which they pretended to profess, Acts 15.5. Gal. 2.13,
14, 15, 16. Chap. 4.9, 10, 11. Chap. 5.2. And of these some afterward
apostatized to Judaism; others abiding in a corrupt mixture of both professions
separated themselves from the Church, and were called Nazarenes and Ebionites.

3. Others, far the greatest number of the whole people, persisted in their Old
Church State, not receiving the salvation that was tendered unto them in the
preaching of the Gospel; and these also were of two sorts: (1.) Such as who
although they had not embraced the faith, yet were free and willing to attend
unto the Doctrine of it, searching the Scriptures for a discovery of its Truth,
and in the mean time instantly serving God, according to the Light of the Old
Testament, which they had received: and in these was the essence of the
Judaical Church preserved to its final dissolution, Acts 17.11. Chap. 28.22,
23, 24. (2.) Such as being hardened in their Infidelity, blasphemed, scoffed at,
and persecuted the Gospel, with all that professed it, Acts 13.45, 50. Chap.
15.19. Chap. 17.5. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. Romans 11.7, 8, 9, 10. whom not long after
the vengeance of God overtook in their total destruction.

Now our Apostle vehemently thirsting after the salvation of the Hebrews in
general, Romans 9.1. Chap. 10.1. having all these several sorts, or parties to
deal withal, he so frames his Epistle unto them, that it might be suited to all
their Good, in their Conversion, Instruction, Edification, and Establishment,
as their several conditions did require: the latter sort only excepted, who
being under judicial blindness were cast out of the care of God, and his, Acts
13.46, 51. Hence in part is that admirable contexture of this Epistle, which
Peter ascribes unto his eminent wisdom, 2 Pet. 3.18. As it is indeed evident
from the story, that he did excel, in applying himself to the various
Principles, Capacities and prejudices of them with whom he had to do. The Lord
Christ having set him forth as a great example of that diligence, zeal and
prudence, which he requires in the dispensers of the Gospel. Divine reasonings,
instructions, exhortations, promises, threats, arguments are so interwoven in
this Epistle from the beginning to the end, that all to whose hands or hearing
it should come, might every where meet with that which was of especial and
immediate concernment to themselves, unto which of the sorts before mentioned
soever they did belong. And this Principle we must have respect unto, in that
intermixture of Arguments to prove the Truth of the Gospel, with Exhortations
to constancy in the profession of it, which we shall meet withal. The several
conditions of those to whom the Apostle wrote, required that way of proceedure;
Hence no one Chapter in the Epistle is purely dogmatical, the first only
excepted, nor purely Paraenetical. For though the design that lies in view, and
is never out of sight, be Exhortation, yet far the greatest part of the Epistle
of taken up in those doctrinalls, wherein the foundations of the exhortations
do lie, both interwoven together, somewhat variously from the method of the
same Apostle in all his other Epistles, as has been observed, that to the
Galatians, which is of the like nature with this, only excepted.

II. A second thing to be previously observed is, that although those to whom
the Apostle wrote, were of the several sorts before mentioned, yet they
centered in this, that they were Hebrews by Birth and Religion, who all agreed
in some common Principles relating to the subject he treated with them about.
These he makes use of unto them all; For though the unbelieving Jews did deny,
or did not yet acknowledge that Jesus was the Christ, yet they also consented
unto, or could not gainsay, what in the Old Testament was revealed concerning
the Person, Office, Dignity, and Work of the Messiah when he should come; that
being the faith whereby they were saved before his appearance, Acts 26, 6, 7.
Upon these genoral Principles, wherein they also agreed, and which were the
general persuasion of the whole Judaical Church, the Apostle lays the
foundation of all his Arguments. And hence he often times takes that for granted,
which without this consideration, should we look on any of those to whom he
writes under the general notion of unbelievers, would seem to be the thing
principally in question. And therefore have we at large already manifested what
was the avowed Profession of the sounder part of the Judaical Church in those
days concerning the Messiah, which the Apostle here and elsewhere in dealing
with the Jews built upon; Acts 26.22, 23, 27. Chap. 28.23. Chap. 13.16, 17,
etc. which the Reader must have constant respect unto.

III. In urging Testimonies out of the Old Testament, he does not always make
use of those that seem to be most perspicuous and apposite to his purpose, but
often times takes others more abstruse, obscure, and of less evident
consequence at first view. And that upon a double account. First, That he might
instruct the Believers amongst them in the more abstruse Prophecies of the Old
Testament, and thereby incite them to the further search after Christ under the
Mosaical Veil, and Prophetical Allegories, whereby he is therein expressed,
aiming to lead them on toward perfection, Chap. 5.12.6.1. Secondly, Because
most of the Testimonies he makes use of, were generally granted by the Jews of
all sorts to belong to the Messiah, his Kingdom and Offices; and his design was
to deal with them chiefly, upon their own concessions and principles. As we
have some few other helps remaining to acquaint us with what was the received
sense of the Judaical Church, concerning sundry passages in the Old Testament
relating unto the promised Christ, so the Paraphrases of Scripture that were
either at that time in use amongst them, as was the Greek Translation amongst
the Hellenists, or about that time composed, as the Targums, at least, some
parts of them, will give us much light into it. What of that ancient sense
appears yet in the corrupted Copies of those Translations which remain, being
considered, will much evince the reason and suitableness of the Apostles
Quotations. And this is needful to be observed, to refute that impiety of some
(as Cajetan) who not being able to understand, the force of some Testimonies
cited by the Apostle as to his purpose in hand, have questioned the Authority
of the whole Epistle; as also the mistake of Hierom, who in his Epistle to
Pammachius, rashly affirmed that Paul did quote Scriptures that were not indeed
to his purpose, but out of design to stop the mouths of his Adversaries, as he
himself had dealt with Jovinian; which was very far from him whose only design
was (...), to promote the Truth in Love.

IV. He takes it for granted in the whole Epistle, that the Judaical
Church State did yet continue, and that the Worship of it was not yet
disallowed of God; suitably to what was before declared concerning his own and
the other Apostles practice. Had that Church State been utterly abolished, all
observation of Mosaical rites, which were the Worship of that Church as such,
had been utterly unlawful, as now it is. Neither did the determination
recorded Acts 15. abolish them as some suppose, but only free the Gentiles from
their observance. Their free use was yet permitted unto the Jews. Acts 21.20,
22, 25, 26. Chap.27.9. and practiced by Paul in particular, in his Nazaretical
Vow, Acts 21.26. Which was attended with a Sacrifice, Numb. 6.13. Nor was
Mosaical Worship utterly to cease, so as to have no acceptance with God until
the final ruin of that church, foretold by our Savior himself, Mat. 24. by
Peter, 2 Ep. 3. by James also, Chap. 5.6, 7, 8, 9. and by our Apostle in this
Epistle, Chap. 10.37. Chap. 12.25, 26, 27. was accomplished.

Hence it is that our Apostle calls the times of the Gospel, the world to come,
Chap. 2.5. Chap. 6.5. the name whereby the Jews denoted the State of the Church
under the Messiah, proper unto it only whilst the legal administrations of
Worship did continue. Thus as de facto he had showed respect unto the Person of
the High Priest as one yet in lawful Office, Acts 23.5. So doctrinally he takes
it for granted, that, that Office was still continued, Chap. 8.4, 5. with the
whole worship of Moses institution, Chap. 13.11, 12. And this dispensation of
Gods patience being the last trial of that Church, was continued in a
proportion of time answerable to their abode in the Wilderness upon its first
Erection; which our Apostle minds them of, Chap. 3. c. 4.

The Law of Moses then was not actually abrogated by Christ, who observed the
rules of it in the days of his flesh; nor by the Apostles, who seldom used
their liberty from it, leaving the use of it to the Jews still; but having done
its work, whereunto it was designed, and its obligation Expiring, ending, and
being removed, or taken away in the death and resurrection of Christ, and
promulgation of the Gospel that ensued thereupon, which doctrinally declared
its (...), or uselesness; God in his Providence put an end unto it, as to its
observation, in the utter and irrecoverable overthrow of the Temple, the place
designed for the solemn exercise of its Worship; so did it decay, wax old, and
vanish away, Chap. 8.13.

And this also God ordered in his infinite wisdom, that their Temple, City, and
Nation, and so consequently their whole Church State should be utterly wasted
by the Pagan Romans, before the power of the Empire came into the hands of men
professing the name of Christ; who could neither well have suffered their
Temple to stand as by them abused, nor yet have destroyed it, without hardening
them in their impenitency and unbelief.

V. That which is proposed unto confirmation in the whole Epistle, and from
whence all the Inferences and Exhortations insisted on do arise, and are drawn,
is the Excellency of the Gospel, and the Worship of God therein revealed and
appointed, upon the account of its manifold relation to the Person and Offices
of Christ the Mediator, the Son of God. Now because those to whom it is
directed, did, as has been declared, some of them adhere to Mosaical
Ceremonies and Worship in conjunction with the Gospel, others with a preferency
of them above it, and some to a relinquishment of it, especially when they once
found its profession obnoxious to Persecution, the Apostle institutes and at
large prosecutes a comparison between Moses's Law, and the Gospel, as to their
usefulness and excellency, in reference unto men's acceptance with God, of the
one and the other; as also of the Spirituality, Order, and Beauty of the
Worship severally required in them. And herein though he derogates in no
respect from the Law that which was justly due unto it, yet on the accounts
before mentioned, he prefers the Gospel before it; and not only so, but also
manifests, that as Mosaical Institutions were never of any other use, but to
prefigure the real Mediatory work of Christ, with the benefits thereof, so he
being exhibited and his work accomplished, their observation was become
needless, and themselves, if embraced to a neglect or relinquishment of the
Gospel, pernicious.

This comparison (wherein also the proof of the positive worth and Excellency
of the Gospel is included) omitting for weighty reasons (intimated by James,
Acts 21.21. by himself, Acts 9.25. Chap. 22.19, 20, 21.) all Prefatory
salutations he enters upon in the first verses of the Epistle; and being
thereby occasioned to make mention of the Messiah, from whose Person and
Office, the difference he was to insist upon did wholly arise; he spends the
residue of the Chapter in proving the divine excellency of his Person, and the
Eminency of his Office, as the only King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; on
all which the dignity of the Gospel, in the Profession whereof he exhorts them
to persevere, does depend.

He then that would come to a right understanding of this Epistle must always
bear in mind, 1. To whom it was written, which were the Jews of the several
sorts before mentioned: 2. To what End it was written; even to prevail with
them to embrace the Gospel, and to persist in the Profession of it, without any
mixture of Mosaical Observations: 3. On what Principles the Apostle deals with
them in this Argument, which are no other for the most part then what were
granted by the Jews of all sorts: 4. What Testimonies out of the Old Testament
he insists on to prove his purpose, namely, such as were commonly received in
the Judaical Church to belong unto the Messiah and his Office: 5. What he
labors to instruct them in, as to the general use of all sorts amongst them,
which is the nature and use of Mosaical Rites: 6. The main Argument he insists
on for the ends before mentioned, which is the Excellency of the Gospel, the
Worship instituted therein, and the Righteousness manifested thereby, upon the
account of its Author and subject, the Principal Efficient Cause of its
Worship, and only Procurer of the Righteousness exhibited in it, even Jesus
Christ, the Messiah, Mediator, the eternal Son of God. Unless these things are
well borne in mind, and the case of the Jews particularly heeded, our
Exposition will it may be seem often times to go out of the way, though it
constantly pursue the design and scope of the Apostle.

VI. Though this Epistle, was written unto the Hebrews, and immediately for
their use, yet it is left on record in the Canon of the Scripture by the Holy
Ghost, for the same general End with the other parts of the Scripture, and the
use of all believers therein to the end of the world.

This Use in our Exposition is also to be regarded, and that principally in the
paraenetical or hortatory part of it. That then which is dogmatical, and the
foundation of all the Exhortations insisted on may be two ways considered:

1. Properly, as to the special and peculiar tendency of the Principles and
Doctrines handled, and so they specially intend the Jews, and must be opened
with respect to them, their Principles, Traditions, Opinions, Objections; all
which must therefore be considered, that the peculiar force and efficacy of the
Apostles reasonings with respect unto them, may be made manifest. And from the
Doctrinal part of this Epistle so opened, the Exhortations that arise do
chiefly respect the Jews, and are peculiarly suited unto them, their State and
condition.

2. Again, the Doctrines treated on by the Apostle may be considered absolutely
and abstractedly from the special Case of the Jews, which he had in his eye,
merely as to their own nature; and so they are many of them of the chief
fundamental Principles of the Gospel. In this respect they are grounds for the
application of the Exhortations in the Epistle unto all Professors of the
Gospel to the end of the world. And this must guide us in our Exposition.
Having to deal with the Jews; the Doctrinal parts of the Epistle must be opened
with special respect unto them, or we utterly lose the Apostles aim and design;
and dealing with Christians, the Hortatory part shall be principally insisted
on, as respecting all Professors; yet not so, but that in handling the
Doctrinal part, we shall weigh the Principles of it, as Articles of our
Evangelical Faith in general, and consider also the peculiar respect that the
Exhortations have unto the Jews.

Now whereas, as was said, many Principles of the Jews are partly supposed and
taken for granted, partly urged and insisted on to his own purpose by the
Apostle, we must in our passage make some stay in their discovery and
declaration; and shall insert them under their proper heads where they occurr,
even as many of them as are not already handled in our Prolegomena.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE TWO FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE Epistle of PAUL the APOSTLE
UNTO THE HEBREWS.
CHAP. I.
THE General scope and design of the Apostle in this whole Epistle, has been
before declared, and needs not here be repeated. In this first Chapter he
fixes and improveth the principal consideration that he intends to insist on
throughout the Epistle, to prevail with the Hebrews unto constancy and
perseverance in the Doctrine of the Gospel. And this is taken from the
immediate Author of it, the promised Messiah, the Son of God. Him therefore in
this Chapter he at large describes; and that two ways; 1. Absolutely declaring
what he is in his Person and Offices, as also what he has done for the Church.
And 2. Comparatively, with respect unto other Ministerial Revealers of the mind
and will of God, especially insisting on his Excellency and preeminence above
the Angels, as we shall see in the Explication of the several Parts and Verses
of it.

Verse 1, 2. (...).
MAny of these words being variously rendered, their true Grammatical sense and
importance is to be considered before we open the meaning of the whole, and aim
of the Apostle in them, in which way we shall also proceed throughout the whole
Epistle.

(...). Sir. in all parts, or by many parts. Multisariam, Vulg. Eras. A Montan.
diversely. Multis vicibus, Beza; which ours render, at sundry times. (...) is
sortior divido, to part, to take part, to divide; whence is (...), the part of
any thing, and (...) that which consists of many parts: and (...) by many
parts; which is also used as (...), for alternis vicibus, sundry changes; The
word properly is, by many parts; fully, by several parts at several times, as
our Translation intimates; yet so that a diversity of parts and degrees, rather
than of times and seasons is intended.

(...), Sir. in all forms, multisque modis, Vul. Eras: a Montan. Beza; many
ways; or as ours, diverse manners.

(...), Sir. ab initio, from the beginning; Olim; the Latin Translations; of
old; formerly; in times past; (...), is olim, quondam, pridem, jamdudum; any
time past that is opposed (...), or (...), to that which is present, properly,
time some good while past, as that was whereof the Apostle treats, having ended
in Malachy four hundred years before.

(...), Sir. with our Fathers; to the Fathers.

(...), Sir. in the Prophets; so all the Latin Translations, in Prophetis.

(...), Sir. and in those last days; ultimis diebus hisce; ultimis diebus
istis; in these last days; novissime diebus istis, Vul. last of all in these
days; Some Greek Copies have (...), in extremo dierum istorum, in the end of
these days, the reason of which variety we shall see afterward.

(...), as before in the Prophets; not by his Son, but, in the Son; The
Emphasis of the expression is necessarily to be retained, as the opening of the
words will discover.

(...), mundos, secula; (...) Sir. the ages, times, worlds; In the remaining
words there is no difficulty, as to the Grammatical signification; we shall
then read them,

Verse. 1, 2. By sundry parts, and in diverse manners God having formerly (or of
old) spoken unto the Fathers in the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us in the Son, whom he has appointed heir of all, by whom also he made
the worlds.
THe Apostle intending a comparison between the Mosaical Law and the Gospel,
refers it unto two Heads: First, Their Revelation and Institution; whence
the Obligation to the Observance of the one and the other did arise: and
Secondly, Their whole Nature, Use and Efficacy. The First he enters upon in
these words, and premising that wherein they did agree, distinctly lays down
the severals wherein the difference between them does consist; both which were
necessary to complete the comparison intended.

That wherein they agree, is the Principal Efficient Cause of their Revelation,
or the Prime Author from whom they were. This is God; He was the Author of the
Law and Gospel; He spoke of old in the Prophets, he spoke in the last days in
the Son. Neither of them were from Men: not one from one Principle, and the
other from an other; both have the same Divine Original. See 2 Timothy 3.16. 2
Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Herein they both agree.

Their difference in this respect, namely of their Revelation, he refers to
four Heads, all distinctly expressed, saving that some branches of the
Antithesis on the part of the Gospel, are only included in the opposite
expressions that relate unto the Law.

Their difference First, Respects the manner of their Revelation; and that in
two particulars: 1. The Revelation of the Will of God under the Law was given
out by diverse parts; that under the Gospel at once, or in one dispensation of
Grace and Truth: 2. That in diverse manners, this one way only, by the Spirit
dwelling in the Lord Christ in his fullness, and by him communicated unto his
Apostles.

Secondly, The Times and Seasons of their Revelation, that of the Law was made
of Old, formerly, in Times past: This of the Gospel in these last days.

Thirdly, The Persons to whom the Revelation of them was made: That was to the
Fathers, this to us.

Fourthly, And principally, the Persons by whom these Revelations were made;
That was by the Prophets; this by the Son. God spoke then in the Prophets, now
he has spoken in the Son.

The whole stress of the Apostles Argument lying on this last instance,
omitting the prosecution of all the other particulars, he enters upon the
further description of this immediate Revealer of the Gospel in whom God spoke,
the Son; and lays down in general,

1. The Authority committed unto him, God made him Heir of all.

2. The Ground and Equity of committing that great Power and trust unto him, in
those words; by whom also he made the worlds; whereby he opens his way to the
farther declaration of his Divine and incomparable Excellencies, wherein he is
exalted far above all, or any that were employed in the Revelation or
Administration of the Law of Moses, and the holy Worship instituted thereby.

All these particulars must be opened severally, that we may see the intendment
of the Apostle, and the force of his Argument in the whole; and some of them
must necessarily be somewhat largely insisted on, because of their influence
into the ensuing Discourse.

I. That wherein the Law and Gospel do both agree is, (...).
that God was the Author of them both. About this there was no difference, as
to the most of them with whom the Apostle treated: This he takes for granted.
For the Professing Jews did not adhere to Mosaical Institutions, because God
was their Author, not so of the Gospel; but because they were given from God by
Moses, in such a manner, as never to be changed or abrogated. This the Apostle
lays down as an acknowledged Principle with the most, that both Law and Gospel
received their Original from God himself; proving also as we shall see in the
progress of our Discourse to the conviction of others, that such a Revelation
as that of the Gospel, was foretold and expected, and that this was it in
particular, which was preached unto them.

Now God being here spoken of ^n distinction from the Son expressly, and from
the Holy Ghost by evident implication, it being He by whom he spoke in the
Prophets, that name is not taken (...) substantially, to denote primarily the
Essence or being of the Deity, and each person as partaking in the same nature;
but (...); denoting primarily one certain Person, and the divine nature only as
subsisting in that Person: This is the Person of the Father: as elsewhere the
Person of the Son is so signified by that name, Acts 20.28. John 1.1, 2. Romans
9.5. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 3.16. Chap. 5.20. As also the Person of the Holy
Spirit, Acts 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.7, 11. Col. 2.2. So that God even the Father, by
the way of eminency, was the peculiar Author of both Law and Gospel, of which
afterward. And this observation is made necessary from hence, even because he
immediately assigns Divine Properties and Excellencies unto another Person,
evidently distinguished from him whom he intends to denote by the name God in
this place, which he could not do, did that name primarily express, as here
used by him, the divine nature absolutely, but only as it is subsisting in the
Person of the Father.

From this head of their Agreement, the Apostle proceeds to the instances of
the difference that was between the Law and the Gospel, as to their Revelation
from God; of which a little inverting the order of the words, we shall First
consider that which concerns the Times of their giving out, sundry of the other
instances being regulated thereby.

For the First, or the Revelation of the Will of God under the Old Testament it
was, of old; God spoke (...), formerly, or of old; Some space of time is
denoted in this word, which had then received both its beginning and end: both
which we may enquire after. Take the word absolutely, (...).
and it comprizes the whole space of time from the giving out of the first
Promise, unto that End which was put unto all Revelations of public use under
the Old Testament. Take it as relating to the Jews, and the rise of the time
expressed in it, is the giving of the Law by Moses in the Wilderness. And this
is that which the Apostle has respect unto. He had no contest with the Jews
about the first Promise, and the service of God in the world built thereon; nor
about their Privilege, as they were the Sons of Abraham; but only about their
then present Church Privilege and claim by Moses Law. The proper date then and
bound of this (...), of old, is from the giving out of Moses Law, and therein
the constitution of the Judaical Church and Worship, unto the close of public
Prophecy in the days of Malachi. From thence to the days of John Baptist,
God granted no extraordinary Revelation of his Will, as to the standing use of
the whole Church. So that this dispensation of Gods speaking in the Prophets,
continued for the space of twenty one Jubilees, or near eleven hundred years.
That it had been now ceased for a long time, the Apostle intimates in this
word; and that agreeably to the confessed Principles of the Jews, whereby also
he confirmed his own of the coming of the Messiah, by the reviving of the gift
of Prophecy, as was foretold, Joel 2.28, 29.

And we may by the way a little consider their thoughts in this matter; For as
we have observed and proved before, the Apostle engages with them upon their
own acknowledged Principles. The Jews then generally grant unto this day, that
Prophecy for the public use of the Church, was not bestowed under the second
Temple after the days of Malachie; nor is to be expected until the coming of
Elias. The delusions that have been put upon them by impostors, they now labor
all they can to conceal; and are of late by experience made incredulous toward
such pretenders as in former Ages they have been brought to much misery by. Now
as their manner is to fasten all their conjectures, be they true or false; on
some place, word, or letter of the Scripture, so have they done this assertion
also. Observing or supposing the want of sundry things in the second House,
they pretend that want to be intimated, Hag. 1.7, 8. where God promising to
glorify himself in that Temple, the word (...), I will glorify, is written
defectively, without (...), as the Keri notes. That letter being the numeral
note of five, signifies, as they say, the want of five things in that House.
The first of these was (...), the Ark and Cherubims; The second (...), the
anointing Oil; The third (...), the wood of disposition, or perpetual fire.
The fourth (...), Vrim, and Thummim: The fifth (...), the Holy Ghost, or Spirit
of Prophecy. They are not indeed all agreed in this enumeration; The Talmud in
(...) Joma cap. 5. reckons them somewhat otherwise: 1. The Ark with the
Propitiation and Cherubims: 2. The Fire from Heaven, which answers the third,
or w^^d of disposition in the former order. 3. The Divine Majesty, in the room
of the Anointing Oil: 4. The Holy Ghost; 5. Vrim and Thummim. Another order
there is according to Rabbi Bechai Comment. in Pentateuch. Sectione (...); who
places the Anointing Oil distinctly, and confounds the (...), or Divine
Majesty with (...), the Holy Ghost, contradicting the Gemara. The Commonly
approved order is that of the Author of Aruch; in the Root, (...).

"(...), the Ark, Propitiatory, and Cherubims, one.
"(...), the Divine Majesty, the second thing.
"(...), the Holy Ghost, which is Prophecy the third.
"(...), Vrim and Thummim the fourth thing.
"(...), fire from Heaven, the fifth thing.
But as this Argument is ridiculous, both in general in wire-drawing
Conclusions from letters deficient or redundant in writing, and in particular
in reference to this word, which in other places is written as in this, as
Numb. 24.12. 1 Samuel 2.20. Isa. 66.5. so the observation its self of the want of
all these five things in the second House is very questionable, and seems to be
invented to give countenance to the confessed ceasing of Prophecy, by which
their Church had been planted, nourished and maintained, and now by its want
was signified to be near expiration. For although I will grant that they might
offer Sacrifices with other Fire, than that which was traduced from the flame
descending from Heaven, though Nadab and Abihu were destroyed for so doing,
because the Law of that Fire attended the giving of it, whence upon its
providential ceasing, it was as lawful to use other fire in Sacrifice, as it
was before its giving out; yet as to the Ark, the Vrim and Thummim, the matter
is more questionable; and as the anointing Oil out of question, because it
being lawful for the High Priest to make it at any time, it was no doubt
restored in the time of Ezra's Reformation. I know Abarbinel on Exodus Chap. 30.
sec. (...), affirms that there was no High Priest anointed with oil under the
second House, for which he gives this reason; (...), because the anointing Oil
was now hid; (...), for Josiah had hid it with the rest of the holy things: a
talmudical figment; to which he adds, (...), and they had no power to make it;
I will not much contend about matter of fact, or what they did; but that they
might have done otherwise is evident from the first institution of it; for the
prohibition mentioned, Exodus 30.31, 32. respects only private persons. And
Josephus tells us, that God ceased to give answer by Vrim and Thummim two
hundred years before he wrote, Lib. 3. cap. 12. which proves they had it.

It is indeed certain, that at their first return from Babylon, they had not
the Vrim and Thummim, Ezra 2.63. There was no Priest with Vrim and Thummim; yet
it does not appear that afterward, that Jewel, what ever it were, was not made
upon the Prophecies of Haggai and Zechary, whereby the Restoration of the
Temple and the Worship belonging thereunto, was carried on to perfection:
Especially considering the vision of Zechary about clothing the High Priest
with the Robes of his Office, Chap. 3. after which time it seems they were made
and in use: as Josephus shows us Lib. 11. Chap. 8. treating of the Reverence
done by Alexander the Great to the name of God engraven in the Plate of Gold on
the Highpriests forehead. And Maimonides Tractat. Saned. Chap. 10. Sect. 10.
says expressly, that all the eight robes of the High Priest were made under the
second Temple, and particularly the Vrim and Thummim; howbeit as he says they
enquired not of God by them, because the Holy Ghost was not on the Priests. Of
the Ark we shall have occasion to treat afterward, and of its fictitious
hiding by Hieremiah; or Josia, as the Jews fancy. This we may observe for the
present, that as it is certain, that is was carried away by the Babylonians
amongst other Vessels of Gold belonging to the Temple, either amongst them that
were taken away in the days of Jehojakim, 2 Chronicles. 36.7. or those taken away
with Jehojachin his Son, v. 11. or when all that was left before great and
small was carried away in the days of Zedekiah, v. 18. So it may be supposed
to be restored by Cyrus, of whom it is said, that he returned all the Vessels
of the House of the Lord, that Nebuchadnezzar brought from Jerusalem, Ezra.
1.6. And it is uncertain to what end was the solemn yearly entrance of the High
Priest into the Most Holy Place observed to the very destruction of the second
House, if neither Ark nor Mercy Seat were there. Neither is this impeached by
what Tacitus affirms, Histor. lib. 5. that when Pompey entered the Temple, he
found nullas Deum effigies, vacuam sedem, and inania arcana; for as he wrote of
the Jews with shameful negligence, so he only intimates that they had no such
images as were used among other Nations, nor the head of an Ass, which himself
not many Lies before, had affirmed to be consecrated in their Sanctuary: For
ought then appears to the contrary, the Ark might be in the second House, and
be carried thence to Rome with the Book of the Law, which Josephus expressly
mentions. And therefore the same Abarbinel, in his Comment. on Joel tells us,
that Israel by Captivity out of his own Land lost (...) three excellent gifts,
Prophecy, Miracles, and Divine Knowledge, ( Psalm. 74.9.) all which he grants,
were to be restored by the Messiah; without mention of the other things before
recited. And they confess this openly in Sota distinc. Egla hampha. (...);
after the death of the latter Prophets Haggai, Zechariah and Malachy, the holy
Spirit was taken away from Israel.

It is then confessed that God ceased to speak to the Church in Prophets as to
their Oral teaching and writing, after the days of Malachy; which reason of
the want of Vision, though continuing four hundred years and upwards, is called
by Haggai, Chap. 2.8. (...), unum pusillum, a little while, in reference to the
continuance of it from the days of Moses; whereby the Jews may see that they
are long since past all grounds of expectation of its restoration, all
Prophecy having left them double the time that their Church enjoyed it, which
cannot be called (...) a little while in comparison thereof. To return,

This was the (...), these the times wherein God spoke in the Prophets; which
determines one instance more of the comparison; namely, (...).
the Fathers to whom he spoke in them; which were all the Faithful of the
Judaical Church from the days of giving the Law, until the ceasing of Prophecy
in the days of Malachy.

In answer to this first Instance, (...).
on the part of the Gospel the Revelation of it is affirmed to be made in these
last days, has spoken in these last days, the true stating of which time
also will discover who the Persons were to whom it was made, has spoken to us.

Most Expositors suppose that this expression, the last days, is a Periphrasis
of the times of the Gospel. But it does not appear, that they are any where so
called; nor were they ever known by that name among the Jews, upon whose
principles the Apostle proceeds. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Some seasons indeed under the Gospel, in reference to some Churches, are
called the last days, 2 Timothy 3.1.
but the whole time of the Gospel absolutely is no where so termed. It is the
last days of the Judaical Church and State, which were then drawing to their
period and abolition, that are here, and else where called the last days, or
the latter days, or the last hour, 2 Pet. 3.3. 1 John 2.18. Jude 18. For,

1. As we before observed, the Apostle takes it for granted, that the Judaical
Church State did yet continue; and proves that it was drawing to its period,
Chap. 8. ult. having its present station in the patience and forbearance of God
only, without any necessity as unto its Worship, or preservation in the world.
And hereunto does the reading of the words in some Copies, before intimated,
give testimony; (...), in the end or extremity of these days; which as the
event has proved, can no way relate to the times of the Gospel.

2. The personal Ministry of the Son whilst he was upon the earth in the days
of his flesh is here eminently, though not solely intended. For as God of old
spoke in the Prophets, so in these last days he spoke in the Son; that is, in
him, personally present with the Church, as the Prophets also were in their
several generations, Chap. 2. v. 3. Now as to his personal Ministry, he was
sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15.24. (To whom also alone
in his own days he sent his Apostles, Mat. 10.5, 6.) and is therefore said to
have been a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God, Romans 15.5. being
in the last place sent to the same Vineyard, unto which the Prophets were sent
before, Mat. 21.37. The words there used, last of all he sent unto them his
Son, are exegetical of these, he spoke in the Son in the last days.

3. This Phrase of Speech is signally used in the Old Testament to denote the
last days of the Judaical Church; So by Jacob, Genesis 49.1. I will tell you what
shall befall you, (...), in the last days; which words the LXX. rend^ed,
(...), the words here used by the Apostle. The days pointed unto by Jacob
being those wherein the Messiah should come, before Judah was utterly deprived
of Scepter and Scribe. Again by Balaam the same words are used to signify the
same time, Numb. 24.14. where they are rendered (...), in the end of the days,
as many Copies read in this place. And in all the Prophets this is the peculiar
notation of that season, (...), Mich. 4.1. Isa. 2.1. in the latter or last
days; and (...), the He hajediah prefixed, notes that course of days that
were then running; as Deuteronomy. 31.29. Evil will overtake you, (...), in the end of
those days; and the promise of the Conversion of some of the Jews by David
their King is annexed to the same season, Hos. 3.5. From these places is the
expression here used taken, denoting the last times of the Judaical Church, the
times immediately preceding its rejection and final ruin. Hence Manasse lib.
3. de Resurrect. cap. 3. tells us out of Moses Gernudensis, (...), in every
place that mentions the latter days, the days of the Messiah are to be
understood, which saying of his is confirmed by Menasse himself, though
attended with a gloss abominable and false, that is purely Judaical. The days
of the Messiah, and the days of the end of the Judaical Church are the same.
And these words are expressly also used by R.D. Kimchi. Comment. in Isa. 2. v.
2. who honestly refers all the words of that Prophecy unto the Messiah.

It is not for nothing, that the Apostle minds the Hebrews, that the season
then present was the last days, whereof so many things were foretold in the
Old Testament; Many of their concernments lay in the knowledge of it; which
because they give great light unto the whole cause, as stated then between him,
and them, must be opened and considered. The sum is, that the end of their
Church and State, being foretold to be a perpetual desolation, Dan. 9.27. the
last days being now come upon them, they might understand what they were
shortly to expect and look for. The end of the Jews being a People, a Church,
and Kingdom was to bring forth the Messiah, whose coming and work must of
necessity put an end to their old station and condition. Now because herein is
enwrapped the most infallible demonstration that the Messiah is long since
come, the Apostle mentioning the last days to intimate that upon necessity he
must be come in them; I shall further open his design in this matter, but with
briefness having been large on this head in our Prolegomena; and for their
sakes who by any difficulties may be deterred from the consideration of them.

God having from the foundation of the world promised to bring forth the seed
of the woman to work out the Redemption of his Elect in the Conquest of Satan,
did in the separation of Abraham from the rest of the world begin to make
provision of a peculiar stock from whence it should spring. That this was the
cause and end of his Call and Separation is evident from hence, that
immediately thereupon God assures him that in his seed all the Kindreds of the
earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. Chap. 22.18. which is all one as if
he had expressly said unto him, for this cause have I chosen and called thee,
that in thee, I might lay a foundation of bringing forth the promised seed, by
whom the curse is to be taken away, and the blessing of everlasting life
procured, as Gal. 3.13, 14. For this cause was his Posterity continued in a
state of separation from the rest of the world, that he might seek an holy seed
unto himself, Numb. 23.9. Mal. 2.15. For this cause did he raise them into a
Civil, Regal, and Church State, that he might in them type out, and prefigure
the Offices and Benefits of the promised Messiah, who was to gather to himself
the Nations that were to be blessed in the seed of Abraham, Genesis 49.10. Psalm.
45. Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel. 34.23. And all their Sacrifices did but shadow out that
great expiation of sin, which he was to make in his own Person; as has been
already proved.

Things being thus disposed, God promised unto them that their Civil Political
State, their condition as a peculiar Nation and People, should be continued
until the coming of the Messiah, Genesis 49.10. Ezekiel. 21.27. And this was made
good unto them notwithstanding the great oppositions of those mighty Empires,
in the midst of whose devouring jaws they were placed, with some such short
intercisions of the actual administration of Rule amongst them, as being
foretold impeached not the Promise. They lost not their Civil State, until he
came, unto whom was the gathering of the Nations. After that, though many of
the individuals obtained mercy, yet their being a Nation or People, was of no
peculiar use as to any special end of God. Therefore was it immediately
destroyed, and irrecoverably exterminated. From that day, God in a wonderful
manner blasted and cursed all their endeavors, either for the preservation of
what they then had, or for its recovery and restoration when lost. No means
could ever retrive them into a People or Nation on the old account. What may be
hereafter on a New, God knows. The End of the days was come; and it was to no
purpose, for men to endeavor to keep up that, which God having accomplished
the utmost of his design by and upon, would lay aside. And this season was
fully evidenced to all the world, by the gathering of the people to the Shilo,
or the coming in of the Nations to partake in the blessing of faithful Abraham,
Mic. 4.1, 2.

Of their Church State there were two Principal parts: The Temple its self; and
the Worship performed in it: The first of these (as was the Tabernacle) was set
up to typifie him in whom the fullness of the Godhead should dwell bodily; and
the latter the same Person, as he was himself to be the great High Priest and
Sacrifice. Both these also were to be continued until the coming of the
Messiah, but by no endeavors afterward. Hence was that Promise of the glory
of the second House, built after the Captivity, and restored by Herod, because
of his coming unto it who was signified by it, Hag. 2.9. Malach. 3.1. He was to
come whilst that Temple was standing, after which it was to be of no more use.
And therefore Ezekiel describes a third spiritual Temple to succeed in the room
thereof. The condition of their Sacrifices was the same; Therefore Daniel
foretelling the coming of the Messiah four hundred and ninety years after the
Captivity, adds that upon his death the daily Sacrifice must cease for ever,
and a total desolation ensue, on all the things that were used for the end
accomplished, Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. The Nation, State, Temple, Sacrifices,
being set apart, set up, and designed for no other end but to bring him forth,
he was to come whilst they were standing and in use, after which they were
none of them to be allowed a being upon their old foundation. This is that
which the Apostle pointed at in mentioning the last days, that they might
consider in what condition, the Church and People of the Jews then were.

To discover the evidence of this demonstration, as confirmed in our
Prolegomena, I shall here also briefly add some considerations of the miserable
entanglements of the Jews in seeking to avoid the Argument here intimated unto
them by the Apostle. It is a common Tradition among them, that all things were
made for the Messiah; whereby they do not intend as some have imagined, the
whole old Creation, but all things of their Church State and Worship. So the
Targum, Psalm. 40.8. in the person of the Messiah; I shall enter into life
eternal when I study in the volume of the Law, (...), that was written for my
sake. By the Law they understand their all. All depended on their Messiah, all
was written for him. They see by experience that there was a coincidence of all
these things in the last days when Jesus came. No sooner had he done his work,
but Scepter and Scribe departed from Judah. They ceased to be a Church and
Nation. The Temple which the Lord whom they formerly sought came to, was
destroyed; their Sacrifices wherein they trusted, caused to cease, and the
Nations of the Earth were gathered into the faith of Abraham. From that time
they have no more been a people; nor have had any distinction of Tribes, or
Families, Temple, Priesthood, or Sacrifice; nor any hope of a retrivement into
their pristine condition. Let us then see what course they do, or have taken to
countenance themselves in their infidelity. Two ways to relieve themselves
they have fixed on.

1. Granting that the Messiah was to come to their Government and Worship, they
labored to keep them up, and to restore them being cast down, that so they
might prolong their expectation of that to come, which indeed was already past.
This in the righteous and holy Providence of God proved the means of their
ruin. For their endeavor to maintain their Liberty, Rule, and Government
after the coming of the Messiah, was the cause of the utter overthrow of all
Rule, Authority and public Worship amongst them by Vespasian and Titus his
Son. Their endeavor, to restore themselves into a State and People under their
false Messiah Barcosbi, was the means of their utter desolation from all hopes
of being a people and Nation any more by Adrian; as also of their extermination
for ever out of that Country, wherein they were separated from all Nations for
that End which God appointed unto them. After this, once more, still to avoid
the thoughts that the Messiah was come, and had put an end unto their former
condition, they endeavored and were encouraged by Julian the Emperor to
rebuild their Temple, and restore their Sacrifices. And this attempt also God
turned to their further confusion. For whereas in former days in the building
of the Temple he encouraged and supported them against all difficulties and
oppositions; being now upheld and strengthened by the favor and wealth of the
Roman Empire in the same work, he sets himself against them, and scatters them
with no less indignation, than he did the builders of Babel of old. When he
would have a Temple amongst them, he punished them with famine for building
their own houses, and suffering his to lie waste, Hag. 2. v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Now
they may build houses for themselves where they please; but if they take in
hand to build a Temple, God is against them. This State of theirs being now
continued sixteen hundred years, were not blindness come upon them to the
utmost, they could not but see, that it is not the Will of God, that they
should be a People, State, or Church on the former account any more. What then
is become of their Messiah, who was to come unto them whilst they were so;
seeing they were so by their own confession only for his sake? This puts their
latter Masters to their last miserable shifts. For,

2. Contrary to the open nature of all things relating unto them from the
appropriating of the Promise to the Family of Abraham, contrary to the whole
design of the Scripture, and the express testimonies of it before mentioned,
with many other to the same purpose, they deny that their Messiah was to come
to them, or at least to abide with them for the work whereunto he was
destinated, whilst their State, Temple and Sacrifices continued. In the
management of this shift of unbelief, they are woefully divided amongst
themselves.

1. For the Continuance of their State, until the coming of the Messiah, Genesis
49.11. Some say, that by Shilo the Messiah is not intended; who are confuted by
their own Targums, all rendering the word Messiah, and the constant Tradition of
the Elder Doctors; Some that by the Scepter and Scribe, that the Rod of
Affliction and Instruction only are intended; which is a gloss evidently
contrary to the design of the Prophecy, the use of the words in all places
where their sense is not restrained by evident circumstances, the Targums, all
Old Writers; asserting that which was not peculiar to Judah, nor true in its
self, that Tribe having for so long a season enjoyed as flourishing a condition
as any people in the world, as good as the Jews look for under the Messiah.
This State then is utterly gone, and their Messiah as it seems not come.

2. What say they unto their Temple, that second House whereunto he was to
come, and so render the glory of it greater than that of the former, Hag. 2.
Mal. 3. Of old they unanimously agreed, that he was born whilst the Temple
stood, or that day that it was destroyed, as Aben Exra confesses on Isa. 53.
Many stories out of them might be told to this purpose; where he was born, how,
and of whom, to whom it was revealed by the (...), who saw him, where he was
disposed of, where he is; but being all the fancies of idle curious heads, and
unbelieving hearts, which St. Paul calls (...), 1 Timothy 4.7. profane and old
wives fables, we shall not trouble the Reader with them. Abarbinel who in
corrupting the Prophecies concerning the Messiah has a reach beyond his
fellows, affirms that Haggai speaks not of the Second, but of a Third Temple to
be built under the Messiah; but this is nothing but a bold contradiction of the
Prophet, who three or four times signally declares that he spoke of that House
which was then building, which their eyes saw, and which so many contemned as
not to be compared with the former, Chapter 1.4. this House, Chapter 2.7. This House,
v. 8. This House, so v. 18. Others say, that the glory of that House did not
consist in the coming of the Messiah unto it, but in its duration and
continuance; for it stood ten years longer than the former; But this also is
contrary, 1. To the Catholic persuasion of their forefathers, Targums,
Talmuds, and all ancient Doctors: 2. To experience; for what could the
miserable languishing of ten years by that House, whilst it was by their own
confession a Den of Thieves, contribute unto it to enable it to vye for glory
with that wonder of the world the Temple of Solomon, in comparison whereof
their forefathers thought it no more than some of them of old thought
themselves compared to the Sons of Anak. 3. To the Truth; affirming, that the
glory of that House was to consist in the coming of the Lord, whom they sought,
the desire of all Nations unto it: All which things are vindicated in our
Prolegomena.

3. Their Temple being utterly destroyed as well as their State, and their
Messiah not yet come, what think they of their Sacrifices? Daniel tells them
that he was to come, and to be cut off, before the ceasing of the daily
Sacrifices; But they must confess that all Sacrifices are long since utterly
ceased; for surely their offering of a Cock to the Devil on the day of
Expiation, is no continuance of them. Some say that the Messiah intended by
Daniel was King Agrippa whom Vespasian slew at Rome. But this obstinacy is
intolerable; that a Semi-Pagan as Agrippa was, should be their Messiah so
honorably foretold of, is a figment, which whatever they pretend, themselves
believe not. Nor was Agrippa slain or cut off, but lived in peace to the day of
his death. The most of them know not what to say, but only object that the
computation of Daniel is dark and obscure, which Christians themselves are not
agreed about. Concerning which I must refer the Reader to our Proiegomena, as
also for the full and large handling of the things here by the way only touched
upon.

This makes it evident who were the Persons who were spoken unto in these last
days, TO US. That is the members of the Judaical Church, (...).
who lived in the days of the Personal Ministry of Christ, and afterward
under the preaching of the Gospel unto that day; Chap. 2.3. The Jews of those
days were very apt to think that if they had lived in the times of the former
Prophets, and had heard them delivering their message from God, they would have
received it with a cheerful obedience; their only unhappiness they thought was,
that they were born out of due time as to prophetical Revelations; This is
intimated of them, Mat. 23.30. The Apostle meeting with this persuasion in
them, minds them that in the Revelation of the Gospel, God had spoken to
themselves; the things they so much desired, not questioning but that thereon
they should believe and obey. If this word then they attend not unto, they must
needs be self-condemned. Again that care and love which God manifested toward
them, in speaking immediately unto them required the same obedience; especially
considering the manner of it, so far excelling that which before he had used
toward the Fathers; of which afterward.

And these are two instances of the Comparison instituted, relating unto Times
and Persons.

The next difference respects the manner of these several Revelations of the
will of God, and that in two particulars. For (1.) The former was made (...),
by diverse parts, one after the other; The branch of the Antithesis that should
answer hereunto is not expressed, but employed to be (...), or (...), at once.

(...), by many parts, and so consequently at sundry times. (...).
The gradual discovery of the mind and will of God, by the addition of one
thing after another at several seasons, as the Church could bear the light of
them, and as it was subserving unto his main design of reserving all
pre-eminence to the Messiah; is that which is intended in this Expression. How
all this is argumentative to the Apostles purpose will instantly appear. Take
the expression absolutely to denote the whole progress of divine Revelation
from the beginning of the world, and it comprizeth four principal parts or
degrees, with those that were subservient unto them.

The First of these was made to Adam in the Promise of the seed, which was the
principle of faith and Obedience to the Fathers before the Flood; and unto this
were subservient all the consequent particular Revelations made to Seth, Enosh,
Enoch, Lamech, and others before the Flood.

The Second to Noah after the Flood in the Renewall of the Covenant, and
establishing of the Church in his family, Genesis 8.21. Chap. 9.9, 10. whereunto
were subservient the Revelations made to Melchisedech, Genesis 14.18. and others
before the calling of Abraham.

The Third to Abraham in the restriction of the Promise to his seed, and fuller
illustration of the nature of it, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 15.11, 12. and
17.1, 2. Confirmed in the Revelations made to Isaac, Genesis 26.24. Jacob, Genesis
49. Joseph, Heb. 11.22. and others of their Posterity.

The fourth to Moses in the giving of the Law, and erection of the Judaical
Church in the Wilderness, unto which there were three principal heads of
subservient Revelations:

1. To David, which was peculiarly designed to perfect the Revelation of the
will of God concerning the Old Testament-Worship in those things that their
Wilderness condition was not capable of, 1 Chronicles. 23.25, 26, 27, 28. Chap.
28.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. To him we may join Solomon, with the
rest of the Prophets of their days.

2. To the Prophets after the division of the Kingdom unto the Captivity, and
dureing the Captivity; to whom pleading with the people about their defection
by Sin and false Worship, was peculiar.

3. To Ezra, with the Prophets that assisted in the Reformation of the Church
after its return from Babylon, who in an especial manner, excited the people to
an expectation of the coming of the Messiah.

These were the principal parts and degrees of the Revelation of the will of
God from the foundation of the world until the coming of Christ in his
forerunner John the Baptist. And all this I have fully handled and unfolded in
my Discourse of the rise, nature and progress of Scripture Divinity or Theology.

But as I showed before, if we attend unto the special intention of the
Apostle, we must take in the date of these Revelations, and begin with that to
Moses, adding to it those other subservient ones mentioned peculiar to the
Judaical Church, which taught and confirmed the Worship that was established
amongst them.

This then is that, which in this word the Apostle minds the Hebrews of;
namely, that the will of God concerning his Worship and our obedience was not
formerly revealed all at once to his Church, by Moses or any other; but by
several parts and degrees, by new additions of Light, as in his infinite Wisdom
and Care he saw meet. The close and last hand was not to be put unto this work
before the coming of the Messiah. He, they all acknowledged, was to reveal the
whole Counsel of God, John 4.25. after that his way had been prepared by the
coming of Elias, Mal. 4 until when they were to attend to the Law of Moses,
with those Expositions of it which they had received, v. 4, 5. That was the
time appointed, (...), to seal, complete, and finish, Vision and Prophet; as
also (...), to seal up sin, or as we render it, to make an end of sin, or the
Controversy about it, which had held long agitation by Sacrifices, that could
never put an end to that quarrel, Heb. 10.1, 2, 14.

Now in this very first word of his Epistle, does the Apostle clearly convince
the Hebrews of their mistake in their obstinate adherence unto Mosaical
Institutions. It is as if he had bidden them consider the way whereby God
revealed his will to the Church hitherto. Has it not been by parts and
degrees? Has he at any time shut up the Progress of Revelation? Has he not
always kept the Church in expectation of new Revelations of his mind and will?
did he ever declare that he would add no more unto what he had commanded, or
make no alteration in what he had instituted? What he had revealed was to be
observed, Deuteronomy. 27.29. and when he had revealed it: but until he declare that
he will add no more, it is folly to account what is already done, absolutely
complete and immutable. Therefore Moses when he had finished all his work in
the Lords house, tells the Church, that God would raise up another Prophet like
him; that is, who should reveal new Laws and Institutions as he had done, whom
they were to hear and obey on the penalty of utter extermination, Deuteronomy. 18.18.

And this discovers the obstinacy of the Modern Jews, who from the days of
Maimonides, who dyed about the year of our Lord 1104. have made it one of the
fundamental Articles of their Religion, which they have inserted in their
Prayer Books, that the Law of Moses is never to be changed, and that God will
never give them any other Law, or Rule of Worship: and as they further ground
that Article in Ezrim Vearba, printed in the end of Bombergs Bibles, they
affirm, that nothing can be added unto it, nothing taken away from it, no
alteration in its obligation be admitted; which is directly contrary both to
the Truth, and to the Confession of all their Predecessors, who looked for the
Messiah, as we shall afterward declare.

In Opposition to this Gradual Revelation of the mind of God under the Old
Testament, the Apostle intimates that now by Jesus the Messiah, the Lord has
at once begun and finished the whole Revelation of his Will according to their
own hopes and expectation. So Jude 3. The Faith was once delivered unto the
Saints: not in one day, not in one Sermon; or by one Person, but at one season,
or under one dispensation, comprizing all the time from the entrance of the
Lord Christ upon his Ministry, and the closing of the Canon of Scripture, which
period was now at hand. This Season being once past and finished, no new
Revelation is to be expected to the end of the world. Nothing shall be added
unto, nor altered in the Worship of God any more. God will not do it, men that
attempt it, do it on the price of their souls.

2. God spoke in the Prophets, (...), after diverse sorts or manners. (...).
Now this respects either the various ways of Gods revealing himself to the
Prophets, by Dreams, Visions, Inspirations, Voices, Angels, every way with an
equal evidence of their being from God; or the ways of his dealing with the
Fathers by the Prophets, by promises, threats, gradual discoveries of his Will,
special Messages and Prophecies, public Sermons and the like. The latter, or
the various ways of the Prophets delivering their Messages to the People from
God is principally intended, though the former be not excluded, it being that,
from whence this latter variety did principally arise and flow.

In opposition hereunto the Apostle intimates, that the Revelation of God and
his will by Christ was accomplished (...), in one only way and manner, by his
preaching the Gospel who was anointed with the Spirit without measure.

The last difference, or instance in the Comparison, insisted on by the Apostle
is, (...).
that of old God spoke in the Prophets, but now in the Son, (...) for (...) say
most Expositors, in for by, (...); as Luke 1.70. (...), by the mouth of the
holy Prophets; But (...) here, answers the Hebrew (...) Numb. 12. God spoke
(...) in Moses. The certainty of the Revelation and presence of God with his
word is intimated in the Expression. So the word of the Lord was (...), in the
hand of this or that Prophet. They were but instruments to give out, what from
God they had received.

Now these Prophets in whom God spoke of Old, were all those who were divinely
inspired and sent to reveal his Will and Mind, as to the duty of the Church, or
any special concernment of his Providence in the Rule and Government thereof,
whether they declared the inspirations they had, or Revelations they received,
by word of mouth, or by writing. The Modern Jews make a distinction between the
Gift of Prophecy and the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, following Maimonides in
his More Nebuchim part. 2: cap. 32. His opinion, which he calls the opinion or
sentence of the Law, about Prophecy in general is the same with that of the
Gentile Philosophers as he professes. In one thing only he differs from them;
namely, that Prophecy does not so necessarily follow after due preparation, as
that a man cannot but prophecy who is rightly prepared* But the Gift of
Prophecy, he asserts wholly to depend on the temperature of the brain, natural
and moral exercises for the preparing and raising of the imagination, upon
which divine visions will succeed. A brainsick imagination, confounding divine
Revelation with Phanatical distempers. But in the eleven degrees of Prophecy
which he assigns, and attempts to prove by instances out of Scripture, he
placeeth that of inspiration by the Holy Ghost in the last and lowest place.
And therefore by the late Masters is the Book of Daniel cast into this latter
sort, though eminently prophetical, because they are so galled with his
predictions and calculations; other Reason of that disposition none readily
occurs. And this is the ground of their disposition of the Books of the
Scripture, into (...), the Law, or five Books of Moses, given in the highest
way and degree of Prophecy; (...), of two sorts, (...) and (...) Prophets,
first (or Books Historical) and the latter; and (...), or (...), Books written
by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Of the ground of which distinction see Kimchi
in his Preface to the Psalms. Their mistake lies in this, That Prophecy
consists principally in* and is distinguished into several degrees, by the
manner of Revelation; as by Dreams, Visions, Appearances of Angels, or men, and
the like. But as (...), a Prophet, and (...), Prophecy, are of a larger
signification then that pretended, as Numb. 11.29. 1 Samuel 10.5. 1 Chronicles. 25.1,
2, 3. will appear; So that which made any Revelation to be Prophecy in that
sense, as to be an infallible rule for the guidance of the Church, was not the
means of communicateing it to the Prophets; but that inspiration of the Holy
Ghost which implanted upon their minds, and gave forth by their Tongues, or
Pens, that which God would utter in them, and by them, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.

(...).
In answer unto this speaking of God in the Prophets, it is asserted, that in
the Revelation of the Gospel, God spoke in his Son. This is the main hinge on
which all the Arguments of the Apostle in the whole Epistle do turn; this bears
the stress of all the inferences afterward by him insisted on. And therefore
having mentioned it, he proceeds immediately unto that description of him,
which gives evidence to all that he draws from this consideration. Now because
no one Argument of the Apostle can be understood, unless this be rightly
stated, we must on necessity insist somewhat largely upon it; and unto what we
principally intend, some previous observations must be premised.

1. I take it at present for granted, that the Son of God appeared unto the
Prophets under the Old Testament. Whether ever he spoke unto them immediately,
or only by the Ministry of Angels, is not so certain. It is also granted, that
there was in Vision sometimes signs or representations of the Person of the
Father, as Dan. 7. But that the Son of God did mostly appear to the Fathers
under the Old Testament, is acknowledged by the Ancients, and is evident in
Scripture: See Zech. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. And he it was who is called the Angel,
Exodus 23.20, 21. The reason that is pleaded by some, that the Son of God was
not the Angel there mentioned, namely, because the Apostle says that to none
of the Angels was it said at any time, thou art my Son, this day I have
begotten thee, which could not be affirmed, if the Son of God were that Angel,
is not of any force. For notwithstanding this assertion, yet both the Ancient
Jews and Christians generally grant, that it is the Messiah that is called the
Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. though the Modern Jews foolishly apply that
name to Elias, whom they fancy to be present at Circumcision, which they take
to be the Covenant; a privilege as they say, granted him upon his complaint,
that the Children of Israel had forsaken the Covenant, 1 Kings 29.14. that is,
as they suppose, neglected Circumcision. The Apostle therefore speaks of those
who were Angels by nature, and no more, and not of him who being Jehovah the
Son, was sent of the Father, and is therefore called his Angel or Messenger,
being so only by Office. And this appearance of the Son of God, though not well
understanding what they say, is acknowledged by sundry of the Postalmudical
Rabbis. To this purpose very considerable are the words of Moses Gerundensis,
on Exodus 23. Iste Angelus si rem ipsam dicamus, est Angelus Redemptor, de quo
scriptum est, quoniam nomen meum in ipso est. Ille inquam Angelus qui ad Jacob
dicebat, Ego Deus Bethel. Ille de quo dictum est, and vocabat Mosen Deus de
rubo. Vocatur autem Angelus quia mundum gubernat. Scriptum est enim eduxit nos
ex Aegypto. Praeterea scriptum est, and Angelus faciei salvos fecit eos.
Nimirum ille Angelus qui est Dei facies; de quo dictum est, facies mea praeibit
and efficiam ut quiescas; denique ille Angelus est de quo Vates, subito veniet
ad Templum suum Dominus quem vos quaeritis, Angelus faederis quem cupitis. The
Angel if we speak exactly, is the Angel the Redeemer, of whom it is written, my
name is in him; that Angel which said unto Jacob, I am the God of Bethel: He of
whom it is said, God called unto Moses out of the Bush. And he is called the
Angel, because he governs the world. For it is written, Jehovah brought us
out of Egypt; and elsewhere he sent his Angel, and brought us out of Egypt. And
again, it is written, and the Angel of his presence [face] saved them; namely,
the Angel which is the Presence [face] of God; of whom it is said, my presence
[face] shall go before thee, and I will cause thee to rest: Lastly, that Angel
of whom the Prophet speaks, the Lord whom you seek shall suddenly come to his
Temple, the Angel of the Covenant whom you desire. To the same purpose speaks
the same Author on Exodus 33.14. My presence shall go before thee; Animadverte
attente quid ista sibi velint. Moses enim and Israelitae semper optaverunt
Angel^m: primum; cae^^rum, quis ille esset vere intelligere non py^uer^^t.
Neque ^nim ab al^is percipiebunt, n^que prophetica notione satis assequebantur.
Atqui facies Dei ipsum significat Deum -- And again, Facies mea praecedet, hoc
est, Angelus foederis quem vos cupitis. Observe diligently what is the meaning
of these words; for Moses and the Israelites always desired the principal
Angel; but who he was they could not perfectly understand: for they could
neither learn it of others, nor attain it by Prophecy; but the presence of God,
is God himself. My presence [face] shall go before thee; that is, the Angel of
the Covenant whom ye desire. Thus he; to which purpose others also of them do
speak; though how to reconcile these things to their unbelief in denying the
Personality of the Son of God they know not. This was the Angel whose (...),
Moses prayed for on Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33.13. and whom Jacob made to be the same
with the Go^ that fed him all his days, Genesis 48.15, 16. whereof we have
treated largely before. The Son of God having from the foundation of the world
undertaken the Care and Salvation of the Church, he it was who immediately
dealt with it in things which concerned its instruction and edification.
Neither does this hinder but that God the Father may yet be asserted, or that
he is in this place, to be the fountain of all Divine Revelation.

2. There is a difference between the Son of God revealing the will of God in
his Divine Person to the Prophets of which we have spoken, and the Son of God
as incarnate, revealing the will of God immediately to the Church. This is the
difference here insisted on by the Apostle. Under the Old Testament the Son of
God in his Divine Person, instructed the Prophets in the will of God, and gave
them that Spirit on whose Divine Inspiration their infallibility did depend, 1
Pet. 1.11. but now in the Revelation of the Gospel taking his own humanity; or
our Nature hypostatically united unto him, in the room of all the internuncii
or prophetical Messengers he had made use of, he taught it immediately himself.

There lies a seeming exception unto this distinction in the giving of the Law;
for as we affirm, that it was the Son by whom the Law was given, so in his so
doing he spoke immediately to the whole Church, Exodus 20.22. The Lord said, I
have talked with you from Heaven. The Jews say, that the people understood not
one word of what was spoken, but only heard a voice, and saw the terrible
appearances of the Majesty of God; as v. 18. for immediately upon that sight,
they removed and stood afar off; And the matter is left doubtful in the
repetition of the story, Deuteronomy. 5.4. It is said indeed the Lord talked with you
face to face in the Mount; but yet neither do these words fully prove that they
understood what was spoken, and as it was spoken, but only that they clearly
discovered the presence of God delivering the Law: for so are those words
expounded in v. 5. I stood says Moses, between the Lord and you at that time,
to show you the word of the Lord, for you were afraid by reason of the fire,
and went not up unto the Mount; that is, you understood not the words of the
Law, but as I declared them unto you; and it being so, though the Person of the
Son caused the words to be heard, yet he spoke not immediately to the whole
Church, but by Moses. But Secondly, We shall afterward show, that all the
voices then heard by Moses or the people, were formed in the air by the
Ministry of Angels, so that they heard not the immediate voice of God. Now in
the last days did the Lord take that work into his own hands, wherein from the
foundation of the world he had employed Angels and Men.

3. Though the Apostles argument arise not immediately from the differing ways
of Gods revealing himself to the Prophets, and to Christ, but in the difference
that lies in his immediate speaking unto us in Christ the Son, and his speaking
unto the Fathers in the Prophets, yet that former difference also is intimated
by him, in his affirming, that he spoke to them variously or diversely, as has
been declared, and therefore we must consider that also; And herein we are to
obviate the great Judaical prejudice against the Gospel; to which end observe,

1. That though the Apostle mentions the Prophets in general, yet it is Moses
whom he principally intends. This is evident in the Application of this
Argument which he makes in particular, Chap. 3.3. where he expressly prefers the
Lord Jesus before Moses by name, in this matter of Ministering to the Church in
the name of God. For whereas, as was before intimated, the Apostle mannages
this thing with excellent Wisdom in this Epistle, considering the inveterate
prejudices of the Hebrews in their adhering unto Moses, he could not mention
him in particular, until he had proved him whom he preferred above him, to be
so excellent and glorious, so far exalted above Men and Angels, that it was no
disreputation to Moses to be esteemed inferior to him.

2. That the great Reason why the Jews adhered so pertinaciously unto Mosaical
Institutions was their persuasion of the unparalled excellency of the
Revelation made to Moses. This they retreated unto, and boasted of when they
were pressed with the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ, John 9.28, 29. And this
was the main foundation in all their contests with the Apostles, Acts 15.1.
Chap. 21.21, 28. And this at length they have made a principal root or
fundamental Article of their Faith, being the fourth of the thirteen Articles
of their Creed; namely, that Moses was the most excellent and most sublime
among the Prophets, so far above that excellency, that degree of wisdom and
honor which men may attain unto, that he was equal to Angels. This Maimonides
the first disposer of their Faith into fundamental Articles expounds, at large,
More Nebuch. p. 2. cap. 39. Declaravimus, says he, quod Prophetia Mosis
doctoris nostri ab omnium uliorum Prophetiis differat; dicemus nunc quod
propter solam illam apprehensionem ad legem vocati sumus; quia nempe vocationi
illi qua Moses nos vocavit simiis neque antecessit ab Adamo primo ad ipsum
usque neque etiam post ipsum apud ullum Prophetam sequuta est; sic fundamentum
Legis nostrae est quod in aeternum finem non sit habitura vel abolenda, ac
propterea, etiam ex sententia nostra, alia lex nec unquam fuit, nec erit
praeter unicam hanc Legem Mosis Doctoris nostri. We have declared, that the
Prophecy of Moses our Master, differed from the Prophecies of all others; Now
we shall show that upon the account of this persuasion alone, (namely, of the
excellency of the Revelation made unto Moses) we are called to the Law. For
from the first Adam to him, there was never any such call (from God) as that
wherewith Moses called us, nor did ever any such ensue after him. Hence is it a
fundamental Principle of our Law; that it shall never have an end, or be
abolished; and therefore also it is our Judgment that there was never any
other (divine) Law, nor ever shall be, but only this of our Master Moses. This
is their present persuasion; it was so of old. The Law and all Legal
Observances are to be continued for ever: other way of worshipping God there
can be none: and this upon the account of the incomparable Excellency of the
Revelation made to Moses.

To confirm themselves in this prejudicate apprehension, they assign a fourfold
preheminency to the Prophecy of Moses above that of other Prophets; and these
are insisted on by the same Maimonides in his explication of Cap. 10. Tractat.
Sanedr. and by sundry others of them.

1. The first they fix on is this; that God never spoke to any Prophet
immediately, but only to Moses; to him he spoke without Angelical Mediation.
For so he affirms that he spoke to him, (...), mouth to mouth, Numb. 12.13.

2. All other Prophets, they say, received their visions either in their sleep,
or presently after their sleep, but Moses in the day time standing between the
Cherubims, Exodus 29.52. And,

3. That when other Prophets received their Visions or Revelations, although it
was by the mediation of Angels, yet their nature was weakened by it, and the
state of their bodies, by reason of the consternation that befell them, Dan.
10.8. but Moses had no such perturbation befalling him when the Lord spoke unto
him, but it was with him, as when a man speaks unto his friend.

4. That other Prophets had not inspirations and Answers from God at their own
pleasures, but sometimes were forced to wait long, and pray for an answer
before they could receive it. But Moses was wont when he pleased to say, stay
and I will hear what God will command you, Numb. 9.9. So they.

And to reconcile this unto what is elsewhere said, that he could not see the
face of God and live, they add, that he saw God not immediately but (...), in
speculo or speculari, (a word formed from the Latin,) in a glass: an expression
which the Apostle alludes unto, 1 Cor. 13.12. only they add, (...), other
Prophets saw through nine perspectives; (...) but Moses saw through one only:
Vaiikra Rabba. sec. 1. whereunto they add, that his Speculum was clear and
lucid; theirs spotted.

It must be granted, that Moses being the Lawgiver and first Revealer of all
that Worship in the observation whereof the Judaical Church State and
Privilege of that people did consist, had the preheminency above the
succeeding Prophets, whose Ministry chiefly tended to instruct the people in
the nature, and keep them to the observation of his Institutions. But that all
these things by them insisted on, were peculiar to him, it does not appear; nor
if it did so, are the most of them, of any great weight or importance.

The first is granted; and a signal Privilege it was; God spoke unto him
(...), face to face, Exodus 33.11. and (...), mouth to mouth, Numb. 12.13. and
this is mentioned as that which was peculiar to him above the Prophets which
should succeed him in the Ministry of that Church. But that Moses saw the
essence of God, which the Jews contend from those words, is expressly denied in
the Text it self. For even then when it was said, that God spoke to him face to
face, it is also affirmed that he did not, nor could see the face of God, Exodus
33.20. See John 1.17, 18. Both those expressions intend only that God revealed
himself unto him in a more clear and familiar way than he had done unto other
Prophets, or would do, whilst that administration continued. For although the
things which he revealed to, and by other Prophets, were more clear* evident
and open to the understanding of believers, than they were in the Revelation
made to Moses, (they being intended as Expositions of it,) yet in the way of
the Revelation its self, God dealt more clearly and familiarly with Moses, than
with any other Prophet of that Church whatever.

The Second difference assigned is vain. Of the times and seasons wherein the
Prophets received their Visions there can be no determinate rule assigned. Many
of them were at ordinary seasons, whilst they were waking, and some about the
employment of their Callings, as Amos, Chap. 7. v. 15.

The Third also about the consternation of Spirit which befell other Prophets
is groundless. Sometimes it was so with them, as the instance of Daniel proves,
Chap. 7.28. Chap. 10. v. 8. and so it befell Moses himself, Heb. 12.21. which
if we attain to that place we shall prove the Jews themselves to acknowledge.
Ordinarily it was otherwise, as with him, so with them, as is manifest in the
whole story of the Prophets.

There is the same mistake in the last difference assigned. Moses did not so
receive the Spirit of Prophecy, as that he could at his own pleasure reveal
those things which were not discoverable but by that Spirit; or speak out the
mind of God infallibly in any thing for the use of the Church without actual
inspiration as to that particular, which is evident from the mistake that he
was under as to the manner of his Government which he rectified by the advice
of Jethro, Exodus 18.19. And likewise in other Instances did he wait for
particular Answers from God, Numb. 15.34. To have a comprehension at once of
the whole Will of God concerning the obedience and salvation of the Church, was
a Privilege reserved for him who in all things was to have the pre-eminence.
And it seems that Maimonides himself in his exaltation of Moses excepted the
Messiah. For whereas in the Hebrew and Latin Copies of More Nebuch. part. 2.
cap. 45. there are these words, (...), which Buxtorf. renders, est gradus hic
etiam praestantissimorum consiliariorum Israelis, this is the degree (in
Prophecy) of the Counselors of Israel; the Arabic or Original has; And this
also is the degree of the Messiah of Israel, who goes before, or excels all
others, that is, in point of Prophecy.

Not to follow them in their imaginations, the just privileges of Moses above
all other Prophets lay in these three things.

1. That he was the Lawgiver, or Mediator by whom God gave that Law, and
revealed that Worship, in the observation whereof, the very being of the
Judaical Church did consist.

2. That God in the Revelation made unto him, dealt in a more familiar and
clear manner, as to the way of his outward dealing, than with any other
Prophets.

3. In that the Revelation made unto him, concerned the ordering of the whole
house of God, when the other Prophets were employed only about particulars
built on his foundation.

In these things consisted the just and free pre-eminence of Moses, which
whether it were such as would warrant the Jews in their obstinate adherence to
his Institutions upon their own Principles shall be enquired into. But before
we manifest that indeed it was not, the Revelation of the mind of God in and by
the Son, which is compared with, and preferred before and above this of Moses,
must be unfolded; and this we shall do in the ensuing Observations.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ by virtue of the Union of his Person, was from the
womb filled with a perfection of Gracious Light and Knowledge of God and his
Will. An actual exercise of that Principle of holy Wisdom wherewith he was
endued, in his infancy, as afterward, he had not, Luke 2.52. Nor had he in his
humane nature an absolutely infinite comprehension of all individual things
past, present and to come, which he expressly denies, as to the day of
Judgment, Mat. 24.36. Mark 13.32. but he was furnish^d with all that Wisdom
and Knowledge which the humane nature was capable of, both as to principle and
exercise, in the condition wherein it was, without destroying its finite being,
and variety of conditions from the Womb. The Papists have made a vain
Controversy about the knowledge of the humane soul of Christ. Those whom they
charge with error in this matter affirm no more than what is expressly asserted
in the places of Scripture above mentioned; and by their answers unto those
places, it is evident how little they care what scorn they expose the Scripture
and all Religion unto, so they may secure their own mistakes. But this Wisdom
whatever it were, is not that whereby God so revealed his mind unto him, as
thereby to be said to speak to us in him. He had it by his Union, and therefore
immediately from the Person of the Son, sanctifying that nature by the Holy
Ghost which he took into subsistence with himself. But the Revelation, by which
God spoke in him unto us, was in a peculiar manner from the Father, Revel. 1.1.
and as we have showed, it is the Person of the Father that is here peculiarly
spoken of. And hence the enquiry of some on this place, how the Second Person
revealed himself to the humane nature, is not to the purpose of it. For it is
the Person of the Father that is spoken of: So that,

2. The Commission, M^ssion and furnishing of the Son as incarnate and Mediator
with abilities for the declaration of the mind and will of God unto the Church,
were peculiarly from the Father. For the whole work of his Mediation he
received command of the Father, John 10.18. and what he should speak, John
12.4. according to which commandment he wrought and taught, John 14.31. Whence
that is the common Periphrasis whereby he expressed the Person of the Father,
he that sent him, as also he that sealed and anointed him. And his Doctrine on
that account he testified, was not his, his own, that is primarily or
originarily as Mediator, but his that sent him, John 7.16. It was from the
Father that he heard the word, and learned the Doctrine that he declared unto
the Church. And this is asserted where ever there is mention made of the
Fathers sending, sealing, anointing, commanding, teaching him; of his doing the
will, speaking the words, seeking the Glory, obeying the commands of him that
sent him; See John 8.26, 28, 40. Chap. 14.10. c. 15.15. Revel. 1.1. And in the
Old Testament, Zech. 2.8. Isa. 48.15, 16, 17. Chap. 50.4. That blessed Tongue
of the Learned whereby God spoke in and by him, the refreshing word of the
Gospel, unto poor weary sinners, was the gift of the Father.

3. As to the manner of his receiving of the Revelation of the Will of God, a
double mistake must be removed, and then the nature of it must be declared.

1. The Socinians to avoid the force of those Testimonies which are urged to
confirm the Deity of Christ, from the assertions in the Gospel that he who
spoke to the Disciples on earth, was then also in Heaven, John 3.13. Chap.
6.35, 51. Chap. 7.32, 33, 41, 42, 57, 58. Chap. 8.29. have broached a Mahumetan
fancy, that the Lord Christ before his entrance on his public Ministry, was
locally taken up into Heaven, and there instructed in the mystery of the
Gospel, and the mind of God which he was to reveal; Catech. Raccov. cap. 3. de
Offic. Chapter Prophet. Quest. 4, 5. Smalcius de Divinitat. Christi, cap. 4. Socin.
Respons. ad Paraen. Vol. page 38, 39.

But (1.) There was no cause of any such Rapture of the humane Nature of
Christ, as we shall evidence in manifesting the way whereby he was taught of
the Father, especially after his Baptism. (2.) This imaginary Rapture is
grounded solely on their (...), that the Lord Christ in his whole Person was no
more than a mere man. (3.) There is no mention of any such thing in the
Scripture, where the Fathers revealing his mind and will to the Son is treated
of, which had it been, ought not to have been omitted. (4.) The fancy of it is
expressly contrary to Scripture, for (1.) The Holy Ghost affirms, that Christ
entered once into the Holy Place, and that after he had obtained eternal
Redemption, Heb. 9.12. which should have been his second entrance had he been
taken thither before, in his humane nature; so that coming of his into the
world which we look for at the last day, is called his second coming, his
coming again, because of his first entrance into it at his incarnation, Heb.
9.28. (2.) He was to suffer before his entry into Heaven and his glory therein,
Luke 24.26. And (3.) As to the time of his Ascension which these men assign,
namely, the forty days after his baptism, it is said expressly that he was all
that time in the wilderness amongst the wild Beasts, Mark 1.13. So that this
figment may have no place in our enquiry into the way of the Fathers speaking
in the Son.

2. Some lay the whole weight of the Revelation of the will of God unto Christ,
upon the endowments of the Humane Nature by virtue of its Personal Union with
the Eternal Word; but this is wholly inconsistent with the many Testimonies
before rehearsed, of the Fathers revealing himself unto him after that Union.
Wherefore to declare the Nature of this Revelation, we must observe further.

4. That Jesus Christ in his divine Nature, as he was the Eternal Word and
Wisdom of the Fathers, not by a voluntary communication, but eternal generation
had an omnisciency of the whole nature and will of God, as the Father himself
has, because the same with that of the Father; their will and wisdom being the
same. This is the blessed (...), or in-being of each Person, the one in the
other, by virtue of their oneness in the same nature: Thus, as God, he had
absolute omniscience. Moreover the mystery of the Gospel, the especial Counsel
and Covenant of it concerning the Redemption of the Elect in his blood, and the
Worship of God by his Redeemed ones, being transacted between Father and Son
from all eternity, was known unto him as the Son; by virtue of his own personal
transactions with the Father in the eternal Counsel and Covenant of it. See
what we have elsewhere delivered concerning that Covenant.

5. The Lord Christ discharged his Office and work of Revealing the Will of the
Father, in and by his humane nature; that nature wherein he dwelt among us,
Joh. 1.14. For although the Person of Christ, God and man was our Mediator,
Acts 20.28. Joh. 1.14, 18. yet his humane nature was that wherein he discharged
the duties of his Office, and the principium quod of all his mediatory actings,
1 Timothy 2.5.

6. This Humane Nature of Christ, as he was in it made of a woman made under
the Law, Gal. 4.4. was from the instant of its Union with the Person of the Son
of God, an holy thing, Luke 1.35. Holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from
sinners, and radically filled with all that perfection of habitual Grace and
Wisdom, which was or could be necessary to the discharge of that whole duty
which as a man he owed unto God, Luke 2.40, 49, 52. Joh. 8.46. 1 Pet. 2.22. But,

7. Besides this furniture with habitual Grace for the performance of all holy
obedience unto God, as a man made under the Law, there was a peculiar endowment
with the Spirit without and beyond the bounds of all comprehensible measures
that he was to receive as the great Prophet of the Church, in whom the Father
would speak and give out the last Revelation of himself. This communication of
the Spirit unto him, was the foundation of his sufficiency for the discharge of
his Prophetical Office, Isa. 11.2, 3. Chap. 48.16. Chap. 61.1, 2, 3. Dan. 9.24.
As to the reality and being of this Gift of the Spirit, he received it from the
womb; whence in his infancy he was said to be (...), Luke 2.40. filled with
wisdom, wherewith he confuted the Doctors to amazement, v. 47. And with his
years were these Gifts increased in him, (...), he went forwards in wisdom and
stature and favor, v. 52. But the full communication of this Spirit with
special reference unto the discharge of his public Office, with the visible
pledge of it in the Holy Ghost descending on him in the shape of a Dove, he was
made partaker of in his baptism, Matthew. 3.16. when also he received his first
public Testimony from Heaven, v. 17. which when again repeated, received the
additional command of hearing him, Matthew. 17.5. designing the Prophet that was
to be heard on pain of utter extermination, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. And therefore he
was thereupon said to be (...), Luke 4.1. full of the Holy Ghost, and sealed to
this work by the sign foretold of God, Joh. 1.33.

This was the foundation of the Fathers speaking in the Son as incarnate. He
spoke in him by his Spirit, so he did in the Prophets of old, 2 Pet. 1.21. And
herein in general the Prophecy of Christ, and theirs did agree. It remains
then to show wherein his Pre-eminence above them did consist, so that the word
spoken by him is principally and eminently to be attended unto, which is the
Argument of that which the Apostle has in hand in this place.

8. The Preheminencies of the Prophecy of Christ, above that of Moses, and all
other Prophets were of two sorts: 1. Such as arose from his Person who was the
Prophet. 2. Such as accompanied the nature and manner of the Revelation made
unto him.

1. They arise from the infinite Excellency of his Person above theirs. This is
that which the Apostle from the close of this verse insists upon to the very
end of the Chapter, making his discourse upon it the basis of ensuing his
exhortations. I shall therefore remit the consideration of it, unto its proper
place.

2. There were sundry Excellencies that attended the very Revelation it self,
made unto him, or his Prophecy as such: For,

1. Not receiving the Spirit by measure, Joh. 3.34. as they all did, he had
given unto him altogether, a comprehension of the whole will and mind of God,
as to what ever he would have revealed of himself, with the mystery of our
salvation, and all that obedience and worship which in this world he would
require of his Church. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should
dwell, Col. 1.19. that is, of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.17. not granting him a
transient irradiation by them, but a permanency and constant abode of them with
him in their fullness; all treasures of wisdom and knowledge being hid in him,
Col. 2.3. as their home and proper abiding place; which made him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.3. All the Mysteries of the
counsel between the Father and the Eternal Word for the salvation of the Elect,
with all the ways whereby it was to be accomplished through his own blood, were
known unto him; as also were all the bounds, the whole extent of that Worship
which his Church was to render unto God, with the assistance of the Spirit that
was to be afforded unto them for that end and purpose. Hence the only reason
why he did not at once reveal unto his Disciples the whole counsel of God, was
not because all the treasures of it were not committed unto him, but because
they could bear no other but that gradual communication of it, which he used
toward them, Joh. 16.12. But he himself dwelt in the midst of those treasures,
seeing to the bottom of them. All other Prophets, even Moses himself, receiving
their revelation by transient irradiations of their minds, had no treasure of
truth dwelling in them, but apprehended only that particular wherein they were
enlightened; and that not clearly neither in its fullness and perfection, but in
a measure of light, accommodated unto the Age wherein they lived, 1 Pet. 1.11,
12. Hence the Spirit is said to rest on him, Isa. 11.2, 3. and to abide on him,
Matthew. 3.16. who did only in a transient act affect the minds of other
Prophets; and by an actual motion, which had not an habitual spring in
themselves, cause them to speak or write the will of God, as an instrument of
Music gives forth a sound according to the skill of him that strikes it, and
that only when it is so stricken or used. Hence,

2. The Prophets receiving their Revelations, as it were, by number and tale
from the holy Ghost, when they had spoken or written what in particular at any
season they had received from him, could not add one word or syllable of the
same infallibility and authority with what they had so received. But the Lord
Christ having all the treasures of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Truth hid and laid up
in him, did at all times, in all places, with equal infallibility and authority
give forth the mind and will of God, even as he would; what he so spoke having
its whole Authority from his speaking of it, and not from its consonancy unto
any thing otherwise revealed.

3. The Prophets of old were so barely instrumental in receiving and revealing
the will of God, being only servants in the house, Heb. 3.4. for the good of
others, 1 Pet. 1.11. that they saw not to the bottom of the things by
themselves revealed; and did therefore both diligently read and study the books
of them that wrote before their time, Dan. 9.2. and meditated upon the things
which the Spirit uttered by themselves, to obtain an understanding in them, 1
Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. But the Lord Jesus, the Lord over his own house, had an
absolutely perfect comprehension of all the mysteries revealed to him and by
him, by that divine Wisdom which always dwelt in him.

4. The Difference was no less between them in respect of the Revelations
themselves made to them, and by them. For although the substance of the will
and mind of God concerning salvation by the Messiah was made known unto them
all, yet it was done so obscurely to Moses and the Prophets that ensued, that
they came all short in the light of that Mystery to John the Baptist, who did
not rise up in a clear and distinct apprehension of it, unto the least of the
true Disciples of Christ, Matthew. 11.11. whence the giving of the Law by Moses
to instruct the Church in that Mystery, by its types and shadows, is opposed to
that Grace and Truth which were brought by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17, 18. See
Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Col. 1.26, 27. Tit. 2.11. 2 Timothy 1.10.

In these, and sundry other things of the like importance, had the Fathers
speaking in the Son, the pre-eminence above his speaking in Moses and the
Prophets; for which cause the Apostle places this consideration in the head of
his Reasonings and Arguments, for attendance unto, and observation of the
things revealed by him. For even all these things have influence into his
present Argument, though the main stress of it be laid on the excellency of his
Person, of which at large afterward.

6. We must yet further observe, that the Jews, with whom the Apostle had to
do, had all of them an expectation of a new signal and final Revelation of the
will of God, to be made by the Messiah in the last days, that is of their
Church state, and not as they now fondly imagine, of the world. Some of them
indeed imagined that great Prophet promised Deuteronomy. 18. to have been one distinct
from the Messiah, Joh. 1.21. but the general expectation of the Church for the
full Revelation of the will of God, was upon the Messiah, Joh. 4.25. Of the
same mind were their more ancient Doctors, that retained any thing of the
tradition of their Fathers; asserting, that the Law of Moses was alterable by
the Messiah, and that in some things it should be so. Maimonides is the leader
in the opinion of the eternity of the Law: whose Arguments are answered by the
Author of Sepher Ikkarim, lib. 3. cap. 13. and some of them by Nachmanides.
Hence it is laid down as a Principle in Neve shalom, (...) Messiah the King
shall be exalted above Abraham, be high above Moses, yea, and the ministering
Angels. And it is for the excellency of the Revelation made by him, that he is
so exalted above Moses. Whence Maimonides himself acknowledges, Tractat. de
Regibus, that at the coming of the Messiah, (...) hidden and deep things ( i.
e. of the counsel of God) shall be revealed or laid open unto all. And this
persuasion they built on the Promise of a new Covenant to be made with them,
not like the Covenant made with their fathers, Jerem. 31.32, 33. Whence the
Author before mentioned concludes, that it was the judgment of the ancient
Doctors, that they should receive a new Covenant from the mouth of God himself;
and all their Worship being annexed and subservient unto the Covenant that was
made with them in Horeb, upon the removal of that Covenant, there was of
necessity a new kind of Worship, subservient thereunto, to ensue.

From all these observations we may evidently perceive wherein the force of the
Apostles Argument does lie, which he insists upon in this very entrance of his
Discourse: rather insinuating it from their own Principles, than openly
pressing them with its reason, which he does afterward. They acknowledged that
the Messiah was to come, that he was to be in a special manner the Son of God,
(as we shall show;) that in him God would ultimately reveal his mind and will
unto them, and that this Revelation on many accounts would be far more
excellent, than that of old made to and by Moses; which that it was all
accomplished in the ministry of Jesus Christ, and that unto themselves in the
latter days of their Church, according to what was long before foretold, he
asserts and proves; whence it was easy for them to gather, what a necessity of
adhereing to his Doctrine and Institutions, notwithstanding any contrary pleas
or arguings, was incumbent on them.

But moreover the Apostle in these words has opened the spring, from whence
all his ensuing Arguments do flow; in fixing on him who brought life and
immortality to light by the Gospel. And from thence takes occasion to enter
upon the Dogmatical part of the Epistle, in the description of the Person of
Christ, the Son of God, and his Excellency, in whom God spoke unto them, that
they might consider with whom they had to do; wherein he proceeds to the end of
this Chapter.

But before we proceed, we shall stay here a little to consider some things
that may be a refreshment to Believers in their passage, in the consideration
of those spiritual Truths, which for the use of the Church in general are
exhibited unto us, in the words we have considered.

And the first is this.

I. The Revelation of the of Will God, as to all things concerning his Worship,
our Faith and Obedience, is peculiarly and in a way of eminency from the
Father. This is that which the Apostle partly asserts, partly takes for
granted, as the head and spring of his whole ensuing discourse. And this shall
now be a little further cleared and confirmed: to which end we may observe,

1. That the whole Mystery of his Will antecedently to the Revelation of it, is
said to be hid in God, that is, the Father, Ephesians. 3.9. it lay wrapped up from
the eyes of men and Angels, in his Eternal Wisdom and Counsel, Col. 1.26, 27.
The Son indeed, who is, and from eternity was in the bosom of the Father, Joh.
1.18. as one brought up with him, his eternal delight and wisdom, Prove. 8.29,
30. was partaker with him in this Counsel, v. 31. as also his eternal Spirit,
who searches and knows all the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. but yet the
rise and spring of this Mystery, was in the Father. For the order of acting in
the blessed Trinity, follows the order of subsistence. As the Father therefore
is the Fountain of the Trinity as to subsistence, so also to operation. He has
life in himself, and he gives to the Son to have life in himself, Joh. 5.26.
And he does it by communicating unto him his subsistence by eternal Generation.
And thence says the Son, As my Father works, so I work, v. 17. And what he
sees the Father do, that does the Son likewise, v. 19. not by imitation, or
repetition of the like works; but in the same works, in order of nature the
will and wisdom of the Father, does proceed; so also is it in respect of the
holy Ghost, whose order of subsistence denotes that of his of operation.

2. That the Revelation of the Mystery of the will of God, so hidden in the
counsel of his will from Eternity, was always made and given out in the
pursuit, and for the accomplishment of the purpose of the Father; or that
eternal purpose of the will of God, which is by the way of eminency ascribed
unto the Father. Ephesians. 1.8, 9. He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
prudence, having made known unto us the m^stery of his will, according to his
good pleasure which he has purposed in himself. It is the Father of whom he
speaks, v. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now he
abounds to us-wards in wisdom and prudence, or abundantly manifests his
infinite wisdom in his dealing with us, by the Revelation of the mystery of his
will; and this he does in pursuit of his good pleasure, which he purposed in
himself; or that purpose of his will which had its foundation solely in his
good pleasure. This is the purpose of Election, as is declared, v. 3, 4 5. And
this purpose is peculiarly assigned unto him, Joh. 17.6. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. For the
accomplishment of this purpose, or the bringing of those predestined thereby,
to the end purposed for them by the means ordained, for the praise of Gods
glorious grace, is the whole Revelation of the will of God, first, and last,
made. He spoke in his Son, and he spoke in him that he might manifest his Name
(himself and will) to the men whom he gave him: for, says the Son, thine they
were, set apart for thee in thy eternal purpose, and thou gave them unto me,
Joh. 17.6. And therefore Paul tells us, that in preaching of the Gospel, he
endured all things for the elects sake, 2 Timothy 2.10. knowing that it was for
their salvation, that the mystery of it was revealed from the bosom of the
Father, as God also had before taught him, Acts 18.11. See Romans 11.7. chap
8.28, etc.

3. This Purpose of God being communicated with, and unto the Lord Christ, or
the Son, and so becoming the Counsel of peace between them both, Zech. 6.13. He
rejoicing to do the work that was incumbent on him for the accomplishment of
it, Prove. 8.30, 31, 32. Psalm. 40.7, 8. it became peculiarly the care and work
of the Father, to see that the inheritance promised him upon his undertaking, (
Isa. 53.10, 11, 12.) should be given unto him. This is done by the Revelation
of the will of God unto men, concerning their obedience and salvation, whereby
they are made the let, the seed, the portion and inheritance of Christ. To this
end does the Lord, that is, the Father, who said unto the Lord the Son, Sit
thou on my right hand, ( Psalm. 110.2.) send the Rod of his power out of Sion,
v. 2. and that by it to declare his rule even over his enemies, and to make his
people, those given unto him, willing and obedient, v. 3. The inheritance given
by the Father unto Christ, being wholly in the possession of another, it became
him to take it out of the Usurpers hand, and deliver it up to him, whose right
it was; and this he did, and does by the Revelation of his mind in the
preaching of the Word, Col. 1.12, 13. And from these considerations it is, that

4. The whole Revelation and Dispensation of the will of God in and by the
Word, is (as was said) eminently appropriated unto the Father. Eternal life
(the counsel, the purpose, ways, means, and procurer of it) was with the
Father, and was manifested to us by the word of truth, 1 John 1.1, 2. And it is
the Father, that is, his will, mind, purpose, grace, love, that the Son
declares, Joh. 1.18. in which work he speaks nothing, but what he heard from,
and was taught by the Father, Joh. 8.28. And thence he says, the doctrine is
not mine, (that is, principally and originally) but his that sent me, Joh.
7.16. And the Gospel is called the Gospel of the glory of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. which is a periphrasis of the Person of the Father, who is the
Father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17. And we might also declare, that the great work of
making this Gospel effectual on the minds of men, does peculiarly belong unto
the Father, which he accomplisheth by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. c. 4.6. But that
is not our present business. Thus the Revelation of events that should befall
the Church to the end of the world, that Christ signified by his Angel unto
John, was first given him of the Father, Revel. 1.1. And therefore though all
declarations of God and his will, from the foundation of the world, were made
by the Son the second Person of the Trinity, and his Spirit speaking in the
Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 13. yet as it was not by him immediately, no more
was it as absolutely so, but as the great Angel and Messenger of the Covenant,
by the will and appointment of the Father. And therefore the very Dispensers of
the Gospel are said, (...), to treat as Ambassadors about the business of
Christ with men in the name of God the Father; (...), says the Apostle; as if
God the Father exhorted in and by us, 2 Cor. 5.20. For to him does this whole
work principally relate.

And from the appropriating of this work originally and principally to the
Father, there are three things, that are particularly intimated unto us.

1. The Authority that is to be considered in it: the Father is the Original of
all power and Authority; of him the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named,
Ephesians. 3.15. He is the Father of the whole Family, from whom Christ himself
receives all his Power and Authority as Mediator, Mat. 28.18. which when his
work is accomplished, he he shall give up again into his hand, 1 Cor. 15.28. He
sent him into the world, set him over his house, gave him command unto his
work. The very name and Title of Father, carries Authority along with it, Mal.
1.6. And in the disposal of the Church, in respect of this paternal power does
the Son affirm, that the Father is greater than he, Joh. 14.28. And runs up the
contempt of the word in the preaching of it by his Messengers, into a contempt
of this Authority of the Father, he that refuses you, refuses me, he that
refuses me, refuses him that sent me.

The Revelation then and dispensation of the mind and will of God in the word,
is to be considered as an act of Supreme Sovereign Authority: requiring all
subjection of Soul and Conscience in the receiving of it. It is the Father of
the Family that speaks in this word; he that has all power and Authority
essentially in him, over the souls and eternal conditions of them to whom he
speaks. And what holy reverence, humility and universal subjection of soul to
the word this in a particular manner requires, is easy to be apprehended.

2. There is also Love. In the Economy of the blessed Trinity about the work
of our Salvation, that which is eminently and in an especial manner ascribed
unto the Father, is Love, as has been at large elsewhere showed, 1 John 4.9,
10, 16. God, that is, the Father says he, is Love. And how he exerts that
property of his nature in the work of our Salvation by Christ, he there shows
at large: So Joh.. 3.16. Romans 5.7, 8. To be Love, full of Love, to be the
especial spring of all fruits of Love, is peculiar to him as the Father. And
from Love it is that he makes the Revelation of his Will whereof we speak,
Deuteronomy. 7.8. c. 33.3. Psalm. 147.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. It was out of infinite
Love, mercy* and compassion, that God would at all reveal his Mind and Will
unto sinners. He might for ever have locked up the treasures of his Wisdom and
Prudence, wherein he abounds toward us in his word, in his own eternal breast.
He might have left all the Sons of men unto that woeful darkness, whereunto by
Sin they had cast themselves, and kept them under the chains and power of it,
with the Angels that sinned before them, unto the judgment of the great d^y.
But it was from infinite Love that he made this condescension to reveal himself
and his Will unto us. This mixture of Authority and Love, which is the spring
of the Revelation of the Will of God unto us, requires all readiness,
willingness and cheerfulness in the receipt of it, and sub^ission unto it;
Besides these also,

3. There is Care eminently seen in it. The great Care of the Church is in, and
on the Father. He is the Husbandman that takes Care of the Vine and Vineyard,
Joh. 15.1, 2. And thence our Savior who had a delegated Care of his people,
commends them to the Father, Joh. 17. as to whom the Care of them did
principally and originally belong. Care is proper to a Father as such; to God
as a Father. Care is inseparable from paternal Love. And this also is to be
considered in the Revelation of the Will of God.

What directions from these Considerations may be taken for the use both of
them that dispense the word, and of those whose duty it is to attend unto the
dispensation of it, shall only be marked in our passage.

For the Dispensers of the Word; Let them,

1. Take heed of pursuing that work negligently, which has its spring in the
Authority, Love and Care of God. See 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16.

2. Know to whom to look for supportment, help, ability, and encouragement in
their work, Ephesians. 6.19, 20. And,

3. Not be discouraged whatever opposition they meet with in the discharge of
their duty, considering whose work they have in hand, 2 Cor. 4.15, 16.

4. Know how they ought to dispense the Word, so as to answer the spring from
whence it comes; namely, wi^h Authority, Love to, and Care for the souls of
men. And,

5. Consider to whom they are to give an account of the work they are called to
the discharge of, and entrusted with, Heb. 13.7.

And for them to whom the Word is preached; Let them consider,

1. With what Reverence and godly fear, they ought to attend unto the
dispensation of it, seeing it is a proper effect and issue of the Authority of
God, Heb. 12.25. And,

2. How they will escape if they neglect so great Salvation declared unto them
from the Love and Care of God, Heb. 2.3. And,

3. With what holiness and spiritual subjection of Soul unto God, they ought to
be conversant in and with all the Ordinances of Worship that are appointed by
him, Heb. 12.28, 29.

Other Observations I shall more briefly pass over. God spoke in them.

II. The Authority of God speaking in and by the Penmen of the Scriptures, is
the sole bottom and foundation of our assenting to them, and what is contained
in them, with Faith Divine and Supernatural. He spoke in them; he then
continues to speak by them, and therefore is their word received, 2 Pet. 3.20,
21. But this is elsewhere handled at large.

III. Gods gradual Revelation of himself, his Mind and Will unto the Church,
was a fruit of infinite Wisdom and Care toward his Elect. These are parts of
his ways, says Job, but how little a portion is heard of him, Job 26.14.
Though all his ways and dispensations are ordered in infinite Wisdom, yet we
can but stand at the shore of the Ocean, and admire its glory and greatness.
Little it is that we can comprehend. Yet what may be our instruction, that may
further our Faith and Obedience is not hidden from us. And these things lie
evident unto us, in this gradual discovery of himself and his Will.

1. That he over-filled not their Vessels, He gave them out light as they were
able to bear; though we know not perfectly what their condition was, yet this
we know, that as no generation needed more light than they had, for the
discharge of the duty that God required of them, so more light would have
unfitted them for somewhat or other, that was their duty in their respective
generations.

2. He kept them in a Continual dependence upon himself, and waiting for their
Rule and Direction from him; which as it tended to his glory, so it was
exceedingly suited to their safety, in keeping them in an humble waiting frame.

3. He so gave out the Light and Knowledge of himself, as that the great work
which he had to accomplish, that lay in the stores of his infinitely Wise Will,
as the end and issue of all Revelations, namely, the bringing forth of Christ
into the world, in the way wherein he was to come, and for the Ends which he
was to bring about, might not be obviated. He gave light enough to believers to
enable them to receive him; and not so much, as to hinder obdurate sinners,
from crucifying him.

4. He did this work so, that the Pre-eminence fully to reveal him, and
ultimately, might be reserved for him, in whom all things were to be gathered
unto an head. All Privileges were to be kept for, and unto him; which was
principally done by this gradual Revelation of the mind of God.

5. And there was tender Care conjoined with this infinite Wisdom. None of his
elect in any age, were left without that Light and instruction which were
needful for them in their seasons and generations: And this so given out unto
them, as that they might have fresh consolation and supportment, as their
occasions did require. Whilst the Church of old was under this dispensation,
they were still harkening when they should hear new tidings from Heaven for
their teaching and refreshment. And if any difficulty did at any time befall
them, they were sure not to want relief in this kind. And this was necessary
before the final hand was set to the work. And this discovers the woeful state
of the present Jews. They grant that the Revelation of the Will of God is not
perfected, and yet notwithstanding all their miseries, darkness and distresses,
they dare not pretend that they have heard one word from heaven these 2000
years; that is, from the days of Malachi: and yet they labor to keep the vail
upon their eyes.

IV. We may see hence the absolute Perfection of the Revelation of the will of
God by Christ and his Apostles, as to every end and purpose what ever, for
which God ever did, or ever will in this world reveal himself, or his mind and
will. For as this was the last way and means that God ever designed for the
discovery of himself, as to the worship and obedience which he requires, so the
Person by whom he accomplished this work makes it indispensably necessary, that
it be also absolutely perfect; from which nothing can be taken, to which
nothing must be added, under the penalty of the extermination threatened to him
that will not attend to the voice of that Prophet.

Return we now again unto the words of our Apostle. Having declared the Son to
be the immediate Revealer of the Gospel; in pursuit of his design, he proceeds
to declare his Glory and Excellency, both that which he had in himself
antecedent to his susception of the Office of Mediator, and what he received
upon his in-vestiture therewith.

Two things in the close of this verse he assigns unto him; 1. That he was
appointed heir of all. 2. That by him the worlds were made. Wherein consists
the first Amplification of his Proposition, concerning the Revealer of the
Gospel, in two parts, both acknowledged by the Jews, both directly conducing to
his purpose in hand.

(...); posuit, fecit, constituit; Sir. (...) posuit; (...).
he placed, set, made, appointed.

I. (...), whom; that is, the Son, in whom the Father spoke unto us; and as
such, (...).
as the Revealer of the Gospel, (...), God and Man. The Son as God has a
natural dominion over all. To this he can be no more appointed, than he can be
to be God. On what account he has his Divine Nature, on the same he has all
the Attributes and Perfections of it, with all things that necessarily on any
supposition attend it; as supreme Dominion does. Nor does this denotation of
him respect merely the Humane Nature: for although the Lord Christ performed
all the Acts of his Mediatory Office, in, and by the Humane Nature, yet he did
them not as Man, but as God and Man in one Person, Joh. 1.14. Acts 20.20. And
therefore unto him, as such, do the Privileges belong that he is vested with
on the account of his being Mediator. Nothing indeed can be added unto him as
God* but there may be to him who is God, in respect of his condescension to
discharge an Office in an other Nature which he did assume. And this salves the
Paralogism of Felbinger on this place; which is that wherewith the Jews and
Socinians perpetually entangle themselves. Deus altissimus non potest salva
majestate sua ab aliquo haeres constitutus esse. Filius Dei a Deo est haeres
omnium constitutus, ergo Filius Dei non est Deus altissimus. God is called
(...) the High, or most High God, with reference to his Sovereign and Supreme
exaltation over all his creatures, as the next words in the place where that
Title is given unto him do declare, (...) Possessor of heaven and earth, Genesis
14.19. He is not termed Deus altissimus, the most high God, as though there
were another Deus altus, an high God that is not the Altissimus, which is the
sense of the Socinians. This one D^us altissimus, most high God, absolutely in
respect of his Divine Nature, cannot be appointed an Heir by any other. But he
who is so this High God, as to be the eternal Son of the Father, and made Man,
may in respect of the Office, which in the nature of Man he undertook to
discharge, by his Father be made Heir of all.

II. (...), the Heir: (...) is a lot, and a peculiar portion received by lot;
thence, (...).
an inheritance, which is a man's lot and portion. (...) an inheritance under
controversy; (...), an heir to goods divided by lot, or he that distributeth
an inheritance to others by lot. Absolutely an Heir. So the Poet of the
covetous Hermocrates, (...), He appointed himself his own heir in his last Will
and Testament. It has also a more large signification, (...), he is in Plato,
whose turn it was to speak next. Strictly, it is the same with Haeres, an Heir.
And an Heir is he, Qui subentrat jus, l^cum, and dominium rerum defuncti, ac si
eadem persona esse^; Who enters into the right, place, and title of him that
is deceased, as if he were the same person. But yet the name of an Heir is not
restrained in the Law to him that so succeeds a deceased person, in which sense
it can have no place here. Haeredis nomen latiore significatione possessorem
and fidei Commissarium and Legatarium comprehendit; it comprehends a Possessor,
a Trustee and a Legatary; so Spigelius. This sense of the word takes off the
Catachresis which must be supposed in the application of it unto the Son, if it
only denoted such an Heir, as Abraham thought Eliezer would be to him, Genesis
15.3, 4. One that succe^ds into the right and goods of the deceased. For the
Father dies not, nor does ever forego his own Title or Dominion. Neither is
the Title and right given to the Son as Mediator, the same with that of God
absolutely considered. This is eternal, natural, coexistent with the being of
all things; that new, created by grant and donation; by whose erection and
establishment the other is not at all impeached. For whereas it is affirmed,
that the Father judges no man, but has com^itted all judgment to the S^n,
Joh. 5.22, 27, 30. it respects not Title and Rule, but actual Administration.

In the latter sense of the word, as it denotes any rightful Possessor by Grant
from another, it is properly ascribed unto the Son; and there are three things
intended in this wo^d.

1. Title, Dominion, Lordship: Haeres est qui herus; for thence is the word,
and not from aere, as Isidore supposes. The Heir is the Lord of that which he
is heir unto. So the Apostle, Gal. 4.1. (...), is (...), the Heir is Lord of
all. And in this sense is Christ called (...) the first born, Psalm. 89.27 I
will give him to be my firstborn, higher than (or, and high above) the Kings
of the earth. Princeps, Dominus, Caput familiae; the Prince, Lord, and Head of
the family, that has right to the inheritance, and distributes portions to
others. Hence (...) is used for every thing that excels, and has the
pre-eminence in its own kind, Job 18.10. Isa. 14.30. Ezekiel. 47.12. So Col. 1.15.

2. Possession. Christ is made actual Possessor of that which he has Title
unto. As he is (...), so he is (...); such a Possessor as comes to his
possession by the surrender or grant of another. God in respect of his Dominion
is called (...), the absolute Poss^ssor of heaven and earth, Genesis 14.22. Christ
as a Mediator is (...), a Possessor by grant. And there was a suitableness,
that he that was the Son, should thus be Heir. Whence Chrysostom and
Theophylact affirm, that the words denote, (...); The propriety of his Sonship,
and the immutability of his Lordship. Not that he was thus made Heir of all, as
he was (...), the only begotten Son of the Father, Joh. 1.14. But it was
agreeable and consonant, that he who was eternally (...), and had on that
account an absolute dominion over all with his Father, becoming (...) ( Romans
8.29.) the firstborn amongst many brethren, should have a delegated Heirship
of all, and be given to be the head over all unto the Church, Ephesians. 1.22.

3. That he has both this Title and Possession by Grant from the Father, of
which afterward. Christ then, by virtue of a Grant from the Father, is made
Lord by a new Title, and has Possession given him according to his Title; he
is (...), the Heir.

(...).
III. (...), of all. This is the object of the H^irship of Christ, his
Inheritance. The word may be taken in the M^sculine gender, and denote all
pers^ns; all those of whom he had spoken before, all the Revealers of the Will
of God under the Old Testament; the Son was the Lord over them all; which is
true: but the word in the Neuter gender denotes all things absolutely; and so
it is in this place to be understood. For,

1. It is so used elsewhere to the same purpose, 1 Cor. 15.27. (...), he has
subjected all things unto him. So Romans 9.5. (...), Who is God over all.

2. This sense suits the Apostles Argument, and adds a double force to his
intention and design. For, 1. The Author of the Gospel being Heir and Lord of
all things what ever, the sovereign disposal of all those Rites and Ordinances
of Worship, about which the Jews contended, must needs be in his hand, to
change and alter them as he saw good. 2. He being the Heir and Lord of all
things, it was easy for them to conclude, that if they intended to be made
partakers of any good in heaven or earth, in a way of love and mercy, it must
be by an interest in him, which without a constant abode in Obedience unto his
Gospel, cannot be attained.

3. The next words evince this sense, By whom also he made the worlds. Probably
they render a reason of the Equitableness of this great trust made to the Son.
He made all, and it was meet he should be Lord of all. However, the force of
the Connection of the words, (...), by whom also he made the worlds, equals
the (...), the All forgoeing, to the (...), or the worlds following.

4. The Inheritance given, answers the promise of it unto Abraham, which was
that he should be Heir of the world, Romans 4.13. namely, in his seed, Gal. 3.16.
as also the request made by Christ on that promise, Psalm. 2.8. both which
extend it to the whole world, the Ends of the Earth.

5. The Original and Rise of this Inheritance of Christ will give us its true
extent, which must therefore more especially be considered.

Upon the Creation of man God gave unto him a Dominion over all things in this
lower world, Genesis 1.28, 29. He made him his Heir, Vicegerent and Substitute in
the earth. And as for those other Creatures to which his Power and Authority
did not immediately extend, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, the whole inanimate
Host of the Superior World, they were ordered by him that made them, to serve
for his good and behoof, Genesis 1.14. Deuteronomy. 4.19. So that even they also in a
sort belonged unto his inheritance, being made to serve him in his subjection
unto God.

Further, besides this lower part of his Dominion, God had for his Glory
created Angels in Heaven above, of whom we shall have occasion hereafter to
treat. These made up another branch of Gods Providential Kingdom, the whole
administered in the upper and lower world, being of each other independent, and
meeting in nothing but their dependence upon, and subjection unto God himself.
Hence they did not so stand in the condition of their Creation* but that one
kind or race of them might fail and perish without any impeachment of the
other. So also it came to pass. Man might have persisted in his honor and
dignity notwithstanding the fall and Apostasy of some of the Angels. When he
fell from his heirship and dominion, the whole subordination of all things unto
him, and by him unto God, was lost. And all creatures returned to an immediate
absolute dependence on the Government of God; without any respect to the
Authority and Sovereignty delegated unto man. But as the fall of Angels did not
in its own nature prejudice mankind, no more did this fall of man, the Angels
that persisted in their obedience, they being no part of his inheritance.
However by the Sin, Apostasy, and punishment of that portion of the Angels
which kept not their first station, it was manifested how possible it was, that
the remainder of them might sin after the similitude of their transgression.
Things being brought into this condition, one branch of the Kingdom of God
under the administration of man, or allotted to his service, being cast out of
that order wherein he had placed it, and the other in an open possibility of
being so also, it seemed good to the Lord in his infinite Wisdom to erect one
Kingdom out of these two disordered members of his first Do^inion, and to
appoint one common Heir, Head, Ruler and Lord to them both. And this was the
Son as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1.10. He gathered together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in the Heavens, and which are in Earth, even
in him. He designed (...), to bring all into one head, and rule in him. It is
not a similitude taken from casting up accounts, wherein lesser sums are in
the close brought into one head, as some have imagined; nor yet an Allusion to
Orators, who in the close of their long Orations, sum up the matter they have
at large treated of, that the Apostle makes use of; both which are beneath the
Majesty of, and no way suited to illustrate the matter he has in hand. But as
Chrysostom well intimates on the place, it is as if he had said, (...), he
appointed one head to them all, Angels and Men, with whatsoever in the first
constitution of the Divine Government was subordinate unto them. So we have
found the object and extent of the Heirship of Christ, expressed in this word
(...), which I shall further explain in that brief Scheme of the whole Kingdom
of Christ, which to the Exposition of these words shall be subjoyned.

IV. (...); (...).
The way whereby Christ the Son came to his Inheritance is in this word
expressed. God appointed or placed him therein: The Word may denote either
those special Acts whereby he came into the full possession of his Heirship, or
it may be extended to other preparatory Acts that long preceeded them;
especially if we shall take it to be of the same importance with (...) in the
second aoristus. In the former sense the glorious investiture of the Lord
Christ, in the full actual possession of his Kingdom after his Resurrection,
with the manifestation of it in his Ascension, and token of its stability in
his sitting at the Right hand of God, is designed. By all these God, (...),
made him, placed him with solemn investiture, Heir of all. The grant was made
to him upon his Resurrection, Matthew. 28.18. and therein fully declared unto
others. Romans 1.3. Acts 13.33. As there was of Solomon's being King, when he was
proclaimed by Benaiah, Zadock and Nathan, 1 Kings 1.31, 32, 33, 34. The
Solemnization of it was in his Ascension, Psalm. 68.17, 18. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10.
Typed by Solomon's riding on David's Mule unto his Throne, all the people crying,
(...), v. 29. Let the King live. All was sealed and ratified when he took
possession of his Throne at the Right hand of the Father; by all which he was
made and declared to be Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. c. 4.11. c. 5.30, 31. And
such weight does the Scripture lay upon this glorious Investiture of Christ in
his Inheritance, that it speaks of his whole power as then first granted unto
him, Romans 14.9. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. And the Reason of it is, because he had
then actually performed that work and duty upon the Consideration whereof, that
Power and Authority were eternally designed, and originally granted unto him.
Gods actual committing all power over all things and persons in Heaven and
Earth to be exerted and managed for the ends of his Mediation, declaring this
Act, Grant, and Delegation by his Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at his
right hand, is that which this word denotes.

I will not deny, but it may have respect unto sundry things preceding these,
and preparatory unto them; As,

1. The Eternal purpose of God ordaining him before the foundation of the
world, unto his Work and Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.20.

2. The Covenant that was of old between the Father and Son for the
accomplishment of the great work of Redemption; this Inheritance being included
in the Contract. Prove. 8.30, 31. Isa. 53.10, 11.

3. The Promises made unto him in his Types, Abraham, David, and Solomon, Genesis
15. Psalm. 72.

4. The Promises left upon record in the Old Testament for his supportment and
assurance of success, Psalm. 2. Isa. 49. etc.

5. The solemn proclamation of him to be the great Heir and Lord of all, at his
first coming into the world, Luke 2.11, 30, 31, 32.

But it is the consummation of all these, whatever was intended or declared in
these previous acts of the Will and Wisdom of God, that is principally intended
in this expression.

Some suppose it of importance in this matter of the Heirship of Christ, to
assert that he was the rightful Heir of the Crown and Scepter of Israel. This
opinion is so promoted by Baronius as to contend that the right of the Kingdom
was devolved on him, which was caused to cease for a season in Antigonus, who
was slain by M. Anthony. But what was the right of the Kingdom that was in
Antigonus, is hard to declare. The Hasmonaeans of whom that ruled, he was the
last, were of the Tribe of Levi. Their right to the Scepter was no more but
what they had won by the sword. So that by his death there could be no
devolution of a Right to reign unto any; it being that which he never had. Nor
is it probable that our Savior was the next of kin to the reigning House of
Judah; nor was it any wise needful he should be so; nor is there any promise to
that purpose. His lineal descent was from Nathan, and not from Solomon: of that
House was Zerubbabel the Aichmalotarches; which therefore is specially
mentioned in the Reformation, Zech. 12.12. Besides the Heirship promised unto
Christ was neither of a Temporal Kingdom of Israel which he never enjoyed, nor
of any other thing in dependence thereon. Were it so, the Jews must first have
the Dominion before he could inherit it. And such indeed was the mistake of the
Disciples (as it is of the Jews to this day) who enquired not whither he would
take the Kingdom to himself, but whether he would restore it unto Israel.

We have opened the Words; it remains that we consider the sense and
persuasion of the Hebrews in this matter; 2. Show the influence of this
assertion into the Argument that the Apostle has in hand: and 3. Annex a brief
Scheme of the whole Lordship and Kingdom of Christ.

The Testimonies given to this Heirship of the Messiah in the Old Testament,
sufficiently evidencing the faith of the Church guided by the rule thereof,
will be mentioned afterward. For the present I shall only intimate the
continuance of this persuasion among the Jews, both then when the Apostle wrote
unto them, and afterward. To this purpose is that of Jonathan in the Targum on
Zech. 4.7. (...). He shall reveal the Messiah whose name is from everlasting,
who shall have the dominion over all Kingdoms. See Psalm. 72.11. And of him who
was brought before the Ancient of days, like the Son of Man, Dan. 7. to whom
all power is given they say, (...), he is Messiah the King: So R. Solomon on
the place: So R. Bechai on Exodus 23.21. My name is in him, he is called, says
he, (...), because in that name two significations are included, (...), a Lord,
and (...), an Ambassador: the reasons of which Etymology out of the Greek and
Latin Tongues he subjoyns I confess foolishly enough: but yet he adds to our
purpose. It may have a third signification of a Keeper, for the Targum instead
of the Hebrew (...) has (...) from (...); because he, that is the Messiah,
preserves or keeps the world, he is called (...), the Keeper of Israel; hence
it appears, that he is the Lord of all things, they being put under him, and
that the whole host of things above and below are in his hand. He is also the
messenger of all above, and beneath, because God has made him to rule over
all; has appointed him the Lord of his house, the Ruler of all he has: which
expressions how consonant they are to what is delivered by the Apostle in this
place, and Chap. 3. is easily discerned.

The Influence of this Assertion, or common Principle of the Judaical Church,
into the Argument that the Apostle has in hand is evident and manifest; He who
is the Heir and Lord of all things, Spiritual, Temporal, Ecclesiastical, must
needs have power over all Mosaical Institutions, be the Lord of them, which are
no where exempted from his Rule.

The words being opened, and the design of the Apostle in them discovered,
because they contain an eminent Head of the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning
the Lordship and Kingdom of Jesus Christ the Messiah, I shall stay here a
little to give in a Scheme of his whole Dominion, seeing the consideration of
it, will not again so directly occur unto us. That which is the intendment of
the words in the interpretation given of them is this,

God the Father in the pursuit of the Sovereign purpose of his Will, has
granted unto the Son as incarnate, and Mediator of the New Covenant, according
to the eternal Council between them both, a Sovereign Power and Authority over
all things in Heaven and Earth, with the Possession of an absolute proprietor,
to dispose of them at his pleasure, for the furtherance and Advancement of his
proper and peculiar work, as Head of his Church. I shall not insist on the
several Branches of this Thesis; but as I said in general confirm this Grant of
Power and Dominion unto the Lord Christ, and then give in our Scheme of his
Kingdom in the several Branches of it, not enlarging our Discourse upon them,
but only pointing at the heads and springs of things as they lie in the
Scripture.

Of the Kingdom or Lordship of Christ.
THe Grant of Dominion in general unto the Messiah, is intimated in the first
promise of him, Genesis 3.15. His Victory over Satan was to be attended with Rule,
Power and Dominion, Psalm. 68.18. Isa. 53.12. Ephesians. 4.8, 9. Col. 2.15. and
confirmed in the Renewal of that Promise to Abraham, Genesis 22.17, 18. For in him
it was, that Abraham was to be Heir of the world, Romans 4.13. As also unto
Judah, whose seed was to enjoy the Scepter and Lawgiver, until he came who was
to be Lord over all, Genesis 49.10. As Baalam also saw the Star of Jacob, with a
Scepter for Rule, Numb. 24.17, 19. This Kingdom was fully revealed unto David,
and is expressed by him, Psalm. 2. throughout. Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
89.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, etc. Psalm. 72.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3. As
also in all the following Prophets; See Isa. 11.1, 2. Chap. 9.6, 7. Chap.
53.12. Chap. 63.1, 2, 3. Jerem. 23.5, 6. Dan. 7.13, 14, etc.

As this was foretold in the Old Testament, so the accomplishment of it is
expressly asserted in the New. Upon his Birth he is proclaimed to be Christ the
Lord, Luke 2.11. And the first enquiry after him is, where is he that is born
King, Matthew. 2.2, 6. And this Testimony does he give concerning himself;
namely, that all judgment was his, and therefore all honor was due unto him,
Joh. 5.22, 23. And that all things were and a Savior, Acts 5.31. He is highly
exalted, having a name given him above every name, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. being set
at the Right Hand of God in heavenly places far above, etc. Ephesians. 1.20, 21,
22. where he reigns for ever, 1 Cor. 15.25. being the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, Revel. 5.12, 13, 14. for he is Lord of quick and dead, Romans 14.7, 8, 9.

And this in general is fully asserted in the Scripture, unto the Consolation
of the Church, and Terror of his Adversaries. This I say is the spring of the
Churches Glory, Comfort, and Assurance. It is our Head, Husband, and Elder
Brother, who is gloriously vested with all this Power. Our nearest Relation,
our best Friend is thus exalted; not to a place of Honor and trust under
others, a thing that contents the aerie fancy of poor Earthworms; not yet to a
Kingdom on the Earth, a matter that swells some, and even breaks them with
pride; no nor yet to an Empire over this perishing world; but to an abiding, an
everlasting Rule and Dominion over the whole Creation of God. And it is but a
little while, before he will cast off and dispell all those Clouds and shades
which at present interpose themselves, and eclipse his Glory and Majesty from
them that love him. He who in the days of his flesh, was reviled, reproached,
persecuted, crucified for our sakes, that same Jesus is thus exalted and made a
Prince and a Savior, having a Name given him above every name, etc. for though
he was dead; yet he is alive, and lives for ever, and has the Keys of Hell and
Death: These things are every where proposed for the Consolation of the Church.

The Consideration of it also is suited to strike Terror into the hearts of
ungodly men, that oppose him in the world. Whom is it that they do despise?
Against whom do they magnify themselves, and lift up their horns on high?
whose Ordinances, Laws, Institutions do they contemn? whose Gospel do they
refuse Obedience unto? whose people and servants do they revile and persecute?
Is it not He? are they not his, who has all power in Heaven and Earth
committed unto him? in whose hand are the Lives, the Souls, all the
concernments of his Enemies. Caesar thought he had spoken with Terror, when
threatening him with death who stood in his way, he told him, Young man, he
speaks it, to whom it is as easy to do it. He speaks to his Adversaries, who
stand in the way of his interest, to deal no more so proudly, who can in a
moment speak them into Ruin, and that Eternal. See Rev. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

Thus is the Son made Heir of all in general; we shall further consider his
Dominion in a distribution of the chief parts of it; and manifest his power
severally in and over them all. He is Lord, or Heir, (...), that is, of all
Persons; and of all Things.

Persons, or Rational Subsistences here intended, are either Angels, or Men;
for it is evident, that He is exempted who has subjected all things unto him,
1 Cor. 15.27.

Angels are of two sorts: 1. Such as abide doing the will of God, retaining
that name by way of eminency: 2. Such as by Sin have lost their first
habitation, State, and Condition, usually called evil Angels, or Devils: The
Lord Jesus has Dominion over all, and both sorts of them.

Men may be cast under one common distribution which is comprehensive of all
distinctions whereby they are differenced: For they all are either Elect or
Reprobates. And the Lord Jesus has Rule and Dominion over them all.

Things, that are subject unto the Lord Jesus may be referred unto four heads:
for they are either, 1. Spiritual; or 2. Ecclesiastical; or 3. Political; or 4.
Natural.

Again, Spiritual are either, (1.) Temporal, as 1. Grace, 2. Gifts; or (2.)
Eternal, as Glory.

Ecclesiastical or Church things, are either, 1. Judaical, or Old Testament
Things; or 2. Christian, or Things of the New Testament.

Political and Civil Things may be considered as they are managed 1. By his
Friends: 2. His Enemies.

Of Natural Things, we shall speak in a production of some particular instances
to prove the general Assertion.

(...) have here no o^ (...) Something mus^ (...) Christ (...) them, (...) rule
over them; their subjection unto him with the original right and equity of the
grant of this Power and Authority unto him (...) the things which now fall
under our consideration.

His Preh^minence above them is asserted by the Apostle in the fourth verse of
this chapter* He is made better; more excellent than the Angels. See the words
opened af^^^wards. This was to the Jews, who acknowledged that the Messiah
should be above Moses, Abraham, and the ministering Angels; so Never Shalom,
lib. 9. cap. 5. We have testimony unto it, E^hes. 1.20, 21. He set him at his
own right hand; (...), among heavenly things, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named. What ever Title
of Honor o^ Office they enjoy, not ^^ly in this world, but also in that which
is to come, who enjoy their Power and Dignity in that state of Glory which is
promised unto them also, who here believe on him. Phil. 2.9. God also has
exalted him, and given him a name. (Power, Authority and Pre-eminence) above
every name; that at the name of Jesus (unto him vested with that Authority and
Dignity) every knee should bow (all creatures should yield Obedience and be in
subjection) of things in heaven, the (...), proper habitation, and place
residence of the blessed Angels, Jude 6. For,

2. As he is exalted above them, so by the Authority of God the Father they are
made subject unto him* 1 Pet. 3.22. he is gone into heaven, (...), Angels being
brought into order by subjection unto him, Ephesians. 1.22. (...), He has put all
things (Angels of which he treats) in subjection to him, under his feet, as
Psalm. 8.6. (...) 1 Cor. 15.27. And this by the special Authority of God the
Father, in a way of Grant of Privilege and Honor unto him; And to evidence
the Universality of this Subjection,

3. They adore and worship him; the highest Act of Obedience, and most absolute
subjection. This they have in command, Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Psalm. 97.7. (...) worship him with prostration, self-abasement,
and all possible subjection to him: of which place afterward. Their practice
answers the command given them, Rev. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. All the Angels round
about his Throne fall down and ascribe blessing, and honor, and glory, and
power unto him, as we are taught to do in our deepest acknowledgment of the
Majesty and Authority of God, Matthew. 6.13. And as to outward obedience, they
are ready in all things to receive his commands, being ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for them who shall inherit salvation, Heb. 1.13. and that by
him, who is Head over all things unto the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. As for instance,
he sent out one of them to his servant John, Rev. 1.1. who from their
employment under him toward them that believe, are said to be their
fellow servants, that is, unto Christ; namely, of all them have the Testimony
of Jesus, Rev. 19.10. chap. 22.9. And to this purpose.

4. They always attend his Throne. Isa. 6.1, 2. I saw the Lord upon his throne,
and about it stood the Seraphims; This Isaiah spoke of him, when he saw his
glory, Joh. 12.39, 40. He was upon his Throne, when he spoke with the Church in
the wilderness, Act. 7.38. that is, in Mount Sinai; where the Angels attending
him as on Chariots, ready to receive his commands, were twenty thousands, even
thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68.19. Ephesians. 4.8. or thousand thousands, and ten
thousand times ten thousand, as another Prophet expresses it, Dan. 7.10. And
so he is in the Church of the New Testament, Rev. 5.11. and from his walking in
the midst of his golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. are the Angels also present in
Church Assemblies, as attending their Lord and Master, 1 Cor. 11.10. And so
attended shall he come to Judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. when he shall be revealed
from heaven with the Angels of his power; which was foretold concerning him
from the beginning of the world, Jude 7, 8.

Thus his Lordship over Angels is Universal and absolute, and their subjection
unto him answerable thereunto. The manner of the Grant of this excellency,
power and dignity unto him, must be further cleared in the opening of these
words of the Apostle, (...) Being made better than the Angels; the original
right and equity of this Grant, with the ends of it, are now only to be
intimated.

1. The Radical fundamental Equity of this Grant lies in his Divine Nature: and
his creation of Angels, over whom as Mediator he is made Lord. Unto the general
Assertion of his being made Heir of all, the Apostle in this place subjoyns
that general Reason, manifesting the rise of the Equity of it in the Will of
God, that it should be so: By whom also he made the worlds. Which reason is
particularly applicable to every part of his inheritance, and is especially
pleaded in reference unto Angels: Col. 1.15, 16. Who is the image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of every creature; that is, the Heir and Lord of
them all: and the reason is, Because by him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things were created by him and for
him. His creation of those heavenly powers, is the foundation of his Heirship
or Lordship over them. (...), that is, says a learned man (Grotius) on the
place, not created, or made; but ordered, ordained; all things were ordered by
Christ, as to their state and dignity: But what reason is there to depart from
the proper, usual, yea, only sense of the word, in this place? Because, says
he, mention is made of Christ, which is the name of a man, and so the Creation
of all things cannot be attributed unto him. But Christ is the name of the Son
of God incarnate, God and Man: Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever,
Romans 9.5. See Luke 2.11. And he is here spoken of as the Image of the invisible
God, v. 15. the essential Image of the Father, endowed with all his eternal
Attributes, and so the Creator of all. The Socinians add, that the words are
used in the abstract, Principalities and Powers, and therefore their Dignities,
not their Persons are intended. But, 1. All things created in heaven and earth,
visible and invisible, are the Substances and Essences of things themselves,
and not their Qualities and Places only. 2. The Distribution into Thrones and
Dominions, Principalities and Powers, respects only the last branch of things
affirmed to be created by him, namely, things in heaven, invisible; so that if
it should be granted, that he made or created them only as to their Dignity,
Order and Power, yet they obtain not their purpose, since the Creation of all
other things, as to their being and subsistence, is ascribed unto him. But, 3.
The use of the Abstract for the Concrete is not unusual in Scripture. See
Ephesians. 6.12. (...), for (...), Thus (...), Rulers and Kings, Matthew. 10.18. are
termed (...), Principalities and Powers, Luke 12.11. And in this particular,
those who are here Principalities and Powers, are Angels great in power, 2 Pet.
2.10, 11. And Ephesians. 1.20, 21. he is exalted (...), that is, above all vested
with principality and power, as the next words evince, and every name that is
named. So Jude tells us of some, of whom he says, (...); They despise dominion,
and speak evil of dignities; that is, those vested with them. And Paul, Romans
8.38, 39. I am persuaded that neither Angels, (...), nor principalities nor
powers; (...), nor any other creature. So that these Principalities and Powers
are (...), certain creatures, created things and subsistences, that is, the
Angels variously differenced amongst themselves, in respect of us, great in
power and dignity.

This is the first foundation of the Equity of this Grant, of all power over
the Angels unto the Lord Christ; in his Divine Nature he made them, and in that
respect they were before, his own: as on the same account when he came into the
world, he is said to come (...), Joh. 1.11. to his own, or the things that he
had made.

2. It is founded in that Establishment in the condition of their Creation,
which by his interposition to recover what was lost by sin, and to preserve the
untainted part of the Creation from ruin, they did receive. In their own
Right, the Rule of their Obedience, and the Example of those of their number
and society who apostatized from God, they found themselves in a state not
absolutely impregnable: Their Confirmation, which also was attended with that
Exaltation, which they received by their new Relation unto God in and through
him, they received by his means. God gathering up all things to a consistency
and permanency in him, Ephesians. 1.10. And hence also it became equal, that the
Rule and power over them should be committed unto him, by whom, although they
were not like us, recovered from ruin, yet they were preserved from all danger
of it. So that in their subjection unto him consists their principal Honor,
and all their safety.

And as this act of God in appointing Christ Lord of Angels has these
equitable foundations, so it has also sundry glorious Ends.

1. It was as an addition unto that Glory that was set before him, in his
undertaking to redeem sinners. A Kingdom was of old promised unto him; and to
render it exceedingly glorious, the Rule and Scepter of it is extended not only
to his Redeemed ones, but to the holy Angels also; and the sovereignty over
them is granted him as a part of his Reward, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1.20,
21.

2. God hereby gathers up his whole family, at first distinguished by the Law
of their Creation into two especial kinds, and then differenced and set at
variance by Sin, into one Body under one Head, reducing them, that originally
were twain* into one entire family, Ephesians. 1.10. In the fullness of time he
gathered together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and
which are in earth, in him; as was before declared. Before this the Angels had
no immediate created Head; for themselves are called (...), Gods, Psalm. 97.7. 1
Cor. 8.5. Who ever is the Head, must be (...); the God of Gods, or Lord of
Lords, which Christ alone is; and in him, or under him as One Head, is the
whole Family of God united.

3. The Church of Mankind militant on the earth, whose conduct unto Eternal
Glory is committed unto Christ, stands in need of the ministry of Angels. And
therefore has God granted Rule and Power over them unto him, that nothing
might be wanting to enable him to save unto the uttermost them that come unto
God by him. So God has given him to be head over all things to the Church,
Ephesians. 1.22. that he should with an absolute sovereignty, use, and dispose of
all things to the benefit and advantage of the Church.

This is the first branch of the Lordship and Dominion of Christ, according to
the distribution of the severals of it before laid down. He is Lord of Angels,
and they are all of them his servants, the fellow servants of them that have
the testimony of Jesus. And as some men do wilfully cast themselves by their
Religious adoration of Angels, under the curse of Canaan, to be servants unto
servants, Genesis 8.25. so it is the great honor and privilege of true
believers, that in their worship of Christ, they are admitted into the society
of an innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22. Rev. 15.11, 13. for they are
not ashamed to esteem them their fellow servants, whom their Lord and King is
not ashamed to call his Brethren. And herein consists our communion with them,
that we have one common Head and Lord; and any intercourse with them, but only
on this account, or any worship performed toward them, breaks the bond of that
communion, and causes us not to hold the Head, Col. 2.19. The privilege, the
safety and advantage of the Church from this subjection of Angels to its Head
and Savior, are by many spoken unto.

II. There is another sort of Angels, who by sin left their primitive station,
and fell off from God; of whom, their Sin, Fall, Malice, Wrath, Business, Craft
in evil, and Final judgment, the Scripture treats at large. These belong not
indeed to the possession of Christ, as he is the Heir; but they belong unto his
Dominion as he is a Lord. Though he be not a King and Head unto them, yet he is
a Judge and Ruler over them. All things being given into his hand, they also
are subjected unto his power. Now, as under the former head, I shall consider,
1. The Right or Equity: and 2. The End of this Authority of Christ over this
second sort of the first Race of Intellectual Creatures, the Angels that have
sinned.

1. As before, this Right is founded in his Divine Nature, by virtue whereof,
he is (...), fit for this Dominion. He made these Angels also, and therefore,
as God, has an absolute Dominion over them. The Creatures cannot cast off the
Dominion of the Creator by rebellion; though they may lose their moral Relation
unto God as obedient creatures, yet their natural, as creatures, cannot be
dissolved. God will be God still, be his creatures never so wicked; and if they
obey not his Will, they shall bear his Justice. And this Dominion of Christ
over fallen Angels, as God, makes the grant of Rule over them to him, as
Mediator, just and equal.

2. The immediate and peculiar Foundation of his Right unto Rule over fallen
Angels, rendering the special grant of it equal and righteous, is Lawful
Conquest. This gives a special Right, Genesis 48.22. Now that Christ should
conquer fallen Angels, was promised from the foundation of the world, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman, the Messiah, was to break the Serpents head, despoil him
of his power, and bring him into subjection; which he performed accordingly.
Col. 2.15. He spoiled principalities and powers, divested fallen Angels of all
that Title they had got to the world, by the sin of man; triumphing over them,
as Captives to be disposed of at his pleasure. He stilled, or made to cease as
to his power, this Enemy, (...), and self-avenger, Psalm. 8.2. leading captivity
captive, Psalm. 6.18. breaking in pieces the Head over the large earth, Psalm.
110.6. binding the strong man armed, and spoiling his goods. And the Scripture
of the New Testament is full of instances as to his executing his Power and
Authority over Evil Angels; They take up a good part of the Historical Books of
it.

Man having sinned by the instigation of Satan, he was by the just Judgment of
God delivered up unto his power, Heb. 2.14. The Lord Christ undertaking to
recover lost man from under his power by destroying his works, 1 John 3.8. and
to bring them again into favor with God; Satan with all his might sets himself
to oppose him in his Work; and failing in his enterprise, being utterly
conquered, he became absolutely subjected unto him, trodden under his feet, and
the prey he had taken delivered from him.

This is the next Foundation of the Authority of Christ over the Evil Angels.
He had a great Contest and War with them, and that about the Glory of God, his
own Kingdom, and the Eternal Salvation of the Elect; prevailing absolutely
against them, he made a Conquest over them, and they are put in subjection unto
him for ever. They are subjected unto him, as to their present actings, and
future condition* He now rules them; and will hereafter finally judge them.
Wherein he suffers them in his Holiness and Wisdom to act in Temptations,
Seductions, Persecutions, he bounds and limits their Rage, malice, actings,
orders and disposes the Events of them to his own holy and righteous ends, and
keeps them under chains for the Judgment of the last day, when for the full
manifestation of his Dominion over them, he will cause the meanest of his
servants to set their feet on the necks of these conquered Kings, and to join
with himself in sentencing them unto eternal ruin, 1 Cor. 6.3. which they
shall be cast into by him, Rev. 19.

2. The Ends of this Lordship of Christ are various; as 1. His own Glory, Psalm.
110.1. 2. Churches safety, Mat. 16.18. Revel. 12.7, 8, 9. And 3. Exercise for
their Good. (1.) By Temptation, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9, 10. And (2.) Persecution, Rev.
2.10. Chap. 12.10 both which he directs, regulates, and bounds unto their
eternal Advantage. 4. The exercising of his Wrath and vengeance upon his
stubborn enemies, whom these slave^ and vassals to his righteous power, seduce,
blind, harden, provoke, ruin and destroy, Revel. 12.15. Chapter 16.13, 14. Psalm
106. And how much of the peace, safety and consolation of Believers lies wrapped
up in this part of the Dominion of Christ, were easy to demonstrate; as also
that Faiths improvement of it, in every condition, is the greatest part of our
Wisdom in our pilgrimage.

III. All Mankind, (the second sort of Intellectual Creatures or Rational
subsistencies) belong to the Lordship and Dominion of Christ. All Mankind was
in the power of God as one (...), one mass or Lump out of which all Individuals
are made and framed, Romans 9.21. Some to honor, some to dishonor; the (...),
not denoting the same substance, but one common condition; and the making of
the Individuals is not by Temporal Creation, but Eternal Designation. So that
all mankind made out of nothing, and out of the same condition destined to
several Ends for the glory of God, are branched into two sorts. Elect, or
vessels from the common mass unto Honor; and Reprobates, or vessels from the
common mass unto dishonor. As such they were, typed by Jacob and Esau, Romans
9.11, 12. and are expressed under that distribution, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. Some (...),
from the beginning being chosen to salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. (...), Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world, Romans 8.29. Chap. 11.5. Matthew. 20.16. 2 Timothy
2.10. Revel. 21.27. Others are appointed to the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. (...),
of old foreordained to condemnation, Jude 4. (...), for to be destroyed, 2
Pet. 2.12. See Romans 9.22. Chap. 11.7. Revel. 20.15.

Both these sorts, or all Mankind, is the Lordship of Christ extended to, and
to each of them respectively: 1. He is Lord over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. both
living and dead, Romans 14.9. Phil. 2.9, 10.

2. Particularly, he is Lord over all the Elect: And besides the general
foundation of the Equity of his Authority and power in his Divine Nature and
Creation of all things, the Grant of the Father unto him as Mediator to be
their Lord, is founded in other especial Acts both of Father and Son. For,

1. They were given unto him from Eternity in design, and by compact, that they
should be his peculiar portion, and he their Savior, Joh. 17.2. Of the (...)
all flesh, over which he has Authority, there is a (...), an universality of
them whom the Father gave him, in a special manner. Of whom he says, thine
they were, and thou gave them unto me, v. 6. Acts 18.10. They are a portion
given him to save, Joh. 9.39. of which he takes the Care, as Jacob did of the
Sheep of Laban, when he served him for a ^^se, Genesis 31.30, 40. See Prove. 8.30.
This was an Act of the Will of the Father in the Eternal Covenant of the
Mediator; whereof elsewhere.

2. His Grant is strengthened by Redemption, Purchase, and Acquisition. This
was the condition of the former Grant, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. which was made good
by him; so that his Lordship is frequently asserted on this very account, 1
Cor. 6.10. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 1 Timothy 3.6. Joh. 10.15. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Rev.
5.9. Joh. 11.52. And this purchase of Christ, is peculiar to them so given him
of the Father in the Covenant of the Mediator: as (1.) Proceeding from his
especial and greatest Love, Joh. 15.17. Romans 5.8. 1 John 3.16. Chap. 4.9, 10.
Acts 20.28. Romans 8.32. And (2.) Being accompanied with a purchase for them
which they shall certainly enjoy, and that of Grace and Glory, Acts 20.28. Ephesians.
1.14. Acts 2.36. Phil. 1.29. Heb. 9.12, 15. And indeed the Controversy about
the death of Christ, is not primarily about its Extent, but its Efficacy and
Fruits in respect of them for whom he dyed.

3. These thus given him of the Father and redeemed by him, are of two sorts.
1. Such as are actually called to faith in him, and Union with him. These are
further become his, upon many other especial accounts. They are his, in all
Relations of Subjection, his Children, Servants, Brethren, Disciples, Subjects,
his House, his Spouse. He stands toward them in all Relations of Authority; is
their Father, Master, Elder Brother, Teacher, King, Lord, Ruler, Judge,
Husband; Ruling in them by his Spirit and Grace, over them by his Laws in his
Word, preserving them by his power; chastening them in his Care and Love,
feeding them out of his stores, trying them, and delivering them in his Wisdom,
Bearing with their miscarriages in his Patience, and taking them for his
portion, lot and inheritance; in his Providence, raising them at the last day,
taking them to himself in Glory, every way avouching them to be his, and
himself to be their Lord and Master.

2. Some of them, are always uncalled, and shall be so, until the whole
number of them be completed and filled. But before, they belong on the former
accounts, unto his Lot, Care and Rule, John 10.6. They are already his sheep by
grant and purchase, though not yet really so by Grace and Holiness: They are
not yet his, by present Obediential Subjection, but they are his by Eternal
Designation and real Acquisition.

Now the power that the Lord Jesus has over this sort of Mankind is Universal,
unlimited, absolute, and exclusive of all other power over them, as unto the
things peculiarly belonging unto his Kingdom. He is their King, Judge,
Lawgiver, and in things of God, purely Spiritual and Evangelical; other they
have none. It is true he takes them not out of the world, and therefore as unto
(...), the things of this life, things of the world, they are subject to the
Laws and Rulers of the world; but as unto the things of God, he is the only
Lawgiver who is able to kill and make alive. But the nature and ends of the
Lordship of Christ over the Elect, are too large and comprehensive to be here
spoken unto, in this brief delineation of his Kingdom, which we undertook in
this digression.

2. His Lordship and Dominion extends to the other sort of men also; namely,
Reprobates, and men finally impenitent. They are not exempted from that all
flesh, which he has power over, Joh. 17.2. nor from those quick and dead over
whom he is Lord, Romans 14.9. nor from that World which he shall judge; Acts
17.31. And there are two especial grounds that are peculiar to them, of this
Grant, and Power, and Authority over them.

1. His interposition upon the entrance of Sin against the immediate Execution
of the Curse due unto it; as befell the Angels: This fixed the World under a
Dispensation of,

1. Forbearance and Patience, Romans 2.4, 5. Acts 17.30 Romans 9.22. Psalm. 75.3.

2. Goodness and Mercy, Acts 14.16, 17.

That God who spared not the Angels, when they sinned, but immediately cast
them into chains of darkness, should place sinners of the Race of Adam, under a
dispensation of Forbearance and Goodness, that he should spare them with much
Long-suffering dureing their Pilgrimage on the earth, and fill their hearts
with food and gladness, with all those fruits of kindness, which the womb of
his Providence is still bringing forth for their benefit and advantage, is thus
far on the account of the Lord Christ, that though these things as relating
unto Reprobates, are no part of his especial purchase, as Mediator of the
Everlasting Covenant of Grace, yet they are a necessary consequent of his
Interposition against the immediate Execution of the whole Curse upon ^he first
entrance of sin, and of his undertaking for his Elect.

2. He makes a Conquest over them: It was promised, that he should do so, Genesis
3.15. and though the work it self prove long and irksome, though the ways of
accomplishing it, be unto us obscure, and oftentimes invisible, yet he has
undertaken it, and will not give it over, until they are every one brought to
be his Footstool, Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. And the Dominion granted him on
these Grounds; is,

1. Sovereign and Absolute: His enemies are his Footstool, Psalm. 110.2. Mat.
22.44. Mark 12.36. Luke 20.24. Acts 2.34. 1 Cor. 15.25. Heb. 1.13. They are in
his hand, as the Egyptians were in Joseph's, when he had purchased both their
persons and their Estates to be at arbitrary disposal; And he deals with them
as Joseph did with those, so far as any of the Ends of his Rule and Lordship
are concerned in them. And,

2. Judiciary, Joh. 5.22, 23. As he has power over their Persons, so he has
regard unto their sins, Romans 14.9. Acts 17.32. Matthew. 25.31. And this power he
variously exercises over them, even in this World, before he gloriously exerts
it in their Eternal Ruin. For, 1. He enlightens them by those heavenly sparks
of Truth and Reason, which he leaves unextinguished in their own minds, John
1.9. 2. Strives with them by his Spirit, Genesis 6.3. secretly exciting their
consciences to rebuke, bridle, yoke, afflict, and cruciate them, Romans 2.14, 15.
And 3. On some of them he acts by the Power and Authority of his Word: whereby
he quickens their Consciences, galls their Minds and Affections, restrains
their Lusts, bounds their Conversations, aggravates their sins, hard^ns their
Hearts, and judges their souls, Psalm. 45. Isa. 6. 4. He exercises Rule and
Dominion over them in Providential Dispensations, Rev. 6.15, 16. Isa. 63.1, 2,
3, 4. Rev. 19.13. By all which he makes way for the Glory of his final
Judgment of them, Acts. 1.17, 32. Matthew. 25.31. Revel. 19.20. Chap. 20.10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. And all this will he do, unto the Ends 1. Of his own Glory: 2.
His Churches good, exercise and safety.

And this is the second instance of the first Head of the Dominion of Christ in
this World; he is Lord over Persons, Angels and Men.

II. The Second part of the Heirship and Dominion of Christ, consists in his
Lordship over all Things besides, which added to the former comprize the whole
Creation of God. In the distribution of these premised, the first that occur
are Spiritual things, which also are of two sorts: 1. Temporal, or such as in
this life we are made partakers of; and 2. Eternal, the things that are
reserved for them that believe in the State of Glory. The former may be reduced
unto two heads; for they are all of them either Grace, or Gifts, and Christ is
Lord of them all.

1. All that which comes under the name of Grace in Scripture, which flowing
from the free and special Love of God, tends directly to the Spiritual and
Eternal Good of them on whom it is bestowed, may be referred unto four heads.
For as the fountain of all these (or the gracious free purposes of the Will of
God from whence they all do flow) being Antecedent to the Mission of Christ the
Mediator, and Immanent in God, it can be no otherwise granted unto him, but in
respect of its Effects, which we shall show that it is. Now these are;

1. Pardon of sin, and the free Acceptance of the Persons of sinners, in a way
of mercy. This is Grace, Ephesians. 2.8. Tit. 3.5, 7. And a saving Effect and fruit
of the Covenant, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.12.

2. The Regenerating of the Person of a dead sinner, with the purifying and
sanctifying of his Nature, in a way of Spiritual power. This also is Grace, and
promised in the Covenant; and there are three parts of it: (1.) The Infusion of
a quickening Principle into the soul of a dead sinner, Romans 8.2. Tit. 3.5. Joh.
3.6. Ephesians. 2.16. (2.) The Habitual furnishment of a spiritually quickened soul,
with abiding radical principles of Light, Love and Power, fitting it for
Spiritual Obedience, Gal. 5.17. (3.) Actual Assistance, in a Communication of
supplies of strength for every Duty and Work, Phil. 1.13. John 15.3.

3. Preservation in a Condition of Acceptance with God, and holy Obedience
unto him unto the End, is also of Especial Grace: It is the Grace of
Perseverance, and eminently included in the Covenant; as we have elsewhere
showed at large.

4. Adoption as a Privilege, with all the Privileges that flow from it, is
also Grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

All these with all those admirable and inexpressible mercies that they branch
themselves into, giving deliverance unto sinners from evil temporal and
eternal; raising them to Communion with God here, and to the Enjoyment of him
for ever hereafter, are called Grace; and do belong to the Lordship of Christ,
as he is Heir, Lord and Possessor of them all. All the stores of this Grace and
Mercy that are in Heaven for sinners, are given into his hand, and resigned up
to his Sovereign disposal; as we shall intimate in general, and particular.

1. In General; Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should
dwell. There is a fourfold fullness in Christ: 1. Of the Deity in his Divine
Nature, Romans 9.5. 2. Of Union in his Person, Col. 2.9. 3. Of Grace in his
Humane Nature, Joh. 1.14. Chap. 3.34. Luke 2.52. Chap. 4.1. 4. An Authoritative
fullness to communicate of it unto others; that is the fullness here intended.
For it is in him as the head of the Church, v. 18. so as that from him, or that
fullness, which it pleased the Father to entrust him withal, believers might
receive grace for grace Joh. 1.16, 17. Thus he testifies that all things are
delivered to him of the Father, Matthew. 11.27. put into his power and
possession. And they are the things he there intends on the account whereof, he
invites sinners weary and laden to come unto him, v. 28. That is, all Mercy and
Grace, which are the things that burdened sinners need, and look after. The
same is testified Joh. 3.35, 36. and fully, Joh. 16.15. All things that the
Father has are mine, Joh. 16.19. All the Grace and Mercy that are in the Heart
of God as a Father, to bestow upon his Children, they are all given into the
hand of Christ, and are his, or part of his Inheritance.

In particular;

1. All Pardoning Grace for the Acceptance of our Persons, and Forgiveness of
our sins is his; he is the Lord of it; Acts 5.31. He is made a Prince and a
Savior to give repentance and the forgiveness of sins. Forgiveness of sin, is
wholly given unto him, as to the Administration of it; nor does any one receive
it, but out of his stores. And what is the Dominion of ten thousands of worlds
in comparison of this Inheritance? Sure he shall be my God and King who has
all forgiveness at his disposal. All that this World can do, or give, is a
thousand times lighter than the dust of the balance, if compared with these
good things of the Kingdom of Christ.

2. All Regenerating, quickening, sanctifying, assisting Grace is his: 1. Joh.
5.21. He quickneth whom he pleases: He walks among dead souls, and says to
whom he will, Live. And 2. He sanctifies by his Spirit whom he pleases, Joh.
4.14. All the living waters of saving Grace are committed to him, and he
invites men unto them freely, Cant. 5.1. Isa. 55.1. Rev. 21. And 3. All Grace
actually assisting us unto any duty, is his also; for without him we can do
nothing, Joh. 15.5. for it is he alone that gives out suitable help at the time
of need, Heb. 4.16. No man was ever quickened, purified or strengthened but by
him: nor can any dram of this Grace be obtained, but out of his Treasures.
Those who pretend to stores of it in their own wills; are so far Antichrists.

3. The Grace of our Preservation in our Acceptance with God, and Obedience
unto him is solely his, Joh. 10.28. And so also,

4. Are all the blessed and gracious Privileges whereof we are made partakers,
in our Adoption, Joh. 1.12. Heb. 3.6. He is so Lord over the whole House and
family of God, as to have the whole inheritance in his power, and the absolute
disposal of all the good things belonging unto it.

These are the Riches and Treasure of the Kingdom of Christ; the good things of
his House, the Revenues of his Dominion. The Mass of this Treasure that lies by
him is infinite, the stores of it are inexhaustible; and he is ready, free,
gracious and bountiful in his Communications of them to all the Subjects of his
Dominion. This part of his Heirship extends unto, 1. All the Grace and Mercy
that the Father could find in his own gracious Heart to bestow, when he was
full of Counsels of Love, and designed to exalt himself by the way of Grace,
Ephesians. 1.6. 2. To all the Grace and Mercy which he himself could purchase by
the Effusion of his Blood, Heb. 9.14. Ephesians. 1.13. and indeed these are
commensurate; if things, in respect of us altogether boundless, may be said to
be commensurate. 3. All that Grace which has saved the World of Sinners which
are already in the enjoyment of God, and that shall effectually save all that
come to God by him. 4. All that Grace which in the Promises of it in the Old
Testament, is set out by all that is rich, precious, glorious, all that is
eminent in the whole Creation of God; and in the New is called Treasures,
unsearchable Riches, and exceeding Excellency, which being communicated by him
to all the subjects of his Kingdom, makes every one of them richer than all the
Potentates of the earth, who have no interest in him.

The especial Foundation of all this Trust is in an eminent manner expressed,
Esaias 53.10, 11, 12. His suffering for the sins of all those to whom he intends
to communicate of this his fullness, according to the will of God; and the
Purchase he made in his death, according to the tenor of the Covenant of the
Mediator, makes it just and righteous that he should enjoy this part of his
Inheritance. Heb. 2.17. chap. 9.12. The Father says unto him, See thou these
poor wretched Creatures, that lie perishing in their blood, and under the
curse? They had once my Image gloriously enstamped on them, and were every way
meet for my service; but behold the Misery that is come upon them, by their sin
and rebellion; sentence is gone forth against them upon their sin; and they
want nothing to shut them up under Everlasting Ruin, but the Execution of it:
Will thou undertake for to be their Savior and Deliverer, to save them from
their sins, and the wrath to come? Will thou make thy Soul an Offering for
their sins? and lay down thy Life a Ransom for them? Have thou Love enough to
wash them in thy own Blood, in a Nature to be taken of them? Being obedient
therein unto death, the death of the Cross? Whereunto he replies, I am content
to do thy Will, and will undertake this work, and that with joy and delight.
Lo, I come for that purpose, my delight is with these sons men, Psalm. 40.8.
Prove. 8.31. What they have taken, I will pay. What is due from them, let it be
required at my hand. I am ready to undergo Wrath and curse for them, and to
pour out my soul unto death. It shall be, says the Father, as thou have
spoken, and thou shall see of the travel of thy soul and be satisfied. I will
give thee for a Covenant and a Leader unto them, and thou shall be the Captain
of their salvation. To this end take into thy power and disposal all the
Treasures of Heaven, all Mercy and Grace to give out unto them for whom thou
have undertaken. Behold, here are unsearchable hidden Treasures, not of many
Generations, but laid up from Eternity; take all these Riches into thy power,
and at thy disposal shall they be for ever. This is the noble peculiar
foundation of this part of the Inheritance of Christ.

From what has been spoken, the Rule also, whereby the Lord Christ proccedeth
in disposing these Treasures to the sons of men, is made evident. Though he
has all Grace committed unto him, yet he bestows not grace upon all. The Rule
of his procedure herein is God's Election. For the Foundation of this whole
Trust is his undertaking for them, who were given him of his Father, see Act.
13.48. Romans 11.7. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And the variety which is seen in
his actual Communication of Grace and Mercy unto sinners, depends upon the
Sovereign and Eternal Designation of the Persons of them, who by him were to
obtain mercy, and be made Heirs of Salvation.

But although the Persons are designed and allotted unto him from Eternity, who
were to receive this Grace and Mercy at his hands, yet as to the manner, and
all Circumstances of his Dispensation and Communication of them, they are
wholly committed unto his own Sovereign Will and Wisdom. Hence some he calls at
one time, some at another; some in the Morning, that they may glorify Grace in
working all the day; some in the Evening of their lives, that they may exalt
pardoning mercy to Eternity; on some he bestows much Grace, that he may render
them useful in the strength of it; on others less, that he may keep them humble
in a sense of their wants. Some he makes rich in Light, others in Love; some in
Faith, others in Patience; that they may all peculiarly praise him, and set out
the fullness of his stores. And hereby, 1. He glorifies every Grace of his
Spirit, by making it shine eminently in one or other, as Faith in Abraham and
Peter, Love in David and John, Patience in Job. And, 2. he renders his subjects
useful one to another, in that they have opportunities upon the defects and
fullness of each other, to exercise all their Graces. And, 3. so he renders his
whole Body uniform and comely, 1 Cor. 12.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27. 4. Keeping every Member in Humility and dependence, whilst it sees
its own wants in some Graces that others excells in, Col. 2.19.

This is another most eminent part of the Inheritance and Kingdom of Christ.
II. All Gifts that are bestowed on any of the sons of men, whereby they are
differenced from others, or made useful unto others, belong also unto the
Inheritance and Kingdom of Christ.

Gifts bestowed on men are either Natural or Spiritual: Natural Gifts are
especial Endowments of the Persons or Minds of men, in Relation unto things
appertaining unto this Life; as Wisdom, Learning, skill and cunning in Arts and
Sciences: I call them Natural, in respect of the Objects that they are
exercised about, which are (...), things of this life, as also in respect of
their End and Use. They are not always so, as to their rise and spring, but may
be immediately infused, as Wisdom was into Solomon, for Civil Government, 1
King 9.12. and skill for all manner of Mechanical Operations into Bezaleel,
Exodus 31.2, 3, 6. But how far these gifts are educed in an ordinary course of
Providence, out of their hidden seeds and principles in nature, in a just
connection of Causes and Effects, and so fall under a certain Law of
Acquisition, or what there may be of the Interposition of the Spirit of God in
an especial manner, immediately conferring them on any, falls not under our
present consideration of them. Nor yet can we insist on their Use, which is
such, that they are the great Instrument in the hand of God for the
preservation of Humane Society, and to keep the course of man's life and
pilgrimage from being wholly brutish. I design only to show, that even they
also belong (though more remotely) to the Lordship of Jesus Christ; which they
do on two accounts;

1. In that the very use of men's Reason, and their natural faculties, as to any
good end or purpose, is continued unto them upon the account of his
Interposition, bringing the world thereby under a dispensation of patience and
forbearance, as was declared, Joh. 1.9.

2. He is endued with Power and Authority to use them, in whose hand soever
they lie, whether of his friends or enemies, to the especial Ends of his Glory,
in doing good unto his Church. And indeed in the Efficacy of his Spirit and
Power upon the Gifts of the minds of men, exciting, ordering, disposing,
enabling them unto various Actings and Operations, by and with them;
controuling, overruling, entangling each other, and themselves in whom they
are by them, his Wisdom and care in the Rule, Government, Chastisement, and
Deliverance of his Church, are most conspicuous.

III. 2. Spiritual Gifts, which principally come under that Denomination are of
two sorts; Extraordinary, and Ordinary. The first are immediate Endowments of
the minds of men with Abilities exceeding the whole Systeme of Nature, in the
exercise whereof they are mere Instruments of him who bestows those gifts upon
them. Such of old were the Gifts of Miracles, Tongues, Healing, Prediction, and
infallible Inspiration, given out by the Lord Christ unto such as he was
pleased to use in his Gospel service in an Extraordinary manner. The latter
sort are Furnishments of the minds of men, enabling them unto the Comprehension
of spiritual things, and the management of them for spiritual Ends and
purposes. Such are Wisdom, Knowledge, Prudence, Utterance, Aptness to teach; in
general, Abilities to manage the things of Christ and the Gospel, unto their
own proper ends. And these also are of two sorts. 1. Such as are peculiar unto
Office; and, 2. Such as are common unto others for their own and others Good
and Edification, according as they are called unto the exercise of them. And
these two sorts of Gifts differ only in respect of degrees. There are no
ordinary Gifts that Christ's Officers are made partakers of, their Office only
excepted, which differs in the kind or nature of them from those which he
bestows on all his Disciples: which makes their stirring up, and endeavors to
improve the Gifts they have received exceeding necessary unto them. And
Christ's collation of these Gifts unto men, is the foundation of all the
Offices that under him they are called to discharge. See Ephesians. 4.8, 11. 1 Cor.
12.7. Joh. 20.21, 22. And as they are the spring and foundation of Office, so
they are the great and only means of the Churches edification. By them Christ
builds up his Church, to the measure appointed unto the whole and every member
of it. And there is no Member but has its Gift: which is the Talent given, or
rather lent, to trade withal.

Now of all these Christ is the only Lord, they belong unto his Kingdom. Psalm.
68.18. (...), when he ascended on high, he took, or received gifts for man; he
took them into his own power and disposal, being given him of his Father: as
Peter declares, Act. 2.33. adding, that he received the Spirit, by whom all
these gifts are wrought. And Ephesians. 4.8. the Apostle renders the words of the
Psalmist, (...), he gave gifts; because he received them into his power, not to
keep them unto himself, but to give them out to the use of others. And so (...)
does sometimes signify to give. Hos. 14.2. Verbum accipiendi dare significat
cu^n accipiunt aliunde ut dent, say the Jewish Masters. And it was after his
Resurrection, that this accession was made unto his Kingdom, in such an eminent
and visible manner as to be a testimony of his Office, Joh. 7.39. (...), the
holy Ghost was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified; not eminently
given, and received, as to these gifts, Acts 19.2. And this investiture of him,
with power over all gifts, he makes the bottom of the mission of the Apostles,
Matthew. 28.18. This he had as a fruit of his suffering, as a part of his
purchase, and it is a choice portion of his Lordship and Kingdom.

The End also why all these gifts are given into his power and disposal, is
evident, 1. The propagation of his Gospel, and consequently the setting up of
his Kingdom in the world d^pends upon them. These are the Arms that he
furnished his Messengers withal, when he sent them forth to fight with, to
conquer and subdue the world unto him. And by these they prevailed. By that
Spirit of wisdom and knowledge, prayer, utterance, wherewith they were endowed;
attended where, and when needful, with the extraordinary gifts before
mentioned, did they accomplish the work committed unto their charge. Now the
Lord Christ having a right unto a Kingdom and Inheritance given him, which was
actually under possession of his Adversary, it was necessary that all those
arms, wherewith he was to make a conquest of it, should be given to his
disposal, 2 Cor. 10.4. These were the weapons of the warfare of his Apostles
and Disciples, which through God were so mighty to cast down the strong holds
of sin and Satan. These are the slings and stones, before which the Goliahs of
the Earth and Hell did fall. This was that power from above, which he promised
his Apostles to furnish them withal, when they should address themselves to
the conquest of the world, Acts 1.8. With these weapons, this furniture for
their warfare, a few despised persons in the eyes of the world, went from Judea
unto the ends of the earth, subduing all things before them to the obedience of
their Lord and Master. And,

2. By these is his Church edified; and to that end does he continue to bestow
them on men, and will do so to the end of the world, 1 Cor. 12.7, 13, 14.
Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. Col. 2.19. And
for any to hinder their growth and exercise, is what in them lies to pull down
the Church of Christ, and to set themselves against that testimony which he
gives in the world, that he is yet alive; and that he takes care of his
Disciples, being present with them according unto his promise.

3. And by these means and ways is God glorified in him and by him which is the
great end of his Lordship over all the gifts of the Spirit.

That we may a little by the way look into our especial concernment in these
things, the order of them, and their subserviency one to another, may be
briefly considered. For as Natural gifts are the foundation of, and lie in an
especial subordination unto Spiritual, so are Spiritual gifts enlivened, made
effectual and durable by Grace. The principal end of Christ's bestowing gifts,
is the erection of a Ministry in his Church, for the ends before mentioned.
And where all these in their order and mutual subserviency unto one another,
are received by any, there, and there alone, is a competent furniture for the
work of the Ministry received. And where any of them, as to their whole kind,
are wanting, there is a defect in the Person, if not a nullity as to the
Office. Natural gifts and endowments of mind are so necessary a foundation for
any that looks toward the work of the Ministry, that without some competent
measure of them, it is madness and folly to entertain thoughts of any progress.
Unless unto these, Spiritual gifts are in Christ's time super-added, the other
will be never of any use for the edification of the Church, as having in their
own nature and series, no especial tendency unto that end. Nor will these
super-added spiritual gifts enable any man to discharge his duty unto all
well-pleasing before God, unless they also are quickened and seasoned by Grace.
And where there is an intercision of this series and order in any, the defect
will quickly appear. Thus some we see of excellent natural endowments, in their
first setting forth in the world, and in their endeavors on that single stock,
promising great usefulness and excellency in their way; who when they should
come to engage in the service of the Gospel, evidence themselves to be
altogether unfurnished for the employment they undertake; yea, and to have
lost, what before they seemed to have received. Having gone to the utmost
length and bounds that Gifts merely Natural could carry them out unto, and not
receiving super-added Spiritual g^fts, which the Spirit of Christ bestows as
he pleases, 1 Cor. 12.11. they faint in the way, wither, and become utterly
useless. And this for the most part falls out, when men either have abused
their natural gifts to the service of their lusts, and in an opposition to the
simplicity of the Gospel; or when they set upon Spiritual things, and pretend
to the service of Christ, merely in their own strength, without dependence on
him, as the Heir and Lord of all, for abilities and furniture for his work; or
when they have some fixed corrupt end and design to accomplish and bring about
by a pretense of the Ministry, without regard to the glory of Christ, or
compassion to the souls of men, which the Lord Christ will not prostitute the
gifts of his Spirit to make them serviceable unto. And sundry other causes of
this failure may be assigned.

It is no otherwise as to the next degree in this order* in reference unto
spiritual gifts and saving grace. When these gifts, in the good pleasure of the
Lord of them are super-added unto the natural endowments before mentioned, they
carry on them, who have received them, cheerfully, comfortably and usefully in
their way and progress. The former are increased, heightened, strengthened and
perfected by the latter, toward that special end, whereunto themselves are
designed; namely, the glory of Christ in the work of the Gospel. But if these
also are not in due season quickened by saving grace, if the heart be not
moistened and made fruitful thereby, even they also will wither and decay. Sin
and the world in process of time will devour them, whereof we have daily
experience in this world. And this is the Order wherein the Great Lord of all
these Gifts has laid them in a subserviency, one kind unto another, and all of
them unto his own glory.

And this that has been spoken will abundantly discover the reason and ground
of the Apostol^cal Exhortation, Covet the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. As first,
the gift of Wisdom and knowledge in the Word and Will of God, 1 Cor. 12.8. 1
Cor. 2.7. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 1.5. Secondly, the gift of Ability, to manage and
improve this wisdom and knowledge to the edification of others, Heb. 3.13.
chap. 10.25. Romans 15.14. 1 These. 5.11. Thirdly, of Prayer. And many more might
be added of the like usefulness and importance.

IV. 3. To close our considerations of this part of the Lordship of Christ,
there remains only that we show him to be the Lord of all Spiritual Eternal
things, which in one word we call Glory. He is himself the Lord of glory, 2
Cor. 2.4. and the Judge of all, Joh. 5.25. In the discharge of which Office he
gives out Glory as a Reward unto his followers, Matthew. 25.32. Romans 14.10. Glory
is the reward that is with him, which he will give out at the last day, as a
Crown, 2 Timothy 4.8. Joh. 17.2. And to this end that he might be Lord of it, he
has (1) purchased it, Heb. 9.12. Ephesians. 1.14. Heb. 2.10. (2) Taken actual
possession of it in his own Person, Luke 24.25. Joh. 17.5, 22, 24. And that (3)
as the forerunner on whom he will bestow it, Heb. 9.20. And this is a short
view of the Lordship of Christ, as to things Spiritual.

V. Ecclesiastical things, or things that concern Church Institutions, Rule and
Power, belong also unto his Rule and Dominion. He is the only Head, Lord,
Ruler, and Lawgiver of his Church. There was a Church state ever since God
created man on the earth; and there is the same reason of it in all its
alterations, as unto its Relation to the Lord Christ. What ever changes it
under-went, still Christ was the Lord of it, and of all its concernments. But
by way of instance and eminency, we may consider the Mosaical Church state
under the old Testament, and the Evangelical Church state under the New. Christ
is Lord of, and in respect unto them both.

1. He was the Lord of the Old Testament Church state, and he exercised his
Power and Lordship toward it four ways.

1. In, and by its Institution and Erection; he made, framed, set up, and
appointed that Church state, and all the Worship of God therein observed. He it
was who appeared unto Moses in the Wilderness, Exodus 3.5. Act. 7.32, 33. and
who gave them the Law on M^unt Sinai, Exodus 20 Psalm. 68.17. Ephesians. 4.8. and
continued with them in the Wilderness, Numb. 21.6. 1 Cor. 10.9. So that from
him, his Power and Authority, was the Institution and Erection of that Church.

2. By prescribing a complete Rule and form of Worship and obedience unto it,
being erected, as its Lawgiver, to which nothing might be add^d, Deuteronomy. 7.4,
12, 32.

3. By way of Reformation, when it was collapsed and decayed, Zech. 2.8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13. Man. 3, 1, 2, 3.

4. By way of Amotion, or taking down what he himself had set up; because it
was so framed and ordered as to continue only for a season, Heb. 9.10. Deuteronomy.
18.16, 17, 18. Hag. 2 6, 7. Isa. 65.17, 18. 2 Pet. 3.13. Which part of his
Power and Lordship, we shall a^terwards abundantly prove against the Jews.

2. Of the New Testament Evangelical Church state also, he is the only Lord and
Ruler; yea, this is his proper Kingdom, on which all other parts of his
Dominion do depend; for he is given to be head over a^l things unto the Church,
Ephesians. 1.22. For,

1. He is the foundation of this Church state, 1 Cor. 3.11. the whole design
and platform of it being laid in him, and built upon him: And 2. He erects
this Church State upon himself, Matthew. 16.18. I will build my Church; the
Spirit and Word whereby it is done, being from him alone, and ordered in and by
his Wisdom, Power and Care; And 3. He gives Laws and Rules of Worship and
Obedience unto it, when so built by himself and upon himself, Matthew. 28.18.
Acts 1.2. Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And 4. Is the everlasting, constant, abiding
Head, Ruler, King, and Governor of it, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 2.19. Heb. 3.6. Rev.
2.3. All which things are ordinarily spoken unto, and the ends of this Power of
Christ fully declared.

VI. He is Lord also of Political things; All the Governments of the world that
are set up and exercised therein for the good of mankind, and the preservation
of Society according to Rules of Equity and Righteousness; over all these, and
those who in and by them exercise Rule and Authority amongst men, is he Lord
and King.

He alone is the absolute Potentate; the Highest on the earth are in a
subordination unto him. That 1. He was designed unto, Psalm. 89.27. And
accordingly he is 2. Made Lord of Lords and King of Kings, Rev. 17.14. Chap.
19.16. 1 Timothy 6.15. And 3. He exercises dominion answerable unto his Title,
Rev. 6.16. Chap. 17.14. Chap. 18.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 2.8, 9. Isa. 60.
Mich. 5.7, 8, 9. And 4. Has hence right to send his Gospel into all Nations in
the world, attended with the worship by him prescribed, Matthew. 28.18. Psalm.
2.9, 10, 11, 12. which none of the Rulers or Governors of the world have any
right to refuse or oppose, nor can so do, but upon their utmost peril. And 5.
All Kingdoms shall at length be brought into a professed subjection to him and
his Gospel, and have all their Rule disposed of unto the interest of his Church
and Saints, Dan. 7.27. Isa. 60.12. Rev. 19.16, 17, 18, 19.

VII. The last branch of this Dominion of Christ consists in the Residue of the
Creation of God; Heaven and Earth, Sea and Land, Wind, Trees, and fruits of the
earth, and the Creatures of sense, as they are all put under his feet, Psalm.
8.7, 8. Ephesians. 1.22. 1 Cor. 15.27. So the exercise of his power severally over
them, is known from the story of the Gospel. And thus we have glanced at this
Lordship of Christ, in some of the general parts of it: And how small a portion
of his glorious power, are we able to comprehend or declare.

(...).
By whom also he made the worlds.
The Apostle in these words gives further strength to his present Argument,
from another Consideration of the Person of the Messiah; wherein he also
discovers the foundation of the Pre-eminence ascribed unto him in the words
last insisted on. By him the worlds were made; so that they were his own, Joh.
1.11. and it was meet that in the new condition which he underwent, that he
should be the Lord of them all. Moreover, if all things be made by him, all
disobedience unto him is certainly most unreasonable, and will be attended with
inevitable ruin; of the Truth whereof, the Apostle aims to convince the
Hebrews.

Now whereas the Assertion which presents its self at first view in these words
is such, as if we rightly apprehend the meaning of the Holy Ghost in it, must
needs determine the Controversy that the Apostle had with the Jews, and is of
great use and importance unto the faith of the Saints in all ages, I shall
first free the words from false glosses and interpretations, and then explain
the Truth asserted in them, both absolutely, and with relation to the present
purpose of the Apostle.

That which some men design in their wresting of this place, is to deface the
illustrious Testimony given in it unto the Eternal Deity of the Son of God; and
to this purpose they proceed variously.

1. By (...) by whom, they say (...), for whom, is intended. And so the sense
of the place is, that for Christ, for his sake, God made the world: so
Eniedinus; and Grotius embraces his notion; adding in its confirmation that
this was the opinion of the Jews, namely, that all things were made for the
Messiah; and therefore (...), he renders by, condiderat, as signifying the time
long since past, before the bringing forth of Christ in the world; as also that
(...), is put for (...), in Romans 6.4. Rev. 4.11. Chap. 1.14. and therefore may
be here so used. According to this Exposition of the words, we have in them an
expression of the Love of God toward the Messiah, in that for his sake, he
made the worlds; but not any thing of the Excellency, Power and Glory of the
Messiah himself.

It is manifest that the whole strength of this interpretation lies in this,
that (...), may be taken for (...), by whom instead of, for whom: but neither
is it proved that in any other place those expressions are equipollent; nor if
that could be supposed, is there any reason off^red why the one of them should
in this place be put for the other: For,

1. The places referred unto, do no way prove that (...) with a Genitive does
ever denote the final cause, but the efficient only. With an Accusative for the
most part it is as much as propter, signifying the final Cause of the thing
spoken of, and rarely in the New Testament is it otherwise used. (...), Rev.
4.11. At thy will or pleasure, the efficient and disposing not the final Cause
seems to be denoted. And Chap. 13.14. (...), by the signs that were given him
to do; the formal cause is sigfied. But that joined with a Genitive Case it any
where signifies the final Cause does not appear. Beza whom Grotius cites, says
on Romans 6.4. that (...), by the glory of the Father, may be taken for (...),
unto the glory. But the case is not the same, where things, as where Persons
are spoken of: (...) here relates unto a Person, and yet is (...) joined with
it asserted to denote the end of the things spoken of, which is insolent.
Besides (...), in that place, is indeed the glorious power of the Father, the
efficient of the Resurrection of Christ treated of. So that whereas (...) is
used six hundred times with a Genitive Case in the New Testament, no one
instance can be given, where it may be rendered propter, for, and therefore
cannot be so here.

2. On supposition that some such instance might be produced, yet being
contrary to the constant use of the Word, some cogent Reason from the Text
wherein it is used, or the thing treated of, must be urged, to give that sense
admittance: And nothing of that nature is, or can be here pleaded.

3. As (...), and (...), are distinguished, the one expressing the efficient,
the other the final cause, Romans 11.36. so also are (...) and (...), in this
very Epistle, Chap. 2.10. (...), for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things; and is it likely that the Apostle would put one of them for the other,
contrary to the proper use which he intended immediately to assign severally
unto them?

4. (...), by whom here, is the same with (...), by him, Joh. 1.3. which the
same Person interprets properly for the Efficient Cause.

On these accounts the foundation of this Gloss being removed, the superadded
Translation of (...), by condiderat, is altogether useless; and what the Jews
grant that God did with respect to the Messiah, we shall afterward consider.

2. The Socinians, generally lay no exception against the Person making, whom
they acknowledge to be Christ the Son, but unto the Worlds said to be made.
These are not say they the things of the Old, but of the new Creation; not the
fabric of Heaven and Earth, but the Conversion of the souls of men; not the
first institution and forming of all things, but the Restoration of mankind,
and Translation into a new condition of life. This Sclictingius at large
insists on, in his Comment in this place, bringing in the justification of his
interpretation the sum of what is pleaded by any of them, in answer not only
to this Testimony, but also to that of Joh. 1.3. and that also of Coloss. 1.16,
17.

1. The old Creation, he says, is never said to be performed by any
intermediate Cause, as the Father is here said to make these worlds by the Son.
But 1. This is petitio principii; that this expression does denote any such
intermediate cause, as should interpose between the Father, and the Creation of
the world by an operation of its own, diverse from that of the Father. Job
26.13. God is said to adorn the Heavens (...), by his Spirit; which they will
not contend to denote an intermediate cause, and (...) here is but what the
Hebrews express by (...). 2. In the Creation of the world the Father wrought in
and by the Son, the same creating act being the act of both Persons, Joh. 5.17.
their Will, Wisdom and Power being essentially the same.

2. He adds, There is an allusion only in the words unto the first Creation, as
in John, Chap. 1.1, 2, 3. where the Apostle sets out the beginning of the
Gospel in the terms whereby Moses reports the Creation of the world: And
therefore mentions light in particular, because of an allusion to the light at
first created by God, when of all other things wherein there is no such
allusion he makes no mention.

Answ. 1. The new Creation granted by the men of this persuasion, being only a
moral Swasion of the minds of men by the outward Doctrine of the Gospel, I know
not what Allusion can be fancied in it, unto the Creation of the world out of
nothing.

2. It is granted that the Apostle speaks here of the same Creation that John
treats of in the beginning of his Gospel; but that that is the Creation of the
whole world, and all things contained in it, has been elsewhere proved; and
must be granted, or we may well despair of ever understanding one line in the
Scripture, or what we ordinarily speak one to another.

3. John does not mention any particular of the old Creation, affirming only in
general, that by the Word all things were made, whereof he afterward affirms,
that it was the Light of men, not assigning unto him in particular, the
Creation of Light as is pretended.

3. He tells us, the Article preposed (...), intimates that it is not the old
Creation that is intended, but some new especial thing distinct from it and
preferred above it. Answ. 1. As the same Article does used by the same Apostle
to the same purpose in another place, Acts 14.15. (...), who made the Heaven,
the Earth and Sea, which were certainly those created of old. 2. The same
Article is used with the same word again in this Epistle, Chap. 11.3. (...), by
faith we understand that the worlds were made, where this Author acknowledges
the old Creation to be intended.

4. He adds, that the Author of this Epistle seems to allude to the Greek
Translation of Isa. 9.6 wherein (...), the Father of Eternity, or eternal
Father, is rendered the Father of the world to come. Answ. 1. There is no manner
of Relation between (...), the Father of the world to come, and (...), by whom
he made the worlds, unless it be that one word is used in both places in very
distinct senses; which if it be sufficient to evince a cognation between
various places, very strange and uncouth interpretations would quickly ensue.
Nor 2. Does that, which the Apostle here treats of, any way respect that which
the Prophet in that place insists upon; his name and nature being only declared
by the Prophet, and his works by the Apostle. And 3. It is presumption to
suppose the Apostle to allude to a corrupt Translation as that of the LXX. in
that place is, there being no ground for it in the Original; for (...), is not
(...), but (...), the eternal Father: and what the Jews and LXX. intend by the
world to come, we shall afterward consider.

5. His last refuge is, in Isa. 51.16. Where the work of God, as he observes,
in the reduction of the people of the Jews from the Captivity of Babylon, is
called his planting the Heavens, and laying the foundation of the Earth: And
the Vulgar Latin Translation, as he farther observes, renders the word, ut
corlum plants, ut terram fundes, ascribing that to the Prophet which he did
but declare; and in this sense he contends, that God the Father is said to make
the worlds by his Son. Answ. 1. The work mentioned is not that which God would
do in the reduction of the people from Babylon, but that which he had done in
their delivery from Egypt, recorded to strengthen the faith of Believers in
what for the future he would yet do for them. 2. The expressions of planting
the Heavens, and laying the foundation of the Earth, are in this place of the
Prophet plainly, Allegorical, and are in the very same place declared so to be.
First, In the circumstance of time when this work is said to be wrought,
namely, at the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt, when the Heavens and the
Earth properly so called, could not be made, planted, founded, or created.
Secondly, By an adjoined Exposition of the Allegory, I have put my words into
thy mouth, and said unto Zion, thou art my people: This was his planting of the
Heavens, and laying the foundation of the Earth, even the erection of a Church
and Political State amongst the Israelites. 3. It is not to the Prophet; but to
the Church that the words are spoken, and (...) and (...), are not ut plants
and ut fundes, but ad plantandum, to plant, and ad fundandum, to lay the
foundation: and our Author prejudicates his cause, by making use of a
Translation to uphold it, which himself knows to be corrupt. 4. There is not
then, any similitude between that place of the Prophet, wherein words are used
Allegorically, (the Allegory in them being instantly explained;) and this of
the Apostle whose discourse is didactical, and the words used in it, proper,
and suited to the things intended by him to be expressed. And this is the
substance of what is pleaded to wrest from believers this illustrious Testimony
given to the eternal Deity of the Son of God. We may yet further consider the
reasons that offer themselves from the Context for the removal of the
interpretation suggested.

1. It sinks under its own weakness and absurdity. The Apostle intending to set
out the Excellency of the Son of God, affirms that by him the worlds were made;
that is, say they, Christ preaching the Gospel converted some to the faith of
it, and many more were converted by the Apostles preaching the same Doctrine,
whereupon blessed times of Light and Salvation ensued. Who not overpowered with
prejudice could once imagine any such sense in these words? especially
considering that it is as contrary to the design of the Apostle, as it is to
the importance of the words themselves. This is that which Peter calls, men's
wresting the Scripture to their own perdition.

2. The Apostle as we observed, writes didactically, plainly expressing the
matter whereof he treats, in words usual and proper. To what end then should he
use so strained an Allegory in a point of Doctrine, yea, a fundamental Article
of the Religion he taught, and that to express what he had immediately in the
words foregoing properly expressed; For, by whom he made the worlds, is no more
in these men's apprehensions, than, in him has he spoken in these latter days.
Nor is this Expression any where used, no not in the most allegorical
Prophecies of the Old Testament, to denote that which here they would wrest it
unto. But making of the world, signifies, making of the World, in the whole
Scripture throughout, and nothing else.

3. The making of the worlds here intended, was a thing then past; (...), he
made them, that is, he did so of old; and the same word is used by the LXX. to
express the old Creation. But now that which the Jews called the world to come,
or the blessed state of the Church under the Messiah, the Apostle speaks of, as
of that which was not yet come; the present worldly State of the Judaical
Church yet continuing.

4. The word (...); and (...), or (...) and (...), which are so rendered, taken
absolutely as they are here used, do never in any one place in the Scripture in
the Old or New Testament signify the new Creation, or state of the Church
under the Gospel; but the whole world and all things therein contained, they do
in this very Epistle, Chap. 11.3.

5. Wherever the Apostle in this Epistle speaks in the Judaical Idiom of the
Church State under the Messiah, he never calls it by the name of (...), or
(...), but still with the limitation of, to come, as Chap. 2.5. Chap. 6.5 And
where the word is used absolutely as in this place, and Chap. 11.3. it is the
whole world that is intended.

6. The Context utterly refuses this Gloss. The Son in the preceding words,
is said to be made Heir or Lord of all; that is, of all things absolutely and
universally, as we have evinced, and is confessed. Unto that Assertion he
subjoyns a reason of the equity of that transcendent Grant made unto him;
namely, because by him all things were made, whereunto he adds his upholding,
ruling, and disposing of them being so made by him; he upholdeth all things by
the word of his power. That between the all things whereof he is Lord, and the
all things that he upholds, there should be an interposition of words of the
same importance with them, expressing the Reason of them that go before, and the
foundation of that which follows, knitting both parts together, and yet indeed
have a signification in them of things utterly heterogeneous to them, is most
unreasonable to imagine.

We have now obtained liberty by removing the entanglements cast in our way, to
proceed to the opening of the genuine sense and importance of these words.

(...); by whom; not as an Instrument or an inferior intermediate created
Cause; for then also must he be created by himself, seeing all things that were
made, were made by him, Joh. 1.3. but as his own eternal Word, Wisdom and
Power* Prove. 8.22, 23, 24. Joh. 1.3. The same individual creating act, being
the work of Father and Son; whose Power and Wisdom being one and the same
individed, so also are the works which outwardly proceed from them. And as the
joint- working of Father and Son does not infer any other subordination but
that of subsistence and order; so the Preposition (...) does not of it self
intimate the subjection of an instrumental Cause, being used sometimes to
express the work of the Father himself, Gal. 1.1.

(...), created; so the Apostle expresses that word, Acts 17.24, 26. And the
LXX. most commonly, as Genesis 1.1. though sometimes they use (...), as our
Apostle also does, Chap. 10. He made, created, produced out of nothing, by the
things not seen, Chap. 11.3.

(...), so that word is constantly rendered by the Greeks. (...) is to hide, or
to be hid, kept secret, close, undiscovered. Whence a Virgin is called (...),
one not yet come into the public state of Matrimony; as by the Greeks on the
same account (...), one shut up, or a recluse; as the Targumists call an Harlot
(...), a goer abroad, from that description of her, Prove. 7.10, 11. (...), her
feet dwell not in her own house; one while she is in the Street, another while
abroad. As the Mother of the Family is called (...), the dweller at home, Psalm
68.13. Hence (...), signifies the Ages of the world in their succession and
duration, which are things secret and hidden; what is past is forgotten, what
is to come is unknown; and what is present passing away without much
Observation: See Ecclesiastes 1. v. 10.

The world then that is visible and a spectacle in its self, in respect of its
continuance and duration is (...), a thing hidden; So that the word denotes the
fabric of the world by a Metonymie of the Adjunct. When the Hebrews would
express the world in respect of the substance and matter of the Universe, they
do it commonly by a distribution of the whole into its most general and
comprehensive parts, as the Heavens, Earth, and Sea, subjoyning, all things
contained in them. This the Greeks and Latins from its Order, Frame, and
Ornaments call (...), and mundus, which principally respects that (...), that
beauty and ornament of the Heavens which God made by his Spirit, Job. 26.13.
And as it is inhabited by the Sons of men, they call it (...) that is, (...);
that is, (...), Prove. 8.30. The world of the earth; principally, the habitable
parts of the Earth. As quickly passing away they call it (...); and in respect
of its successive duration (...); that is, (...), the word here used.

2. (...), in the Plural number; the worlds, so called, Chap. 11.3. by a mere
Enallage of number, as some suppose; or with respect to the many Ages of the
worlds duration. But moreover, the Apostle accommodates his expression to the
received opinion of the Jews, and their way of expressing themselves about the
world. (...), denotes the world as to the subsistence of it, and as to its
duration; in both these respects, the Jews distributed the world into several
parts, calling them so many worlds. R.D. Kimchi on Isa. 6. distributes these
worlds into three, on the account of which he says, (...), holy, was three
times repeated by the Seraphims. There are says he, (...), three worlds;
(...), the upper world which is the world of Angels and Spirits; (...), the
world of the Heavens and Stars: and (...), this world below. But in the first
respect they generally assign these four (1.) (...), the lower world, the
depress^d world, the Earth and Air in the several regions of it. (2.) (...),
the world of Angels, or Ministering Spirits, whom they suppose to inhabit in
High Places, where they may supervize the affairs of the Earth. (3.) (...), the
world of Spheres; and (4.) (...), the highest world, called by Paul the third
Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. and by Solomon, (...), the Heaven of Heavens, 2 Kings
8.27. and (...), Olam hanneshamoth, the world of Spirits, or souls departed. In
respect of duration they assign a fivefold world: 1. (...), called by Peter,
the old world, or the world before the Flood, the world that perished. 2.
(...), the present world, or the state of things under the Judaical Church: 3.
(...), the world of the coming of the Messiah, or the world to come, as the
Apostle calls it, Chap. 2.5. 4.(...), the world of the Resurrection of the
dead. And 5. (...), the prolonged world, or life eternal; Principally with
respect to the first distribution, as also unto the duration of the whole world
unto the last dispensation mentioned in the second, does the Apostle here call
it, (...), the worlds.

Thus the Apostle having declared the Honor of the Son as Mediator, in that he
was made Heir of all, adds thereunto his Excellency in himself from his eternal
power and Godhead; which he not only asserts, but gives evidence unto by an
Argument from the works of Creation. And to avoid all streightning thoughts of
this work, he expresses it in terms comprehending the whole Creation in that
distribution whereunto it was usually cast by themselves: As John contents not
himself by affirming that he made all things, but adds to that Assertion, that
without him nothing was made that was made, Joh. 1.3.

And this was of old the common faith of the Judaical Church. That all things
were made, and all things disposed by the Word of God, they all confessed.
Evident footsteps of this faith abide still in their Targums. For that by the
Word of God so often mentioned in them they did not understand the Word of his
Power, but an Hypostasis in the Divine Nature, is manifest from the Personal
Properties which are every where assigned unto it; as the Word of God, did
this, said that, thought, went, and the like; as Psalm. 68.17. They affirm that
Word, which gave the Law on Mount Sinai, to dwell in the highest heavens. Yea,
and they say in Bereschit Rabba, of those words, Genesis 1.2. The Spirit of God
moved on the face of the waters, (...) this is the Spirit of the King Messiah;
by which they cannot deny but that all things were formed. And the Apostle in
this expression lets the Hebrews know, that Jesus the Messiah was that Word of
God, by whom all things were made. And so the influence of these words into his
present Argument is manifest. For the Son, in whom the Father had now spoken to
them, and declared the Gospel, being his Eternal Word, by whom the world and
all Ages were created, there could be no question of his Authority to alter
their ceremonious Worship, which he himself had appointed for a season.

Before we pass to the next Verses, we may mark out those Instructions, which
the words passed through afford us in common, as to the abiding interest of all
Believers.

The foundation of them is, That the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great
Prophet of his Church under the New Testament, the only Revealer of the Will of
the Father, as the Son and Wisdom of God, made the Worlds, and all things
contained in them. And therein, 1. We have an illustrious testimony given to
the Eternal Godhead and Power of the Son of God; for he who made all things is
God, as the Apostle elsewhere affirms. And,

2. Unto the Equity of his being made Heir, Lord and Judge of all. No creature
can decline the Authority, or wave the Tribunal of him that made them all. And,

3. A stable bottom of Faith, Hope, Contentment and Patience, is administered
unto the Saints in all dispensations. He who is their Redeemer, that bought
them, has all that interest in all things wherein they are concerned, that the
Sovereign right of Creation can afford unto him; besides that Grant which is
made unto him for this very end, that they might be disposed of to his own
Glory, in their good and advantage, Isa. 54. v. 4, 5. And,

4. From this Order of things, that Christ as the Eternal Son of God having
made the worlds, has them and all things in them put under his power as
Mediator and Head of the Church; we may see what a subserviency to the interest
of the Saints of the most High, the whole Creation is laid and disposed in. And,

5. The way of obtaining a sanctified Interest in, and use of the things of the
Old Creation; namely, not to receive them merely on the general account as made
by the Son of God, but on the more especial of their being granted unto him, as
Mediator of the Church. And,

6. How men on both these foundations, are to be accountable for their use or
abuse of the things of the first Creation.

But besides these particular Instances, there is that which is more general,
and which we may a little insist upon from the Context and design of the
Apostle in this whole discourse, whose consideration will not again occur unto
us; and it is, That God in infinite wisdom ordered all things in the first
Creation, so as that the whole of that work might be subservient to the glory
of his grace in the new creation of all by Jesus Christ.

By the Son he made the worlds in the beginning of time, that in the fullness of
time he might be the just Heir and Lord of all. The Jews have a saying, that
the world was made for the Messiah; which is thus far true, that both it, and
all things in it, were made, disposed of, and ordered in their Creation, so as
that God might be everlastingly glorified in the work which he was designed
unto, and which by him he had to accomplish. I shall consider it only in the
present instance; namely, that by the Son he made the worlds, that he might be
the proper Heir and Lord of them: of which latter we shall treat more
particularly on the ensuing words.

This was declared of Old, where he was spoken of as the Wisdom of God, by whom
he wrought in the Creation and Production of all things, Prove. 8.22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. This Son, or Wisdom of God, declares at large, 1. His
Coexistence with his Father from Eternity, before all, or any of the visible or
invisible Creation were by his Power brought forth, v. 22, 23, and so onward.
And then sets forth the Infinite, Eternal and Ineffable Delight, that was
between him and his Father, both before, and also in the work of Creation, v.
30. Farther, he declares his presence and cooperation with him in the whole
work of making the world, and the several parts of it, v. 27, 28, 29, 30. which
in other, places is expressed as here by the Apostle, that God by him made the
worlds. After which he declares the End of all this Dispensation, namely, that
he might rejoice in the habitable parts of the earth, and his delight be with
the sons of men; to whom therefore he calls to hearken unto him, that they may
be blessed, v. 31. to the end of the chapter; that is, that he might be meet to
accomplish the work of their Redemption, and bring them to Blessedness, to the
Glory of the Grace of God; which work his heart was set upon, and which he
greatly delighted in, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8.

Hence the Apostle John, in the beginning of his Gospel, brings both the
Creations together; the first by the Eternal Word, absolutely; the other by him
as incarnate, that the Suitableness and Correspondency of all things in them,
might be evident. The Word was with God, says he, in the beginning, and all
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made,
v. 1, 2, 3. But what was this unto the Gospel that he undertook to declare?
Yes, very much; for it appears from hence, that when this Word was made flesh,
and came and dwelt among us, v. 14. that he came into the world that was made
by him, though it knew him not, v. 10. he came but to his own, what ever were
the entertainment that he receeived, v. 11. For this End then God made all
things by him, that when he came to change and renew all things, he might have
good right and title so to do, seeing he undertook to deal with, or about, no
more but what he had originally made.

The Holy and Blessed Trinity could have so ordered the work of Creation, as
that it should not immediately, eminently, and signally have been the work of
the Son, of the Eternal Word. But there was a farther design upon the world to
be accomplished by him, and therefore the work was signally to be his; that is,
as to immediate Operation, though as to Authority and Order it peculiarly
belonged to the Father; and to the Spirit as to Disposition and Ornament, Genesis
1.2. Job 26.13.

This, I say, was done, for the End mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.10. All
things at first were made by him; that when they were lost, ruined, scattered,
they might again in the appointed season be gathered together into one head in
him; of which place more at large elsewhere.

And this mystery of the Wisdom of God, the Apostle at large unfoldeth, Col.
1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Speaking of the Son by whom we have Redemption, he
informs us, that in himself and his own nature, he is the Image of the
invisible God; that is, of God the Father, who until then had alone been
clearly revealed unto them; and that in respect of other things he is the
firstborn of every creature, or as he terms himself, Rev. 3.14. the Beginning
of the creation of God; that is, he who is before all creatures, and gave
Beginning to the Creation of God. For so expressly the Apostle explains himself
in the next verses. By him all things were created that are in heaven and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him: and he is before all
things, and by him all things consist. But this is not the full design of the
Apostle. He declares not only that All things were made by him, but also that
All things were made for him, v. 16. so made for him, that he might be the Head
of the Body the Church; that is, that he might be the fountain, head, spring,
and original of the new Creation, as he had been of the Old. So the Apostle
declares in the next words, Who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead.
As he was the Beginning, and the First-b^rn of every creature in the old
Creation, so he is the Beginning and Firstborn from the dead; that is, the
Original and Cause of the whole new Creation. And hereunto he subjoyns the End
and design of God in this whole mysterious work, which was, that the Son might
have the pre-eminence in all things; as he had in and over the works of the old
Creation, seeing they were all made by him, and all consist in him; so also he
has over the New on the same account, being the Beginning and Firstborn of
them. The Apostle in these words gives us the whole of what we intend, namely,
that the making of the worlds, and of all things in them, in the first Creation
by the Son, was peculiarly subservient to the Glory of the Grace of God, in the
Reparation and Renovation of all things by him as incarnate.

It is not for us to enquire much into, or after the reason of this Economy
and Dispensation; we cannot by searching find out God, we cannot find out the
Almighty unto perfection, Job 11.7. It may suffice us, that he disposes of all
things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.12. This Antecedently
unto the consideration of the Effects of it, we cannot, we may not search into,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. What are the Effects and Consequences of his infinitely holy wise
Counsel, wherein his Glory shines forth unto his Creatures, those we may
consider and contemplate on, and rejoice in the light that they will afford us,
into the treasures of these counsels themselves.

Now herein we see, first, that it was the Eternal Design of God, that the
whole Creation should be put in subjection unto the Word incarnate, whereof the
Apostle also treats in the second Chapter of this Epistle. God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. God has put all
things in subjection unto him, not only the things peculiarly redeemed by him,
but all things what ever, as we shall show in the next words of our Epistle.
See 1 Cor. 15, 24. Heb. 2.8. Romans 14.11. Hence John saw every creature which is
in heaven and earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, even all
that are in them, ascribing blessing, and honor, and glory, and power unto the
Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13. that is, owning and avowing their Duty,
Obedience and Subjection unto him. This being designed of God in the Eternal
Counsel of his Will, before the world was, 1 Pet. 1.2. Tit. 1.2. He prepared
and made way for it in the Creation of all things by him; so that his Title and
right to be the Ruler and Lord of all Angels and Men, the whole Creation, in
and of Heaven and Earth, might be laid in this great and blessed foundation,
that he made them all.

Again, God designed from Eternity, that his great and everlasting Glory should
arise from the new Creation, and the work thereof. Herein has he ordered all
things to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. And this praise
will he inhabit for ever. It is true, the works of the old Creation did set
forth the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. they manifested his eternal power and
Godhead, Romans 1.20. But God had not resolved, ultimately to commit the
manifestation of his glory unto those works, though very glorious; and
therefore did he suffer sin to enter into the world, which stained the beauty
of it, and brought it wholly under the curse. But he never suffered spot nor
stain to come upon the work of the new Creation, Ephesians. 5.6. nothing that might
defeat, eclipse, or impair the glory that he intended to exalt himself in
thereby. Yet God has so ultimately laid up his glory in the new Creation, as
that he will not lose any thing of that, which also is due unto him from the
Old: but yet he will not receive it immediately from thence neither; but as it
is put over into a subserviency unto the work of the New. Now God ordered all
things so, as that this might be effected without force, coaction, or wresting
of the Creation, or putting it besides its own order. And is there any thing
more genuine, natural and proper, than that the world should come into
subjection unto him, by whom it was made, although there be some alteration in
its state and condition, as to outward dispensation, in his being made Man? And
this I take to be the meaning of that discourse of the Apostle about the
bondage and liberty of the creature, which we have, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. The
Apostle tells us, that the Creature it self had an expectation, and desire
after the Manifestation of the Sons of God, or the bringing forth of the
Kingdom of Christ in Glory and Power, v. 19. and gives this reason for it,
because it is brought into a condition of vanity, corruption and bondage;
wherein it did, as it were, unwillingly abide, and groaned to be delivered from
it; that is, by the entrance of sin, the Creation was brought into that
condition, as wherein it could not answer the end for which it was made and
erected; namely, to declare the glory of God, that he might be worshipped and
honored as God; but was, as it were, left, especially in the Earth, and the
Inhabitants of it, to be a stage for men to act their enmity against God upon,
and a means for the fulfilling and satisfaction of their filthy lusts. This
state being unsuitable unto its primitive constitution, preternatural,
occasional, and forced, it is said to dislike it, to groan under it, to hope
for Deliverance; doing that in what it is, by its nature, which it would do
voluntarily were it endowed with a rational understanding. But, says the
Apostle, there is a better condition for this Creation; which whilst it was
afar of, it put out its head after and unto. What is this better state? Why the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God; that is, the new state and condition that
all things are restored unto, in order unto the glory of God, by Jesus Christ.
The Creation has, as it were, a natural propensity, yea, a longing to come
into a subjection unto Christ, as that which retrieves and frees it from the
Vanity, Bondage and Corruption that it was cast into, when put out of its first
Order by sin. And this arises from that plot and design which God first laid
in the Creation of all things; that they being made by the Son, should
naturally and willingly, as it were, give up themselves unto Obedience unto
him, when he should take the Rule of them upon the new account of his Mediation.

Thirdly, God would hereby instruct us, both in the Use that we are to make of
his creatures, and the improvement that we are to make of the work of the
Creation unto his glory. For the first, it is his Will that we should not use
any thing as merely made and created by him, though originally for that
purpose; seeing as they are so left, they are under the curse, and so impure
and unclean unto them that use them, Tit. 1.15. But he would have us to look
upon them, and receive them as they are given over unto Christ. For the Apostle
in his Application of the eighth Psalm unto the Lord Christ, chap. 2.6, 7, 8.
manifests, that even the beasts of the field, on which we live, are passed over
in a peculiar manner unto his Dominion. And he lays our interest in their use
as to a clear, profitable, and sanctified way of it, in the new state of things
brought in by Christ. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Every creature of God is good, and nothing
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the
word of God and prayer. The word of promise confirmed in Christ, called on by
the Spirit, given by Christ in prayer, gives a sanctified use of the creatures.
This God instructs us in, namely to look for a profitable sanctified Use of the
creatures in Christ, in that himself ordered them in the very first Creation,
to fall at length naturally under his Rule and Dominion, making them all by
him. And hereby also we are instructed how to learn the glory of God from them.
The whole mystery of laying the works of the old Creation in a subserviency
unto the New, being hidden from many Ages and Generations, from the foundation
of the world men did by the Effects and works which they saw, conclude, that
there was an Eternal Power and Infinite Wisdom, whereby they were produced. But
whereas there is but a twofold holy use of the works of the Creation, the one
suited unto the state of Innocence, and the moral natural Worship of God
therein, which they had lost; the other, to the state of Grace, and the Worship
of God in that, which they had not attained, the world and the inhabitants
thereof being otherwise involved in the Curse and Darkness wherewith it was
attended, exercised themselves in fruitless speculations about them, (foolish
imaginations, as the Apostle calls them) and glorified not God in any due
manner, Romans 1.21. Neither do, nor can men unto this day make any better
improvement of their contemplation on the Works of Creation, who are
unacquainted with the Recapitulation of all things in Christ, and the Beauty of
it; in that all things at first were made by him. But when men shall by faith
perceive and consider, that the Production of all things owes it self, in its
first original, unto the Son of God, in that by him the world was made, and
that unto this End and Purpose, that he being afterward Incarnate for our
Redemption, they might all be put into subjection unto him, they cannot but be
ravished with the Admiration of the Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Love of God,
in this holy, wise, beautiful disposition of all his works and ways. And this
is the very subject of the Eighth Psalm. The Psalmist considers the Excellency
and Glory of God in the Creation of all things, instancing in the most glorious
and eminent parts of it. But does he do this absolutely, as they are such? does
he rest there? No, but proceeds to manifest the cause of his Admiration, in
that God did of old design, and would at length actually put, all these things
into subjection unto the Man Christ Jesus; as the Apostle expounds his meaning,
chap. 2. which causes him to renew his Admiration and praise, v. 9. that is,
to glorify God, as God, and to be thankful; which yet Paul declared that they
were not, who considered the works of God only absolutely, with reference to
their first Original from infinite Power and Wisdom.

But against what we have been discoursing, it may be objected, that God in the
Creation of all things suited them perfectly and absolutely unto a state of
Innocence and Holiness, without any respect unto the entrance of sin, and the
curse that ensued, which gave Occasion to that infinitely wise and holy work of
the Mediation of Christ, and the Restoration of all things by him; so that they
could not be laid in such a subserviency and Order, one to the other, as is
pretended: though the former might be afterward traduced, and translated into
the use of the other. But,

1. What is clearly testified unto in the Scripture, as that truth is, which we
have insisted on, is not to be called into question, because we cannot
understand the Order and method of things in the hidden Counsels of God. Such
knowledge is too wonderful for us. Neither do we benefit our selves much by
inquiring into that which we cannot comprehend. It is enough for us, that we
hold fast revealed things, that we may know and do the will of God; but secret
things belong to him; and to him are they to be left.

2. The Scripture testifies, that Known unto God are all his works from the
foundation of the world, Acts 15.18. Not only all those, which at first he
wrought, but also all that ever he would so do. The Idea and System of them was
all in his Holy Mind from Eternity. Now though in their creation and production
they are all singly suited and fitted, to the time and season wherein they are
brought forth and made, yet as they lie all together in the Mind, Will, and
Purpose of God, they have a Relation one to another, from the first to the
last. There is an Harmony and correspondency between them all; they lie all in
a blessed subserviency in themselves, and in their respect unto one another,
unto the Promotion of the Glory of God. And therefore though in the Creation of
all things, that work was suited unto the state and condition wherein they were
created, that is, of Innocence and Holiness; yet this hinders not, but that God
might and did so order them, that they might have a respect unto that future
work of his in their Restoration by Christ, which was then no less known unto
him, than that which was perfectly wrought.

3. The most reasonable and best intelligible Way of declaring the Order of
Gods Decrees, is that which casts them under the two general heads, which all
rational Agents respect in their Purposes and Operations; namely, of the last
End, and the means conducing thereunto. Now the utmost End of God in all his
ways toward the Sons of men, being the Manifestation of his own Glory by the
way of Mercy and Justice, what ever tends thereunto, is all jointly to be
looked on, as one entire means tending unto that End and purpose. The works
therefore of the Old and New Creation being of this sort and nature, one joint
and general means for the compassing of the forementioned end, nothing can
hinder but that they may have that respect to each other, which before we have
declared.

Verse III.
THe Apostle in the pursuit of his Argument, proceeds in the Description of the
Person of Christ; partly as giving a farther account of what he had before
affirmed concerning his Divine Power in making the worlds; and partly to
instruct the Hebrews from their own Typical Institutions, that it was the
Messiah who was figured and represented formerly unto them, in those signs and
pledges of Gods Glorious Presence which they enjoyed. And so by the whole, he
confirms the Proposition he had in hand, concerning the Excellency and
Eminency of him by whom the Gospel was revealed, that their Faith in him, and
Obedience unto him, might not be shaken or hindered.

Verse 3. (...).
(...), is wanting in M.S.T. But the sense requires the words, and all other
ancient Copies retain them: (...), is wanting in some Copies: and one or two
for (...), have (...), which has nothing whereunto it should relate. Some also
read, (...); taken from Chap. 12. v. 2. where the word is used.

(...), Qui est; Qui cum sit; Qui existens; Who is; Who when he is, or was;
(...).
Who existing; as Phil. 2.6. (...), Who being in the Form of God.

Who being, (...), Splendour, Radius, Jubar, Effulgentia, Refulgentia, (...).
Relucentia. The Splendor, Ray, Beam, Effulgency, or shining forth of Glory.
Sir. (...), Germen, so Boderius, the branch; Tremelius and D' Dieu, Splendour,
the Arabic concurring.

(...), is Lux, Light; particularly the Morning Light, Acts 20. v. 11. (...),
he talked until the break of day, or the beaming of the Morning Light; (...),
Gloss. Vet. Jubar Solis; the Sunbeam; and sometimes it denotes the Day it
self. It is also sometimes used for the Light that is in burning Iron: (...),
is of the same signification: properly Splendour Lucis, the Brightness, Shining,
Beauty, Glory, or Luster of light. Hence is (...), to shine forth, to shine
into, to irradiate, 2 Cor. 4.4. (...), that the Light of the Gospel should not
irradiate, shine into them. (...), is of the same importance; and from thence
(...); The Word is no where used in the New Testament save in this place only;
nor does it occurr in the Old of the LXX. Only we have it, Wisd. 7.26. Wisdom
is said to be (...), a Beam of eternal light; to which place the Margin of our
Translation refer^. And it is so used by Nazianzen, (...); a little beam of a
great light. It answers exactly to the Hebrew (...), or (...); that is, the
Morning Light, Prove. 4.18. The path of the righteous, (...), ut Lux splendoris,
Hierom; as the light of Brightness; that is, of the Morning, (...), Acts 20.11.
And it is also applied to the light of Fire, or Fire in Iron, Isa. 4.5. (...),
the light of fire; and the fiery streaming of Lightning, Heb. 3.11.

(...).
The Brightness, Shining, Ray, Beam, (...) of Glory; Some look on this
Expression as an Hebraism; (...), the Beam of Glory; for (...), a Glorious
Beam; But this will not answer the design of the Apostle, as we shall see
afterward.

Our Translators have supplied, His, the Brightness of his Glory, by repeating
(...), from the end of the sentence; perhaps as we shall find, not altogether
necessarily* in which cases alone, such supplements unto the Text are allowed
in Translations.

(...).
(...), Character, Imago, Forma, Figura, Expressa Forma, Figura expressa, (...),
Sir. the Character, Image, Form, Figure, express Form, express Figure; so
variously is the word rendered by Translators with little difference. It is no
where used in the New Testament, but only in this place; In other Authors it
has many significations. Sometimes they use it Properly and Naturally;
sometimes Metaphorical^y and Artificially; as when it denotes several forms of
Speech, or Orations. Properly from (...) or (...), to engrave with a Tool, or
Style, is (...), and (...), which is firstly and properly, the note, or mark
cut by a Tool or Instrument into Wood, or any other subject capable of such
impression; or the stamp and sign that is left in the coining of money. The
Mark or scarr also left by a Wound, is by the LXX. termed (...), Lev. 13.25. It
is in general an express Representation of another thing communicated unto it,
by an impression of its likeness upon it; opposed unto that which is umbratile
and imaginary.

(...).
(...), Substantiae, Subsistentiae Personae; Sir. (...), substantiae ejus;
Hypostasis, Substance, Subsistence, Person. The word is four times used in the
New Testament. Thrice in this Epistle; In this place, and Chap. 3.14. and Chap.
11.1. as also, 2 Cor. 9.4. every where in a different sense; so that the mere
Use of it in one place, will afford no Light unto the meaning of it in another;
but it must be taken from the Context and subject treated of. The Composition
of the word would denote substantia, but so as to differ from, and to add
something unto (...), Substance, or Being; which in the Divine Nature can be
nothing but a special manner of subsistence. But the Controversy that has
been about the precise signification of these words, we shall not here enter
into the Discussion of.

(...).
(...), Agens, Regens, Moderans; acting, disposing, ruling, governing; also
Portans, Bajulans, Sustinens; bearing, supporting, carrying, upholding; which
of these senses is peculiarly intended, we shall afterward enquire into.

(...).
(...); by the Word of his Power; by his powerful word; Sir. (...), by the Power
of his Word; changing the order of the words, but not the meaning of them; by
the Power of his Word, or the Word of his Power; that is, his powerful Word.
(...); some would read it (...), and refer it unto the Father; by the powerful
Word of him, that is of the Father, by whose Power, they say, the Son disposes
of all things. But all Copies with Accents have (...), constantly, none (...),
nor will the disposition of the Words bear that reference.

(...); by himself, in his own Person.

(...).
(...). Purgationem faciens; Purgatione facta. Having purged, cleansed,
expiated, (or purified us from) our sins: Having made a Purgation or
Purification of our sins.

(...).
(...), is used both neutrally and actively; answering to (...), both in Kal and
Hiphil; signifying to sit down, and to cause to sit down. Chrysostom seems to
have understood the Word in the latter sense; referring it to God the Father
causing the Son to sit down. But it is hard to find any Antecedent Word whereby
it should be regulated, but only (...), Who, in the beginning of the verse;
that is, he himself: And as Erasmus observes, (...), in the following Words,
will not Grammatically admit of this Construction; for if (...), be to be
understood actively and transitively, it must have been (...). And the Apostle
clears the neutral sense of the word, Chap. 8.1. It is well then rendered by
our Translators; he sat, or sat down.

(...).
(...), Psalm. 110.1. (...): LXX. (...), in the Plural Number; so is the same
thing expressed, Acts 7.55. and by Mark, (...). Chap. 16.5. Our Apostle
constantly keeps the singular number, with (...). Chap. 1.13. Chap. 8.1.
Chap. 12.2. The same thing in both Expressions is intended; only that of (...),
or (...), in the plural number is more eminently destructive of the folly of
the Anthropomorphites; for they cannot hence pretend that God has a right
hand, unless they will grant that he has many; which were not only to turn the
Glory of the invisible God into the likeness of a man, but of a Monster. And
Austin well observes, that in the Psalm, where that expression is first used,
sit on my Right Hand; it is added, (...), the Lord on thy right hand; at the
Right hand of him, who sat on his right hand: which removes all Carnal
Apprehensions from the meaning of the words.

(...). This word is seldom used in other Authors; twice in this Epistle, (...)
here, and Chap. 8.1. once by Jude, v. 25. and no where else in the New
Testament. by the LXX. not at all. The Apostle evidently expresses by it (...)
or (...); not as they are used appellatively, for Glory, Power, or Majesty, but
as they are names, and denote the essential glory of God; the glorious God. So
that (...), is God himself; not absolutely considered, but with reference unto
the Revelation of his Glory and Majesty in Heaven; God on his Throne; as our
Apostle declares, Chap. 8.1.

(...). in the Highest. (...), is (...); that is, (...), (...).
the Highest, God himself: See Luke 1.35.

Verse 3. Who being the Brightness of Glory, and the express image of his
Person, and upholding (or disposing of) all things by the word of his power,
having by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty
on high.
THe Apostle proceeds in his Description of the Person in whom God spoke in the
Revelation of the Gospel; ascending unto such a manifestation of him, as that
they might understand his Eminency above all formerly used in the like
Ministrations; as also how he was pointed out and shaddowed by sundry Types and
Figures under the Old Testament.

Of this Description there are three Parts: The first declaring What he is; the
second What he does, or did; and the third the Consequent of them both, in what
he enjoys.

Of the first Part of this Description of the Messiah, there a^e two Branches,
or it is two ways expressed; For he affirms of him, First, That he is the
Brightn^ss, Beam or Splendour of the Glory; and Secondly, the express image, or
character of his Fathers Person.

In the second also there are two things assigned unto him: The former relating
unto his Power; as he is the Brightness of Glory; he sustaineth, or rules and
disposes of all things by the Word of his Power: The latter unto his Love and
Work of Mediation; by himself, or in his own Person, he has purged our sins.

His present and perpetual Enjoyment, as a consequent of what he was and did,
or does, is expressed in the last words; he sat down at the right hand of the
Majesty on high.

Some of these Expressions may well be granted to contain some of those (...),
Things hard to be understood, which Peter affirms to be in this E^istle of
Paul, 2 Epist. 3.16. which unstable and unlearned men have in all Ages wrested
unto their own destruction. The Things intended are unquestionably sublime and
Mysterious. The Terms wherein they are expressed are rare, and no where else
used in the Scripture to the same purpose; some of them not at all, which
deprives us of one great help in the Interpretation of them. The Metaphors used
in the Words, or Types alluded unto by them, are abstruse and dark; so that the
difficulty of discovering the true, precise, and genuine meaning of the Holy
Ghost in them is such, as that this verse, at least some part of it, may well
be reckoned among those places which the Lord has left in his Word, to
exercise our Faith and Diligence and Dependence on his Spirit, for a right
Understanding of them. It may be indeed, that from what was known and
acknowledged in the Judaical Church, the whole intention of the Apostle was
more plain unto them, and more plainly and clearly delivered, than now it
seems unto us to be, who are deprived of their Advantages. However both to
them and us, the things were and are deep and Mysterious. And we shall desire
to handle, (as it becomes us) both Things and Words with Reverence and Godly
fear, looking up unto him for Assistance, who alone can lead us into all Truth.

We begin with the double Description given us of the Lord Christ at the
entrance of the Verse, as to What he is in himself; and here a double
Difficulty presents it self unto us; First, In general unto what Nature in
Christ, or unto what of Christ, this Description does belong: Secondly, what is
the particular meaning and importance of the Words or Expressions themselves.

For the First, Some assert, that these words intend only the Divine Nature of
Christ, wherein he is Consubstantial with his Father. Herein as he is said to
be, God of God, and Light of Light, (an expression doubtless taken from hence)
receiving as the Son his Nature and subsistence from the Father, so fully and
absolutely as that he is every way the same with him in respect of his Essence,
and every way like him in respect of his Person; so he is said to be the
brightness of his Glory, and the Character of his Person on that account. This
way went the Ancients generally; and of Modern Expositors very many; as Calvin,
Brentius, Marlorat, Rollocus, Gomarus, Paraeus, Estius, Tena, A Lapide, Rihera,
and sundry others.

Some think that the Apostle speaks of him as Incarnate; as he is declared in
the Gospel, or as preached to be the Image of the invisible God, 2 Cor. 4.4.
And these take three ways in the Explication of the words, and their
Application of them unto him.

First, Some affirm that their meaning is, that whereas God is in himself
infinite and incomprehensible, so that we are not able to contemplate on his
Excellencies, but that we are overpowred in our minds with their Glory and
Majesty, he has in Christ the Son as incarnate, contemperated his infinite
Love, Power, Goodness, Grace, Greatness and Holiness, unto our Faith, Love and
Contemplation, they all shining forth in him, and being eminently expressed in
him; so Beza.

Secondly, Some think that the Apostle pursues the Description that he was
entered upon of the Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, as Heir of all; and that his
being exalted in Glory unto Power, Rule and Dominion, expressing and
representing therein the Person of his Father, is intended in these words; so
Camero.

Thirdly, Some refer these words to the Prophetical Office of Christ; and say
that he was the Brightness of Gods Glory, etc. by his revealing and declaring
of the Will of God unto us, which before was done darkly only, and in shadows.
So the Socinians generally; though Schlictingius refer the Words unto all that
similitude, which they fancy to have been between God, and the man Christ
Jesus, whilst he was in the earth; and therefore renders the Participle (...),
not by the present, but praeterimperfect tense; who was, that is, whilst he
was on the Earth, though as he says, not exclusively unto what he is now in
Heaven.

I shall not examine in particular the Reasons that are alleged for these
several Interpretations; but only propose and confirm that sense of the place,
which on full and due consideration, appears, as agreeable unto the Analogy of
Faith, so expressly to answer the Design and intendment of the Apostle; wherein
also, the unsoundness of the two last branches or ways of applying the second
Interpretation, with the real coincidence of the first, and first branch of the
latter Exposition, will be discovered. To this End the following Positions are
to be observed.

First, It is not the direct and immediate design of the Apostle to treat
absolutely of either Nature of Christ, his Divine or Humane; but only of his
Person. Hence though the things which he mentions and expresses, may some of
them belong unto, or be the Properties of his Divine Nature, some of his
Humane, yet none of them are spoken of as such, but are all considered as
belonging unto his Person. And this solves that difficulty which Chrysostom
observes in the Words, and strives to remove by a similitude; namely, that the
Apostle does not observe any Order or Method, in speaking of the Divine and
Humane Natures of Christ distinctly one after another; but first speaks of the
one, then of the other, and then returns again to the former, and that
frequently: But the Truth is, he intends not to speak directly, and absolutely
of either nature of Christ; but treating ex professo of his Person, some things
that he mentions concerning him, have a special Foundation in, and respect unto
his Divine Nature; some in and unto his Humane, as must every thing that is
spoken of him. And therefore the Method and Order of the Apostle is not to be
enquired after in what relates in his expressions to this or that Nature of
Christ, but in the Progress that he makes in the description of his Person and
Offices, which alone he had undertaken.

Secondly, That which the Apostle principally intends in and about the Person
of Christ, is to set forth his Dignity, Preeminence, and Exaltation above all;
and that not only consequentially, to his discharge of the Office of Mediator,
but also antecedently, in his worth, fitness, ability and suitedness to
undertake and discharge it, which in a great measure depended on, and flowed
from his Divine Nature.

3. These things being supposed, we observe thirdly, That as these Expressions
are none of them singly, much less in that conjunction wherein they are here
placed, used concerning any other but Christ only; so they do plainly contain
and express things that are more sublime and glorious, than can by the Rule of
Scripture, or the Analogy of faith, be ascribed unto any mere creature, however
used or exalted. There is in the word evidently a comparison with God the
Father; he is infinitely glorious, Eternally subsisting in his own Person; and
the Son is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person.
Angels are called the sons of God, are mighty in power, and excellent in
created glory; but when they come to be compared with God, it is said they are
not pure in his sight, and he charge them with folly; Job 4.18. And they
cover their faces at the brightness of his glory, Isa. 6.2. So that they cannot
be said so to be. Man also was created in the image of God, and is again by
grace renewed thereunto, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. But to say a man is the express image
of the Person of God the Father, is to depress the glory of God by
Anthropomorphism. So that unto God asking that question, Whom will ye compare
unto me, and whom will you liken me unto? we cannot answer of any one who is
not God by nature, that he is the brightness of his glory, and the express
image of his person.

Fourthly, Though the design of the Apostle in general be to show how the
Father expressed and declared himself unto us in the Son; yet this could not be
done without manifesting what the Son is in himself, and in reference unto the
Father, which both the expressions do in the first place declare. They express
him such an one, as in whom the infinite Perfections and Excellencies of God
are revealed unto us. So that the first Application of the words, namely to the
Divine Nature of Christ, and the first Branch of the second, considering him as
incarnate, are very well consistent; as A Lapide grants, after he had blamed
Beza for his interpretation. The first direction then given unto our faith in
these words, is, by what the Son is in respect of the Father, namely, the
Brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; whence it
follows, that in him being incarnate, the Fathers glory and his person are
e^^^essed and manifested unto us.

Fifthly, There is nothing in these words that is not applicable unto the
Divine Nature of Christ. Some, as we have showed, suppose that it is not that
which is peculiarly intended in the words; but yet they can give no reason from
them, nor manifest any thing denoted by them, which may not be conveniently
applied thereunto. I say, what ever can be proved to be signified by them, or
contained in them, if we will keep our selves within the bounds of that holy
reverence which becomes us in the contemplation of the Majesty of God, may be
applied unto the Nature of God as existing in the person of the Son. He is in
his Person distinct from the Father, another, not the Father, but yet the same
in Nature, and this in all glorious Properties and Excellencies. This Oneness
in Nature, and Distinction in Person, may be well shadowed out by these
Expressions, He is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person. The Boldness and Curiosity of the Schoolmen, and some others, in
expressing the way and manner of the Generation of the Son, by similitudes of
our understanding and its Acts, declaring how he is the Image of the Father in
their terms, are intolerable, and full of offense. Nor are the rigid
impositions of those Words and Terms, in this matter which they, or others,
have found out to express it by, of any better nature. Yet I confess, that
supposing with some, that by the first expression here used, the brightness of
glory, the Apostle intends to set forth unto us the Relation of the Son to the
Father, by an allusion unto the Sun and its Beams, or the Light of Fire in
Iron, some relief may thence be given unto our weak understandings in the
Contemplation of this Mystery, if we observe that one known Rule, whose use
Chrysostom urges in this place, namely, that in the use of such Allusions,
every thing of imperfection is to be removed in their Application unto God. A
few instances we may give unto this purpose, holding our selves unto an
Allusion to the Sun and its Beams.

1. As the Sun in comparison of the Beam is of it self, and the Beam of the
Sun; so is the Father of himself, and the Son of the Father. 2. As the Sun,
without diminution or partition of its substance, without change or alteration
in its nature, produces the Beam; so is the Son begotten of the Father. 3. As
the Sun in Order of Nature is before the Beam, but in time both are coexistent;
so is the Father in Order of Nature before the Son, though in Existence both
Coeternal. 4. As the Beam is distinct from the Sun, so that the Sun is not the
Beam, and the Beam is not the Sun; so is it between the Father and the Son. 5.
As the Beam is never separated from the Sun, nor can the Sun be without the
Beam; no more can the Son be from the Father, nor was the Father ever without
the Son. 6. As the Sun cannot be seen but by the Beam, no more can the Father
but in and by the Son.

I acknowledge that these things are true, and that there is nothing in them
disagreeable unto the Analogy of faith. But yet as sundry other things may be
affirmed of the Sun and its Beam, whereof no tolerable Application can be made
to the matter in hand; so I am not persuaded that the Apostle intended any such
Comparison or Allusion, or aimed at our Information or Instruction by them.
They were common people of the Jews, and not Philosophers, to whom the Apostle
wrote this Epistle. And therefore either he expresses the things that he
intends, in terms answering unto what was in use among themselves to the same
purpose, or else he asserts them plainly in words, as meet to express them
properly by, as any that are in use amongst men. To say there is an Allusion in
the words, and that the Son is not properly, but by a Metaphor the brightness
of Glory, is to teach the Apostle to express himself in the things of God. For
my part, I understand as much of the Nature, Glory, and Properties of the Son,
in, and by this expression, He is the Brightness of Glory, as I do by any of
the most accurate expressions, which men have arbitrarily invented to signify
the same thing. That he is one distinct from God the Father, related unto him,
and partaker of his glory, is clearly asserted in these words, and more is not
intended in them.

Sixthly, These things then being premised, we may discern the general
importance of these expressions. The words themselves, as was before observed,
being no where else used in the Scripture, we may receive a contribution of
light unto them from those in other places, which are of their nearest
alliance. Such are these and the like, We have seen his glory, the glory of the
only Son of God, Joh. 1.14. He is the Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15.
The glory of God shines forth in him, 2 Cor. 4.6. Now in these and the like
places, the glory of the Divine Nature is so intimated, as that we are directed
to look unto the Glory of the absolutely invisible and incomprehensible God, in
him Incarnate. And this in general is the mea^^^g and intendment of the Apostle
in these expressions; the Son in whom God speaks unto us in the Revelation of
the Gospel, does in his own Person so every way answer the Excellencies and
Perfections of God the Father, that he is in him expressly represented unto our
Faith and Contemplation.

It remains then in the second place that we consider the Expressions
severally, with the reasons why the Apostle thus expresses the Divine glory of
Jesus Christ. (...); Who being the Brightness; Light, Luster, Majesty of Glory.
The Apostle, in my judgment, (which is humbly submitted unto consideration)
alludes and attends unto some thing, that the people were instructed by
typically under the Old Testament, in this great Mystery of the manifestation
of the glory of God unto them in and by the Son, the Second Person in the
Trinity. The Ark, which was the most signal Representation of the presence of
God amongst them, was called his Glory. So the Wife of Phineas, upon the taking
of the Ark, affirmed, that the Glory was departed, 1 Samuel 4.22. The glory is
departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken. And the Psalmist mentioning
the same thing, calls it his glory absolutely: Psalm. 78.61. He gave his glory
into the hand of his enemies; that is the Ark. Now on the filling of the
Tabernacle with the signs of God's presence in Cloud and Fire, the Jews affirm
that there was a constant (...), a (...), or Majestic shining glory resting on
the Ark; which was the (...), the splendour of the glory of God, in that Typical
Representation of his Presence. And this was to instruct them in the way and
manner whereby God would dwell amongst them. The Apostle therefore calling them
from the Types, by which in much darkness they had been instructed in these
Mysteries, unto the things themselves represented obscurely by them, acquaints
them with what that Typical glory and splendor of it signified, namely the
Eternal glory of God, with the Essential beaming and brightness of it in the
Son, in and by whom the glory of the Father shines forth unto us. So that the
words seem to relate unto that way of Instruction, which was of old granted
unto them.

Besides, they were wont to express their Faith in this Mystery with words unto
this purpose. (...), Glory, is sometimes put for God himself, Psalm. 85.10.
(...), That glory may dwell in our land; that is, the God of glory, or glorious
God. This glory the Targum calls (...), and the Majesty of that glory (...).
See Hab. 1.8. Hence Psalm. 44.25. they render those words, (...), Why hidest
thou thy face? (...), Why take thou away the Majesty of thy glory? as both
the Venetian and Basil Bibles read the place. For the Regia have only (...),
omitting (...). And in the Vision of Isaiah, chap. 6.1. they say it was (...),
so Kimchi, (...), so Rashi; (...), so the Targum. And they affirm, that it was
the same which came down and appeared on Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.20. where those
words, (...) And the Lord descended on mount Sinai, are rendered by Onkelos.
(...), The Majesty of God was revealed; which words, from Psalm. 68. are applied
by our Apostle unto the Son, Ephesians. 4. (...), then is nothing also but (...) or
(...); the Essential Presence or Majesty of the glorious God. This, says he,
is Christ the Son; and thus of old they expressed their faith concerning him.

The words, as was showed before, denote the Divine Nature of Christ, yet not
absolutely, but as God the Father in him does manifest himself unto us. Hence
is he called, (...), or (...), or (...). The Word is from (...), he dwelt.
Elias in Tishbi gives us somewhat another account of the Application of that
name, in the root, (...), The Rabbis of blessed memory called the holy Ghost
Shechinah, because he dwelt upon the Prophets. But that this is not so, may be
observed throughout the Targum, wherein the holy Ghost is always expressly
called (...): and the Shechinah is spoken of in such places as cannot be
applied unto him. But as the Fullness of the Godhead is said to dwell in the
Lord Christ, (...), Col. 1.9. and he as the only begotten Son of God, to dwell
amongst us, Joh. 1.14. so is he said in the same sense to be (...), or (...),
the Majesty, Presence, Splendour of the Glory, or the glorious God.

This then is that whereof the Apostle minds the Jews. God having promised to
dwell amongst them by his glorious Presence, from whence the very name of
Jerusalem was called, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. he who in and under that
name was with them, as sent by Jehovah, Zech. 1.8. was the Son, in whom he had
now spoken unto them in these latter days. And this must needs be of weight
with them, being instructed, that he who had revealed the Will of God unto
them, was none other but he who had dwelt among them from the beginning,
representing in all things the Person of the Father, being typically revealed
unto them, as the brightness of his glory.

The Apostle adds, that he is (...), the express figure or image of his
Person; that is, of the Person of God the Father. I shall not enter into any
dispute about the meaning of the word Hypostasis, or the difference between it
and (...). Many controversies about these words there were of old. And Hierom
was very cautious about acknowledging three Hypostases in the Deity, and that
because he thought the word in this place to denote substantia, and of that
mind are many still, it being so rendered by the Vulgar Translation. But the
consideration of these vexed Questions tending not to the opening of the design
of the Apostle and meaning of the holy Ghost in this place, I shall not insist
upon them. The

1. Hypostasis of the Father, is the Father himself. Hereof, or of him, is the
Son said to be the express image. As is the Father, so is the Son. And this
agreement, likeness and convenience, between the Father and the Son, is
Essential, not Accidental; as those things are between relations finite and
corporeal. What the Father is, does, has; that the Son is, does, has; or else
the Father as the Father could not be fully satisfied in him, nor represented
by him.

2. By Character two things seem to be intended. 1. That the Son in himself is
(...), in the likeness of God, Phil. 2.6. 2. That unto us he is (...), the
image of God, representing him unto us, Col. 1.16. For these three words are
used of the Lord Christ in respect unto God the Father; (...); and their use
seems thus to difference them. 1. That is said of him, (...), being existing,
subsisting in the form of God; that is, being so, essentially so; for there is
no (...), or Form in the Deity, but what is Essential unto it. This he was
absolutely, antecedently unto his Incarnation. The whole Nature of God being in
him, and consequently he being in the Form of God. 2. In the Manifestation of
God unto us, he is said to be (...), Col. 1.16. The image of the invisible God;
because in him, so partaker of the Nature of the Father, do the Power,
Goodness, Holiness, Grace, and all other glorious Properties of God shine
forth, being in him represented unto us, 2 Cor. 4.6. And both these seem to be
comprised in this word, (...); both that the whole Nature of God is in him, as
also that by him God is declared and expressed unto us.

Neither were the Jews of old ignorant of this notion of the Son of God. So
Philo expresses their sense, de confusione linguarum, (...); If any one be not
yet worthy to be called the Son of God, yet endeavor thou to be conformed unto
his first begotten Word, the most ancient Angel, the archangel with many names;
for he is called the Beginning, the name of God, the man according to the Image
of God, the Seer of Israel. And again, (...). For if we are not meet to be
called the sons of God, let us be so of his eternal Image, the most sacred
Word; for that most ancient Word is the Image of God. Thus he; expressing some
of their conceptions concerning this Eternal character of the Person of the
Father.

We have seen what it is, that is intended in this Expression; and shall only
add thereunto a consideration of that, from whence the Expression is taken.
The ordinary ingraving of Rings, or Seals, or Stones, is generally thought to
be alluded unto. It may be also, that the Apostle had respect unto some
Representation of the glory of God by Ingraving amongst the Institutions of
Moses. Now there was scarcely any thing of old that more gloriously represented
God, than that of the Ingraving of his Name on a plate of gold to be worn on
the front of the Mitre of the High priest; at the sight whereof, the great
Conqueror of the East fell down before him. Mention of it we have, Exodus 28.36.
Thou shall make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the ingraving of
a signet, (...), Holiness of Jehovah, or to Jehovah. Here was that Name of God
which denotes his Essence and Being characterized, and engraven to represent
his Holiness and glory to the people. And Aaron was to wear this engraven Name
of God on his forehead, that he might bear the iniquity of the holy things and
gifts of the children of Israel; which could really be done only by him who was
Jehovah himself. And thus also when God promises to bring forth the Son, as
the corner stone of the Church, he promises to ingrave upon him the seven eyes
of the Lord, Zech. 3.9. or the perfection of his Wisdom and Power to be
expressed unto the Church in him. There having been then this Representation of
the presence of God, by the character or ingraving of his glorious Name upon
the plate of gold, which the High priest was to wear that he might bear
iniquities; the Apostle lets the Hebrews know, that in Christ the Son is the
real accomplishment of what was typified thereby, the Father having actually
communicated unto him his Nature denoted by that name, whereby he was able
really to bear our iniquities, and most gloriously represent the Person of his
Father unto us.

And this, with submission to better judgments, do I conceive to be the design
of the Apostle, in this his description of the Person of Jesus Christ. It
pleased the holy Ghost herein, to use these terms and expressions, to mind the
Hebrews how they were of old instructed, though obscurely, in the things now
actually exhibited unto them; and that nothing was now preached or declared,
but what in their Typical Institutions they had before given their assent unto.

We have been somewhat long in our Explication of this description of the
Person of the Son of God; yet, as we suppose, not any longer than the nature of
the things treated of, and the manner of their expression, necessarily required
us to be. We shall therefore here stay a while, before we proceed to the
ensuing words of this verse, and take some observation from what has been
spoken for our direction and refreshment in our passage.

Observe. 1. All the glorious Perfections of the Nature of God, do belong unto,
and dwell in the person of the Son. Were it not so, he could not gloriously
represent unto us the Person of the Father; nor by the Contemplation of him,
could we be led to an acquaintance with the Person of the Father. This the
Apostle here teaches us, as in the Explication of the words we have
manifested. Now because the confirmation of this allusion depends on the proofs
and testimonies given of and unto the Divine Nature of Christ, which I have
elsewhere largely insisted on, and vindicated from Exceptions, I shall not
here reassume that task; especially considering that the same Truth will again
occur unto us.

Observe. 2. The whole Manifestation of the Nature of God unto us, and all
communications of grace, are immediately by and through the Person of the Son.
He represents him unto us, and through him, is every thing that is communicated
unto us from the fullness of the Deity conveyed.

There are sundry signal instances wherein God reveals himself, and
communicates from his own infinite fullness unto his creatures; and in all of
them he does it immediately by the Son. 1. In the Creation of all things. 2. In
their Providential rule and disposal. 3. In the revelation of his Will, and
institution of Ordinances. 4. In the communication of his Spirit and Grace. In
none of which is the Person of the Father any otherwise immediately represented
unto us, than in and by the Person of the Son.

1. In the Creation of all things, God both gave them their Being, and imparted
unto them of his Goodness, and manifested his Nature unto those that were
capable of an holy Apprehension of it. Now all this God did immediately by the
Son; not as a subordinate Instrument, but as the principal Efficient, being his
own Power and Wisdom. This we have manifested in our Explication of the last
words of the Verse foregoing. In express testimony hereunto, see Joh. 1.3.
Col. 1.16. 1 Cor. 8.6. The Son, as the Power and Wisdom of the Father, made all
things; so that in that work, the glory of the Father shines forth in him, and
no otherwise: By him was there a communication of Being, Goodness and Existence
unto the Creation.

2. In the providential Rule and disposal of all things created, God farther
manifests himself if unto his creatures, and farther communicates of his
goodness unto them. That this also is done in and by the Son, we shall farther
evidence in the explication of the next words of this verse.

3. The matter is yet more plain, as to the Revelation of his Will, and the
institution of Ordinances from first to last. It is granted, that after the
entrance of sin, God does not graciously reveal, nor communicate himself unto
any of his creatures but by his Son. This might fully be manifested by a
consideration of the first promise, the foundation of future Revelations and
Institutions, with an induction of all ensuing instances. But whereas all
Revelations and Institutions springing from the first promise, are completed
and finished in the Gospel, it may suffice to show, that what we assert is
true, with peculiar reference thereunto. The testimonies given unto it are
innumerable. This is the substance and end of the Gospel, to reveal the Father
by and in the Son unto us, to declare that through him alone we can be made
partakers of his grace and goodness; and that no other way we can have either
acquaintance or communion with him, see Joh. 1.18. The whole end of the Gospel
is to give us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. that is, the glory of the invisible God, whom none has seen at any
time, 1 Timothy 6.16. 1 John 4.12. that is, to be communicated unto us. But how is
this to be done, absolutely and immediately as it is the glory of the Father?
no, but as it shines forth in the face of Jesus Christ; or as it is in his
Person manifested and represented unto us: for he is, as the same Apostle in
the same place, v. 4. the image of God. And herein also, as to the
communication of Grace and the Spirit, the Scripture is express, and believers
are daily instructed in it. See Col. 1.17. Joh. 1.16. especially 1 John 5.11,
14. Now the grounds of this Order of the things lies,

1. In the Essential Inbeing of the Father and the Son. This our Savior
expresses, Joh. 10.38. The Father is in me, and I in him; the same Essential
Properties and Nature being in each of the persons, by virtue thereof their
Persons also are said to be in each other. The Person of the Son is in the
Person of the Father; not as such, not in or by its own personality, but by
union of its Nature and Essential Properties, which are not alike, as the
Persons are, but the same in the one and the other. And this Inbeing of the
Father in the Son, and of the Son in him, our Savior affirms to be manifested
by the works that he wrought, being wrought by the power of the Father, yet as
in him, and not as in the Father immediately. See to the same purpose chap.
14.10, 11. and chap. 17.21.

2. The Father being thus in the Son, and the Son in the Father, whereby all
the glorious Properties of the one do shine forth in the other, the order and
Economy of the blessed Trinity in Subsistence and Operation, requires that the
manifestation and communication of the Father unto us, be through and by the
Son. For as the Father is the Original and Fountain of the whole Trinity as to
subsistence, so as to Operation he works not but by the Son, who having the
Divine Nature communicated unto him by Eternal Generation, is to communicate
the Effects of the Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness by temporary Operation.
And thus he becomes the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image
of his person; namely by the receiving his glorious Nature from him, the whole
and all of it, and expressing him in his works of nature and grace unto his
creatures.

3. Because in the dispensation and council of Grace, God has determined, that
all communication of himself unto us, shall be by the Son, as incarnate. This
the whole Gospel is given to testify. So that this truth has its foundation
in the very subsistence of the Persons of the Deity, is confirmed by the Order
and Operation, and Voluntary Disposition in the Covenant of Grace.

And this discovers unto us, first, The Necessity of coming unto God by Christ.
God in himself is said to be in thick darkness, as also to dwell in Light,
whereunto no creature can approach; which expressions though seeming contrary,
yet teach us the same thing, namely the infinite distance of the Divine Nature
from our apprehensions and conceptions; no man having seen God at any time. But
this God, invisible, eternal, incomprehensibly glorious, has implanted sundry
characters of his Excellencies, and left footsteps of his blessed Properties on
the things that he has made, that by the Consideration and Contemplation of
them, we might come to some such Acquaintance with him, as might encourage us
to fear and serve him, and to make him our utmost End. But these Expressions of
God in all other things, besides his Son Christ Jesus, are all of them partial,
revealing only something of him, not All that is necessary to be known, that we
may live unto him here, and enjoy him hereafter; and obscure, not leading us
unto any perfect stable knowledge of him. And hence it is, that those who have
attempted to come unto God by the light of that manifestation which he has
made of himself, any other way than in and by Christ Jesus, have all failed and
come short of his glory. But now the Lord Christ being the Brightness of his
glory, in whom his glory shines out of the immense Darkness that his Nature is
enwrapped in unto us, and beams out of that inaccessible light which he
inhabits; and the express image of his Person, representing all the perfections
of his Person, fully and clearly unto us, in him alone, can we attain a saving
Acquaintance with him. On this account he tells Philip, Joh. 14.9. He that has
seen me, he has seen the Father; the reason of which assertion, taken from the
mutual inbeing of Father and Son, and his expression of his mind and glory, he
asserts in the next verses. He then is the only way and means of coming unto
the knowledge and enjoyment of God; because in and by him alone, is he fully
and perfectly expressed unto us. And therefore, this, secondly, is our great
Guide and direction in all our endeavors after an acceptable access unto him.
Would we come to that acquintance with the Nature, Properties, and Excellencies
of the Father, which poor, weak, finite creatures are capable of attaining in
this world, which is sufficient that we may love him, fear him, serve him and
come unto the enjoyment of him; would we know his Love and Grace, would we
admire his Wisdom and Holiness; let us labor to come to an intimate and near
acquaintance with his Son Jesus Christ, in whom all these things dwell in their
fullness, and by whom they are exhibited, revealed, unfolded unto us. Seek the
Father in the Son; out of whom, not one Property of the Divine Nature can be
savingly apprehended, or rightly understood; and in whom they are all exposed
to our faith and spiritual contemplation. This is our Wisdom, to abide in
Christ, to abide with him, to learn him, and in him we shall learn, see and
know the Father also.

(...). Unto the Description of the Person, the Apostle returns unto an
Assertion of the Power of Christ the Son of God, and therein makes his
Transition from the Kingly and Prophetical, unto his Sacerdotal Office, on all
which he intends afterward to enlarge his Discourse.

He showed before, that by him the Worlds were created; whereunto as a farther
evidence of his glorious Power, and of his continuance to act suitably unto
that beginning of his exercise of it, he adds, that he also abides to uphold,
or rule and dispose of all things, so made by him.

For the Explication of these words, two things are to be enquired after;
First, How, or in what sense Christ is said to uphold or rule all things.
Secondly, How he does it by the Word of his power.

(...) is taken by Expositors in a double sense, and accordingly variously
rendered in Translations. Some render it by upholding, supporting, bearing,
carrying. And these suppose it to express that infinite Divine Power, which is
exerted in the conservation of the Creation, keeping it from sinking into its
Original of confusion and nothing. Hereof our Savior says, My Father works
hitherto, (...), or yet; and I work: that is, in the providential sustentation
of all things made at the beginning. And this, says Chrysostom on this place,
is a greater work than that of the Creation. By the former, all things were
brought forth from nothing; by the latter are they preserved from that return
unto nothing, which their own nature, not capable of existence without
dependence on their first cause, and their perpetual conflict by contrariety of
Qualities, would precipitate them into.

2. Some take the word to express his ruling, governing, and disposing of all
things by him made, and (which is supposed) sustained; and so it may deno^e the
putting forth of that power over all things which is given unto the Son as
Mediator; or else that providential rule over all, which he has with his
Father; which seems rather to be intended, because of the way expressed whereby
he exercises this Rule, namely, by the Word of his Power.

The use of the word (...) is not so obvious in this latter sense, as it is in
the former. As in the Proverb, (...). But I see no reason why we should suppose
an inconsistency in these senses, and not rather conclude that they are both of
them employed. For as absolutely it is the same Divine Power and Providence
which is exercised in the upholding, and the ruling or disposing of all things;
so all Rule and Government is a matter of weight and burden; and he who rules
or governs others, is said to bear or carry them. So Moses expresses his Rule
of the People in the Wilderness, Numb. 11.11, 12. Thou have put, says he,
(...) the weight or burden of this people upon me, and thou have said, (...),
bear or carry them in thy bosom. And hence from (...), to bear or carry, is
(...) a Prince or Ruler, that is, one that carries and bears the burden of the
people, that upholds and rules them. To bear then, or uphold, and to rule and
dispose, may be both well intended in this word; as they are both expressed in
that Prophecy of Christ, Isa. 9.6. The rule or government shall be on his
shoulder; that together with his Power and Rule he may sustain and bear the
weight of his people. Only whereas this is done amongst men with much labor
and travel, he does it by an inexpress^ble facility, by the Word of his Power.
And this is safe, to take the expression in its most comprehensive sense.

But whereas the phrase of speech it self is no where else used in the New
Testament, nor is (...) applied unto any such purpose else where, (though once
(...) be taken for actus or agitatus 1 Pet. 1.) we may enquire what word it was
among the Hebrews that the Apostle intended to express, whereby they had
formerly been instructed in the same matter.

1. It may be he intended (...), a participle from (...), to sustain, to bear,
to endure; as Mal. 3.2. it signifies also to feed, nourish and cherish; 1 King.
4.7. Ruth 4.15. Zech. 11.16. (...), that is, (...), sustinens, nutriens omnia,
sustaining and cherishing all things. But this word has no respect unto Rule
or disposal. And in this sense, as the work of Creation is eminently ascribed
unto the Father, who is said to make all things by the Son, so that of the
preservation and cherishing of all things is here peculiarly assigned unto the
Son. And this is not unsuitable unto the analogy of faith. For it was the power
of God that was eminently exalted, and is conspicuously seen in the work of
Creation, as the Apostle declares, Romans 1.20. although that power was
accompanied also with infinite wisdom; and it is the wisdom of God that is most
eminently manifested in the preservation of all things, though that wisdom be
also exercised in power infinite. At least in the contemplation of the works of
the Creation, we are lead by the wonder of the infinite Power whereby they were
wrought, to the consideration of the Wisdom that accompanied it; and that which
in the works of Providence first presents it self unto our minds, is the
infinite Wisdom whereby all things are disposed; which leads us also to the
admiration of the Power expressed in them. Now it is usual with the Scripture
to assign the things wherein Power is most eminent, unto the Father; as those
wherein Wisdom is most conspicuously exalted, unto the Son, who is the Eternal
Wisdom of the Father. And this sense is not unsuitable unto the Text:

2. (...) is another word that may be intended, and this denotes a bearing like
a Prince in Government; as (...). And in this sense the word ought to be
referred unto Christ as Mediator, entrusted with Power and Rule by the Father.
But neither the words nor Context will well bear this sense. For, 1. It is
mentioned before, where it is said that he is appointed heir of all; and it is
not likely that the Apostle in this summary description of the Person and
Offices of the Messiah, would twice mention the same thing under different
expressions. 2. The particle (...) added unto (...), refers us to the beginning
of this verse, (...) -- (...) -- who being the brightness of glory, and bearing
all things. So that these things must necessarily be spoken of him in the same
respect; and the former, as we have showed, relates unto his Person in respect
of his Divine Nature, so therefore does the latter, and his acting therein.

3. There is yet another word, which I suppose the Apostle had a principle aim
to express, and this is (...) is properly to ride, to be carried, to be carried
over; and it is frequently, though metaphorically used concerning God himself;
as Deuteronomy. 33.26. (...) riding on the heavens; on the clouds, Isa. 19.1. on the
wings of the wind, Psalm. 18. and Psalm. 68.5. whereby his Majesty, Authority and
Government is shadowed out unto us. And hence also the word signifies to
administer, dispose, govern or praeside in and over things.

Thus in Ezekiel's Vision of the glorious providence of God in ruling the whole
Creation, it is represented by a Chariot ((...)) of ((...)) Cherubims. The
(...) Cherubims with their wheels made that Chariot, over which sat the God of
Israel, in his disposing and ruling of all things. And the words themselves
have that affinity in signification, which is frequently seen among the Hebrew
Roots, differing only in the transposition of one letter. And the description
of him who sat above the Cherubims of Providence, Ezekiel. 1.10. is the same with
that of John, Revel. 4. Now God in that Vision is placed (...), as governing,
ruling, influencing all second Causes, as to the orderly Production of their
Effects, by the communication of life, motion and guidance unto them. And
though this divine Administration of all things be dreadful to consider, the
rings of the wheels being high and dreadful, chap. 1.18. and the living
creature ran as the appearance of a flash of lightning, v. 14. as also full of
entanglements, there being to appearance cross wheels, or wheels within wheels,
v. 16. which are all said to be rolling, chap. 10.13. yet it is carried on in
an unspeakable Order, without the least Confusion, chap. 1. v. 17. and with a
mavelous facility, by a mere intimation of the Mind and Will of him who
guides the whole; and that because there was a living powerful spirit, passing
through all, both living creatures and wheels, that moved them speedily,
regularly and effectually, as he pleased; that is, the Energetical Power of
divine Providence, animating, guiding and disposing the whole, as seemed good
unto him.

Now all this is excellently expressed by the Apostle in these words. For as
that power which is in him that sits over the Chariot, influencing and giving
existence, life, motion and guidance unto all things, is clearly expressed by
(...), upholding and disposing of all things, that is, (...); so is the
exercise and issuing of it forth by the spirit of life in all things to guide
them certainly and regularly, by those words, (...), by the word of his power;
both denoting the unspeakable facility of omnipotent power in its operations.
And Kimchi on the 6 of Isaiah affirms, that the vision which the Prophet had
was of the glory of God, that Glory which Ezekiel saw in the likeness of a man;
which we find applied unto the Lord Christ. Joh. 12.42.

I shall only add, that in Ezekiel's vision, the voice of the Quadriga of the
living creatures in its motion, was as the voice (...), omnipotentis,
praepotentis, sibi sufficientis, of the Almighty, the Powerful, the All, or
Self-sufficient, which is also fully expressed in this of the Apostle, bearing,
upholding, disposing of all things.

Our next enquiry is after the manner whereby the Son thus upholdeth and
disposes of all things. He does it by the word of his power. (...) in the New
Testament is used in the same latitude and extent with (...) in the Old.
Sometimes it denotes any matter or thing, be it good or evil; as Matthew. 5.11,
12, 36.18.16. Mark 9.22. Luke 1.37.2.15.18.34. A word of blessing by
providence, Matthew. 4.4. any word spoken, Matthew. 26.75.27.14. Luke 9.45. of
promise, Luke 1.38. And (...), blasphemous words, Acts 6.11. The Word of God,
the Word of Prophecy, Luke 3.2. Romans 10.17. Ephesians. 5.12.6.17. 1 Pet. 1.25. An
Authoritative command, Luke 5.5. In this Epistle it is used variously; in this
only it differs from (...), that it never denotes the Eternal or Essential Word
of God. That which in this place is denoted by it, with its adjunct of (...),
is the (...), or the Divine Power, executing the Counsels of the Will and
Wisdom of God; or the Efficacy of God's providence, whereby he works and
effects all things according to the counsel of his will. See Genesis 1.3. Psalm.
47.15, 18. Psalm. 148.8. Isa. 30.31. And this is indifferently expressed by
(...) and (...). Hence the same thing which Paul expresses by the one of them,
Heb. 11.3. (...); By faith we know that the heavens were made by the Word of
God; Peter does by the other, 2 Pet. 3.5. (...).

Now this Efficacy of Divine Providence, is called the Word of God; to
intimate, that as Rulers accomplish their will by a Word of command, in and
about things subject to their pleasure, Matthew. 8.9. so does God accomplish his
whole mind and will in all things by his Power. And therefore (...), of his
power, is here added by way of difference and distinction, to show what word it
is that the Apostle intends. It is not (...), the Essential Word of God, who is
the Person spoken of; nor (...), the Word spoken by him in the revelation of
himself, his mind and will; but a Word that is effectual and operative, namely,
the putting forth of his Divine Power, with easiness and Authority
accomplishing his Will and Purpose in and by all things.

This in the Vision of Ezekiel is the communication of a spirit of life to the
Cherubs and Wheels, to act and move them as seems good to him by whom they are
guided. For as it is very probable, that the Apostle in these words, setting
forth the Divine Power of the Son in ruling and governing the whole Creation,
did intend to mind the Hebrews, that the Lord Christ the Son is he who was
represented in the form of a man unto Ezekiel, ruling and disposing of all
things, and the (...), the Almighty, whose voice was heard amongst the Wheels;
so it is most certain that the same thing is intended in both places. And this
expression of upholding or disposing of all things by the word of his power,
does fully declare the glorious providence emblematically expressed in that
Vision. The Son being over all things made by himself, as on a Throne over the
Cherubims and Wheels, influenceth the whole Creation with his Power,
communicating unto it respectively subsistence, life and motion, acting, ruling
and disposing of all according to the counsel of his own will.

This then is that which the Apostle assigns unto the Son, thereby to set out
the dignity of his Person, that the Hebrews might well consider all things
before they deserted his Doctrine. He is one that is partaker essentially of
the Nature of God, being the brightness of glory, and the express image of his
Father's Person, who exercises and manifests his divine Power, both in the
creation of all things, as also in the supportment, rule and disposal of all,
after they are made by him. And hence will follow, as his Power and Authority
to change the Mosaical Institutions, so his Truth and Faithfulness in the
Revelation of the Will of God by him made, which it was their duty to embrace
and adhere unto.

The several passages of this Verse are all of them conjoined by the Apostle,
and used unto the same general end and purpose; but themselves are of such
distinct senses and importance, considered absolutely and apart, that we shall
in our passage take out the Observations which they singly afford unto us.

And from these last words we may learn.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ as the Son of God, has the weight of the whole
Creation upon his hand, and disposes of it by his Power and Wisdom.

2. Such is the nature and condition of the Universe, that it could not subsist
a moment, nor could any thing in it act regularly unto its appointed end,
without the continual supportment, guidance, influence and disposal of the Son
of God.

We may briefly consider the sum of both these jointly, to manifest the Power
and Care of Christ over us, as also the weak dependent condition of the whole
Creation in and by it self. The things of this Creation can no more support act
and dispose themselves, then they could at first make themselves out of
nothing. The greatest cannot conserve it self by its Power, or Greatness, or
Order; nor the least by its distance from Opposition. Were there not a mighty
hand under them all and every one, they would all sink into confusion and
nothing; did not an effectual Power influence them, they would become a
slothful heap. It is true, God has in the creation of all things implanted in
every particle of the Creation, a special natural inclination and disposition,
according unto which it is ready to act, move, or work regularly; but he has
not placed this Nature and Power absolutely in them, and independently of his
own Power and Operation. The Sun is endued with a nature to produce all the
glorious effects of Light and Heat, that we behold or conceive; the Fire to
burn, the Wind to blow, and all creatures also in the like manner; but yet
neither could Sun, or Fire, or Wind preserve themselves in their being, or
retain the principles of their Operations, did not the Son of God, by a
constant continual emanation of his eternal Power uphold and preserve them; nor
could they produce any one effect by all their actings, did not he work in
them, and by them. And so is it with the sons of men, with all Agents what
ever, whether natural and unnecessary, or free, and proceeding in their
operations by election and choice. Hence Paul tells us, that in God we live,
and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. He had before asserted, that he had
of one blood made all nations, v. 26. That is, all men of one, whom he first
created; to which he adds, that we may may know that he has not so left us,
to stand by our selves on that first foundation, or that we have any Power or
Ability being made, to do or act any thing without him, that in him, that is in
his Power, Care, Providence, and by virtue of his effectual influence, our
lives are supported and continued, that we are acted, moved, and enabled
thereby to do all we do, be it never so small, wherein there is any effect of
life or motion So Daniel tells Belshazzar, that his breath and all his ways
were in the hand of God, Dan. 5.23. His breath in the supportment and
continuance of his Being; and his ways in his effectual guidance and disposal
of them. Peter speaks to the same purpose in general, concerning the fabric of
the Heavens, Sea, and Earth, 2 Pet. 3.5.

Now what is thus spoken of God in general, is by Paul particularly applied
unto the Son. Col. 1.16, 17. All things were created by him, and for him, and
he is before all things, and by him all things consist. He did not only make
all things, as we have declared, and that for himself and his own glory, but
also he continues in the head of them; so that by him, and by his Power, they
consist, are preserved in their present state and condition, kept from
dissolution, in their singular existence, and in a consistency among themselves.

And the reason hereof is taken, first, from the limited, finite, dependent
condition of the Creation, and the absolute necessity that it should be so. It
is utterly impossible and repugnant to the very nature and being of God, that
he should make, create, or produce any thing without himself, that should have
either a self-subsistence, or a self-sufficiency, or be independent on himself.
All these are natural and Essential Properties of the Divine Nature; where they
are, there is God, so that no creature can be made partaker of them: Where we
name a creature, we name that which has a derived and dependant Being. And
that which cannot subsist in and by it self, cannot act so neither.

Secondly, The Energetical Efficacy of God's Providence joined with his
infinite Wisdom in caring for the works of his own hands, the product of his
Power, requires that it should be so. He works yet. He did not create the
world, to leave it to an uncertain event; to stand by, and to see what would
become of it, to see whether it would return to its primitive nothing, of which
cask it always smells strongly; or how it would be tossed up and down by the
adverse and contrary Qualities which were implanted in the severals of it: But
the same Power and Wisdom that produced it, does still accompany it, powerfully
piercing through every parcel and particle of it. To fancy a Providence in God,
without a continual Energetical Operation, or a Wisdom without a constant care
inspection and oversight of the works of his hands, is not to have
apprehensions of the Living God, but to erect an Idol in our own imaginations.

Thirdly, This work is peculiarly assigned unto the Son, not only as he is the
Eternal Power and Wisdom of God, but also because by his interposition, as
undertaking the work of Mediation, he reprieved the world from an immediate
dissolution upon the first entrance of sin and disorder; that it might
continue, as it were, the great Stage for the mighty works of God's Grace,
Wisdom, and Love to be wrought in. Hence the care of the continuance of the
Creation and the disposal of it, is delegated unto him, as he that has
undertaken to bring forth and consummate the glory of God in it,
notwithstanding the great breach made upon it by the sin of Angels and men.
This is the substance of the Apostles discourse, Col. 1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Having asserted him to be the Image of God, in the sense before opened and
declared, and to have made all things, he affirms, that all things have also
their present consistency in him, and by his Power; and must have so, until the
work of Reconciliation of all things unto God being accomplished, the glory of
God may be fully retrieved and established for ever.

1. We may see from hence the Vanity of expecting any thing from the Creatures,
but only what the Lord Christ is pleased to communicate unto us by them. They
that cannot sustain, move or act themselves, by any power, virtue, or strength
of their own, are very unlikely by and of themselves to afford any real
assistance, relief, or help unto others. They all abide and exist severally,
and consist together, in their Order, and Operation, by the Word of the Power
of Christ; and what he will communicate by them, that they will yield and
afford, and nothing else. In themselves they are broken Cisterns that will hold
no water; what he drops into them may be derived unto us, and no more. They who
rest upon them, or rest in them, without the consideration of their constant
dependence on Christ, will find at length all their hopes disappointed, and all
their Enjoyments vanish into nothing.

2. Learn hence also the full, absolute, plenary self-sufficiency and
Sovereignty of the Son our Savior. We showed before the Universality of his
Kingdom and Moral Rule over the whole Creation; but this is not all. A King
has a Moral Rule over his Subjects in his Kingdom; but he does not really and
physically give them their Being and Existence; he does not uphold and act them
at his pleasure; but every one of them stand therein upon the same, or an equal
bottom with himself. He can indeed by the permission of God, take away the
Lives of any of them, and so put an end to all their actings and operations in
this World; but he cannot give them life, or continue their lives at his
pleasure one moment, or make them so much as to move a finger. But with the
Lord Christ it is otherwise; he not only rules over all the whole Creation,
disposing of it according to the Rule and Law of his own Counsel and pleasure;
but also they all have their Beings, Natures, Inclinations, and Lives from him;
by his Power are they continued unto them, and all their Actions are influenced
thereby. And this as it argues an All Sufficiency in himself, so an absolute
Sovereignty over all other things. And this should teach us our constant
dependence on him, and our universal subjection unto him.

3. And this abundantly discovers the Vanity and folly of them, who make use of
the Creation in an Opposition unto the Lord Christ, and his peculiar interest
in this World. His own Power is the very ground that they stand upon in their
Opposition unto him; and all things which they use against him, consist in him.
They hold their Lives absolutely at the pleasure of him whom they oppose; and
they act against him, without whose continual supportment and influence, they
could neither live nor act one moment, which is the greatest madness, and most
contemptible folly imaginable.

PRoceed we now with our Apostle in his description of the Person and Offices
of the Messiah.

This beginning of the Epistle, as has been declared, contains a summary
Proposition of those things, which the Apostle intends severally to insist upon
throughout the whole. And these all relate to the Person and Offices of the
Messiah, the principal subject of this Epistle. Having therefore first declared
him to be the great Prophet of the New Testament; and Secondly, the Lord, Ruler
and Governor of all things, as also manifested the Equity of the Grant of that
universal Sovereignty unto him, from the Excellency of his Person on the
account of his Divine Nature, and the Operations thereof in the works of
Creation and Providence, he proceeds to finish and close his general
proposition of the Argument of the Epistle, by a brief intimation of his
Priestly-Office, with what he did therein, and what ensued thereon, in the
remaining words of this Verse.

And this Order and Method of the Apostle, is required by the nature of the
things themselves whereof he treats. For the work of purging sins, which as a
Priest he assigns unto him, cannot well be declared, without a previous
manifestation of his Divine Nature. For it is opu^ (...), a work of him who is
God and man. For as God takes it to be his property to blot out our sins, so he
could not have done it by himself, had he not been man also: And this is
asserted in the next words.

(...).
Having by himself purged our sins.
The Vulgar Latin renders these words; purgationem peccatorum faciens; not
without sundry mistakes. For First, Those words, (...), by himself, and (...),
our, are omitted; and yet the Emphasis and proper sense of the whole depends
upon them. Secondly, (...), having made, is rendered in the present Tense,
making, which seems to direct the sense of the words to another thing and
Action of Christ, than that is here intended. And therefore the Expositors of
the Roman Church, as Thomas, Lyranus, Cajetan, Estlus, Ribera, A Lapide, all
desert their own Text, and expound the words according to the Original: The
Ancients also as Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Oecumenius, lay the chief weight
of their whole Exposition of this place, on the words omitted in that
Translation.

The doctrine of purging our sins by Christ, is deep and large, extending its
self unto many weighty heads of the Gospel: but we shall follow our Apostle,
and in this place pass it over briefly and in general, because the
consideration of it will directly occur unto us in our progress.

Two things the Apostle here expresses concerning the Messiah; and one, which
is the foundation of both the other he implies or supposes. First, He
expresses What he did; he purged our sins: Secondly, How he did it, he did it
by himself. That which he supposes as the foundation of both these is, that he
was the Great High Priest of the Church; they with whom he dealt knowing full
well that this matter of purging sins, belonged only unto the Priest.

Here then the Apostle tacitly enters upon a Comparison of Christ with Aaron,
the High Priest; as he had done before with all the Prophetical Revealers of
the Will of God; and as he named none of them in particular, no more does he
here name Aaron; but afterward when he comes more largely to insist on the
same matter again, he expressly makes mention of his name, as also of that of
Moses.

And in both the things here ascribed unto him as the great High Priest of his
Church does he prefer him above Aaron. First, In that he purged our sins; that
is, really and effectually before God, and in the Conscience of the sinner, and
that for ever. Whereas the Purgation of sins about which Aaron was employed,
was in its self but typical, external, and representative of that which was
true and real, both of which the Apostle proves at large afterward. Secondly,
In that he did it by himself, or the offering of himself; whereas what ever
Aaron did of this kind, he did it by the offering of the blood of Bulls and
Goats, as shall be declared.

And hence appears also the vanity of the Gloss of a learned man on these
words; postquam, says he, morte sua causam dedisset ejus fidei per quam a
peccatis purgamur, quod nec Moses fecerat, nec Prophetae. For as we shall see
that Christ's purging of our sins, does not consist in giving a ground and cause
for faith, whereby we purge our selves, so the Apostle is not comparing the
Lord Christ in these words with Moses and the Prophets, who had nothing to do
in the work of purging sin, but with Aaron who by Office was designed thereunto.

(...).
Let us then see what it is that is here ascribed unto the Lord Christ. (...),
does most frequently denote real actual Purification, either of outward
defilements, by healing and cleansing, as Mark 1.40. Chap. 7.19. Luke 5.12. or
spiritual defilements of sin, by sanctifying Grace, as Acts 15.9. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Ephesians. 5.26. But it is also frequently used in the same sense with (...), and
(...), to purge by Expiation or Atonement, as Heb. 9.22, 23. And in the like
variety is (...) also used. But (...), to make a Purgation or Purification of
our sins, cannot here be taken in the first sense for real and inherent
sanctifying. First, Because it is spoken of as a thing already past and
perfected; having purged our sins; when Purification by Sanctification, is
begun only in some, not all at any time, perfected in none at all in this
world. Secondly, Because he did it, (...), by himself alone, without the use or
Application of any other medium unto them that are purged. When real inherent
Sanctification is with washing of Water by the word, Ephesians. 5.26. or by
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Titus 3:5. And the gloss above
mentioned, that Christ should purge us from our sins in his death, by
occasioning that Faith whereby we are cleansed, is excluded, as was in part
showed before by the Context. That is assigned unto the death of Christ, as
done really and effectually thereby; which was done tipically of old in the
Legal Sacrifices by the Priests; as is evident from the Antith^sis couched in
that Expression by himself. But this was not the way whereby sins were of old
purged by Sacrifices, namely, by the begetting a persuasion in the minds of men
that should be useful for that purpose; and therefore no such things is here
intended.

(...).
(...) then, is such a purging as is made by Expiation, Lustration and
Atonement. That is (...) or (...), Propitiatio; Atonement, Propitiation. So
is that Word rendered by the LXX. Exodus 29.36. (...), the day of Atonement, or
Expiation. They do indeed mostly render (...), by (...), and (...), to
propitiate, to appease, to atone; but they do it also by (...), to purge, as
Exodus 29.37. and Chap. 30 10. So also in other Authors, (...) is used for
(...), that is, expiatio, expiamentum, piaculum; Expiation, Atonement,
diversion of guilt. So Lucian, (...), We cast him down headlong for an
expiation of the Army: or as one that by his death should expiate, bear, take
away the guilt of the Army. And such Lustrations were common among the Heathen,
when Persons devoted themselves to destruction, or were devoted by others, to
purge, lustrate, bear the guilt of any, that they might go free; such were
Codius, Menaeceus, and the Decii, whose stories are known. This purging then of
our sins, which the Apostle declares to have been effected before the
Ascension of Christ, and his sitting down at the Right Hand of God, consists
not in the actual Sanctification and Purification of believers, by the Spirit
in the Application of the blood of Christ unto them, but in the Atonement made
by him in the Sacrifice of himself, that our sins should not be imputed unto
us. And therefore is he said to purge our sins, and not to purge us from our
sins. And where ever sins, not sinners, are made the Object of any Mediatory
acts of Christ, that act immediately respects God and not the sinner, and
intends the removal of sin, so as that it should not be imputed. So Chap. 2.17.
of this Epistle; he is a merciful High Priest; (...), to reconcile the sins of
the people; that is, (...), to make Atonement or Reconciliation with God for
the sins of the people. And again; He underwent death, (...), for the
redemption of Transgressions under the first Covenant, that is, to pay a price
for them, that transgressors might be set free from the sentence of the Law. So
that (...); is as much, as having made atonement for our sins.

And this the Apostle further declares by manifesting the Way whereby he did
it; that is, (...), by himself, that is, by the Sacrifice and Offering of
himself; as Chap. (...).
9.14. Ephesians. 5.2. The High Priest of old made Atonement, and typically purged
the sins of the People, by sacrificing of Beasts according unto the Appointment
of the Law, Levit. 16. This High Priest by the Sacrifice of himself, Isa.
53.10. Heb. 9.12. Of the nature of Propitiatory or Expiatory Sacrifices, we
must treat at large afterward. We keep our selves now, unto the Apostles
general Proposition, expressing briefly the Sacerdotal Office of Christ, and
the Excellency of it, in that he really purged our sins, and that by the
Sacrifice of himself. And this was in and by his death on the Cross, with his
antecedent preparatory sufferings. Some distinguish between his Death, and the
Oblation of himself. This they say he performed in Heaven, when as the High
Priest of his Church, he entered into the Holiest not made with hands,
whereunto his death was but a preparation. For the slaying of the Beast, they
say, was not the Sacrifice, but the offering of its blood upon the Altar, and
the carrying of it into the Holy Place. But this utterly overthrows the whole
Sacrifice of Christ, which indeed is the thing by them aimed at. It is true,
the slaying of the Beast was not the whole Sacrifice, but only an essential
part of it, as was also the offering of its blood; and the sprinkling of it in
the Holy Place, in the anniversary Sacrifice of Atonement, but not in any
other. And the Reason why the whole Sacrifice could not consist in any one
Action, arose merely from the imperfection of the things and persons employed
in that work. The Priest was one thing, the Beast to be sacrificed another, the
Altar another, the Fire on the Altar another, the Incense added another, each
of them limited and designed unto its peculiar end, so that the atonement
could not be made by any one of them, nor the Sacrifice consist in them. But
now in this sacrifice of Christ all these meet in one, because of his
Perfection; He himself was both Priest, Sacrifice, Altar and Incense, as we
shall see in our progress; and he perfected his whole sacrifice at once, in and
by his death and bloodshedding, as the Apostle evidently declares, Chap.
9.12.14.

Thus by himself did Christ purge our sins, making an Atonement for them by
the sacrifice of himself in his death, that they should never be imputed unto
them that believe.

And this part of this Verse will afford us also this distinct Observation.

So great was the work of freeing us from sin, that it could no otherwise be
effected but by the self-sacrifice of the Son of God.

Our Apostle makes it his design in several places to evince that none of those
things from whence mankind usually did, or might with any hopes or
probabilities expect relief in this case, would yield them any at all.

The best that the Gentiles could attain, all that they had to trust unto, was
but the Improvement of natural Light and Reason, with an attendance unto those
seeds and Principles of Good and Evil, which are yet left in the depraved
nature of man. Under the Conduct, and in Obedience unto these, they sought for
Rest, Glory, and Immortality: how miserably they were disappointed in their
aims and expectations, and what a woeful issue all their endeavors had, the
Apostle declares and proves at large, Romans 1.18. unto the end.

The Jews, who enjoyed the benefit of Divine Revelation, having lost for the
most part the true spiritual import of them, sought for the same ends by the
Law, and their own diligent Observation of it. They rested in the Law; Romans
2.17. namely, that by it, they should obtain Deliverance from sin, and
Acceptance with God; and followed after it, Chap. 9.31. that is, to attain
Righteousness and Salvation by it. And this seemed to be a sufficient bottom
and foundation for them to build upon: for having lost the spiritual
Understanding, the use and End of the Law, as renewed unto them in the Covenant
of Horeb, they went back unto the primitive Use and End of it, upon its first
giving in Innocence; and foolishly thought, as many more yet do, that it would
do the same things for sinners, that it would have done for men, if they had
not sinned in Adam; that is, have given them Acceptance with God here, and
Eternal Life hereafter; Wherefore the Apostle in many places takes great pains
to undeceive them, to rectify their mistake, and to prove that God had no such
design in giving them the Law, as that, which they would impose upon him.

And First, He asserts and proves in general, that the Law would deceive their
Expectation; and that by the deeds of the Law no flesh should be justified,
Romans 3.20. and that it would not give them life, Gal. 3.21. or Righteousness.
And that they might not complain, that then God himself had deceived them in
giving a Law that would not serve the turn for which it was given; he declares,
Secondly, That they had mistaken the End for which the Law was renewed unto
them; which was not that it might give them Life or Righteousness, but that it
might discover sin, exact obedience, and by both drive and compel them to look
out after some other thing, that might both save them from their sin, and
afford them a Righteousness unto Salvation. And furthermore, he Thirdly,
Acquaints them whence it was, that the Law was become unsufficient for these
ends; and that was, because it was become weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. The
Law was able to continue our Acceptance with God, in that condition wherein at
first we were created; but after that man by sin became flesh, to have a
Principle of Enmity against God in him, bringing forth the fruits of sin
continually, the Law stood aside, as weakened and insufficient to help and save
such an one. And these things the Apostle expressly and carefully insists upon
in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians.

But Thirdly, Though the Law, and an earnest endeavor after the Observation of
it in general, would not serve to save us from our sins, yet there were
especial Institutions of the Law, that were appointed for that End and Purpose;
as namely, the Sacrifices in particular; which were designed to make Atonement
for the delivery of sinners, and to procure their Reconciliation with God.
These the Jews principally rested on, and trusted unto; and indeed to expect
Righteousness and Justification by the Mosaical Sacrifices, as they did, was
far more rational, than to expect it by the Works of the Moral Law as some now
do; for all Good works what ever, are required in the Law, and so far are works
of the Law: For in the Sacrifices, there was a supposition of sin, and an
appearance of a compensation to be made, that the sinner might go free; but in
the Moral Law, there is nothing but absolute universal and exact Righteousness
required or admitted, without the least provision of relief for them who come
short therein. But yet our Apostle declar^s, and proves that neither were these
available for the End aimed at, as we shall see at large on the ninth and tenth
Chapters of this Epistle.

Now within the compass of these three, Natural Light or Reason, with ingrafted
principles of Good and Evil, the Moral Law, and the Sacrifices thereof, do lie
and consist, all the hopes and endeavors of sinners after Deliverance and
Acceptance with God. Nothing is there that they can do, or put any confidence
in, but may be referred unto one of these heads. And if all this fail them, as
assuredly they will, (which we might prove by Reasons and Demonstrations in
numerable, though at present we content our selves with the Testimonies above
reported) it is certain, that there is nothing under Heaven can yield them in
this case the least relief.

Again, This is the only way for that End which is suited unto the Wisdom of
God. The Wisdom of God is an infinite abyss, which as it lies in his own
Eternal breast, we cannot at all look into. We can only adore it, as it breaks
forth and discovers it self in the Works that outwardly are of him, or the
Effects of it. Thus, David in the consideration of the Works of God, falls into
an admiration of the Wisdom whereby they were made, Psalm. 104.24. and Psalm.
136.5. The Wisdom of God opens and manifests its self in its Effects; and
thence according unto our measure, do we learn what does become it, and is
suitable unto it. But when the Holy Ghost comes to speak of this Work of our
Redemption by Christ, he does not only call us to consider singly the Wisdom of
God, but his Various and manifold Wisdom, Ephesians. 3.10. and affirms that all the
Treasures of Wisdom are hid in it, Col. 2.3. plainly intimating that it is a
work so suited unto, so answering the Infinite Wisdom of God in all things
throughout, that it could no otherwise have been disposed and effected. And
this as well upon the account of the Wisdom of God its self absolutely
considered, as also as it is that Property whereby God designs and effects the
glorifying of all other Excellencies of his Nature; whence it is called
various, or manifold; so that we may well conclude that no other way of
Deliverance of sinners was suited unto the Wisdom of God.

Secondly, This was alone answered the Holiness and Righteousness of God. He is
an holy God, who will not suffer the guilty to go free, of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity, and his Judgment is that they who commit sin are worthy of
death. Sin is contrary to his Nature; and his Justice requires that it go not
unpunished. Besides he is the great and supreme Governor of all; and whereas
sin breaks and dissolveth the dependence of the creature upon him, should he
not avenge that defection, his whole Rule and Government would be disannulled.
But now if this Vengeance and Punishment should fall on the sinners themselves,
they must perish under it eternally; not one of them could escape, or ever be
freed or purged from their sins. A commutation then there must be; that the
Punishment due to sin, which the Holiness and Righteousness of God exacteth may
be inflicted, and Mercy and Grace showed unto the sinner. That none was able,
fit, or worthy to undergo this penalty, so as to make a compensation for all
the sins of all the Elect, that none was able to bear it, and break through it,
so as that the End of the undertaking might be happy blessed and glorious on
all hands, but only the Son of God, we shall farther manifest in our progress;
and it has been elsewhere declared.

And this, First should teach us to live in an Holy Admiration of this mighty
and wonderful product of the Wisdom, Righteousness, Grace and Goodness of God,
which had found out, and appointed this Way of delivering sinners, and have
gloriously accomplished it in the self-sacrifice of the Son of God. The Holy
Ghost every where proposes this unto us, as a Mystery, a great and hidden
Mystery, which none of the Great, or Wise, or Disputers of the World, ever did
or could come to the least acquaintance withal. And three things he asserts
concerning it. First, That it is revealed in the Gospel, and is thence alone to
be learned and attained, whence we are invited again and again, to search and
enquire diligently into it; unto this very End, that we may become wise in the
Knowledge and Acknowledgement of this deep and hidden Mystery. Secondly, That
we cannot in our own strength, and by our own most diligent Endeavors, come to
an holy Acquaintance with it, notwithstanding that Revelation that is made of
it, in the letter of the Word; unless moreover we receive from God, the Spirit
of Wisdom Knowledge and Revelation, opening our eyes, making our minds
spiritual, and enabling us to discover these depths of the Holy Ghost in a
spiritual manner. Thirdly, That we cannot by these helps attain in this life
unto a perfection in the knowledge of this deep and unfathomable Mystery; but
must still labor to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of it. Our thriving in
all Grace and Obedience depending thereon. All these things the Scripture
abounds in the Repetition of. And besides, it every where sets forth the
blessedness and Happiness of them, who by Grace obtain a spiritual insight into
this Mystery; and themselves also find by experience the satisfying Excellency
of it, with the Apostle, Phil. 3.8. all which Considerations are powerful
motives unto this Duty of enquiring into, and admiring this wonderful Mystery,
wherein we have the Angels themselves for our Associates and Companions.

2. Consider we may also the unspeakable Love of Christ in this work of his
delivering us from sin. This the Scripture also abundantly goes before us in;
setting forth, extolling, commending this Love of Christ, and calling us to an
holy consideration of it. Particularly it shows it accompanied with all things
that may make Love expressive and to be admired. For, First, It proposes the
Necessity and Exigency of the Condition wherein the Lord Christ gave us this
relief; that was when we were sinners, when we were lost, when we were Children
of Wrath, under the Curse, when no eye did pity us, when no hand could relieve
us. And if John mourned greatly, when he thought that there was none found
worthy in Heaven or Earth to open his Book of Visions, and to unloose the seals
thereof; how justly might the whole Creation mourn and lament, if there had
been none found to yield Relief, when all were obnoxious to this fatal ruin.
And this is an exceeding commendation of the love of Christ, that he set his
hand to that work which none could touch; and put his shoulders under that
Burden which none else could bear, when all lay in a desperate condition.
Secondly, The greatness of this delivery; it is from Wrath, and Curse, and
Vengeance Eternal: Not from a Trouble or Danger of a few days continuance, not
from a momentary suffering, but from Everlasting Wrath, under the curse of God
and power of Satan in the execution of it; which necessarily attend sin and
sinners; And Thirdly, The Way whereby he did it; not by his word whereby he
made the world; not by his Power whereby he sustains and rules the things that
he has made; not by paying a price of corruptible things; not by revealing a
way unto us only, whereby we our selves might escape that condition wherein we
were, as some foolishly imagine; but by the sacrifice of himself, making his
soul an Offering for sin; and offering up himself unto God through the Eternal
Spirit; by laying down his Life for us; and greater love can no man manifest
than by so doing. And Fourthly, The Infinite Condescension that he used to put
himself into that condition, wherein by himself he might purge our sins. For to
this purpose when he was in the form of God, he emptied himself of his Glory,
made himself of no account, was made flesh, took on him the form of a servant,
that he might be obedient unto death, the death of the Cross. And Fifthly, The
End of his undertaking for us; which was the bringing of us unto God, into his
Love and Favor here, and the Eternal Enjoyment of him hereafter. All these
things, I say, does the Scripture insist frequently and largely upon, to set
forth the Excellency of the Love of Christ, to render it admirable and amiable
unto us; And these things should we lay up in our Hearts and continually ponder
them, that we may give due Acceptance and entertainment to this wonderful Love
of the Son of God.

THe Apostle having thus asserted in general the Sacerdotal Office of Christ,
and the Sacrifice that he offered, with the End of it, because that could not
be done without the greatest Dejection, Humiliation and Abasement of the Son,
that we may not conceive, that he was left in, or does yet abide under the same
Condition, adds the blessed Event and Consequent of his great work and
undertaking.

(...).
He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High.
These words we have already opened, as to their sense and importance. The
design and meaning of the Holy Ghost in them is nextly to be considered. The
things to be enquired after to this End, are; First, The scope of the Apostle
in these words: Secondly, The manner of his expressing his intendment; and the
particulars therein intended. Thirdly, What he related unto in the Mosaical
Economy, whereby he strengthened the Argument which he had in hand.

Two things the Apostle in general designs in these words:

First, That the Lord Christ undertaking to purge our sins, did by the one
offering of himself perfectly effect it, so discharging the whole work of his
Priesthood, as to the making Atonement for sinners. This the blessed issue of
his undertaking does demonstrate; Immediately upon his work, he entered into
the Glorious Condition here expressed; a signal pledge and Evidence that his
Work was perfected, and that God was fully satisfied, and well pleased with
what he had done.

Secondly, The blessed and Glorious Condition of the Lord Jesus after his
Humiliation is expressed in these words. His Spirit did of old signify both
his sufferings and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1.11. as himself
interpreted the Scriptures unto his Disciples, Luke 24.26. And this upon the
close of his work, he requested as due unto him upon Compact and Promise, John
17.5. These are the things in general designed by the Apostle in these words.

Secondly, The Manner of his Expression of the Glory and blessed Condition of
the Son of God after his purging our sins, and what is particularly intimated
therein, is to be considered. Some mistakes, or groundless curiosities must
first be removed, and then the real importance of the words declared.

Some contend, that the Left Hand of old was most honorable; so that the
placing of Christ at the Right Hand of God, as it denotes his Honor and Glory,
so also an inferiority unto the Father. To this purpose they produce some
sayings out of some ancient Writers among the Heathen, giving the preference of
place or dignity unto the Left Hand. As these sayings are made use of by the
Romanists, to answer an Objection of very little moment against Peter's
Supremacy, taken from some ancient Episcopal Seals, wherein the figure of Paul
was placed on the Right Hand of that of Peter. But this conjecture may be
easily disproved by Testimonies innumerable out of approved Authors among the
Gentiles: And in Scripture the Right Hand does constantly denote Dignity and
Pre-eminence. The instance of Jacobs blessing Joseph's Children testifies also
the constant usage of those ancient times from the intimation of nature it
self, Genesis 48.17, 18, 19. And the disposal of the Sheep and Goats at the last
day, to the Right hand and Left, gives the Privilege to the former. So Basil,
(...): the right hand place denotes a quality of dignity. And Chrysostom,
(...); if he would have signified any lessening or diminution, he would not
have said sit on my Right Hand, but on my Left. So that it is Honor and Glory
which is signified by this Expression, and that only.

Some, granting the Right Hand to denote the most honorable place, enquire
whither this be spoken in reference unto God the Father himself, or unto others
that do or may be supposed to sit on his left hand. For the first sense
contends Maldonate on Matthew. 16.19. For says he, though it be impossible that
the Son in absolute or Essential Glory should be preferred before or above the
Father, yet as to his immediate Rule over the Church, he may more show forth
his Power and Glory in the Rule and Government of all things. Others contend
that it is spoken with respect unto sitting at the left hand, above which, this
is preferred. But this whole enquiry, is both curious and groundless, For
First, Though sitting at the Right Hand be a token of great Glory and Dignity,
yet as the Apostle speaks in this very case, it is manifest that he is excepted
who put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15.27. He who thus exalted him over all at
his right hand is excepted: and Secondly, Here is no comparison at all, or
regard to sitting on the left hand, nor is there so where ever that expression
is used, but only the Glory of Christ the Mediator is absolutely declared.

And this may be cleared by other instances. Solomon placed his Mother when she
came unto him on his Right Hand; a token of exceeding Honor; but he himself
sat down on the Throne of the Kingdom, 1 Kings 2.19. The Church is said to be
at the Right Hand of Christ, Psalm 45.9. which as it prefers her above all
others, so it takes not off, her subjection unto Christ. Nero in Suetonius when
Tirid^tes King of Armenia came to Rome, placed him for his Honor on his right
hand, himself sitting on the Throne of Rule. And where three sit together, the
middle seat is the place of chiefest honor. Hence Cato in Africa when Juba
would have placed himself in the midst between him and Scipio, removed himself
to the left hand of Scipio, that Juba might not have the place of pre-eminence
above Roman Magistrates.

It is not unlikely but that there may be an Allusion in this expression unto
the Sanhedrin the highest Court of Judicature among the Jews. He who presided
in it was called (...) or (...), the Father of Judgment, or Father of the
House of Judgment; and sat at the right hand of the (...), or Prince of the
Sanhedrin, next unto him, unto whom belonged the execution of the Sentence of
the Court. Of this Ab din mention is made in the Targum, Cantic. 7.4. (...),
the Father of the House of Judgment, who judges thy judgments: agreeable to
that; the Father judges no man but has committed all judgment unto the Son.

The whole Expression then is plainly Metaphorical, and taken from what is, or
was in use amongst men, and thence translated to signify the State and
Condition of Christ in Heaven. And this is that which the Apostle in general
intimates in these words, that as the greatest Honor that can be done unto any
one among the sons of men, is for the Chief Ruler to set him next himself on
his Right Hand, so is the Son as Mediator, made partaker of the greatest glory
that God has to bestow in Heaven. It is not then the Essential Eternal Glory
of the Son of God, that he has equal with the Father, which in these words is
expressed, and whereof the Apostle had spoken before; but that Glory and Honor
which is bestowed on him by the Father, after and upon the Sacrifice of himself
for the Expiation of sin. So then, the Right hand of God is not here taken
absolutely, as in other places, for the Power and Strength of God, but with the
adjunct of sitting at it, it shadows out a place and eminency of Glory, as he
is considered on his Throne of Majesty: and therefore it is here termed the
Right hand of Majesty, and not of Omnipotency or Power.

In particular, two things are intended in this Expression.

First, The Security of Christ from all his Adversaries, and all sufferings for
the future. The Jews knew what he suffered from God and Man. Hereof he lets
them know what was the reason, it was for the purging of our sins. And moreover
declares, that now he is everlastingly secured from all Opposition, for where
he is, thither his Adversaries cannot come; as Joh. 7.34. He is above their
reach, beyond their power, secure in the Throne and Presence of God. Thus the
fruit of the Church, being secured from the rage and persecution of Satan, is
said to be caught up unto God, and to his throne, Rev. 12.5. Hence though men
do, and will continue their malice and wrath against the Lord Christ to the end
of the world, as though they would crucify him afresh; yet he dies no more,
being secure out of their reach at the Right hand of God.

Secondly, His Majesty and Glory inexpressible. All that can be given of God in
heaven. God on his Throne, is God in the full manifestation of his own Majesty
and Glory; on his Right hand sits the Mediator; yea so, as that he also is in
the midst of the Thrones, Revel. 5.6. How little can our weak understandings
apprehend of this Majesty? See Phil. 2.8. Matthew. 20.21. Romans 8.34. Col. 3.5.
Ephesians. 1.20.

These are the things which the Apostle sets forth in this Expression. And they
are plainly intimated in the Context of the Psalm from whence the words are
taken, Psalm. 110.1. So that it is not his Rule and Authority, but his Safety,
Majesty and Glory which accompany them, that are here intended.

Thirdly, We are to enquire what it was that the Apostle had respect unto in
this Ascription of Glory and Majesty unto Christ in the old Church state of the
Jews, and so what it is that he prefers him above.

It is thought by many, that the Apostle in these words exalts Christ above
David, the chiefest King among the Jews. Of him it is said, that God would make
him his firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. His Throne
was high on the earth, and his Glory above that of all the Kings about him, but
for the Lord Christ, he is incomparably exalted above him also, in that he is
sat down at the Right hand of the Majesty on High. But, as was said, these
words denote not the Rule, Power, or Authority of Christ, typed by the Kingdom
of David; but his Glory and Majesty, represented by the magnificent Throne of
Solomon. Besides, he is not treating of the Kingly Power of Christ, but of his
Sacerdotal Office, and the Glory that ensued upon the discharge thereof.

That therefore which in these words the Apostle seems to have had respect
unto, was the high Priests entrance into the Holy Place, after his offering of
the solemn anniversary Sacrifice of Expiation. Then alone was he admitted into
that Holy Place, or Heaven below; where was the solemn Representation of the
Presence of God, his Throne and his Glory. And what did he there? He stood with
all Humility and lowly Reverence ministering before the Lord, whose presence was
there represented. He did not go and sit down between the Cherubims, but
worshipping at the footstool of the Lord, he departed. It is not, says the
Apostle, so with Christ; but as his Sacrifice was infinitely more excellent,
and effectual than theirs, so upon the offering of it, he entered into the Holy
Place, or Heaven it self above, and into the real glorious presence of God, not
to minister in humility, but to a participation of the Throne of Majesty and
Glory. He is a King and Priest upon his Throne, Zech. 6.13.

Thus the Apostle shuts up his general Proposition of the whole matter, which
he intends farther to dilate and treat upon. In this description of the Person
and Offices of the Messiah, he coucheth the springs of all his ensuing
Arguments, and from thence enforces the Exhortation which we have observed him
constantly to pursue. And we also may hence observe,

1. That there is nothing more vain, foolish and fruitless, than the Opposition
which Satan and his Agents yet make unto the Lord Christ and his Kingdom. Can
they ascend into heaven? Can they pluck the Lord Christ from the Throne of God?
A little time will manifest this madness, and that unto Eternity.

2. That the service of the Lord Christ is both safe and honorable. He is, as
a Good, so a glorious Master; one that sits at the Right Hand of God.

3. Great is the spiritual and eternal security of them that truly believe in
Christ. Of all which severally afterward.

Verse IV.
THE design of the Apostle, as we have now often showed, is to evince the
necessity of abiding in the Doctrine of the Gospel, from the Excellency of the
Person by whom it pleased God to reveal it unto us. This he has done already
in general, in that Description which he has given us of his Person, Power,
Works, Offices and Glory; whereby he has made it evident, that no creature,
whom God was pleased at any time to make use of in the Revelation of his Will,
or the Institution of his Worship, was any way to be compared with him. Having
proceeded thus far in general, he descends now to the consideration of
particular instances, in all those whom God employed in the Ministration of the
Law, and constitution of Mosaical Worship, and takes occasion from them all to
set forth the Dignity and incomparable Excellencies of the Lord Christ, whom in
all things he exalts.

First then, he treats concerning Angels, as those who were the most glorious
creatures employed in the giving of the Law. The Hebrews owned, yea pleaded
this in their own defense, That besides the Mediation of Moses, God used the
Ministry of Angels in the giving of the Law, and in other occasional
instructions of their forefathers. Some of them contend that the last of the
Prophets was personally an Angel, as the signification of his name imports.
Holy Stephen upbraiding them with their abuse and contempt of their greatest
privileges, tells them that they received the Law by the disposition,
ordering, or ministry of Angels, Acts 7. v. 53. And the Targum interprets the
Chariots of God with the thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68.18, 19. of the Angels,
by whose ministry God taught Israel the Law. This then might leave a special
prejudice in their minds, that the Law being so delivered by Angels, must needs
have therein the advantage above the Gospel, and be therefore excellent and
immutable.

To remove this prejudice also, and further to declare the Excellency and
Pre-eminence in all things of him who revealed the Gospel, the Apostle takes
occasion from what he had newly taught them concerning the Exaltation of Jesus
Christ at the Right Hand of God, to prove unto them out of the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, that he is exceedingly advanced, and glorious above the
Angels themselves, whose concurrence in the Ministration of the Law they
boasted in; and to this purpose produces four signal testimonies one after
another.

This is the design of the Apostle, which he pursues and makes out unto the end
of this Chapter; and that we may rightly conceive of his intention, and the
meaning of the Holy Ghost in the whole, we shall, before we consider his
Proposition laid down in this fourth verse, or the ensuing confirmations of it,
enquire in general what it is in Christ which he compares with, and prefers
above the Angels, and wherein it is that he so exalts him.

The comparison entered on between the Lord Christ and Angels, must be either
with respect unto their Natures, or unto their Dignity, Office, Power and
Glory. If the comparison be of Nature with Nature, then it must be either in
respect of the Divine or Humane Nature of Christ. If it should be of the Divine
Nature of Christ, with the Nature of Angels, then it is not a comparison of
Proportion, as between two Natures agreeing in any general kind of being, as do
the nature of a man and a worm; but a comparison only manifesting a Difference
and distance without any Proportion. So answers Athanasius, Orat. 2. and
Arian. But the truth is, the Apostle has no design to prove by Arguments and
Testimonies the Excellency of the Divine Nature above the Angelical. There was
no need so to do, nor do his Testimonies prove any such thing. Besides,
speaking of Angels, the other part of the comparison, he treats not of their
Nature, but their Office, Work and Employment; with their honorable and
glorious Condition therein. Whereas therefore the Apostle produces sundry
Testimonies, confirming the Deity of the Son, he does it not absolutely to
prove the Divine Nature to be more excellent that the Angelica^, but only to
manifest thereby the glorious condition of him, who is partaker of it, and
consequently his Pre-eminence above Angels, or the Equity that it should be so.

Neither is the comparison between the Humane Nature of Christ and the Nature
of Angels: For that absolutely considered and in it self, is inferior to the
Angelical; whence in regard of his Participation of it, he is said to be made
lower than the Angels, chap. 2.

The Apostle then treats of the Person of Christ, God and Man, who was
appointed and designed of God the Father, to be the Revealer of the Gospel, and
Mediator of the New Testament. As such, he is the subject of the ensuing
general Proposition; as such, he was spoken of in the words immediately
foregoing; and concerning him as such, are the ensuing testimonies to be
interpreted; even those which testify his Divine Nature, being produced to
demonstrate the Excellency of his Person, as vested with the Offices of the
King, Priest and Prophet of his Church, the great Revealer of the will of God
in the last days.

(...). (...): Sir. (...), and ipse tantum praestantior suit. Bodesian. and he
was so much more excellent; at tanto potior factus est. Tremel. And he is made
so much more better; at ipse toto excellit: or as De Dieu, at hoc totum
excellit, And he wholly excels; or in all things he excels: Vulg. tanto
melior facius angelis; the translation of (...) by melior is blamed by Erasmus,
Beza, Vatablus; and is generally deserted by the Expositors of the Roman
Church. And it is hard, if not impossible, to find melior in any good Author,
used in the sense that (...) is here, and elsewhere constantly applied unto.
Ours render the word Better, made better; to avoid, I believe, a coincidence
with that which they express (...) by, (...).
more excellent: (...) is properly nobilior, potentior, praestantior,
excellentior; more Powerful, Able, Excellent; as to Love, Honor; or State and
Condition; as in that of Homer,

(...). That is, (...), says Eustathius, multo potentior, more powerful, able
to prevail, or more excellent. (...).
(...), factus, effectus; made, was became. (...), differentius, different,
which is sometimes put absolutely for the best things, or things far better
than other things that differ, the best things. Make to differ, to prefer, make
better, 1 Cor. (...).
4.7. Sir. (...), excellentius, more excellent. (...) is both to differ and
excel; but the differentius of the Vulgar yields no good sense in this place.
(...), haereditavit, sortitus est, jure hereditario obtinuit; of the importance
of which word, before.

Being in so much preferred (exalted, made eminent) above Angels, as he
(obtained) inherited a more excellent name than they.

There are five things considerable in, and for the Exposition of these words.

First, What it is that the Apostle asserts in them as his general Proposition;
namely, that the Son, as the great Priest and Prophet of the Church, was
preferred above, and made more glorious and powerful than the Angels; and how
this was done, and wherein it does consist.

Secondly, When he was so preferred above them; which belongs unto the
Explication and right understanding of the former.

Thirdly, The Degree of this preference of him above the Angels, intimated in
the comparison; being by so much made more excellent, as he has, etc.

Fourthly. The Proof of the Assertion, both absolutely, and as to the Degree
intimated; and this is taken from his Name.

Fifthly, The way whereby he came to have this Name; he obtained it as his lot
and portion, or he inherited it.

First, He is made more excellent than the Angels, preferred above them; that
is, say some, declared so to be. Tum res dicitur fieri, cum incipit patesieri.
Frequently in tho Scripture, a thing is then said to be made, or to be, when it
is manifested so to be. And in this sense the word (...) is sometimes used.
Romans 3.4. (...); Let God be true, and every man a liar; that is, manifested and
acknowledged so to be. So, James 1.12. (...), he that is approved in trial, and
thereby manifested to be sincere and sound. In this sense the Apostle tells us,
Romans 1.3. that the Lord Christ was declared to be the Son of God by the
resurrection from the dead. The resurrection from the dead did not make him to
be the Son of God, but evidently manifested and declared him so to be.
According to this interpretation of the words, that which the holy Ghost
intimates is, That whereas the Lord Christ ministered in an outwardly low
condition in this world, whilst he purged our sins, yet by his sitting down at
the right hand of God, he was revealed, manifested, declared to be more
excellent than all the Angels in heaven.

But I see no reason why we should desert the proper and most usual
signification of the word, nothing in the Context persuading us so to do.
Besides, this suits not the Apostles design, who does not prove from the
Scripture that the Lord Christ was manifested to be more excellent than the
Angels, but that really he was preferred and exalted above them.

So then, (...) is as much as preferred, exalted, actually placed, (...).
in more Power, Glory, Dignity, than the Angels. This John Baptist affirms of
him, (...), He was preferred before me, because he was before me. Preferred
above him, called to another manner of Office than that which John ministered
in; made before or above him in Dignity, because he was before him in Nature
and Existence. And this is the proper sense of the words; The Lord Jesus
Christ, the Revealer of the Will of God in the Gospel, is exalted above,
preferred before, made more excellent and glorious than the Angels themselves,
all or any of them, who ministered unto the Lord in the giving of the Law on
mount Sinai.

Some object unto this Interpretation, That he who is said to be made or set
above the Angels, is supposed to have been lower than they before: To which I
answer, And so he was, not in respect of Essence, Subsistence, and real
Dignity, but in respect of the infirmities and sufferings that he was exposed
unto, in the discharge of his word here on the earth; as the Apostle expressly
declares, chap. 2.9.

2. And this gives us light into our second enquiry on these words; namely,
When it was, that Christ was thus exalted above the Angels.

1. Some say, that it was in the time of his Incarnation; for then the Humane
Nature being taken into Personal subsistence with the Son of God, it became
more excellent than that of the Angels. This sense is fixed on by some of the
Ancients, who are followed by sundry Modern Expositors. But we have proved
before, that it is not of either Nature of Christ absolutely or abstractedly,
that the Apostle here speaks; nor of his Person, but as vested with his
Office; and discharging of it. And moreover the Incarnation of Christ was part
of his Humiliation and Exinanition, and is not therefore especially intended,
where his Exaltation and Glory is expressly spoken of.

2. Some say, that it was at the time of his Baptism, when he was anointed with
the Spirit, for the discharge of his Prophetical Office, Isa. 60.1, 2. But yet
neither can this Designation of the time be allowed. And that because the main
things wherein he was made lower than the Angels, as his temptations, and
sufferings, and death it self, did follow his Baptism and Unction.

3. It must therefore be the time of his Resurrection, Ascension, and
Exaltation at the Right hand of God, which ensued thereon, that is designed as
the season wherein he was made more excellent than the Angels, as evidently
appears from the Text and Context.

For, 1. That was the Time, as we have showed before, when he was gloriously
vested with that All Power in heaven and earth, which was of old designed unto
him, and prepared for him. 2. The Order also of the Apostles discourse leads us
to fix on this season. After he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down,
etc. Being made so much more excellent; that is, therein, and then he was so
made. 3. The Testimony in the first place produced by the Apostle in the
confirmation of his Assertion, is elsewhere, as we shall see, applied by
himself unto his Resurrection and the Glory that ensued, and consequently they
are also in this place intended. 4. This Preference of the Lord Christ above
the Angels, is plainly included in that Grant of All Power made unto him,
Matthew. 28.18. expounded Ephesians. 1.21, 22. 5. The Testimony used by the Apostle
in the first place, is the word that God spoke unto his King, when he set him
upon his holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6, 7, 8. which typically expresses his
glorious Enstalment in his heavenly Kingdom.

The Lord Christ then, who in respect of his Divine Nature was always
infinitely and incomparably himself more excellent than all the Angels, after
his Humiliation in the Assumption of the Humane Nature, with the sufferings and
temptations that he underwent, upon his Resurrection was exalted into a
condition of Glory, Power, Authority, and Excellency, and entrusted with Power
over them, as our Apostle here informs us.

3. In this Preference and Exaltation of the Lord Christ, there is a Degree
intimated; being made so much more, etc. now our conceptions hereabout, as to
this place, are wholly to be regulated by the Name given unto him. Look, says
the Apostle, how much the Name given unto the Messiah, excels the Name given
unto Angels, so much does he himself excel them in Glory, Authority and Power;
for these Names are severally given them of God, to signify their state and
condition. What, and how great this difference is, we shall afterward see, in
the consideration of the Instances given of it by the Apostle in the Verses
ensuing.

4. The Proof of this Assertion which the Apostle first fixes on, is taken
from the Name of Christ. His Name, not given him by man, not assumed by
himself, but ascribed unto him by God himself. Neither does he here by the Name
of Christ, or the name of the Angels, intend any individual proper names of the
one or the other; but such Descriptions as are made of them, and Titles given
unto them by God, as whereby their state and condition may be known. Observe,
says he, how they are called of God; by what Names and Titles he owns them,
and you may learn the Difference between them. This Name he declares in the
next Verse; God said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
It is not absolutely his being the Son of God that is intended; but that by the
testimony of the holy Ghost, God said these words unto him, Thou art my Son,
and thereby declared his state and condition to be far above that of the
Angels, to none of whom he ever said any such thing, but speaks of them in a
far distinct manner, as we shall see. But hereof in the next Verse.

Some by this excellent Name understand his Power, and Dignity, and Glory,
called his name above every name, Phil. 2.8. but then this can no way prove
that which the Apostle produces it for, it being directly the same with that
which is asserted, in whose confirmation it is produced.

5. (...).
The last thing considerable is, How the Lord Christ came by this Name, or
obtained it; (...); he obtained it by Inheritance, as his peculiar lot and
portion for ever. In what sense he is said to be (...), the Heir, was before
declared. As he was made the Heir of all, so he inherited a more excellent Name
than the Angels. Now he was made Heir of all, in that all things being made and
formed by him, the Father committed unto him as Mediator a peculiar Power over
all things, to be disposed of by him unto all the ends of his Mediation. So
also being the Natural and Eternal Son of God, in, and upon the discharge of
his work, the Father declared and pronounced that to be his Name; see Luke
1.35. Isa. 7.14. chap. 9.6. His being the Son of God, is the proper foundation
of his being called so; and his discharge of his Office the Occasion of its
declaration: so he came unto it by Right of Inheritance, when he was declared
to be the Son of God with Power, by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.3.

This then is the sum of the Apostles Proposition, and the Confirmation of it.
A Name given by God to that end and purpose, does truly declare the nature,
state and condition of him or them to whom it is given. But unto Christ the
Mediator there is a Name given of God himself, exceedingly more excellent than
any that by him is given unto the Angels; which undeniably evinceth, that he is
placed in a state and condition of Glory far above them, or preferred before
them.

I shall only observe one or two things, concerning the Hebrews to whom the
Apostle wrote, and so put an end to our Exposition of this Verse.

First then, this discourse of the Apostle proving the Pre-eminence of the
Messiah above the Angels, was very necessary unto the Hebrews, although it were
very suitable unto their own principles, and in general acknowledged by them.
It is to this day a Tradition amongst them, that the Messiah shall be exalted
above Abraham, and Moses, and the ministering Angels. Besides, they acknowledged
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, wherein the Apostle shows them that this
Truth was taught and confirmed. But they were dull and flow in making
Application of these Principles unto the confirmation of their faith in the
Gospel, as the Apostle charge them, Chap. 5.11, 12. And they had at that time
great Speculations, about the Glory Dignity and Excellency of Angels, and were
fallen into some kind of worshipping of them. And it may be this Curiosity
Vanity and Superstition in them, was heightened by the heat of the Controversy
between the Pharisees and Sadduces about them; the one denying their Existence
and being, the other whom the body of the People followed, ex^lting them above
measure, and inclining to the Worship of them. This the Apostle declares, Col.
2.18. treating of those Judaizing Teachers who then troubled the Churches, he
charge them with fruitless and curious speculations about Angels, and the
worshipping of them. And of their Ministry in the giving of the Law they still
boasted. It was necessary therefore, to take them off from this Confidence of
that Privilege, and the superstition that ensued thereon, to instruct them in
the Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above them all; that so their thoughts
might be directed unto him, and their Trust placed in him alone. And this
Exaltation of the Messiah, some of their latter Doctors assert on Dan. 7.9.
(...), I behold until the Thrones were set, placed, exalted, as in the Original
Chaldee; and as all old Translations, Greek, Latin, Syriack and Arabic render
the words (however Ours read, until the Thrones were cast down) affirming that
one of those Thrones was f^r the Messiah, before whom all the Angels ministered
in obedience.

Secondly, It may not be amiss to remark that the Jews have always had a
Tradition of the glorious name of the Messiah; which even since their utter
Rejection they retain some obscure remembrance of. The name which they
principally magnify is (...), Metatron. Ben Vzziel in his Targum on Genesis 5.
ascrib^s this name to Enoch when he was translated, he ascended into Heaven in
the word of the Lord, (...), and his name was called Mitatron the great Scribe.
But this opinion of Enoch being Metatron is rejected and confuted in the
Talmud. There they tell us that Metatron is (...), the Prince of the world: or
as Elias calls him in Thisbi (...), the Prince of Gods Presence. And in the
first mention of this Name which is Talmud. Tract. Saned. cap. 4. fol. 38. they
plainly intimate that they intended an uncreated Angel by this Expression. And
such indeed must He be, unto whom may be assigned what they ascribe unto
Metatron. For as Reuchlin from the Cabbalists informs us, they say, (...); The
Teacher of Moses himself was Metatron. He it is, says Elias, that is the Angel
always appearing in the Presence of God, of whom it is said, My name is in
him. And the Talmudists, that he has power to blot out the sins of Israel:
whence they call him the Chancellor of Heaven. And Bechai on Exodus 23.
affirms, that this name signifies both a Lord, a Messenger, and a Keeper. A
Lord because he rules all; a Messenger because he stands always before God to
do his Will; and a Keeper, because he keeps Israel. I confess the Etymology
that he gives of this name to that purpose, is weak and foolish; as is also
that of Elias; who tells us that Metatron is (...), in the Greek Tongue; one
sent. But yet it is evident what is intended by all these obscure Intimations;
the increated Prince of Glory, and his Exaltation over all, with the Excellency
of his name, is aimed at. For the word it self, it is either a mere corruption
of the Latin word Mediator, such as is usual amongst them, or a Gematrical
Fiction to answer (...), the Almighty, there being a coincidence in their
numeral letters.

The Doctrine of the Preference and Pre-eminence of Christ is insisted on by
the Apostle unto the End of this Chapter; and therefore I shall not treat of
it, until we have gone through all the Proof's of it produced; and then but
briefly neither, having already in part spoken of it, in our Consideration of
his Sovereignty and Lordship over all.

That which we are peculiarly instructed in by these words is, that,

All Pre-eminence and Exaltation of one above others, depends on the supreme
Counsel and Will of God. The instance he gives of him who is exalted over all,
sufficiently confirms our general Rule. He had his Name, denoting his Glory and
excellency by Inheritance; an heritage designed for him, and given unto him in
the Counsel, Will and good pleasure of God: He gave him that name above every
name, Phil. 2.9. And that of his own Will and pleasure; It pleased the Father,
that in him all fullness should dwell. That so in all things he might have the
Pre-eminence, Col. 1.16, 17. He foreordained him unto it from Eternity, 1 Pet.
1.20. and actually exalted him according to his Eternal Counsel in the fullness
of time, Acts 2.36. Chap. 5.31.

This Prelation then of Christ above all, depends on the Counsel and Pleasure
of God; and he is herein a Pattern of all Privilege and Pre-eminence in others.

Grace, Mercy and Glory, spiritual things, and eternal, are those wherein
really there is any difference among the Sons of men. Now that any one in these
things is preferred before another, it depends merely on the sole good pleasure
of God. No man in these things makes himself to differ from another, neither
has he any thing that he has not received. God has Mercy on whom he will
have mercy. And this Discrimination of all things by the Supreme Will of God,
especially Spiritual and Eternal, is the Spring, Fountain and Rule of all that
Glory which he will manifest, and be exalted in, unto Eternity.

Verse V.
THe Apostle proceeds to the confirmation of his Proposition concerning the
Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above the Angels, and of his proof of it from
the Excellency of the Name given unto him; And this he does by sundry
Testimonies produced out of the Old Testament; two whereof are conjoined in
this Verse, as the Verses are divided in our Bibles.

(...). (...).
(...); Vulg. dixit aliquando, said he sometimes; for, at any time. Sir (...),
from at any time said God. Eloah, God is supplied; needlessly; though better
than those who would render, (...), impersonally; was it said at any time. For
it is express in the Psalm from whence the words are taken, (...), the Lord
said. The Lord said unto me, (...), thou my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
The Elipsis of the Verb substantive in the Original which is perpetual, is
supplied by the Apostle, with (...), Thou art my Son. Further difficulty in the
Grammatical sense of the words there is not. And h^re we shall close this
Verse, or at least consider this Testimony by its self.

Verse 5. Unto which of the Angels did he at any time (or ever) say, thou art
my Son this day have I begotten thee.
Two things are considerable in these words.

1. The manner of the Apostles producing the Testimony which he intended to
make use of. Unto which of the Angels said he at any time.

2. The Testimony it self; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

In the former, three things may be observed.

First, That the Testimony which in a matter of Faith he insisted on, is that
of the Scripture. He refers the Jews unto that common Principle which was
acknowledged between them. Men had not as yet learned in such contests to make
that cavilling return, which we are now used unto; How do you know those
Scriptures to be the word of God? Nor indeed is it suitable unto common
Honesty, for men to question the credit, and prostitute the Authority of their
own most Sacred Principles, for no other end, but to prejudice their
Adversaries. But our Apostle here confidently sends the Hebrews to the
acknowledged Rule of their Faith and Worship; whose Authority he knew they
would not decline, Isa. 8.21.

Secondly, That the Apostle argues negatively from the Authority and Perfection
of the Scripture in things relating to Faith and the Worship of God. It is no
where said in the Scripture to Angels; therefore they have not the Name spoken
of, or not in that manner wherein it is ascribed to the Messiah. This Argument
says an Expositor of great name in this place, seems to be weak and not unlike
unto that which the Heretics make use of in the like cases. And therefore
answers, that the Apostle argues negatively, not only from the Scripture, but
from Tradition also. But this Answer is far more weak than the Argument is
pretended to be. The Apostle deals expressly in all this Chapter from the
Testimony of Scripture; and to that alone do his words relate; and therein does
he issue the whole Controversy he had in hand; knowing that the Jews had many
corrupt Traditions expressly contrary to what he undertook to prove;
particularly, that the Law of Moses was Eternally Obligatory, against which he
directly contends in the whole Epistle. An Argument then taken negatively from
the Authority of the Scripture in matters of Faith, or what relates to the
Worship of God, is valid and effectual, and here consecrated for ever to the
use of the Church by the Apostle.

Thirdly, That the Apostle either inde^d grants or else for Arguments sake
condescends unto the Apprehension of the Hebrews, that there is a distinction
of degrees and pre-eminence amongst the Angels themselves. To confirm therefore
his general Assertion of the Dignity and Pre-eminence of Christ above them all,
he provokes them to instance in any one of them, which either indeed, or in
their Apprehension, was promoted above others, to whom such Words as these were
ever spoken. To which of the Angels said he; his Assertion respects not only
the community of them, but any, or all of the chief, or Princes among them.
There are (...), Dan. 10.13. Chief Princes among the Angels. And of them
Michael, the Prince of the People of God, is said to be (...), One; that is not
in Order; but the chief in Dignity, their Head and Leader. Now says the
Apostle, to which of any of these, or of the rest of them, were these words
spoken?

Proceed we now to the Testimony its self produced. Three things are required
to make it pertinent unto his Purpose, and useful unto the End for which he
makes mention of it.

First, That He of whom he speaks was peculiarly intended therein.

Secondly, That there be in it an Assignation of a Name unto him made by God
himself, which thereon he might claim as his peculiar Inheritance.

Thirdly, That this Name either absolutely, or in its peculiar manner of
Appropriation unto him, is more excellent than any that was ever given unto
Angels, as a sign of their Dignity, Authority, and Excellency.

And these things for the clearing of the Apostles Argument must particularly
be insisted on.

First, The words produced do peculiarly belong unto him to whom they are
applied. That is, it is the Messiah who is prophesied of in the second Psalm
from whence they are taken. This with all Christians is put beyond dispute, by
the Application of it in several places unto him: as Acts 4.25, 26, 27. Acts
13.33. Heb. 5.5. It is certain also, that the Jews always esteemed this Psalm
to relate unto the Messiah, they do so to this day. Hence the Targum on the
Psalm expressly applies it unto him; thus rendering these words; O beloved, as a
Son to his Father, thou art pure to me as in the day wherein I created thee. So
are the words perverted by the Targumist; not knowing what sense to ascribe
unto them, which is frequent with him. But it is manifest that the constant
Opinion of the ancient Jews, was that this Psalm principally intended the
Messiah; nor did any of them of old dissent. Some of their latter Masters are
otherwise minded; but therein discover their obstinacy and iniquity.

Thus Rabbi Solomon Jarchi in his Comment on this Psalm, in the Venetian
Edition of the great Masoretical Bibles, affirms, that what ever is sung in
this Psalm, our Masters interpreted of Messiah the King; but says he,
according unto the sound of the words, and for the confutation of the Heretics
(that is, Christians) it is convenient that we expound it of David. So wickedly
corrupt and partial are they now in their Interpretations of the Scripture. But
these words are left out in the Basil Edition of the same Notes and Comments,
by the fraud it may be of the Jews employed in that work, so to hide the
dishonesty of one of their great Masters. But the confession of the Judgment
of their Fathers or Predecessors in this matter, is therein also extant. And
Aben Ezra though he would apply it unto David, yet speaks doubtfully whether it
may not better be ascribed unto the Messiah.

But this was not enough for the Apostle, that those with whom he dealt
acknowledged these words to be spoken concerning the Messiah, unless they were
so really, that so his Argument might proceed ex veri^, as well as ex
concessis, from what was true, as upon what was granted. This then we must next
enquire into.

The whole Psalm say some, seems principally, if not only to intend David. He
having taken the Hill and Tower of Sion, and settled it for the seat of his
Kingdom; the Nations round about tumultuated against him; and some of them as
the Philistines presently engaged in War against him for his ruin, 2 Samuel
5.17. To declare how vain all their Attempts should be, and the certainty of
Gods purpose in raising him to the Kingdom of Israel, and for his preservation
therein against all his adversaries, with the indignation of God against them,
the Holy Ghost gave out this Psalm for the comfort and Establishment of the
Church in the persuasion of so great a mercy. And this is borrowed of Rashi.

But suppose the Psalm to have a farther resp^^^ than unto David and his
temporal Kingdom, and that it does point at the Messiah under the Type of
David, yet then also what ever is spoken in it, must firstly and properly be
understood of David. So that if the words insisted on by the Apostle do prove
that the Lord Christ was made more excellent than the Angels, they prove the
same concerning David also, concerning whom they were spoken in the first place.

Answ. 1. There is no cogent Reason why we should acknowledge David and his
Kingdom to be at all intended in this Psalm. The Apostles we see apply it unto
the Lord Christ without any mention of David, and that four several times;
Twice in the Acts, and twice in this Epistle. The Jews acknowledge that it
belongs unto the Messiah. Besides there are sundry things spoken in the Psalm,
that could never truly and properly be applied unto David. Such are the
Promises, v. 8, 9. and the Invitation of all men to put their Trust and
Confidence in him, v. 12. And we have a Rule given us by the Holy Ghost, that
where any thing seems to be spoken of any one, to whom it does not properly
belong, there the Person is not at all to be understood, but the Lord Christ
himself immediately. This Rule Peter gives us in his interpretation of the
sixteenth Psalm, and his Application of it unto the Lord Jesus, Acts 2.29, 30,
31. So that there is no necessity to grant that there is any reference in these
words to any Type at all. But,

Secondly, We grant the David was a Type of Christ, and that as he was King of
the people of God. Hence he is not only often signally called the Son of David,
but David also, Jer. 30.9. Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. Hos. 3.5. And the Throne and
Kingdom promised to David for ever and ever, that it should be as the Sun, and
established for ever as the Moon, Psalm. 89.36, 37. that is, whilst the world
endures, had no Accomplishment but in the Throne and Kingdom of his Son Jesus
Christ. Thus also many other things are said of him and his Kingdom, which in
Propriety of Speech can no way be applied unto him, but as he was a Type of
Christ, and represented him to the Church; We may then grant, as that about
which we will not contend, that in this Psalm consideration was had of David
and his Kingdom, but not absolutely, but only as a Type of Christ. And hence
two things will follow.

First, That some things may be spoken in the Psalm, which no way respect the
Type at all. For when not the Type, but the Person or thing signified is
principally aimed at, it is not necessary that every thing spoken thereof
should be applicable properly unto the Type it self; It being sufficient that
there was in the Type somewhat that bare a general Resemblance unto him, or
that, which was principally intended. So on the contrary; where the Type is
principally intended, and an Application made to the thing signified only, by
way of general Allusion; there it is not required that all the particulars
assigned unto the Type, should belong unto, or be accommodated unto the thing
typed out; as we shall see in the next Testimony cited by the Apostle. Hence
though in general David, and his Deliverance from trouble, with the
Establishment of his Throne, might be respected in this Psalm, as an obscure
Representation of the Kingdom of Christ, yet sundry particulars in it, and
among them this mentioned by our Apostle, seem to have no respect unto him, but
directly and immediately to intend the Messiah.

Secondly, If it yet be supposed that what is here spoken, Thou art my Son this
day have I begotten thee, is also to be applied unto David; yet it is not
ascribed unto him Personally and absolutely, but merely considered as a Type of
Christ: What then is principally and directly intended in the words, is to be
sought for in Christ alone; It being sufficient to preserve the Nature of the
Type, that there was in David any Resemblance or Representation of it.

Thus whether David be admitted as a Type of Christ in this Psalm or no, the
purpose of the Apostle stands firm, that the words were principally and
properly spoken of the Messiah, and unto him. And this is the first thing
required in the Application of the Testimony insisted on.

Secondly, It is required that in the Testimony produced, a signal Name be
given unto the Messiah, and appropriated unto him, so as that he may inherit it
for ever as his own; neither men nor Angels having the same interest with him
in it. It is not being called by this or that name in common with others, that
is intended; but such a peculiar Assignation of a Name unto him, as whereby he
might for ever be distinguished from all others. Thus many may be beloved of
the Lord, and be so termed; but yet Solomon only was peculiarly called (...),
Jedediah; and by that name was distinguished from others. In this way it is
that the Messiah has this name assigned unto him. God decreed from Eternity
that he should be called by that name; he spoke unto him and called him by that
name, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. He is not called the Son
of God upon such a common account as Angels and Men, the one by Creation, the
other by Adoption, but God peculiarly, and in a way of Eminency gives this name
unto him.

Thirdly, This name must be such, as either absolutely, or by Reason of its
peculiar manner of Appropriation unto the Messiah, proves his pre-eminence
above the Angels. Now the Name designed, is the Son of God; Thou art my Son;
not absolutely, but with that exegetical Adjunct of his generation, this day
have I begotten thee. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. on Genesis 6. positively denies, that the
Angels in Scripture are any where called the sons of God. Hence some
conjecture, that the Translation of the LXX. is changed since that time; seeing
it is evident that they are so called in the Greek Bibles now extant. However
in the Original they are called the sons of God, Job 1.6. Chap. 2.1. Chap.
38.7. Psalm 89.6. Believers are also called the sons of God, Romans 8.16. Gal.
4.6. 1 John 3.1. And Magistrates Gods, Psalm. 82.1, 6. Joh. 10.34. It does not
therefore appear, how the mere assigning of this name to the Messiah, does
prove his pre-eminence above the Angels, who are also called by it.

Answ. Angels may be called the Sons of God upon a general Account, and by
virtue of their Participation in some common Privilege; as they are by Reason
of their Creation, like Adam, Luke 3. ult. and constant Obedience, Job 1. But
it was never said unto any Angel personally upon his own account, thou art the
son of God. God never said so unto any of them; especially with the Reason of
the Appellation annexed; this day have I begotten thee. It is not then the
general name of a Son, or the sons of God, that the Apostle instanceth in; but
the peculiar Assignation of this Name unto the Lord Jesus on his own particular
account, with the Reason of it annexed, this day have I begotten thee, which is
insisted on. So that here is an especial Appropriation of this Glorious Name
unto the Messiah.

Fourthly, The Appropriation of this Name unto him in the manner expressed,
proves his Dignity and Pre-eminence above all the Angels. For it is evident,
that God intended thereby to declare his singular Honor and Glory, giving him
a name to denote it* that was never by him assigned unto any mere creature, as
his peculiar Inheritance; in particular, not unto any of the Angels; not one of
them can lay any claim unto it, as his peculiar Heritage from the Lord.

And this is the whole that was incumbent on the Apostle to prove by the
Testimony produced. He manifests him sufficiently to be more excellent than the
Angels, from the Excellency of the name which he inherits, according to his
Proposition before laid down. There is indeed included in this reasoning of the
Apostle, an intimation of a peculiar Filiation and Sonship of Christ; had he
not been so the Son of God, as never any Angel or other creature was, he never
had been called so, in such a way as they are never so called. But this the
Apostle at present does not expressly insist upon; only he intimates it as the
foundation of his discourse.

To conclude then our Considerations of this Testimony, we shall briefly
enquire after the sense of the words themselves, absolutely considered;
although as I have showed, that does not belong directly unto the present
Argument of the Apostle.

Expositors are much divided about the precise Intendment of these words; both
as they are used in the Psalm, and variously applied by the Apostles. But yet
generally the Expositions given of them are pious, and consistent with each
other. I shall not insist long upon them, because as I said, their especial
sense belongs not unto the design and Argument of the Apostle.

That Christ is the Natural and Eternal Son of God, is agreed at this day by
all Christians, save the Socinians. And he is called so, because he is so. The
Formal Reason why he is so called, is one and the same; namely, his Eternal
Sonship; but Occasions of actual ascribing that name unto him, there are many.
And hence arises the difficulty that is found in the words. Some think those
words, This day have I begotten thee, do contain the formal Reas^n of Christ's
being properly called the Son of God, and so to denote his Eternal Generation.
Others think they express only some outward Act of God toward the Lord Christ,
on the Occasion whereof he was declared to be the Son of God, and so called.
The former way went Austin with sundry of the Ancients. The (...), the body,
or this day, here was the same with them, which the nunc stans, as they call
it, of Eternity; and the (...), I have begotten thee, denotes as they say, the
proper natural Gen^ration of the Son, by an unconceivable communication of the
Essence and Substance of the Godhead by the Person of the Father unto him. And
this doctrine is true, but whether here intended or no, is by some greatly
questioned.

Others therefore, take the words to express only an Occasion of giving this
name at a certain season to the Lord Christ when he was revealed, or declared
to be the Son of God. And some assign this to the day of his Incarnation, when
he declared him to be his Son, and that he should be so called, as Luke 1.35.
Some to the Day of his Baptism when he was again solemnly from Heaven
proclaimed so to be, Mat. 3.17. Some to the Day of his Resurrection when he was
declared to be the Son of God with Power, Romans 1.3. and Acts 13.33. Some to the
day of his Ascension, whereunto these words are applied. And all these
Interpretations are consistent, and reconciliable with each other, in as much
as they are all means serving unto the same end; That of his Resurrection from
the dead being the most signal amongst them, and fixed on in particular by our
Apostle in his Application of this Testimony unto him, Acts 13.33.

And in this sense alone the words have any Appearance of respect unto David as
a Type of Christ; seeing he was said as it were to be begotten of God when he
rais^d him up, and established him in his Rule and Kingdom. Neither indeed does
the Apostle treat in this place of the Eternal Generation of the Son, but of
his Exaltation and Pre-eminence above Angels.

The word also (...) constantly in the Scripture denotes some signal time, one
day, or more. And that expression, This Day have I begotten thee, following
immediately upon that other Typical one, I have set my King upon my holy hill
of Sion, seems to be of the same Importance, and in like manner to be
interpreted. Thus far I then choose to embrace the latter Interpretation of the
words; namely, that the Eternal Generation of Christ, on which his Filiation or
Sonship, both name and thing does depend, is to be taken only declaratively;
and that declaration to be made in his Resurrection and Exaltation over all,
that ensued thereon. But every one is left unto the Liberty of his own
Judgment herein.

And this is the first Testimony, whereby the Apostle confirms his Assertion of
the Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above the Angels, from the name that he
inherits as his peculiar Right and Possession.

For the further confirmation of the same Truth, he adds another Testimony of
the same Importance, in the words ensuing.

(...). Vulg. and rursum, ego ero illi in patrem, and ipse erit mihi in filium.
I will be unto him for a Father, and he shall be to me for a Son. So also
Syriack; (...) and (...), in patrem, and in filium: not pro patre, and pro
filio, as some render the words. Erasmus worse than they; ego ero ei loco
patris, and ille erit mihi loco filii; instead of a Father, and instead of a
Son; or in the place; which agrees not with the letter; and corrupts the sense.
B^za, Ego ero ei pater, and ipse erit mihi filius: who is followed by ours. And
again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a son.

(...), and again. That is in another place, or again it is said to the Son,
(...).
what is no where spoken unto the Angels. (...), (...).
the prefixed (...) does not denote a Substitution or Comparison, but the truth
of the thing itself. So it is said of Rebeckah, (...), she was unto him, not
for, or instead, or in the place of, but, his wife. And in the words of the
Covenant, Jer. 31.33. I will be to them (...), and they shall be to me (...);
not, I will be unto them instead of God, and they shall be unto me instead of a
people; but, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the same is
the signification of these words, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son.

This is the second testimony produced by the Apostle to prove the pre-eminence
of the Lord Christ above the Angels, from the excellency of the Name given unto
him. One word, one witness, the testimony being that of God, and not of man,
had been sufficient to have evinced the truth of his assertion. But the Apostle
adds a second here, partly to manifest the importance of the matter he treated
of, and partly to stir them up unto a diligent search of the Scripture, where
the same truths, especially those that are of most concernment unto us, are
stored up and down in sundry places, as the holy Ghost had Occasion to make
mention of them. This is that Mine of precious Gold which we are continually to
dig for, and search after, if we intend to grow, and to be rich in the
knowledge of God in Christ, Prove. 2.3, 4. Expositors do generally perplex
themselves and their Readers about the application of these words unto the Lord
Christ. Cajetan for this cause, that this Testimony is not rightly produced nor
applied as it ought, rejects the whole Epistle, as not written by the Apostle,
nor of Canonical authority. Such instances do even Wise and Learned men give of
their folly and self-fulness every day. The conclusion that he makes must needs
be built on these two suppositions. First, that what ever any man might or
could apprehend concerning the right application of this testimony, that he
himself might and could so do; for otherwise he might have acknowledged his own
insufficiency, and have left the solution of the difficulty unto them to whom
God should be pleased to reveal it. Secondly, That when men of any Generation
cannot understand the force and efficacy of the Reasonings of the Penmen of
the holy Ghost, nor discern the suitableness of the Testimonies they make use
of, unto the things they produce them in the confirmation of, they may lawfully
reject any portion of Scripture thereon. The folly and iniquity of which
principles or suppositions are manifest.

The application of Testimonies out of the Old Testament in the New, depends as
to their authority, on the veracity of him that makes use of them; and as to
their cogency in Argument, on the acknowledgment of them on whom they are
pressed. Where we find these concurring, as in this place, there remains
nothing for us, but to endeavor a Right understanding of what is in it self
infallibly true, and unquestionably cogent unto the ends for which it is used.

Indeed the main Difficulty, which in this place Expositors generally trouble
themselves withal, arises purely from their own mistake. They cannot
understand how these words should p^ove the Natural Sonship of Jesus Christ,
which they supposed they are produced to confirm, seeing it is from thence that
he is exalted above the Angels. But the truth is, the words are not designed by
the Apostle unto any such end; his aim is only to prove, that the Lord Christ
has a Name assigned unto him more excellent, either in it self, or in the
manner of its Attribution, than any that is given unto the Angels, which is the
medium of this first Argument to prove him, not as the Eternal Son of God, nor
in respect of his Humane Nature, but as the Revealer of the Will of God in the
Gospel, to be preferred above all the Angels in heaven, and consequently in
particular above those whose ministry was used in the giving of the Law.

Two things then are necessary to render this Testimony effectual to the
purpose for which it is cited by the Apostle; first, that it was originally
intended of him to whom he does apply it; secondly, that there is a Name in it
assigned unto him, more excellent than any ascribed unto the Angels.

For the first of these, we must not wave the Difficulties that Interpreters
have either found out in it, or cast upon it. The words are taken from 2 Samuel
7.14. and are part of the Answer returned from God unto David by Nathan, upon
his resolution to build him an house. The whole Oracle is as follows, v. 11.
The Lord tells thee, that he will make thee an house. v. 12. And when thy
days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy
seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish
his Kingdom: (Or as 1 Chronicles. 17.11. And it shall come to pass when thy days be
expired, that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy
seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons, and I will establish his kingdom.)
v. 13. He shall build an house for my name, and I will establish the throne of
his kingdom for ever. (chap. 13. v. 12. he shall build me an house, and I will
establish his throne for ever.) v. 14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my
son; if he commit iniquity, I will chastise him with the rod of men, and with
the stripes of the children of men. v. 15. But my mercy shall not depart away
from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. (1 Chronicles. 13. I
will be his Father, and he shall be my son, and I will not take my mercy away
from him, as I took it from him that was before thee.) v. 16. And thy house and
thy kingdom shall be established for ever before me; thy throne shall be
established for ever. (1 Chronicles.) But I will settle him in mine house, and in my
kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be established for evermore.

This is the whole Divine Oracle, from whence the Apostle takes the testimony
under consideration; and the difficulty wherewith it is attended arises from
hence, that it is not easy to apprehend, how any thing at all in these words
should be appropriated unto the Lord Christ; seeing Solomon seems in the whole
to be directly and only intended. And concerning this difficulty, there are
three Opinions among Interpreters.

1. Some cutting that knot, which they suppose could not otherwise be loosed,
affirm, that Solomon is not at all intended in these words, but that they are a
direct and immediate Prophecy of Christ, who was to be the Son of David, and
to build the Spiritual House or Temple of God. And for the confirmation of this
Assertion, they produce sundry Reasons from the Oracle it self: As,

1. It is said, That God would raise up to David a seed, or son; intimating
that he was not as yet born, being foretold to be raised up; whereas Solomon
was born at the time of this Prophecy.

2. It is also affirmed, that this Son or seed should reign and sit upon the
throne of David after his decease, and being gathered unto his fathers; whereas
Solomon was made King, and sat upon the Throne whilst David was yet alive, and
not entered into rest with his fathers.

3. The Throne of this Son is to be established for ever, or as the same
promise is expressed, Psalm. 89. whilst the Sun and Moon continue. The Throne of
Solomon and his posterity failing within a few Gen^rations.

4. The Title there given unto him who is directly prophesied of, shows him, as
our Apostle intimates, to be preferred above all the Angels; and none will say
that Sol^mon was so, who as he was inferior to them in Nature and Condition,
so by sin he greatly provoked the Lord against himself and his posterity.

But yet all these Observations, though they want not some appearance and
probability of reason, come short of proving evidently what they are produced
for, as we may briefly manifest: for,

1. It does not appear that Solomon was born at the time of the giving forth of
this Oracle; if we must suppose that God intimated in it unto David, that none
of the sons which he then had should succeed him in his Kingdom; yea, it is
manifest from the story that he was not. Besides, raising up does not denote
the Birth or Nativity of the person intended, but his Designation or Exaltation
to his Throne and Office, as is the usual meaning of that expression in the
Scripture; so that Solomon might be intended, though now born, yea and grown
up, if not yet by the providence of God marked and taken out from amongst his
brethren to be King, as afterward he was.

2. Although a few days before the death of David, to prevent Sedition and
Division about Titles and Pretensions to the Kingdom, Solomon by his
appointment was proclaimed King, or Heir to the Crown, yet he was not actually
vested with the whole Power of the Kingdom, until after his natural decease.
Moreover also, David being then very weak and feeble, and rendered unable for
Public Administration, the short remainder of his days after the Inauguration
of Solomon needed no Observation in the Prophecy.

The other two remaining Reasons must be afterward spoken unto. And for the
present removal of this Exposition, I shall only observe, That, to affirm
Solomon not at all to be intended in this Oracle, nor the House or Temple which
afterward he built, is to make the whole Answer of God by the Prophet unto
David to be Equivocal. For David enquired of Nathan about building an House or
material Temple unto God. Nathan returns him answer from God, that he shall not
do so, but that his son should perform that work. This Answer David understands
of his immediate son, and of a material House, and thereupon makes material
provision for it, and preparation in great abundance upon the encouragement he
received in this Answer of God. Now if neither of these were at all intended in
it, neither his son, nor the material Temple, it is evident that he was led
into a great mistake, by the Ambiguity and Equivocation of the word, which we
find by the Event that he was not, God approving and accepting of his Obedience
in what he did. It remains then that Solomon firstly and immediately is
intended in these words.

2. Some on the other hand affirm the whole Prophecy so to belong unto, and so
to be fulfilled in Solomon, and in him alone, that there is no direct respect
therein unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And the reason for their assertion they
take from those words which immediately follow those insisted on by the
Apostle, namely, If he commit iniquity, I will chastise him with the rod of
men; which cannot be applied unto him who did no sin, neither was there guile
found in his mouth. They say therefore, that the Apostle applies these words
unto Christ, only by way of an Allegory; thus he deals with the Law of not
muzling the Ox which treads out the corn, applying it to the provision of
carnal things to be made for the Dispensers of the Gospel. As he also in
another place represents the two Testaments in the story of Sarah and Hagar.

That which principally is to be insisted on for the removal of this
difficulty, and which will utterly take it out of our way, will fall in with
our Confirmation of the third Interpretation to be proposed. For the present, I
shall only answer, that as the words cited by the Apostle do principally
concern the Person of Christ himself, yet being spoken and given out in form of
a Covenant, they have respect also unto him as he is the Head of the Covenant,
which God makes with all the Elect in him. And thus whole mystical Christ, Head
and Members, are referred unto in the Prophecy; and therefore David in his
repetition and pleading of this Oracle, Psalm. 89.30. changes those words, if
he commit iniquity, into, if his children forsake my law. Notwithstanding then
a supposition of transgression in him, concerning whom these words are spoken,
the Lord Christ may be intended in them; such failings and transgressions as
disannul not the Covenant, often falling out on their part, for whom he
undertaketh therein. But I offer this only in majorem cautelam, to secure the
testimony insisted on unto our Apostles intention; the difficulty it self will
be clearly afterward assoiled.

3. We say therefore with others, that both Solomon and the Lord Christ are
intended in this whole Oracle; Solomon literally and nextly, as the Type; the
Lord Christ principally and mystically, as he who was typed, figured, and
represented by him. And our sense herein shall be farther explained and
confirmed in the ensuing Consider^tions.

1. That there never was any one Type of Christ and his Offices, that entirely
represented him, and all that he was to do. For as it was impossible that any
one thing or person should do so, because of the perfection of his Person, and
the Excellency of his Office, which no one thing, that might be appointed to
prefigure him as a Type, because of its limitedness and imperfection, could
fully represent; so had any such been found out, that multiplication of Types
which God in his infinite Wisdom was pleased to make use of for the revelation
of him intended in them, had been altogether useless and needless. Wherefore
according as God saw good, and as he had made them meet and fit; so He designed
one thing or person to figure out one thing in him, another for another end and
purpose.

2. That no Type of Christ was in all things that he was or did a Type of him,
but only in that particular wherein he was designed of God so to be, and
wherein he has revealed him so to have been. David was a Type of Christ, but
not in all things that he was and did. In his Conquests of the Enemies of the
Church, in his Throne and Kingdom he was so; but in his private actions,
whether as a Man, or as a King, or Captain, he was not so. The like must be
said of Isaac, Melchisedeck, Solomon, and all other personal Types under the
Old Testament, and much more of other things.

3. That not all things spoken of him that was a Type, even therein wherein he
was a Type, are spoken of him as a Type, or have any respect unto the thing
signified, but some of them may belong unto him in his personal capacity only.
And the reason is, because he, who was a Type by God's institution, might
morally fail in the performance of his duty, even then and in those things,
when and wherein he was a Type. Hence somewhat may be spoken of him as to his
moral performance of his Duty, that may no way concern the Antitype, or Christ
prefigured by him. And this wholly removes the difficulty mentioned in the
second Interpretation of the words, excluding the Lord Christ from being
directly in the Oracle, upon that expression, if he sin against me; for those
words relating to the moral duty of Solomon, in that wherein he was a Type of
Christ, namely the Rule and Administration of his Kingdom, may not at all
belong to Christ, who was prefigured by God's institution of things, and not in
any moral deportment in the observance of them.

4. That what is spoken of any Type, as it was a Type, and in respect of its
institution to be such, does not really and properly belong unto him, or that
which was the Type, but unto him who was represented thereby. For the Type it
self, it was enough that there was some resemblance in it of that which was
principally intended; the things belonging unto the Antitype being affirmed of
it Analogically, on the account of the relation between them by God's
institution. Hence that which follows on such Enuntiations, does not at all
respect, or belong to the Type, but only to the Antitype. Thus at the
Sacrifice of Expiation, the escape Goat is said to bear and carry away all the
sins of the people into a land not inhabited; not really, and in the substance
of the matter, but only in an instituted Representation: for the Law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Much less may the things
that ensue upon the Lord Christ's real bearing and taking away of our sins, be
ascribed to the devoted beast. So is it in this case. The words applied by the
Apostle to prove the Son to have a more excellent Name than the Angels, and
consequently to be preferred above them, do not at all prove that Solomon of
whom they were spoken merely as he was a Type, should be esteemed to be
preferred above all Angels, seeing he did only represent him who was so, and
had these words spoken unto him, not absolutely, but with respect unto that
Representation. And this removes the fourth Objection made in the behalf of the
first Interpretation, excluding Solomon from being at all intended in the
Prophecy, for what was spoken of him as a Type, required not a full
accomplishment in his own person but only that he should represent him, who was
principally intended.

5. That there is a twofold Perpetuity mentioned in the Scripture, the one
limited and relative, the other absolute; and both these are applied unto the
Kingdom of David. First, there was a Perpetuity promised unto him and his
Posterity in the Kingdom, as of the Priesthood to Aaron; that is a limited
perpetuity, namely, during the continuance of the typical state and condition
of that People; whilst they continued, the Rule by right belonged unto the
House of David. There was also an absolute perpetuity promised to the Kingdom
of David, to be made good only in the Kingdom and Rule of the Messiah; and both
these kinds of Perpetuity are expressed in the same words, giving their sense
according as they are applied. If applied to the successors of David, as his
Kingdom was a Type of that of Christ, they denote the limited Perpetuity before
mentioned, as that which respected an Adjunct of the Typical state of that
People, that was to be regulated by it, and commensurate unto it: but as they
were referred to the Kingdom of Christ represented in the other, so an Absolute
Perpetuity is expressed in them. And this takes away the third Reason,
excluding Solomon from being intended in these words; the Perpetuity promised
being unto him limited and bounded.

These considerations being premised, I say, the words insisted on by the
Apostle, I will be unto him a Father, and he shall be unto me a son, belonged
first and nextly unto Solomon, denoting that fatherly Love Care and Protection
that God would afford unto him in his Kingdom, so far forth as Christ was
represented by him therein; which requires not that they must absolutely, and
in all just consequences from them belong unto the person of Solomon:
principally therefore they intend Christ himself, expressing that eternal
unchangeable Love which the Father bore unto him, grounded on the Relation of
Father and Son.

The Jews, I confess, of all others, do see least of Typicalness in Solomon.
But the reason of it is, because that his sin was the Occasion of ruining their
carnal earthly Glory and Wealth, which things alone they lust after. But the
thing was doubtless confessed by the Church of old, with whom Paul had to do;
and therefore we see, that the Writer of the Book of the Chronicles, written
after the return of the People from their Captivity, when Solomon's line was
failed, and Zerubbabel of the house of Nathan was Governor amongst them, yet
records again this Promise, as that which looked forward, and was yet to
receive its full accomplishment in the Lord Christ. And some of the Rabbis
themselves tell us, that Solom^^ because of his sin had only the name of peace,
God stirring up Adversaries against him; the thing it self is to be looked for
under Messiah Ben-david.

The allegation of these words by the Apostle being thus fully and at large
vindicated, I shall now briefly enquire into the sense and meaning of the words
themselves.

It was before observed, that they are not produced by the Apostle to prove the
Natural Sonship of Jesus Christ, nor do they signify it; nor were they urged
by him to confirm directly and immediately that he is more excellent than the
Angels, of whom there is nothing spoken in them, nor in the place from whence
they are taken. But the Apostle insists on this testimony, merely in
confirmation of his former Argument, for the pre-eminence of the Son above
Angels, taken from that more excellent Name which he obtained by inheritance;
which being the Name of the Son of God, he hereby proves that indeed he was so
called by God himself.

Thus then do these words confirm the intention of the Apostle. For to which of
the Angels said God at any time, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son. The words contain a great and signal privilege; they are spoken unto
and concerning the Messiah; and neither they nor any thing equivalent unto them
were ever spoken of any Angel; especially the Name of the Son of God, so
emphatically, and in way of distinction from all others, was never assigned
unto any of them. And this, as has been already showed, proves an Eminency and
Pre-eminence in him, above all that the Angels attain unto. All this, I say,
follows from the peculiar signal Appropriation of the Name of the Son of God
unto him; and his especial Relation unto God therein expressed.

Briefly, we may adjoyn the intention of the words as in themselves considered,
and so complete the Exposition of them. Now God promises in them to be unto
the Lord Christ, as exalted into his Throne, a Father, in love, care, power, to
protect and carry him on in his Rule unto the end of the world. And therefore
upon his Ascension he says that he went unto his God and Father, Joh. 20.17.
And he rules in the Name and Majesty of God, Mic. 5.4. This is the importance
of the words; they intend not the Eternal and Natural Relation that is between
the Father and Son, which neither is, nor can be the subject of any Promise,
but the Paternal care of God over Christ in his Kingdom, and the dearness of
Christ himself unto him.

If it be asked on what account God would thus be a Father unto Jesus Christ in
this peculiar manner, it must be answered, that the radical fundamental cause
of it lay in the Relation that was between them from his Eternal Generation;
but he manifested himself to be his Father, and engaged to deal with him in the
love and care of a Father, as he had accomplished his work of Mediation on the
Earth, and was exalted unto his Throne and Rule in Heaven.

And this is the first Argument of the Apostle, whereby he proves that the Son,
as the Revealer of the Mind and Will of God in the Gospel, is made more
excellent than the Angels, whose Glory was a refuge to the Jews in their
adherance to Legal Rites and Administrations, even because they were given unto
them by the Disposition of Angels.

According unto our proposed method, we must in our progress draw hence also
some Instructions for our own use and edification. As,

1. Every thing in the Scripture is instructive. The Apostles arguing in this
place is not so much from the thing spoken, as from the manner wherein it is
spoken: even that also is highly Mysterious. So are all the concernments of it.
Nothing is in it needless, nothing useless. Men sometimes perplex themselves to
find out the suitableness of some Testimonies produced out of the Old Testament
unto the confirmation of things and Doctrines in the New, by the Penmen of the
holy Ghost; when all the difficulty arises from a fond conceit, that they can
apprehend the depth and breadth of the Wisdom that is laid up in any one Text
of Scripture; when the Holy Ghost may have a principal aim at those things
which they are not able to dive into. Every letter and tittle of it is
teaching, and every thing that relates unto it, is instructive in the Mind of
God. And it must be so, because,

1. It proceeds from infinite Wisdom, which has put an impress of it self upon
it, and filled all its capacity with its blessed effects. In the whole Frame,
Structure and Order of it, in the Sense, Words, Coherence, Expression, it is
filled with Wisdom; which makes the Commandment exceeding broad and large, so
that there is no absolute comprehension of it in this life. We cannot perfectly
trace the footsteps of infinite Wisdom, nor find out all the Effects and
characters of it, that it has left upon the Word. The whole Scripture is full
of Wisdom, as the Sea is of Water, which fills and covers all the parts of it.
And,

2. Because it was to be very Comprehensive. It was to contain directly or by
consequence, one way or other, the whole Revelation of God unto us, and all our
Duty unto him, both which are marvelous, great, large and various: Now this
could not have been done in so narrow a room, but that every Part of it, and
all the Concernment of it, with its whole Order, were to be filled with
Mysteries, and Expressions or intimations of the Mind and Will of God. It could
not hence be that any thing superfluous should be put into it, or any thing be
in it, that should not relate to Teaching and Instruction.

3. It is that which God has given unto his servants, for their continual
Exercise day and night in this world; And in their enquiry into it, he requires
of them their utmost Diligence and endeavors. This being assigned for their
Duty, it was convenient unto Divine Wisdom and Goodness to find them blessed
and useful work in the whole Scripture, to exercise themselves about: That
every where they might meet with that which might satisfy their Enquiry, and
answer their Industry. There shall never be any Time or Strength lost or
misspent, that is laid out according to the Mind of God in and about his Word.
The matter, the Words, the Order, the Contexture of them, the Scope, Design and
aim of the Holy Ghost in them, all, and every one of them, may well take up the
utmost of our Diligence; are all divine. Nothing is empty, unfurnished, or
unprepared for our spiritual use, advantage and benefit. Let us then learn
hence,

1. To admire, and as one said of old, to adore the fullness of the Scripture,
or of the Wisdom of God in it; it is all full of Divine Wisdom, and calls for
our Reverence in the Consideration of it. And indeed a constant Awe of the
Majesty, Authority and Holiness of God in his word, is the only teachable
frame. Proud and careless spirits see nothing of Heaven, or Divinity in the
Word; but the humble are made wise in it.

2. To stir up and exercise our Faith and Diligence to the utmost in our study
and search of the Scripture. It is an endless storehouse, a bottomless
Treasure of Divine Truth. Gold is in every sand; All the wise men in the world
may every one for himself learn somewhat out of every Word of it, and yet leave
enough still behind them for the Instruction of all those that shall come after
them. The fountains and springs of Wisdom in it are endless, and will never be
dry. We may have much truth and power out of a word, sometimes enough, but
never All that is in it. There will still be enough remaining, to exercise and
refresh us anew for ever. So that we may attain a True s^nse, but we can never
attain the full sense of any Place; we can never exhaust the whole impress of
infinite Wisdom that is on the Word. And how should this stir us up to be
meditating in it day and night; and many the like inferences may hence be
taken. Learn also,

2. That it is lawful to draw consequences from Scripture Assertions, and such
consequences rightly deduced are infaliibly true, and de fide. Thus from the
Name given unto Christ, the Apostle deduceth by just consequence his Exaltation
and Pre-eminence above Angels. Nothing will rightly follow from Truth, but what
is so also; and that of the same nature with the Truth from whence it is
derived: So that whatever by just consequence is drawn from the Word of God, is
it self also the Word of God, and of Truth infallible. And to deprive the
Church of this liberty in the interpretation of the Word, is to deprive it of
the chiefest benefit intended by it. This is that on which the whole Ordinance
of Preaching is founded; which makes that which is derived out of the Word, to
have the Power, Authority and Efficacy of the Word accompanying it. Thus though
it be the proper Work and Effect of the Word of God to quicken, regenerate,
sanctify and purify the Elect, and the Word primarily and directly is only
that which is written in the Scriptures; yet we find all these eff^cts produced
in and by the preaching of the Word, when perhaps not one sentence of the
Scripture is verbatim repeated. And the Reason hereof is, because whatsoever is
directly deduced, and delivered according to the Mind and Appointment of God
from the Word, is the Word of God, and has the Power, Authority and Efficacy
of the Word accompanying of it.

3. The Declaration of Christ to be the Son of God, is the Care and Work of the
Father. He said it, he recorded it, he revealed it. This indeed is to be made
known by the Preaching of the Gospel; but that it shall be done, the Father
has taken the care upon himself. It is the design of the Father in all things
to glorify the Son; that all men may honor him even as they honor the
Father; This cannot be done, without the Declaration of that Glory which he had
with him before the world was; that is the Glory of his Eternal Sonship. This
he will therefore make known and maintain in the world.

4. God the Father is perpetually present with the Lord Christ in Love, Care
and power, in the Administration of his Office as he is Mediator, Head and King
of the Church. He has taken upon himself, to stand by him to own him, to
effect every thing that is needful unto the Establishment of his Throne, the
enlargement of his Kingdom, and the Ruin and Destruction of his Enemies. And
this he will assuredly do to the end of the world.

1. Because he has promised so to do; innumerable are the Promises on record
that are made unto Jesus Christ unto this purpose; God has engaged to hold him
in his Hand, and to hide him as a polished shaft in his quiver, to give him a
Throne, a Glorious Kingdom, an everlasting Rule and Government, and the like.
Now what he has promised in Love and Grace, he will make good with Care and
Power. See Isa. 49.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Chap. 50.7, 8, 9.

2. All these Promises have respect unto the Obedience of the Lord Christ in
the work of Mediation, which being performed by him rightly, and to the utmost,
gives him a peculiar Right unto them, and makes that just and righteous in the
Performance, which was mere sovereign Grace in the Promise. The condition being
absolutely performed on the part of Christ, the Promise shall be certainly
accomplished on the part of the Father. By this is the Covenant of the Redeemer
completed, ratified and established; the condition of it on his part being
performed unto the uttermost, there shall be no failure in the Promises, Isa.
53.11, 12.

3. The Lord Christ makes it his request, that he may enjoy the Presence and
Power of his Father with him in his work, and the Administration of his
Mediation; and the Father always hears him. Part of his Covenant with his
Father was like that of Barak who was a type of him, with Deborah the
Prophetess, who spoke in the name of the Lord, Judge. 4.8. If thou will go with
me, I will go, against all the enemies of the Church: Isa. 50.8, 9. And
accordingly upon his engagement to go with him, he requests his Presence; and
in the assurance of it, professes that he is not alone, but that his Father is
with him, John 8.16. To this purpose see his requests, John 17.

4. The nature of his Work and Kingdom require it. God has appointed him to
reign in the midst of his Enemies; and mighty Opposition is made on all hands
to his whole Design, and every particular Act of it. The whole work of Satan
sin and the world, is both to obstruct in general the Progress of his Kingdom,
and to ruin and destroy every particular subject of it; And this is carried on
continually with unspeakable Violence, and unsearchable Stratagems; This makes
the Presence of the Authority and Power of the Father necessary to him in his
work; This he asserts as a great ground of consolation to his Disciples, John
10.28, 29. There will be great plucking, great contending to take believers out
of the hand of Christ; one way or other to make them come short of Eternal
Life; and though his own Power be such, as is able to preserve them, yet he
lets them know also for their greater Assurance and Consolation, that his
Father who is over all, is greater, more powerful than all, greater than he
himself in the Work of Mediation, John 14.28. is also engaged with him in their
defense and preservation: So also is he as to the Destruction of his
Adversaries; all opposing power whatever: Psalm. 110.5, 6. The Lord stands by
him, on his right hand, to smite and tread down his enemies, all that arise
against his design, interest, and Kingdom; be they never so many, never so
great, he will ruin them, and make them his footstool every one. See Micha 5.4.

Verse VI.
THe Apostle proceeds to the confirmation of the same important Truth, by
another Testimony; wherein we shall meet with some difficulty, both in the
manner of the Citation, and the importance of the Testimony it self.

Verse 6. (...).
V.L. and cum introducit primogenitum in orbem terrae, dicit and adorent eum
omnes Angeli Dei: omitting (...), again.

Sir. (...); Rursum autem cum inducit; and again when he brings in. (...),
into the world.

(...), again, is omitted in the Arabic, as in the Vulgar Latin.

Beza; Rursum autem cum inducit primogenitum in orbem terrarum, dicit, and
adorent (Eras. Adorabunt) eum omnes Angeli Dei; which is exactly expressed by
Ours.

And again when he brings in the first begotten into the world he says; and
let all the Angels of God worship him.

(...).
There is not much of Difficulty in the Words themselves: (...), cum autem,
quando autem; but when.

(...).
(...), Rursum, again, as in the former Verse. What sense it is here used in,
and what Word it is to be joined withal, shall be afterward declared.

(...).
(...); Inducit; or inducet, or introducit; he brings in, or leads in, or
shall bring in, of which Difference also afterward.

(...).
(...), the first begotten; the first born; He before whom none is born; not
necessarily, after whom any is so. Under the Law, there was a Sacrifice for the
(...), first begotten, so called when as yet none were begotten after him, and
very uncertain whether ever any should be so of the same womb or no; and
doubtless it often fell out that none were so.

(...).
(...), the habitable world; or (...), Prove. 8. The public place of Habitation,
where the Creatures of God do dwell. The Word is no where used absolutely in
Scripture in any sense but for this habitable World. Only sometimes it has a
restrained sense, denoting the Roman Empire, as Luke 2.1. According to the
usual Language of those days, wherein the People of Rome, or their Emperors
were styled Rerum, and Orbis terrarum Domini: and sometimes indefinitely
denotes any part of the world as habitable, Luke 17.6. Chap. 19.27. Chap.
21.26. And therefore oftentimes has (...), the whole, joined with it, when it
is extended universally to the Habitable Earth.

(...).
(...); Heb. (...); Imperative in Hithpael, from (...), to incline, to bow down.
The LXX. constantly render that word by (...). And (...) is probably derived
from (...); and thence (...), osculor, to kiss; which also is sometimes used
for to Adore, or Worship; as, (...); that is, says Eustathius, (...); they
worship me as their Lord; for being joined with (...), bowing, or falling down,
it expresses the whole use and signification of (...). How kissing was of old
a Sign, Token and Pledge of Worship, especially to bow down and kiss the
ground, I have elsewhere declared. And this derivation of the word, I prefer
far before that which makes it primitively signify more canum adulari; as if
taken from the crouching of D^gs.

In the New Testament it is no where used, but for that Religious Worship which
is due to God alone. And when it is remembered of any that they did (...), or
perform the Duty and Homage denoted by this Word, unto any but God, it is
remembered as their Idolatry, Rev. 13.12, 16. 2. And unto this sense was it
restrained of old by the Spartans, who denied that it was (...) lawful for
them (...), that is, to fall down to, or to adore a man; Herodot. in Polym.

And in this sense it is exceedingly restrained from the use and importance of
(...); yea, and from that of (...), in Hithpael, though that always signify a
bowing down with Respect and Reverence; for it is employed to denote Civil, as
well as Religious Worship. But for several sorts of Religious Worship
diversified by its Objects, the Scripture knows nothing. The word properly
denotes to bow down, and when it is referred unto God, it respects the inward
Reverence and Subjection of our minds, by a Metonymie of the Adjunct. See it
for Civil* respect, Genesis 27.29. Chap. 133.6.

(...).
(...), Elohim is rendered Angels by the LXX. Genesis 31.24. Job 38.7. Psalm. 8.6.
Psalm. 96.8. Psalm. 137 1. of which Interpretation of the word, we shall treat in
the ensuing Exposition.

This is the second Argument used by the Apostle to confirm his Assertion of
the Preference of the Son above Angels; and is taken from the command of God
given unto them to worship him; For without Controversy, He who is to be
worshipped, is greater than they whose duty it is to worship him.

In the words we must consider, 1. The Apostles Preface: 2. His Proof. And in
the latter must weigh, (1.) The Sense of it. (2.) The Suitableness of it to his
present Purpose.

His Preface, or the manner of his producing of this second Testimony is this:
(...); which words have been exposed unto variety of Interpretations; for if
(...), be joined with (...), which immediately follows; they are to be
rendered; and when he brings in again into the world; if with (...), which
follows it after the Interposition of sundry other words, then is it to be
rendered as by our Interpreters; and again, when he brings; he says.

Moreover! it is not clear in what sense Christ is called (...), the Firstborn
who is elsewhere termed (...), the Only Begotten Son of the Father.

We must also enquire what is the Introduction, or bringing in here intended;
How and When performed; as also what is the world whereinto he was brought. The
difficulties about all which must be severally considered.

1. (...), again, may be joined with (...); And then the sense of the words
must run as above intimated; namely, when he brings in again the firstborn
into the world. And it is evident, that most Expositors both Ancient and Modern
embrace this sense. So do Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, Oecumenius, Thomas,
Lyra, Cajetan, Ribera, Camero; Gomarus, Estius, A Lapide; our Mede, with many
others. But about what this bringing in again, or Second bringing in of the
firstborn into the world should be, they are greatly divided.

The Ancients refer it to his Incarnation; affirming somewhat harshly, that he
was brought before into the world, when all things were made by him.

2. Others refer it to the Resurrection, which was as it were a second bringing
of Christ into the world, as David was brought into his Kingdom again, after he
had expelled by the Conspiracy and Rebellion of Absalom.

3. Others refer it unto his coming forth in the Effectual Preaching of the
Gospel after his Ascension, whereby he was brought forth in another manner, and
with another kind of Power, than that which he appeared in, in the Days of his
flesh.

4. Some suppose the Personal Reign of Christ on the earth for a thousand years
with his Saints, is intended in these words, when God will bring him again with
Glory into the world; of which judgment was Mede; and now many follow him.

5. Others again, and they the most, assign the Accomplishment of what is here
asserted, to the General Judgment, and the Second Coming of Christ in the
Glory of the Father, with all the holy Angels attending him to judge the quick
and the dead.

6. Some of the Socinians refer them unto the Triumphant Ascension of Christ
into Heaven, after his Resurrection; he having, as they fancy, once before been
taken into it, there to be instructed in the Mind and Will of God.

Now all these Assertions concerning the bringing in of Christ into the world,
have a Truth in them absolutely considered; but whether any of them be here
intended by the Apostle, we must enquire by an Examination of the common
Foundation that all their Authors proceed upon, with the Reasons given for its
Confirmation. Now this is that which we observed before; namely, that in the
Construction of the words, (...), again, is to be joined with (...), he
brings in; and so to be rendered, when he brings in again, or a second time,
the firstborn; which must needs point to a second coming of Christ, of one
kind or another: And to this purpose they say,

1. That the Trajection of the words in the other sense, is hard and difficult,
and not to be admitted but upon very cogent Reasons. It is to suppose that the
Apostle by (...), When Again; intends (...); Again when; And besides, the
Interposition of the many words between it, and (...), he says, will not admit
that they should be conjoined in Sense and Construction.

But this Reason is not cogent: for,

1. Most of the ancient Translations acknowledge this Transposition of the
words; so the Syriack; reading thus, and again when he brings in; so the
Vulgar Latin; and the Arabic, omitting the term again, as not designing any
new thing, but merely denoting a new Testimony. And they are followed by Valla,
Erasmus, Beza, and the best of Modern Translators.

2. Such Trajections are not unusual, and that in this place has a peculiar
Elegancy. For the word (...), again, being used in the head of the Testimony
foregoing, this Transposition adds to the Elegancy of the words; and that there
was cause for it, we shall see afterward.

3. The Apostle having immediately before used the word (...), again, as his
note of producing a second Testimony, and placing it here in the entrance of a
third, it must needs be used Equivocally, if the Trajection opposed be not
allowed.

2. They deny that the Angels worshipped Christ at his first coming into the
world; that is, that they are recorded so to have done; and therefore it must
needs be his second coming that is intended, when he shall come in Glory with
all his holy Angels, openly worshipping him, and performing his commands.

This Reason is especially suited unto the Fifth Opinion before mentioned,
referring the words to the coming of Christ at the General Day of Judgment,
and is unserviceable unto any of the rest. But yet neither is this
satisfactory; for the Question is not, whether it be any where recorded, that
the Angels worshipped Christ at his first Entrance into the World; but whether
the Lord Christ upon his Incarnation was not put into that condition, wherein
it was the Duty of all the Angels of God to worship him. Now this being at
least interpretative, a Command of God, and the Angels expressly always doing
his Will, the thing it self is certain, though no particular Instances of it be
recorded. Besides, the Angels attendance on his Birth, proclamation of his
Nativity, and celebrating the Glory of God on that account, seem to have been a
performance of that duty, which they had received command for. And this is
allowed by those of the Ancients who suppose that the second bringing of Christ
into the world, was upon his Nativity.

3. They say, that this bringing in of the first begotten into the world,
denotes a glorious Presenting of him in his Rule, and enjoyment of his
Inheritance;

But (1.) This proves not, that the Words must respect the coming of Christ
unto Judgment, to which End this Reason is insisted on; because he was
certainly proclaimed with Glory to be the Son, Lord and Heir of all, upon his
Resurrection, and by the first preaching of the Gospel. And (2.) No such thing
indeed can be rightly deduced from the words. The Expression signifies no more,
but an Introduction into the world; a real bringing in, without any intimation
of the way or manner of it.

4. It is argued in the behalf of the same Opinion from the Psalm from whence
these words are taken, that it is a Glorious Reign of Christ, and his coming
unto Judgment, that is set forth therein; and not his coming and abode in the
state of Humiliation. And this reason Camero affirms to prove undeniably, that
it is the coming of Christ unto Judgment that is intended.

But the Truth is, the consideration of the scope of the Psalm does quite
reject the Opinion which is sought to be maintained by it. For (1.) v. 1. upon
the Reign of the Lord therein set forth, both Jews and Gentiles, the Earth and
the multitude of the Isles, are called to rejoice therein: that is to receive,
delight in, and be glad of the Salvation brought by the Lord Christ unto
mankind; which is not the Work of the last day: (2.) Idolaters are deterred
from their Idolatry, and exhorted to worship him, v. 7. a duty incumbent on
them before the day of Judgment. (3.) The Church is exhorted upon his Reign,
to abstain from sin, and promised Deliverance from the wicked and oppressors;
all which things as they are unsuited unto his coming at the day of Judgment,
so they expressly belong unto the setting up of his Kingdom in this world.

And hereby it appears, that that Opinion which indeed seems with any
probability to assert a second coming of Christ into the world, to be intended
in these words, is inconsistent with the scope of the place from whence the
Testimony is taken, and consequently the design of the Apostle himself.

The other Conjectures mentioned will easily be removed out of the way;

Unto that of the Ancients assigning this bringing in of Christ into the world
unto his Incarnation; we say it is true; but then that was his first bringing
in, and being supposed to be intended in this place, the words can be no
otherwise rendered, but that (...), again, must be esteemed only an Intimation
of the Citation of a new Testimony.

Neither can the Resurrection of the Lord Christ be assigned as the season of
the Accomplishment of this word, which was not indeed a bringing of him into
the world, but rather an Entrance into his leaving of it; neither did he at his
death leave the world utterly, for though his Soul was separated from his Body,
yet his Body was not separated from his Person; and therein he continued on the
Earth.

The coming of Christ to Reign here on earth a 1000 years is, if not a
groundless Opinion, yet so dubious and uncertain, as not to be admitted a place
in the Analogy of Faith, to regulate our interpretation of Scripture, in places
that may fairly admit of another Application.

The figment of the Socinians, that the Lord Christ during the time of his
forty days fast, was taken into Heaven, which they lay as a Supposition unto
their Interpretation of this place, I have elsewhere showed to be Irrational,
Anti-scriptural, Mahumetical, and derogatory to the Honor of our Lord Jesus,
as he is the Eternal Son of God.

From what has been spoken it is evident, that the Trajection proposed may be
allowed, as it is by most of the Ancient and Modern Translations. And so the
word (...), again, relating unto (...), he says, denotes only the Introduction
of a new proof, and does not intimate a second bringing in of the Lord Christ.
And unto what has already been spoken I shall only add, that such an
intention in the words as has been pleaded for, would be so far from promoting
the Apostles design, that it would greatly weaken and impair it. For the matter
he had in hand was to prove the Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above the
Angels, not absolutely, but as he was the Revealer of the Gospel; and if this
was not so, and proved to be so by this testimony, whilst he was employed in
that work in the world, it is nothing at all to his purpose.

Having cleared this Difficulty, and showed that no Second Coming of Christ is
intended in this word, but only a new testimony to the same purpose with them
foregoing produced, the intention of the Apostle in his Prefatory Expression,
may be farther opened, by considering what that world is whereunto the Father
brought the Son, with how; and when he did so, and the manner of it.

There are two Opinions about the World, whereinto Christ is said to be brought
by the Father; the one is, that of the Socinians, asserted as by others of
them, so by Schliclingius in his Comment on this place; and by Grotius after
them in his Annotations. (...), says Grotius, est regio illa superna quae ab
angelis habitatur, ut ipse mox scriptor noster ad haec sua verba respiciens
dicet, cap. 2.5. It is, says he, that Region above, which is inhabited by the
Angels, that is intended; and our Author declares as much in that respect which
he has to these words, chap. 2.5. In like manner Schliclingius, Per terram
istam; non esse intelligendam hanc quam mortales incolimus, sed coelestem illam
quam aliquando immortales affecti incolemus, and res ipsa, and D. author
sequenti capite v. 5. aperte declarat. That is, by the Earth, not the Earth but
the Heaven is to be understood. But,

1. This suits not at all with the Purpose and Design of the Apostle, which is
plainly to prove that the Lord Christ, then, when he spoke to us, and revealed
the will of God, and in that work, was above the Angels, which is not at all
proved by showing what befell him after his work was accomplished.

2. It receives no countenance from that other place of chap. 2.5. whither we
are sent by these Interpreters. For that the Apostle is there treating of a
matter quite of another nature, without any respect unto these words, shall be
there declared. Neither does he absolutely there mention (...), the world, but
with the addition of (...), to come; which what it is, we shall enquire upon
the place.

3. (...) signifies properly the Habitable Earth, and is never used absolutely
in the Scripture, but for the habitable world, or men dwelling in it; and
causelessly to wrest it unto another signification, is not to interpret but to
offer violence unto the Text.

2. By (...) then, the World, or Habitable Earth with them that dwell therein,
and nothing else is intended; for as the word has no other signification, so
the Psalmist in the place from whence the ensuing testimony is taken expounds
it, by the multitude of the Isles, or the Nations lying abroad in the wide
earth. This is the World designed, even that Earth wherein the rational
creatures of God converse here below. Into this was the Lord Christ brought in
by the Father.

We are therefore nextly to enquire wherein the Fathers bringing of the Son
into this world did consist. We have seen formerly, that some have assigned it
unto One thing in particular, some Another; some to his Incarnation and
Nativity, some to his Resurrection, some to his Mission of the Spirit, and
propagation of his Kingdom that ensued. The Opinion about his Coming to reign
in the world a thousand years, as also that of his coming at the general
Judgment, we have already excluded. Of the others, I am apt to think, that it
is not any one particular exclusive to the other, that the Apostle intends or
designeth. That which was intended in the Old Testament in the Promises of his
coming into the world, is that which is here expressed by the phrase of
bringing him in. See Mal. 3.2. The Lord whom ye seek shall come, but who may
abide the day of his coming? Now it was not any one special Act, nor any one
particular Day that was designed in that and the like Promises. But it is the
whole work of God in bringing forth the Messiah by his Conception, Nativity,
Unction with the Spirit, Resurrection, Sending of the Holy Ghost, and preaching
of the Gospel, which is the subject of those Promises. And their accomplishment
it is which those words express, When he brings the firstborn into the world;
that is, after he had kept his Church under the Administration of the Law given
by Angels in the hand of Moses the Mediator, in the expectation of the coming
of the Messiah, when he brings him forth unto and carries him on in his work
unto the accomplishment of it, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him.
And herein most of the former senses are comprised.

And this Interpretation of the words completely answers the intention of the
Apostle in the citation of the ensuing Testimony, namely, to prove that in the
discharge of his work of revealing the Will of God, he was such an One, as by
reason of the Dignity of his Person, had all Religious Worship and Honor due
unto him from the Angels themselves.

This sense also we are led unto by the Psalm whence the ensuing testimony is
taken, Psalm. 97. The Exultation which the first verse of the Psalm requires and
calls for, is not unlike that which was in the Name of the whole Creation
expressed at his Nativity, Luke 2.11. And the four following verses are an
Allegorical description of the work that the Lord Christ should make, in and by
the preaching of the Gospel. See Mal. 3.2, 3, 4. chap. 4.1. Matthew. 3.10. Luke
2.24. And hereon ensues that shame and ruin which was brought upon Idols and
Idolaters thereby v. 7. And the joy of the whole Church in the presence of
Christ, v. 8. attended with his glorious Reign in Heaven, as a consequent of
the Accomplishment of his work, v. 9. Which is proposed as a motive unto
Obedience, and a matter of confidence and rejoicing unto the Church. And this
is the Fathers bringing of the Son into the world, described by the Psalmist,
and intended by the Apostle.

It remains that we enquire why, and in what sense, Christ is here called
(...), primogenitus, or the firstborn. The common Answer is, Non quod post
illum alii, sed quod ante illum nullus; Not that any was born after him, (in
the same way) but that none was born before him; which as we have showed before
will agree well enough with the use of the Word. And this is applied both to
the Eternal G^neration of his Divine Person, and to the Conception and Nativity
of his Humane Nature.

But if we suppose that his Person and Eternal Generation may be intended in
this Expression, we must make (...), or the firstborn, to be the same with
(...), or only begotten, which may not be allowed; for Christ is absolutely
called the only begotten of the Father in his Eternal Generation, his Essence
being infinite, took up the whole Nature of Divine Filiation; so that it is
impossible that with respect thereunto, there should be any more Sons of God.
But (...), or firstborn, is used in relation unto others; and yet, as I showed
before, it does not require that he who is so should have any other brethren in
the same kind of Sonship. But because this is by some asserted, namely that
Christ has many Brethren in the same kind of sonship whereby he is himself the
Son of God, and is on that account called the firstborn, (which is an
assertion greatly derogatory to his Glory and Honor) I shall in our passage
remove it, as a stumbling block, out of the way.

Thus Schliclingius on the place, Primogenitum eum nomine Dei Filium appellat,
innuens hoc pacto plures Dei esse Filios etiam ad Christum respectu habito;
scilicet ut ostenderet non ita Christum esse Dei Filium, quin alii etiam eodem
filiationis genere contineantur, quanquam filiationis perfectione and gradu
Christo multo inferiores. And again, Primogenitus dicitur Christus quod eum
Deus ante omnes Filios, eos nimirum qui Christi fratres appellantur genuerit;
eo scilicet modo quo Deus Filios gignere solet; eos autem gignit quos sibi
similes efficit: primus est Christus qui Deo ea sanctitate similis fuit, qualem
in novo faedere praecipit.

But these things agree neither with the truth, nor with the design of the
Apostle in this place, nor with the Principles of them by whom they are
asserted. It is acknowledged that God has other sons besides Jesus Christ, and
that with respect unto him; for in him we are adopted, the only way whereby any
one may attain unto the privilege of Sonship; but that we are sons of God,
with, or in the same kind of sonship with Jesus Christ, is,

1. False; because, 1. Christ in his Sonship is (...), the only begotten Son of
God; and ther^ (...) is impossible that God should have any more sons in the
same kind with him; for if he had, certainly the Lord Christ could not be
(...), his only begotten Son. 2. The only way of Filiation, the only kind of
Sonship, that Believers share in, is that of Adoption; in any other kind of
sonship they are not partakers. Now if Christ be the Son of God in this kind,
he must of necessity antecedently unto his Adoption be a Member of another
Family, that is, of the Family of Satan and the World, as we are by Nature,
and from thence be transplanted by Adoption into the Family of God; which is
Blasphemy to imagine. So that neither can Believers be the sons of God with
that kind of sonship which is proper to Christ, he being the only begotten of
the Father; nor can the Lord Christ be the Son of God with the same kind of
Sonship as Believers are, which is only by Adoption, and their translation out
of one Family into another. So that either to exalt Believers into the same
kind of Sonship with Christ, or to depress him into the same rank with them, is
wholly inconsistent with the Analogy of Faith, and Principles of the Gospel. 3.
If this were so, that the Lord Christ and Believers were the Sons of God by the
same kind of Sonship, only differing in degrees, (which also are imaginary, for
the formal Reason of the same kind of Sonship is not capable of variation by
degrees) what great matter is in the condescension mentioned by the Apostle,
chap. 2.11. that he is not ashamed to call them brethren; which yet he compares
with the condescension of God, in being called their God, chap. 11.16.

2. This conceit, as it is Untrue, so it is contrary to the design of the
Apostle. For to assert the Messiah to be the Son of God in the same way with
men, does not tend at all to prove him more excellent than the Angels, but
rather leaves us just ground of suspecting their preference above him.

3. It is contrary unto other declared Principles of the Authors of this
Assertion. They elsewhere affirm, that the Lord Christ was the Son of God on
many accounts, as first and principally, because he was conceived and born of a
Virgin by the power of God; now surely all Believers are not partakers with him
in this kind of Sonship. Again, they say, he is the Son of God because God
raised him from the dead, to confirm the Doctrine that he had taught; which is
not so with Believers. Also they say he is the Son of God, and so called, upon
the account of his sitting at the Right Hand of God, which is no less his
peculiar privilege than the former. So that this is but an unhappy attempt to
lay hold of a word for an advantage, which yields nothing in the issue but
trouble and perplexity.

Nor can the Lord Christ (which is affirmed in the last place) be called the
Son of God, and the firstborn, because in him was that Holiness which is
required in the new Covenant; for both all Believers under the Old Testament
had that Holiness and likeness unto God in their degrees, and that Holiness
consists principally in Regeneration, or being born again by the Word and
Spirit out of a corrupted estate of death and sin, which the Lord Christ was
not capable of. Yea, the truth is, the Holiness and Image of God in Christ was
in the kind of it that which was required under the first Covenant; an Holiness
of perfect Innocence and perfect Righteousness in Obedience. So that this last
invention has no better success than the former.

It appears then, that the Lord Christ is not called the first-begotten, or
the firstborn, with any such respect unto others, as should include him and
them in the same kind of Filiation.

To give therefore a direct account of this Appellation of Christ, we may
observe, that indeed the Lord Christ is never absolutely called the
first-begotten, or firstborn, with respect either to his Eternal Generation,
or to the Conception and Nativity of his Humane Nature. In respect of the
former he is called the Son, and the only begotten Son of God; but no where the
firstborn, or first-begotten: and in respect of the latter, indeed he is
called the first-begotten Son of the Virgin, because she had none before him,
but not absolutely the firstborn, or first-begotten, which Title is here and
elsewhere ascribed unto him in the Scripture. It is not therefore the thing it
self, of being the firstborn, but the Dignity and Privilege that attended it,
which are designed in this Appellation. So Col. 1.15. he is said to be (...),
the firstborn of the creation; which is no more, but he that has Power and
Authority over all the creatures of God.

The word which the Apostle intends to express is (...), which oft-times is
used in the sense now pleaded for, namely to denote not the birth in the first
place, but the privilege that belonged thereunto. So Psalm. 89.27. God is said
to make David his (...), his firstborn; which is expounded in the next words,
higher than the Kings of the earth. So that the Lord Christ being the
firstborn, is but the same which we have insisted on, of his being Heir of
all, which was the privilege of the firstborn. And this privilege was
sometimes transmitted unto others that were not the firstborn, although the
natural course of their nativity could not be changed: Genesis 21.10. chap. 49. v.
3, 4, 8. The Lord Christ then, by the appointment of the Father, being
entrusted with the whole Inheritance of Heaven and Earth, and Authority to
dispose of it, that he might give out portions to all the rest of God's family
is, and is called the firstborn thereof.

There remains now but one word more to be considered for the opening of this
Introduction of the ensuing Testimony; and that is (...), he says; that is,
God himself says; they are His words which shall be produced. What ever is
spoken in the Scripture in his name, it is his speaking, and he continues to
speak it unto this day. He speaks in the Scripture unto the end of the world.
This is the foundation of our faith, that which it rises from, and that which
it is r^solved into; God speaks, and I suppose we need no interposition of
Church or Tradition to give Authority or Credit unto what he says or speaks.

This then is the sum of these words of the Apostle, Again, in another place,
where the Holy Ghost fore-tells the bringing forth into the world, and amongst
men, him that is the Lord and Heir of all, to undertake his work, and to enter
into his Kingdom and Glory, the Lord speaks to this purpose, Let all the Angels
of God worship him.

To manifest this testimony to be apposite unto the confirmation of the
Apostles assertion, three things are required.

1. That it is the Son who is intended and spoken of in the place from whence
the words are taken, and so designed as the Person to be worshipped.

2. That they are Angels that are spoken unto, and commanded to worship him.

3. That on these suppositions, the words prove the Pre-eminence of Christ
above the Angels.

For the two former, with them that acknowledge the Divine Authority of this
Epistle, it is sufficient in general to give them satisfaction. The place is
applied unto Christ, and this passage unto the ministering Angels, by the same
Spirit who first wrote that Scripture. But yet there is room left for our
enquiry how these things may be evidenced, whereby the strength of the Apostles
Reasonings with them who were not yet convinced of the infallibility of his
Assertions, any farther than they were confirmed by testimonies out of the Old
Testament, and the faith of the Ancient Church of the Hebrews in this matter,
may be made to appear; as also a check given to their boldness, who upon
pretense of the impropriety of these Allegations have questioned the Authority
of the whole Epistle.

And our first enquiry must be, whence this testimony is taken. Many of the
Ancients, as Epiphanius, Theodoret, Euthymius, Procopius, and Anselm, conceive
the words to be cited from Deuteronomy. 32.42. where they expressly occur in the
Translation of the LXX. (...); Rejoice ye Heavens with him, and let all the
Angels of God worship him. But there are two considerations that put it beyond
all pretensions that the words are not taken from this place of the LXX.

1. Because indeed there are no such words in the Original Text, nor any thing
spoken that might give occasion to the sense expressed in them; but that whole
Verse is inserted in the Greek Version quite besides the scope of the place.
Now though it may perhaps be safely granted, that the Apostles in citing the
Scripture of the Old Testament, did sometimes use the words of the Greek
Translation then in use, yea, though not exact according to the Original whilst
the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost was retained in them; yet to cite that
from the Scripture as the word and testimony of God, which indeed is not
therein, nor was ever spoken by God, but by humane failure and corruption crept
into the Greek Version, is not to be imputed unto them. And indeed I no way
question, but that this addition unto the Greek Text in that place, was made
after the Apostle had used this testimony. For it is not unlikely, but that
some considering of it, and not considering from whence it was taken, because
the words occur not absolutely and exactly in the Greek any where, inserted it
into that place of Moses, amidst other words of an alike sound, and somewhat an
alike importante; such as immediately precede and follow the clause inserted.

2. The Holy Ghost is not treating in that place about the Introduction of the
Firstborn into the world, but quite of another matter, as is evident upon the
first view of the Text; so that this testimony is evidently not taken from this
place; nor would, nor could the Apostle make use of a testimony liable unto
such just exceptions.

Later Expositors generally agree, that the words are taken out of Psalm. 97. v.
7. where the Original is rendered by the LXX, (...); which with a very small
variation in the words, and none at all in the sense, is here expressed by the
Apostle, And let all the Angels of God worship him.

The Psalm has no Title at all in the Original, which the Greek Version
notes, affirming that it is (...); but it adds one of its own, namely, (...),
A Psalm of David, when his land was restored. Hence it is referred by some to
the time of his return unto Jerusalem, after he had been expelled the Kingdom
by Absalom; by others, with more probability, to the time of his bringing the
Ark into the Tabernacle from the house of Obed-edom, when the land was quieted
before him. And unquestionably in it, the Kingdom of God was shadowed out under
the Type of the Kingdom of David; which Kingdom of God was none other but that
of the Messiah.

It is evident that this Psalm is of the same Nature with that which goes
before, yea a part of it, or an Appendix unto it. The first words of this take
up and carry on what is affirmed in the tenth verse, or close of that: so that
both of them are but one continued Psalm of Praise. Now the Title of that
Psalm, and consequently this is (...), A new song, v. 1. which Psalms, as Rashi
confesses, are to be referred unto the World to come, that is the Time and
Kingdom of the Messiah. So Kimchi affirms, that this Psalm and that following,
respect the time when the people shall be delivered from the Captivity out of
all Nations, that is the time of the Messiah. And Rakenati affirms, that the
last verse of it, He comes to judge the earth, can respect nothing but the
coming and reign of the Messiah. Thus they out of their Traditions.

Some of the Ancients, I confess, charge them with corrupting this Psalm in the
version of the 10 verse, affirming that the words sometimes were (...), The
Lord reigned from the Tree, denoting, as the say, the Cross. So Justin Martyr
in his Dialogue with Trypho. And after him the same words are remembered by
Tertullian, ad. Judae. cap. 10. ad. Marci. lib. 3. And Augustine. Enarr. in
Psalm. 95. And though the fraud and corruption pretended be improbable, indeed
impossible; nor are the words mentioned by Justine acknowledged by the Targum,
or any Greek Translator, or Hierom; yet it is evident, that all parties granted
the Messiah and his Kingdom to be intended in the Psalm, or there had been no
need or color for the one to suspect the other of corruption about it. It is
then evident, that the Ancient Church of the Jews, whose Tradition is herein
followed by the Modern, acknowledged this Psalm to contain a description of the
Kingdom of God in the Messiah, and on their consent does the Apostle proceed.
And the next Psalm, which is of the same importance with this, is entitled by
the Targumist, (...), A Prophetical Psalm, namely of the Kingdom and Reign of
the Messiah.

But the matter of the Psalm it self makes it manifest that the Holy Ghost
treats in it about God's bringing in the firstborn into the world, and the
setting up of his Kingdom in him. A Kingdom is described, wherein God would
reign, which should destroy Idolatry and false-worship; a Kingdom wherein the
Isles of the Gentiles should rejoice, being called to an interest therein; a
Kingdom that was to be preached, proclaimed, declared, unto the increase of
Light and Holiness in the world, with the manifestation of the glory of God
unto the ends of the earth; every part whereof declares the Kingdom of Christ
to be intended in the Psalm, and consequently that it is a Prophecy of the
bringing in of the first-begotten into the world.

2. Our second enquiry is, Whether the Angels be intended in these words. They
are, as was before observed, (...), omnes dii; and are so rendered by Hierom,
Adorate eum omnes dii; and by ours, Worship him, all ye gods. The preceding
words are, Confounded be all they that serve graven images, (...), that boast
themselves in, or of idols; Vanities, Nothings, as the word signifies; whereon
ensues this Apostrophe, Worship him, (...), all ye gods: And who they are, is
our present enquiry.

Some, as all the Modern Jews, say, that it is the gods of the Gentiles, those
whom they worship, that are intended; so making (...) and (...), gods, and vain
idols, to be the same in this place: But,

1. It cannot be, that the Psalmist should exhort the idols of the Heathen,
some whereof were Devils, some dead men, some inanimate parts of the Creation,
unto a reverential worshipping of God reigning over all. Hence the Targumist
seeing the vanity of that Interpretation perverts the words, and renders them,
Worship before him all ye Nations, which serve idols.

2. (...), Elohim, is so far in this place from being exegetical of (...),
gods, or vain idols, that it is put in direct Opposition unto it, as is evident
from the words themselves.

3. The word Elohim, which most frequently denotes the true God, does never
alone, and absolutely taken, signify false gods or idols, but only when it is
joined with some other word discovering its application; as his god, or their
gods, or the gods of this or that people: in which case it is rendered by the
LXX sometimes (...), an idol, sometimes (...), an idol made with hands,
sometimes (...), an abomination: but here it has no such limitation or
restriction.

Whereas therefore there are some Creatures, who by reason of some peculiar
Excellency and likeness unto God, or subordination unto him in his work, are
called gods, it must be those, or some of them that are intended in the
expression; now these are either Magistrates or Angels.

First, Magistrates are somewhere called Elohim, because of the Representation
they make of God in his Power, and their peculiar subordination unto him in
their working. The Jews indeed contend that no other Magistrates but only those
of the Great Sanedrin are any where called gods; but that concerns not our
present enquiry: some Magistrates are so called, but none of them are here
intended by the Psalmist; there being no Occasion administered unto him of any
such Apostrophe unto them.

Secondly, Angels also are called Elohim; (...), 1 Cor. 8.5. They have the Name
of God attributed unto them, as we have showed before in some instances. And
these alone are they whom the Psalmist speaks unto. Having called on the whole
Creation to rejoice in the bringing forth of the Kingdom of God, and pressed
his Exhortation upon things on the Earth, he turns unto the ministering Angels,
and calls on them to the discharge of their duty unto the King of that Kingdom.
Hence the Targumist in the beginning of Psalm. 96. which is indeed in the
beginning of this, expressly mentions (...), his high Angels, joining in his
praise and worship, using the Greek word (...), for distinction sake; as on the
same account it often occurs in the Targum.

We have thus evinced that the Psalm treats about the bringing in of the
firstborn into the world; as also that they are the ministering Angels who are
here commanded to worship him.

For the command it self, and the nature of it, it consisted in these two
things. 1. A declaration of the state and condition of the Messiah, which is
such, as that he is a meet Object of Religious Adoration unto the Angels, and
attended with peculiar motives unto the discharge of their duty. The former he
has from his Divine Nature, the latter from his Work with his State and
Dignity that ensued thereon. 2. An intimation of the pleasure of God unto the
Angels, not that Divine Worship was absolutely due unto the Son of God, which
they knew from the first instant of their Creation; but that all Honor and
Glory were due unto him on the account of his Work and Office, as Mediator and
King of his Church.

3. It remains only that we show, that this testimony thus explained was
suitable unto the Apostles design and purpose, and did prove the Assertion in
the Confirmation whereof it is produced. Now this is a matter of so full and
clear an evidence, that it will not at all detain us. For it is impossible that
there should be any more clear or full demonstration of this truth, That the
Lord Christ has an unspeakable Pre-eminence above the Angels than this; that
they are all appointed and commanded by God himself to adore him* with Divine
and Religious Worship. We may now therefore consider what Observations the
words will afford us for our own instruction. It appears then from hence.

1. That the Authority of God speaking in the Scripture is that alone which
Divine Faith rests upon, and is to be resolved into. He says. It was the
begetting of faith in some of the Hebrews, and the increase or establishment of
it in others, that the Apostle aimed at. That which he proposes to them as the
Object of their faith, that which they were to believe, was that Excellency of
the Person and Kingly Authority of the Messiah, wherein they had not as yet
been instructed. And hereof he endeavors not to beget an Opinion in them, but
that Faith which cannot deceive, or be deceived. To this end he proposes that
unto them, which they ought to submit unto, and which they may safely rest in.
For as Faith is an Act of Religious Obedience, it respects the Authority of God
requiring it, and as it is a Religious infallible assent of the mind, it
regards the Truth and Veracity of God as its Object. On this alone it rests,
God says. And in what ever God speaks in the Scripture, his Truth and
Authority manifest themselves to the satisfaction of faith, and no where else
does it find rest.

II. That for the begetting, increasing, and strengthening of faith, it is
useful to have important fundamental Truths confirmed by many testimonies of
Scripture. Again he says. Any one word of God is sufficient to establish the
most important Truth to Eternity, so as to hang the salvation of all mankind
thereon; neither can any thing impeach or weaken what is so confirmed. No more
is required in any case to make Faith necessary on our part as a Duty of
Obedience, and infallible as to the Event, but that God has by any means, by
any one word revealed that which he requires our assent unto. But God deals
not upon strict terms. Infinite Condescension lies at the bottom of all wherein
he has to deal with us. He respects not what the nature of the thing strictly
requires, but what is needful unto our infirmity and weakness. Hence he
multiplies his Commands and Promises, and confirms all by his Oath, swearing to
his Truth by himself, to take away all pretense of distrust and unbelief. For
this cause he multiplies Testimonies to the Truths wherein the concernments of
his Glory and our Obedience do lie; as might be manifested by the consideration
of instances innumerable. Thus in his name deals the Apostle in this place. And
this is useful to Faith. For,

1. What is it may be obscure in one, is cleared in another; and so what doubts
and fears remain on the consideration of one Testimony, are removed by another,
whereby the souls of Believers are carried on unto a full Assurance. And
therefore because such is our weakness that there is need hereof in our selves,
such is the Goodness of God that there is no want of it in the Word.

2. Faith discerns hereby the weight that God lays upon its embracing of the
Truth so testified unto. He knows our concernment in it, and thereon urges us
with its acceptance. This awakens and excites Faith unto Attention and
Consideration, the eminent means of its growth and increase. It knows that it
is not for nothing that the Holy Ghost thus presses his Truth upon it, and
attends the more diligently upon his urgency.

3. Every testimony has something single in it, and peculiar unto it. Though
many bear witness to the same truth, yet such is the fullness of the Scripture,
and such the Wisdom of God laid up therein, that every one of them has also
somewhat of its own, somewhat singular, tending to the enlightening and
establishment of our minds. This Faith makes a discovery of, and so receives
peculiar profit and advantage thereby.

And this should teach us to abound in the study and search of the Scriptures,
that we may thereby come to establishment in the truth. God has thus left us
many testimonies to each important Truth, and he has not done it in vain; he
knows our need of it; and his Condescension in so doing, when he might have
bound us up to the strictest terms of closing with the least intimation of his
will, is for ever to be admired. For us to neglect this great effect and
product of the Wisdom Grace and Love of God, is unspeakable folly. If we think
we need it not, we make our selves wiser than God; if we think we do, and
neglect our duty herein, we are really as unwise as the Beasts that perish.
Want of this fortifying of faith by a diligent search after the testimonies
given unto the truth proposed unto it to be believed, is the cause that so many
every day turn away from it, and therewithal make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience. Let us then never think our selves safe in the knowledge and
profession of any truth, but whilst we continue sincerely in the investigation
of all the confirmation that God has given it in his Word. The Opposition made
to every Truth is so various, and from so many hands, that not the least
contribution of evidence unto it can be neglected with safety.

III. The whole Creation of God has a great concernment in God's bringing
forth Christ into the world, and his Exaltation in his Kingdom. Hence in the
Psalm from whence these words are taken, all the principal parts of it are
called on to triumph and rejoice therein; The Earth, and the multitude of the
Isles, the Heaven, and all People, are invited unto this congratulation;
neither is any thing excluded but Idols and Idolaters, whose ruin God intends
in the Erection of the Kingdom of Christ. And this they have ground for.

1. Because, in that Work consisted the principal manifestation of the Wisdom
Power and Goodness of God. The whole Creation is concerned in the Glory of the
Creator. In his Exaltation does their honor interest and blessedness consist.
For this End were they made, that God might be glorified. The more that is done
by any means, the more is their End attained.

Hence the very inanimate parts of it are introduced by a (...), rejoicing,
exulting shouting and clapping their hands, when the Glory of God is
manifested; in all which, their suitableness and propensity to their proper End
is declared; as also by their being burdened and groaning under such an Estate
and Condition of things, as does any way eclipse the Glory of their Maker. Now
in this work of bringing forth the firstborn is the Glory of God principally
and eminently exalted. For the Lord Christ is the Brightness of his Glory, and
in him all the Treasures of Wisdom Grace and Goodness, are laid up and hid.
What ever God had any other ways before parcelled out, of and concerning his
Glory by the works of his hands, is all, and altogether, and with an
unspeakable Addition of Beauty and Excellency, repeated in Christ.

2. The whole Creation receives a real Advancement and honor in the Sons
being made the firstborn of every creature, that is the especial Heir and Lord
of them all. Their being brought into a new dependence on the Lord Christ, is
their Honor, and they are exalted by becoming his Possession. For after that
they had lost their first Original Dependence on God, and their respect unto
him grounded on his pronouncing of them exceeding good, that is such as became
his Wisdom and Power to have made, they fell under the power of the Devil, who
became Prince of this world by sin. Herein consisted the vanity and debasement
of the Creature, which it was never willingly, or of its own accord subject
unto. But God setting up the Kingdom of Christ, and making him the firstborn,
the whole Creation has a right unto a new glorious Lord and Master. And
however any part of it be violently for a season detained under its old
bondage, yet it has grounds of an earnest Expectation of a full and total
Deliverance into Liberty, by virtue of this Primogeniture of Christ Jesus.

3. Angels and Men the Inhabitants of Heaven and Earth, the principal parts of
the Creation, on whom God has in an especial manner estamped his own likeness
and Image, are hereby made partakers of such inestimable Benefits, as
indispensably call for rejoicing in a way of Thankfulness and Gratitude. This
the whole Gospel declares, and therefore it needs not our particular
improvement in this place.

And if this be the duty of the whole Creation, it is easy to discern in what
a special manner it is incumbent on them that believe, whose Benefit Advantage
and Glory was principally intended in this whole work of God. Should they be
found wanting in this Duty, God might as of old call Heaven and Earth to
witness against them. Yea, Thankfulness to God, for the bringing forth of the
firstborn into the world, is the sum and substance of all that Obedience
which God requires at the hands of believers.

IV. The Command of God is the ground and Reason of all Religious Worship. The
Angels are to worship the Lord Christ the Mediator, and the ground of their so
doing is Gods command: he says, Worship him all ye Angels.

Now the command of God is twofold: (1.) Formal and vocal; when God gives out a
Law or Precept unto any creature superadded to the Law of its Creation: Such
was the Command given unto our first Parents in the Garden, concerning the Tree
of the knowledge of Good and Evil; and such were all the Laws, Precepts, and
Institutions, which he afterward gave unto his Church, with those which to
this day continue as the Rule and Reason of their Obedience. (2.) Real and
interpretative; consisting in an impression of the Mind and Will of God upon
the nature of his creatures, with respect unto that Obedience which their state
condition and dependence on him requires. The very nature of an intellectual
Creature made for the Glory of God, and placed in a moral dependence upon him,
and subjection unto him, has in it the force of a Command, as to the Worship
and Service that God requires at their hands. But this Law in man, being
blotted, weakened, impaired through sin, God has in mercy unto us collected,
drawn forth, and disposed all the Directions and Commands of it in vocal formal
Precepts recorded in his Word; whereunto he has superadded sundry new Commands
in the Institutions of his Worship. Wi^h Angels it is otherwise. The ingrafted
Law of their Creation requiring of them the Worship of God and Obedience to his
whole Will, is kept and preserved entire; so that they have no need to have it
repeated and expressed in vocal formal Commands. And by virtue of this Law,
were they obliged to constant and everlasting Worship of the Eternal Son of
God, as being created and upheld in an universal dependence upon him. But now
when God brings forth his Son into the world, and places him in a new
condition of being incarnate, and becoming so the Head of his Church, there is
a new Modification of the Worship that is due to him brought in, and a new
respect unto things not considered in the first creation. With reference
hereunto God gives a new Command unto the Angels, for that peculiar kind of
Worship and Honor, which is due unto him in that state and condition which he
had taken upon himself.

This the Law of their Creation in general directed them unto; but in
particular required not of them. It enjoined the Worship of the Son of God in
every condition, but that condition was not expressed. This God supplies by a
new Command; That is such an Intimation of his Mind and Will unto them, as
answers unto a vocal Command given unto men, who by that means only may come to
know the Will of God. Thus in one way or other, Command is the Ground and Cause
of all Worship. For,

1. All Worship is Obedience; Obedience respects Authority; and Authority
exerts it self in Commands. And if this Authority be not the Authority of God,
the Worship performed in Obedience unto it, is not the Worship of God, but of
him or them whose Commands and Authority are the Reason and cause of it. It is
the Authority of God alone that can make any Worship to be religious, or the
performance of it to be an Act of Obedience unto him.

2. God would never allow that the Will and Wisdom of any of his Creatures
should be the rise, Rule, or measure of his Worship, or any part of it, or any
thing that belongs unto it: This Honor he has reserved unto himself, neither
will he part with it unto any other. He alone knows what becomes his own
Greatness and Holiness, and what tends to the Advancement of his Glory. Hence
the Scripture abounds with severe Interdictions and Comminations against them,
who shall presume to do or appoint any thing in his Worship besides or beyond
his own Institution.

3. All Prescriptions of Worship are vain, where men have not strength to
perform it in a due manner, nor Assurance of Acceptance when it is performed.
Now both these are, and must be from God alone; nor does he give strength and
ability for any thing in his Worship but what himself commands; nor does he
promise to accept any thing but what is of his own Appointment; so that it is
the greatest folly imaginable to undertake any thing in his Worship and
Service, but what his Appointment gives warrant for.

And this should teach us in all that we have to do in the Worship of God
carefully to look after his word of Command and Institution. Without this, all
that we do is lost, as being no Obedience unto God. Yea, it is an open setting
up of our own Wills and Wisdom against him, and that in things of his own
especial concernment, which is intolerable boldness and presumption. Let us
deal thus with our Rulers amongst men, and obey them not according to their
Laws but our own fancies, and see whether they will accept our persons? And is
the Great and Holy God less to be regarded? besides, what we have our own
Inventions, or the Commands of other men as the ground and reason of our doing
it, we have nothing but our own or their warranty for its Acceptance with God;
and how far this will secure us, is easy to judge.

We might hence also farther observe,

V. That the Mediator of the New Covenant is in his own Person God blessed for
ever, to whom Divine or Religious Worship is due from the Angels themselves. As
also that,

VI. The Father upon the account of the Work of Christ in the World, and his
Kingdom that ensued it, gives a new Commandment unto the Angels to Worship him,
his Glory being greatly concerned therein. And that,

VII. Great is the Churches security and Honor, when the Head of it is
worshipped by all the Angels in Heaven; as also that,

VIII. It can be no duty of the Saints of the New Testament to worship Angels,
who are their fellow servants in the worship of Jesus Christ.

Verse VII.
HAving in one Testimony from the Scripture expressing the subjection of Angels
unto the Lord Christ, signally proved his main Design; The Apostle proceeds
to the farther confirmation of it in the same way, and that by ballancing
single Testimonies concerning the Nature and Offices of the Angels, with some
others concerning the same things in the Lord Christ of whom he treats. And the
first of these relating unto Angels he lays down in the next verse.

Verse 7. (...).
(...).
There is not much of Difficulty in the words: (...), unto the Angels. Sir.
(...), of, or concerning the Angels. (...), is often used for (...), and on the
contrary, and (...) for (...); so that (...), to the Angels, is as much as
(...), of, or concerning the Angels. But as concerning the Angels, (or) and of
the Angels he says; for these words are not spoken unto the Angels, as the
following words are directly spoken unto the Son; He is the Person as well
spoken to, as spoken of, but so are not the Angels in the place from whence
this Testimony is taken, wherein the Holy Ghost only declares the Providence
of God concerning them.

(...), he says; that is, God the Father says; or the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture says, as was before observed.

(...).
(...), is Minister publicus; a public Minister, or Agent; from (...), which is
the same with (...), as Hesychius renders it, public. He that is employed in
any great and public work is (...). Hence of old Magistrates were termed
(...), as they are by Paul (...), Romans 13.4. The Ministers of God. And Chap. 8.
v. 2. of this Epistle, he calls the Lord Jesus in respect of his Priestly
Office, (...), the public Minister of Holy Things; and himself, in respect of
his Apostleship, (...), Romans 15.16. A Minister of Jesus Christ. So the name is
on this account aequipollent unto that of Angels; For as that denotes the
Mission of those spirits unto their work, so does this their Employment therein.

This Testimony is taken from Psalm. 104. v. 4. where the words are to the same
purpose. (...). The Translation now in the Greek is the same with that of the
Apostle; only for (...), a flame of fire, some Copies have it (...), a flaming
fire, more express to the Original; and the change probably was made in the
Copies from this place of the Apostle; Symmachus, (...), a devouring Fire.

Verse 7. But unto (of) the Angels he says, who makes his Angels Spirits, and
his Ministers a flame of fire; or flaming fire.
The Apostle here enters upon his Third Argument to prove the Pre-eminence of
the Lord Christ above Angels, and that by comparing them together, either as to
their Natures, or as to their Employments, according as the one and the other
is set forth declared and testified unto in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament. And this first Place which he refers unto Angels, we shall now
explain and vindicate. And in so doing enquire, both Who they are of whom the
Psalmist speaks, and what it is that he affirms of them.

There is a threefold sense given of the words of the Psalmist, as they lie in
the Hebrew Text.

1. The First is that of the Modern Jews, who deny that there is any mention
made of Angels: affirming the Subject that the Psalmist treats of to be the
Winds, with Thunder and Lightning, which God employes as his Messengers and
Ministers to accomplish his Will and Pleasure. So he made the Winds his
Messengers when he sent them to raise a storm on Jonah, when he fled from his
Presence; and a flaming fire his Minister, when by it he consumed Sodom and
Gomorrah; and this Opinion makes (...), which it interprets Winds, and (...), a
flaming fire to be the Subject of the Proposition, of whom it is affirmed that
God employes them as his Messengers and Ministers.

That this Opinion which is directly contradictory to the Authority of the
Apostle, is so also to the Design of the Psalmist, sense of the Words, Consent
of the Ancient Jews, and so no way to be admitted, shall afterward be made to
appear.

2. Some averr that the Winds and Meteors are principally intended, but yet so,
as that God affirming that he makes the Winds his Messengers, does also
intimate that it is the Work and Employment of his Angels above to be his
Messengers also; and that because he makes use of their Ministry to cause
those Winds and Fires, whereby he accomplisheth his Will; And this they
illustrate by the Fire and Winds caused by them on Mount Sinai, at the giving
of the Law.

But this Interpretation, whatever is pretended to the contrary, does not
really differ from the former, denying Angels to be intentionally spoken of,
only hooking in a respect unto them, not to be seen to contradict the Apostle,
and therefore will be disproved together with that which went before.

3. Others grant, that it is the Angels of whom the Apostle treats, but as to
the Interpretation of the words, they are of two Opinions.

1. Some make Spirits to be the subject of what is affirmed, and Angels to be
the Predicate. In this sense, God is said to make those spiritual Substances
Inhabitants of Heaven his Messengers, employing them in his service, and them
whose nature is a flaming fire, that is, the Seraphims to be his Ministers, and
to accomplish his pleasure. And this way, after Austin, go many Expositors,
making the Term, Angels, here merely to denote an Employment, and not the
Persons employed. But as this Interpretation also takes off from the Efficacy
and Evidence of the Apostles Argument, so we shall see that there is nothing in
the words themselves, leading to the Embracement of it.

It remains therefore, that it is the Angels that are here spoken of, as also
that they are intended and designed by that name, which denotes their Persons
and not their employment.

1. That Angels are primarily intended by the Psalmist, contrary to the first
Opinion of the Modern Jews, and the second mentioned, leaning thereunto:
appears,

1. From the scope and design of the Psalmist. For designing to set out the
Glory of God in his works of Creation and Providence, after he had declared the
framing of all things by his Power, which come under the name of Heaven, v. 2,
3. before he proceeds to the Creation of the Earth, passing over, with Moses,
the creation of Angels, or couching it with him under the production of Light,
or of the Heavens, as they are called in Job, he declares his Providence and
Sovereignty in employing his Angels between Heaven and Earth, as his servants
for the accomplishment of his pleasure. Neither does it at all suit his method
or design, in his Enumeration of the works of God, to make mention of the Winds
and Tempests, and their use in the Earth, before he had mentioned the Creation
of the Earth its self; which follows in the next Verse unto this; so that these
senses are excluded by the Context of the Psalm.

2. The consent of the Ancient Jews lies against the sentiments of the Modern;
both the old Translations either made, or embraced by them, expressly refer the
words unto Angels. So does that of the LXX. as is evident from the words; and
so does the Targum thus rendering the place, (...), who makes his Messengers,
or Angels swift as Spirits, and his Ministers strong or powerful, as a flaming
fire. The supply of the note of similitude makes it evident that they
understood the Text of Angels, and not Winds; and of making Angels as Spirits,
and not of making Winds to be Angels or Messengers which is inconsistent with
their Words.

3. The word (...), does usually denote the Angels themselves, and no reason
can be given why it should not do so in this place.

2. Moreover it appears that that Term is the Subject of the Proposition. For,

1. The Apostle, and the LXX. fixing the Articles before (...), and (...),
Angels and Ministers do plainly determine the Subject spoken of. For although
it may be, some variety may be observed in the use of Articles in other places,
so that they do not always determine the subject of the Proposition, as
sometimes confessedly they do, as John 1.1. John 4.24. Yet in this place, where
in the Original all the words are left indefinitely without any prefix to
direct the Emphasis unto any one of them, the fixing of them in the Translation
of the Apostle, and LXX. must necessarily design the subject of them or else by
the addition of the Article, they leave the sense much more ambiguous than
before, and give occasion to a great mistake in the Interpretation of the words.

2. The Apostle speaks of Angels; Unto the Angels he says; and in all other
Testimonies produced by him, that whereof he treats, has the place of the
subject spoken of, and not of that which is attributed unto any thing else.
Neither can the words be freed from equivocation, if Angels in the first place
denote the Persons of the Angels, and in the latter their employment only.

3. The Design and scope of the Apostle requires this Construction of the
words; for his intention is to prove by this Testimony, that the Angels are
employed in such Works and Services, and in such a manner as that they are no
way to be compared to the Son of God, in respect of that Office which as
Mediator he has undertaken; which the sense and construction contended for
alone does prove.

4. The Original Text requires this sense; for according to the common use of
that Language, among words indefinitely used, the first denotes the subject
spoken of, which is Angels here; (...), making his Angels Spirits; and in such
Propositions often times some note of similitude is to be understood, without
which the sense is not complete; and which as I have showed the Targum
supplyeth in this place.

From what has been said, I suppose it is made evident, both that the Psalmist
expressly treats of Angels, and that that the subject spoken of by the Apostle
is expressed in that word; and that following, of Ministers.

Our next enquiry is after what is affirmed concerning these Angels and
Ministers spoken of; And that is, that God makes them Spirits, and a flame of
fire. And concerning the meaning of these words there are two Opinions.

First, That the Creation of Angels is intended in the words; and the Nature
whereof they were made is expressed in them. He made them Spirits; that is of a
spiritual substance; and his Heavenly Ministers, quick, powerful, agile, as a
flaming fire; Some carry this sense farther, and affirm that two sorts of
Angels are intimated; one of an aerial substance like the Wind, and the other
igneal or fiery, denying all pure intelligences without mixture of matter, as
the product of the School of Aristotle.

But this seems not to be the intention of the words; nor is the Creation of
the Angels, or the substance whereof they consist, here expressed. For,

First, The Analysis of the Psalm formerly touched on requires the referring of
these words to the Providence of God employing of the Angels, and not to his
Power in making them.

Secondly, The Apostle in this place has nothing to do with the Essence and
Nature of the Angels, but with their Dignity, Honor and Employment, on which
accounts he prefers the Lord Christ before them. Wherefore,

Secondly, The Providence of God in disposing and employing of Angels in his
service is intended in these words; and so they may have a double sense;

1. That God employeth his Angels and Heavenly Ministers in the Production of
those Winds, (...), and Fire, (...) Thunder and Lightning, whereby he executes
many Judgments in the world.

2. A note of similitude may be understood to complete the sense; which is
expressed in the Targum on the Psalm; he makes, or sends his Angels like the
Winds, or like a flaming fire, makes them speedy, spiritual, agil, powerful,
quickly and effectually accomplishing the work that is appointed unto them.

Either way this is the plain intendment of the Psalm; that God uses and
employeth his Angels in effecting the Works of his Providence here below, and
they were made to serve the Providence of God in that way and manner. This
says the Apostle is the Testimony which the Holy Ghost gives concerning them,
their Nature, Duty and Work wherein they serve the Providence of God; But now
says he, consider what the Scripture says concerning the Son, how it calls
him God, how it ascribes a Throne and a Kingdom unto him, (Testimonies whereof
he produces in the next Verses) and you will easily discern his Pre-eminence
above them.

But before we proceed to the consideration of the ensuing Testimonies we may
make some Observations on that which we have already passed through: as,

1. Our conceptions of the Angels, their Nature, Office and Work is to be
regulated by the Scripture.

The Jews of old had many curious speculations about Angels, wherein they
greatly pleased, and greatly deceived themselves. Wherefore the Apostle in his
dealing with them calls them off from all their foolish imaginations, to attend
unto those things which God has revealed in his word concerning them. This the
Holy Ghost says of them, and therefore this we are to receive and believe, and
this alone: For,

1. This will keep us unto that becoming Sobriety in things above us, which
both the Scripture greatly commends, and is exceedingly suited unto Right
Reason. The Scripture minds us, (...), Romans 12.3. To keep our selves within the
bounds of Modesty, and to be wise to sobriety. And the Rule of that Sobriety is
given us for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.28. (...), Secret things belong to the Lord our
God, but revealed things to us and our Children. Divine Revelation is the Rule
and measure of our knowledge in these things, and that bounds and determines
our sobriety. And hence the Apostle condemning the Curiosity of men in this
very subject about Angels, makes the nature of their sin to consist in
exceeding these bounds, by an enquiry into things unrevealed, and the rise of
that evil to lie in Pride, Vanity and Fleshliness, and the tendency of it to be
unto false Worship, Superstition and Idolatry, Col. 2.18. Neither is there any
thing more averse from Right Reason, nor more condemned by wise men of former
times, than a curious humor of prying into those things wherein we are not
concerned; and for whose investigation we have no certain, honest, lawful Rule
or medium. And this evil is increased where God himself has given bounds to
our enquiries, as in this case he has.

2. This alone will bring us unto any Certainty and Truth. Whilst men indulge
to their own imaginations and fancies, as too many in this matter have been apt
to do, it is sad to consider how they have wandered up and down, and with what
fond Conceits they have deceived themselves and others. The world has been
filled with monstrous Opinions and Doctrines about Angels, their Nature,
Offices and Employments; some have Worshipped them, others pretended I know not
what Communion and intercourse with them, in all which conceits there has been
little of Truth, and nothing at all of Certainty. Whereas if men according to
the Example of the Apostle, would keep themselves to the word of God, as they
would know enough in this matter for the discharging of their own Duty, so they
would have Assurance and Evidence of Truth in their conceptions, without which
pretended high and raised notions, are but a shadow of a dream, worse then
professed ignorance.

II. We may hence observe, That the Glory, Honor and Exaltation of Angels lies
in their subserviency to the Povidence of God; It lies not so much in their
Nature, as in their work and service. The intention of the Apostle is to show
the Glory of Angels and their Exaltation, which he does by the induction of
this Testimony, reporting their serviceableness in the works wherein of God
they are employed. God has endowed the Angels with a very Excellent Nature;
furnished them with many eminent properties of Wisdom, Power, Agility,
Perpetuity; but yet what is hereby glorious and honorable herein, consists not
merely in their nature it self, and its Essential Properties, all which abide
in the horridest and most to be detested Part of the whole Creation, namely,
the Devils; but in their conformity and answerableness unto the Mind and Will
of God, that is in their moral, not merely natural Endowments; These make them
amiable, glorious, excellent. Unto this their Readiness for, and compliance
with the will of God, that God having made them for his service, and employing
them in his work, their discharge of their Duty therein, with Cheerfulness,
Alacrity, Readiness and Ability, is that which renders them truly honorable
and glorious. Their Readiness and Ability to serve the Providence of God is
their Glory. For,

1. The greatest Glory that any Creature can be made partaker of is to serve
the Will, and set forth the Praise of its Creator. That is its Order and
Tendency toward its Principal End, in which two all true Honor consists. It
is glorious even in the Angels to serve the God of Glory; what is there above
this for a creature to aspire unto? what that its nature is capable of? Those
among the Angels, who as it seems attempted somewhat farther, somewhat higher,
attained nothing but an endless Ruin in shame and misery. Men are ready to
fancy strange things about the Glory of Angels, and do little consider, that
all the difference in Glory that is in any parts of Gods Creation, lies merely
in Willingness, Ability and Readiness to serve God their Creator.

2. The works wherein God employes them in a subservience unto his Providence,
are in an especial manner glorious works. For the service of Angels as it is
intimated unto us in the Scripture, it may be reduced unto two Heads. For they
are employed either in the communication of Protection and Blessings to the
Church, or in the Execution of the Vengeance and Judgments of God against his
Enemies. Instances to both these purposes may be multiplied; but they are
commonly known. Now these are glorious works. God in them eminently exalts his
Mercy and Justice, the two properties of his Nature, in the Execution whereof
he is most eminently exalted; and from these works arises all that Revenue of
Glory and Praise which God is pleased to reserve to himself from the world; so
that it must needs be very honorable to be employed in these works.

3. They perform their Duty in their service in a very glorious manner; with
great Power, Wisdom, and uncontrollable Efficacy. Thus one of them flew 145000.
of the Enemies of God in a night; Another set fire on Sodom and Gomorrah from
Heaven; of the like Power and Expedition are they in all their services; in all
things to the utmost capacity of creatures answering the Will of God. God
himself, it is true, sees that in them and their Works, which keeps them short
of absolute Purity and Perfection; which are his own Properties; but as to the
capacity of mere Creatures, and for their state and condition, there is a
perfection in their Obedience, and that is their Glory.

Now if this be the great Glory of Angels, and we poor worms of the earth are
invited as we are, into a Participation with them therein, what unspeakable
folly will it be in us, if we be found negligent in laboring to attain
thereunto. Our future Glory consists in this, that we shall be made like unto
Angels; and our Way toward it is to do the Will of our Father on Earth, as it
is done by them in Heaven. Oh in how many Vanities does vain man place his
Glory; nothing so shameful that one or other has not gloried in; whilst the
true and only glory of doing the will of God is neglected by almost all. But we
must treat again of these things upon the last Verse of this Chapter.

Verse VIII, IX.
HAving given an Account of what the Scripture teaches and testifies
concerning Angels, in the following Verses, He shows how much other things,
and far more glorious are spoken to and of the Son, by whom God revealed his
will in the Gospel.

Ver. 8, 9. (...).
(...).
(...). But unto the Son. Sir. (...), but of the Son he says; which is
necessarily supplied as to the Apostles design. In the Psalm the words are
spoken by way of Apostrophe to the Son; and they are recited by the Apostle as
spoken of him; that is, so spoken to him, as to continue a Description of him
and his State or Kingdom.

(...), Psalm. 45.7. is the place from whence the words are taken. (...). The
LXX. render these words as the Apostle. Aquila, (...), for (...). Thy Throne O
God for ever and yet; Symmachus, (...), Thy Throne O God is everlasting and
yet; and that because it is not said (...), but (...), absolutely; (...), as in
the Translation of Aquila.

(...) is a Kingly Throne; nor is it ever used in Scripture for (...), a Common
Seat. (...).
Metonymically it is used for Power and Government, and that frequently. The
LXX almost constantly render it by (...), and (...) is (...), Athenae. lib. 5.
A free open Seat with a Footstool. And such a Throne is here properly assigned
unto the Lord Christ, mention of his Footstool being immediately subjoyned. So
God says of himself, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool: as
the Heathen termed Heaven, (...), the Throne of God.

Thy Throne, O God, (...), In seculum and usque; in sempiternum and perpetuo;
(...).
in seculum seculorum. The Duration denoted by the conjunction of both these
words, is mostly an absolute perpetuity, and a certain uninterrupted
continuance, where the subject spoken of admits a limitation. Many of the Greek
Interpreters render (...) by (...), attending to the sound rather than the use
and signification of the word; so is yet in our language. This we express by,
For ever and ever.

(...); the variation of (...) in the first place before mentioned, takes off
from the Elegancy of the Expression, (...).
and darkens the sense; for the Article prefixed to the last (...) declares
that to be the subject of the Proposition.

The words of the Psalmist are, (...). Shelet is Virga and Sceptrum, and in
this place is rendered by Aquila (...), a Rod, a Staff, a Scepter; always a
Scepter when referred to Rule, as in this place it is called the Scepter of the
Kingdom.

A Scepter (...), from (...), rectus fuit, to be right, straight; (...).
upright principally in a moral sense: (...), of Uprightness. (...) is properly
such a Rectitude as we call straight, opposed to crooked; and Metaphorically
only is it used for moral uprightness, that is, Equity and Righteousness. Sir.
(...); Boderianus, Sceptrum erectum, a Scepter listed up, or held upright. The
Paris Edition, Sceptrum protensum, a Scepter stretched out; and the stretching
out of the Scepter was a sign and token of mercy, Esth. 5.2. Tremelius, Virga
recta, which answers mischor in both its acceptations. Erpenius to the same
purpose, Sceptrum rectum, a right Scepter.

Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated (...), Iniquity, Unrighteousness,
(...).
Wickedness; (...), propterea, propter quod, quare, ideo, idcirco; Wherefore,
for which cause. Some copies of the LXX and Aquila read (...); so that (...)
seems to have been taken into the LXX from this rendering of the words by the
Apostle.

(...) God thy God, has anointed thee. (...).
The words in Greek and Hebrew are those from whence the Names of Christ and
Messiah are taken, which are of the same importance and signification, the
Anointed one. And the same is expressed by the Targumist. Aquila, (...).

Has anointed thee, (...), (...).
the Instrument in doing of the thing intended, expressed by the Accusative
Case; whereof there are other instances in that Language. Of old the LXX read
(...), with the Oil of delight, or Ornament; so that (...) came also into the
Greek Version from this place of the Apostle, and is more proper than the old
reading, the Oil of rejoicing, Joy or Gladness.

(...), before, or above those that partake with thee. (...).
Thy fellows, or companions: so Symmachus, (...).

Verse. 8, 9. But unto the Son (he says) Thy Throne, O God is for ever, the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness. Thou have loved
Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, wherefore God, thy God, has anointed thee
with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows.
This testimony is produced by the Apostle in answer unto that foregoing
concerning Angels. Those words, says he, were spoken by the Holy Ghost of the
Angels, wherein their Office and Employment under the Providence of God is
described. These are spoken by the same Spirit of the Son, or spoken to him;
denoting his Praeexistence unto the Prophesies themselves.

There is little or no difficulty to prove that this Testimony belongs properly
unto him by whom it is applied by the Apostle. The ancient Jews granted it, and
the present Doctors cannot deny it: One of them says indeed, (...), this Psalm
is spoken of David or the Messiah. These are the words, and this is the opinion
of Aben-Ezra, who accordingly endeavors to give a double sense of the chief
passages in this Psalm; one as applied unto David, another as applied unto the
Messiah which he enclines unto. Jarchi turns it into an Allegory, without any
tolerable sense throughout his discourse. But though it might respect them
both, yet there is no pretense to make David the subject of it; the Title and
whole Contexture of it excluding such an Application.

The Targum wholly applies the Psalm to the Messiah; which is somewhat a better
evidence of the Conception of the ancient Jews, than the private Opinion of any
later Writer can give us. And the Title of the Psalm in that Paraphrase, would
make it a Prophecy given out in the days of Moses, for the use of the
Sanedrin; which manifests what account it had of old in their Creed concerning
the Messiah.

Some Christian Interpreters have so far assented unto the latter Rabbis, as
to grant that Solomon was primarily intended in this Psalm as a Type of Christ;
and that the whole was an Epithalamium or Marriage-song, composed upon his
Nuptials with the Daughter of Pharaoh. But there want not important Reasons
against this Opinion. For,

1. It is not probable that the Holy Ghost should so celebrate that Marriage,
which as it was antecedently forbidden by God, so it was never consequently
blessed by him, she being among the number of those strange women which tu^ned
his heart from God, and was cursed with barrenness; the first foreign breach
that came upon his Family and all his Magnificence being also from Egypt, where
his transgression began.

2. There is scarce any thing in the Psalm that can with propriety of speech be
applied unto Solomon. Two things are especially insisted on in the former part
of the Psalm; first, the Righteousness of the Person spoken of in all his ways
and administrations, and then the perpetuity of his Kingdom. How the first of
these can be attributed unto him, whose transgressions and sins were so public
and notorious; or the latter to him who reigned but forty years, and then left
his Kingdom broken and divided to a wicked foolish son, is hard to conceive.

As all then grant that the Messiah is principally, so there is no cogent
reason to prove that he is not solely intended in this Psalm. I will not
contend, but that sundry things treated of in it might be obscurely typified in
the Kingdom and Magnificence of Solomon; yet it is certain, that most of the
things mentioned, and expressions of them, do so immediately and directly
belong unto the Lord Christ, as that they can in no sense be applied unto the
person of Solomon; and such are the words insisted on in this place by our
Apostle, as will be made evident in the ensuing explication of them.

We must then in the next place consider what it is that the Apostle intends to
prove and confirm by this testimony, whereby we shall discover its suitableness
unto his design. Now this is not, as some have supposed, the Deity of Christ;
nor does he make use of that directly in this place, though he do in the next
verse, as a medium to prove his Pre-eminence above the Angels, although the
testimonies which he produces do eminently mention his Divine Nature. But that
which he designs to evince is this only, that He whom they saw for a time made
lower than the Angels, chap. 2.10. was yet in his whole Person, and as he
discharged the Office committed unto him, so far above them, as that he had
Power to alter and change those Institutions which were given out by the
ministry of Angels. And this he does undeniably by the testimonies alleged,
as they are compared together. For whereas the Scripture testifies concerning
Angels, that they are all servants, and that their chiefest Glory consists in
the discharge of their Duty as servants; unto Him a Throne, Rule, and
Everlasting Dominion, administered with Glory, Power, Righteousness and Equity
are ascribed: whence it is evident, that he is exceedingly exalted above them,
as is a King on his Throne above the servants that attend him and do his
pleasure.

And this is sufficient to manifest the design of the Apostle, as also the
evidence of his Argument from this testimony. The Exposition of the words
belongs properly to the place from whence they are taken. But yet that we may
not leave the Reader unsatisfied as to any particular difficulty that may seem
to occur in them, this Exposition shall be here also attended.

The first thing to be attended in them, is the Compellation of the Person
spoken unto, O God; Thy Throne, O God.

Some would have Elohim, ((...)) to be a name common to God with others, namely
Angels, and Judges; and in that large acceptance to be here ascribed to the
Lord Christ; so that though he be expressly called Elohim, and (...) yet that
proves him not to be God by Nature, but only to be so termed in respect of his
Office, Dignity and Authority; and this is contended for by the Socinians. But
this gloss is contrary to the perpetual use of the Scripture; for no one place
can be instanced in, where the name Elohim is used absolutely, and restrained
unto any one person, wherein it does not undeniably denote the true and only
God. Magistrates are indeed said to be Elohim, in respect of their Office, but
no one Magistrate was ever so called; nor can a man say without blasphemy to
any of them, Thou art Elohim, or God. Moses also is said to be Elohim, a God,
but not absolutely; but a God to Pharaoh, and to Aaron; that is, in God's
stead, doing and performing in the name of God what he had commanded him. Which
places Jarchi produces in his Comment, to countenance this sense but in vain.

It is then the True God that is spoken unto in this Apostrophe, Elohim, O God.
This being granted, Erasmus starts a new Interpretation of the whole words,
though he seems not to approve of his own invention: (...), It is uncertain,
says he, whether the meaning be, Thy throne, O God, or God is thy throne for
ever: in the first way, the word is an Apostrophe to the Son, in the latter it
expresses the Person of the Father. And this Interpretation is embraced and
improved by Grotius, who granting that the word Elohim used absolutely
signifies as much as Elohe Elohim, the God of Gods, would not allow that it
should be spoken of Christ, and therefore renders the words, God shall be thy
seat for ever, that is, shall establish thee in thy Throne. And this Evasion is
also fixed on by Aben-Ezra, from Hagaon, (...); God shall establish thy throne.
May men be allowed thus to thrust in what words they please into the Text,
leading to another sense than what it self expresses, there will not much be
left certain in the whole Book of God. However, in this present instance, we
have light enough to rebuke the boldness of this attempt. For, 1. The
Interpretation insisted on is contrary to all old Translations, whose language
would bear a difference in the word, expressing it in the Vocative Case, O God.
2. Contrary to the received sense of Jews and Christians of old, and in
especial of the Targum on the Psalm, rendering the words, Thy throne, O God, is
in heaven, for ever. 3. Contrary to the contexture and design of the Apostles
discourses, as may appear from the consideration of the preceding Enarration of
them. 4. Leaves no tolerable sense unto the words; neither can they who
embrace it declare in what sense God is the throne of Christ. 5. Is contrary to
the universally constant use of the expression in Scripture; for where ever
there is mention of the Throne of Christ, somewhat else, and not God, is
intended thereby. 6. The word supplied by Grotius from Saadias and Aben-Ezra,
to induce a sense unto his Exposition, [shall establish] makes a new Text, or
leads the old utterly from the intention of the words. For whereas it cannot be
said, that God is the throne of Christ, nor was there any need to say, that God
was for ever and ever, which two things must take up the whole intendment of
the words, if God the Father be spoken of, the adding of, shall establish, or
confirm, into the Text, gives it an arbitrary sense, and such as by the like
suggestion of any other word, (as shall destroy) may be rendered quite of
another importance.

It is Christ then, the Son, that is spoken to and denoted by that name Elohim,
O God, as being the true God by Nature, though what is here affirmed of him be
not as God, but as the King of his Church and People; as in another place, God
is said to redeem his Church with his own blood.

Secondly, We may consider what is assigned unto him, which is his Kingdom; and
that is described, 1. By the Insignia regalia, the Royal Ensigns of it, namely
his Throne and Scepter. 2. By its duration, it is for ever. 3. His manner of
Administration, it is with Righteousness; his Scepter is a Scepter of
righteousness. 4. His furniture or preparation for this Administration, he
loved righteousness and hated iniquity. 5. By an adjunct privilege, unction
with the Oil of gladness: Which, 6. is exemplified by a comparison with others,
it is so with him, above his fellows.

The first insigne regium mentioned, is his Throne, whereunto the Attribute of
Perpetuity is annexed, it is for ever. And this Throne denotes the Kingdom it
self. A Throne is the seat of a King in his Kingdom, and is frequently used
metonymically for the Kingdom it self, and that applied unto God and man. See
Dan. 7.9. 1 King. 8.2, 7. Angels indeed are called Thrones, Col. 1.16. But that
is either metaphorically only, or else in respect of some especial service
allotted unto them; as they are also called Princes, Dan. 10.13. yet being
indeed servants, Rev. 22.9. Heb. 1.14. These are no where said to have Thrones;
the Kingdom is not theirs, but the Sons. And whereas our Lord Jesus Christ
promises his Apostles that they shall at the last day sit on Thrones judging
the Tribes of Israel: as it proves their participation with Christ in his
Kingly Power, being made Kings unto God, Rev. 1.5. and their interest in the
Kingdom which it is his pleasure to give them, so it proves not absolutely that
the Kingdom is theirs, but his on whose Throne theirs do attend.

Neither does the Throne simply denote the Kingdom of Christ, or his supreme
Rule and Dominion; but the Glory also of his Kingdom, being on his Throne, is
in the height of his Glory. And thus because God manifests his Glory in Heaven,
he calls that his Throne, as the Earth is his footstool, Isa. 66.1. So that the
Throne of Christ is his Glorious Kingdom elsewhere expressed by his sitting
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Secondly, To this Throne Eternity is attributed; it is (...), for ever and
ever. So is the Throne of Christ said to be in Opposition unto the frail
mutable Kingdoms of the earth. Of the increase of his Government and Peace
there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order
it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth and for
ever, Isa. 9.7. His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall not pass
away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, Dan, 7.14. Micah 4.7.
Psalm. 72.7, 17. Psalm. 145.13. It shall neither decay of it self, nor fail
through the Opposition of its Enemies: for he must reign until all his enemies
are made his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27. Nor is it any impeachment of
the perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ, that at the last day he shall deliver
it up to God the Father: 1 Cor. 15.24. Seeing that then shall be an end of all
Rule. It is enough that it continue until all the Ends of Rule be perfectly
accomplished; that is, until all the enemies of it be subdued, and all the
Church be saved, and the Righteousness Grace and Patience of God be fully
glorified; whereof afterward.

Thirdly, The second insigne Regium, is his Scepter. And this though it
sometimes also denote the Kingdom it self, Genesis 49.10. Numb. 24.17. Isa. 14.5.
Zech. 10.11. Yet here it denotes the actual Administration of Rule, as is
evident from the Adjunct of Vprightness annexed unto it. And thus the Scepter
denotes both the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Efficacy of the Government it
self. So that which we call a Righteous Government, is here called a Scepter of
Uprightness.

Now the Means whereby Christ carries on his Kingdom, are his Word and Spirit,
with a subserviency of Power in the works of his Providence, to make way for
the progress of his Word to avenge its Contempt. So the Gospel is called, The
rod of his strength, Psalm 110.2. See 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. He smites the earth
with the rod of his mouth, and slayes the wicked with the breath of his lips,
Isa. 11.4. And these are attended with the sword of his Power and Providence,
Psalm. 45.3. Revel. 19.15. or his rod, Psalm. 2.8. or sickle, Revel. 14.18. In
these things consists the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom.

Fourthly, Concerning this Scepter it is affirmed, that it is a Scepter of
Vprightness. (...); or (...), denotes either the Nature of the Scepter, that it
is straight and right, or the Use of it, that it is lifted up or stretched out,
as was showed in the opening of the words. In the first sense it denotes
Righteousness, in the latter Mercy. According to the first sense, the following
words, thou have loved Righteousness, discover the habitual root of his actual
Righteous Administration. According to the latter, there is a progress made in
them to a farther qualification of the Rule of Christ, or of Christ in his
Rule. But the former sense is rather to be embraced; the latter Metaphor being
more strained and sounded only in one instance that I remember in the
Scripture, and that not taken from among the people of God, but Strangers and
Oppressors, Esther 5.2.

The Scepter then of the Kingdom of Christ is a Scepter of Righteousness,
because all the Laws of his Gospel are Righteous, Holy, Just, full of Benignity
and Truth, Titus 2.11, 12. And all his Administration of Grace, Mercy, Justice,
Rewards and Punishments, according to the Rules, Promises and Threats of it, in
the Conversion, Pardon, Sanctification, Trials, Afflictions, Chastisements, and
Preservation of his Elect, in his convincing, hardening, and destruction of his
Enemies, are all Righteous, holy, unblameable and good, Isa. 11.4, 5, 6. Chap.
32.7. Psalm. 145.17. Rev. 15.34. Chap. 16.5. and as such will they be gloriously
manifested at the last day, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. though in this present world they
are reproached and despised.

Fifthly, The Habitual Frame of the Heart of Christ in his Regal
Administrations. He loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity. This shows the
absolute compleatness of the Righteousness of Christ's Kingdom, and of his
Righteousness in his Kingdom. The Laws of his Rule are righteous, and his
Administrations are righteous, and they all proceed from an habitual love to
Righteousness, and hatred of Iniquity in his own person. Among the Governments
of this world, often times the very Laws are tyranical, unjust and oppressive;
and if the Laws are good and equal, yet often times their Administration is
unjust, partial and wicked; or when men do abstain from such Exorbitancies, yet
frequently they do so upon the account of some self-interest and advantage,
like Jehu, and not out of a constant, equal, unchangeable love of Righteousness
and hatred of iniquity; but all these are absolutely complete in the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. For whereas the expression both in the Hebrew and the Greek seems
to regard the time past, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, yet
the constant present frame of the heart of Christ in his Rule is denoted
thereby; for the Greek Translation exactly follows and expresses the Hebrew.
Now there being no form of Verbs in that Language expressing the present time,
there is nothing more frequent in it than to denote that which is present and
abiding, by the Praeterperfect Tense, as it does in this place.

Sixthly, The Consequence of this Righteous Rule in Christ is, his Anointing
with the Oil of Gladness; wherein we may consider, (1.) The Author of the
Privilege conferred on him; that is, God, his God. (2.) The Privilege it
self, Unction with the oil of gladness. (3.) The Connection of the collation
of this privilege unto what went before; wherefore, or for which cause.

1. For the Author of it, it is said to be God. (...), God thy God. Many both
ancient and Modern Expositors do suppose, that (...), in the first place, or
God, is used in the same sense as (...), in the Verse foregoing, and that it
ought to be rendered O God, and the words to be read, therefore, O God, thy God
has anointed thee; but as no old Translation gives countenance to this
Conception, so that Reduplication of the Name of God, by an Application of it
in the second place, as God my God, God thy God, God the God of Israel, being
frequent in the Scripture, there is no cogent Reason why we should depart in
this place from that sense of the Expression. The name God, in the first place,
denotes him absolutely who conferred this privilege on the Lord Christ, that
is God; and in the second place, a reason is intimated of the coll^tion its
self, by an Appropriation of God to be his God in a peculiar manner.

God is said to be the God of the Son, upon a threefold account; 1. In respect
of his Divine Nature; as he is his Father, so his God, whence he is said to be
God of God; as having his nature communicated unto him by virtue of his Eternal
Generation, John 1.14. 2. In respect of his Humane Nature, as he was made of a
Woman made under the Law; so God also was his God; as he is the God of all
creatures: Psalm. 16.3. Psalm. 22.1. 3. In respect of his whole person, God and
Man, as he was designed by his Father to the work of Mediation; In which sense
he calls him his God and his Father, John 20.17. And in this last sense is it,
that God is here said to be his God; that is, his God in especial Covenant, as
he was designed and appointed to be the Head and King of his Church: For
therein did God the Father undertake to be with him, to stand by him, to carry
him through with his work, and in the End to crown him with Glory. See Isa.
49.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 50.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

2. For the Privilege it self, it is Unction with the Oil of Gladness. There
may be a double Allusion in these words. 1. To the common use of Oil, and
anointing, which was to exhilerate and make the countenance appear cheerful at
Feasts and public Solemnities, Psalm. 104.15. Luke 7.37. 2. To the especial use
of it in the Unction of Kings, Priests and Prophets, Exodus 30. That the
Ceremony was typical, is evident from Isa. 61.1. and it denoted the collation
of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, whereby the Person anointed was enabled for the
discharge of the Office he was called unto. And in this sense there is commonly
assigned a threefold Unction of Christ. 1. At his Conception, when his Humane
Nature was sanctified by the Holy Spirit, Luke 1.35. and radically endowed with
Wisdom and Grace which he grew up in Luke 2.40, 52. 2. At his Baptism and
entrance into his public Ministry, when he was in an especial manner furnished
with those Gifts of the Spirit which were needful for the discharge of his
Prophetical Office, Matthew. 3.17. John 1. 3. At his Ascension, when he received
of the Father the Promise of the Spirit, to pour him forth upon his Disciples,
Acts 2.33. Now though I acknowledge the Lord Christ to have been thus anointed,
and that the communication of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit unto him in
fullness, is called his Unction; yet I cannot grant that any of them are here
directly intended. But that which the Apostle seems here to express with the
Psalmist, is the Glorious Exaltation of Jesus Christ, when he was solemnly
enstated in his Kingdom: This is that which is called the making of him both
Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. When God raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory, 1 Pet. 1.21. He is called Christ from the Unction of the Spirit; and yet
here in his Exaltation, he is said in especial manner to be made Christ; that
is, taken gloriously into the Possession of all the Offices and their full
Administration, whereunto he was anointed and fitted by the communication of
the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit unto him. It is I say, the joyful glorious
Unction of his Exaltation, when he was signally made Lord and Christ, and
declared to be the anointed one of God that is here intended: Se^ Phil. 2.9,
11. which also appears,

1. From the Adjunct of this Unction; he is anointed with the Oil of gladness;
which denotes Triumph and Exaltation, freedom from trouble and distress:
Whereas, after those Antec^dent communications of the Spirit unto the Lord
Christ, he was a man of sorrows, acquainted with grief, and exposed to
innumerable evils and troubles.

2. The Relation of this Privilege granted unto the Lord Christ unto what went
before, He loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, expressed by (...), and
(...), (the third thing considerable in this last clause of the Testimony) does
plainly declare it. The Lord Christ's Love to Righteousness and Hatred to
Iniquity, proceeded from his Unction with the Graces and Gifts of the Spirit;
and yet they are plainly intimated here to go before this anointing with the
Oil of gladness; which is therefore mentioned, as the Consequent of his
discharge of his Office in this world, in like manner as his Exaltation every
where is, Phil. 2.9, 11. Romans 14.9. And if this anointing denote the first
Unction of Christ, then must he be supposed to have the Love to Righteousness
mentioned, from elsewhere, as antecedent thereunto, which is not so. Wherefore
these words, (...), and (...), do declare at least a Relation of Congruency and
Convenience unto an antecedent discharge of Office in the Lord Christ, and are
of the same importance with (...), Psalm. 2.9. and so can respect nothing but
his glorious Exaltation, which is thus expressed.

The last thing considerable in the words, is the Prerogative of the Lord
Christ in this Privilege; He is anointed above his fellows. Now these Fellows,
Companions, or Associates of the Lord Christ, may be considered either
generally, for all those that partake with him in this Unction, which are all
Believers, who are Coheirs with him, and thereby heirs of God, Romans 8.17. or
more especially for those who were employed by God, in the Service Building and
Rule of his Church in their subordination unto him; such as were the Prophets
of old, and afterward the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. In respect unto both sorts
the Lord Christ is anointed with the Oil of gladness above them; but the
latter sort are especially intended; concerning whom the Apostle gives an
especial instance in Moses, Chapter 3. affirming the Lord Christ in his work about
the Church to be made partaker of more Glory than he. In a word, he is
incomprehensibly exalted above Angels and Men.

And this is the first Testimony whereby the Apostle confirms his Assertion of
the pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above Angels, in that comparison which he
makes between them; which also will afford the ensuing Observations.

I. The conferring and comparing of Scriptures is an excellent means of coming
to an Acquaintance with the Mind and Will of God in them. Thus deals the
Apostle in this place; he compares what is spoken of Angels in one place, and
what of the Son in another, and from thence manifests what is the mind of God
concerning them. This duty lies in the command we have to search the
Scriptures, John 5.39. (...), make a diligent Investigation of the Mind of God
in them, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. What God has declared of
the mind of the Spirit in one place, with what in like manner he has
manifested in another. God to try our Obedience, and to exercise our Diligence,
unto a study in his Word day and night, Psalm. 1.2. and our continual Meditation
thereon, 1 Timothy 4.15. ((...), Meditate on these things, be wholly in them) has
planted his Truths with great Variety up and down his Word; yea, here one part,
and there another of the same Truth, which cannot be thoroughly learned, unless
we gather them together into one view. For instance, In one place, God commands
us to circumcise our Hearts, and to make unto our selves new hearts, that we
may fear him; which at first consideration seems so to represent it not only as
our Duty, but also within our Power, as though we had no need of any help from
Grace for its Accomplishment. In another he promises absolutely to circumcise
our hearts, and to give us new hearts to fear him, as though it were so his
work, as not to be our concernment to attempt it. But now these several places
being spiritually compared together, make it evident, that as it is our Duty to
have new and circumcised hearts, so it is the Effectual Grace of God that must
work and create them in us. And the like may be observed in all the important
Truths that are of Divine Revelation. And this,

1. Discovers the Root of almost all the Errors and Heresies that are in the
World. Men whose hearts are not subdued by Faith and Humility unto the
Obedience of the Truth, lighting on some Expressions in the Scripture, that
singly considered seem to give countenance to some such Opinion as they are
willing to embrace; without farther search they fix it on their minds and
imagination, until it is too late to oppose any thing unto it. For when they
are once fixed in their persuasions, those other places of Scripture which they
should with Humility have compared with that whose seeming sense they cleave
unto, and from thence have learned the mind of the Holy Ghost in them all, are
considered by them to no other End, but only how they may pervert them, and
free themselves from the Authority of them. This I say, seems to be the way of
the most of them, who pertinaciously cleave unto false and foolish Opinions.
They rashly take up a seeming sense of some particular places, and then
obstinately make that sense the Rule of interpreting all other Scriptures what
ever. Thus in our own days, we have many who from the outward sound of those
words, Joh. 1.9. He is the true light which lighteneth every man that comes
into the world, having taken up a rash, foolish and false imagination that
Christ is that Light which is remaining in all men, and therein their Guide and
Rule, do from thence either wrest the whole Scripture to make it suit and
answer that supposal, or else utterly slight and despise it; when if they had
compared it with other Scriptures which clearly explain and declare the mind of
God in the things which concern the Person and Mediation of the Lord Christ,
with the Nature and Works of natural, and saving spiritual light, and submitted
to the Authority and Wisdom of God in them, they might have been preserved from
their delusion. It shows also,

2. The Danger that there is unto men unskilled and unexercised in the Word of
Truth: when without the Advice, Assistance, or Directions of others who are
able to guide them and instruct their Enquiry after the mind of God. They
hastily embrace Opinions, which it may be some one Text or other of Scripture
does seemingly give countenance unto. By this means do men run themselves into
the forementioned Danger every day; especially where any seducing Spirit
applies himself unto them, with swelling words of vanity, boasting of some
misunderstood word or other. Thus have we seen multitudes lead by some general
Expressions in two or three particular places of Scripture, into an Opinion
about a general Redemption of all mankind and every Individual thereof; when if
they had been wise, and able to have searched those other Scriptures
innumerable, setting forth the Eternal Love of God to his Elect, his purpose to
save them by Jesus Christ, the nature and end of his Oblation and ransom, and
compared them with others, they would have understood the vanity of their hasty
Conceptions.

3. From these things it appears, what Diligence, Patience, Waiting, Wisdom is
required of all men in searching of the Scriptures, who intend to come unto the
acknowledgement of the Truth thereby. And unto this end, and because of the
greatness of our concernment therein, does the Scripture it self abound with
Precepts, Rules, Directions, to enable us unto a right and profitable
discharging of our Duty. They are too many here to be inserted. I shall only
add, that the Diligence of Heathens will rise up in judgment and condemn the
sloth of many that are called Christians in this matter. For whereas they had
no certain Rule, Way, or means to come to the knowledge of the Truth, yet they
ceased not with indefatigable diligence and industry to enquire after it, and
to trace the obscure footsteps of what was left in their own natures, or
implanted on the works of Creation. But many, the most of those unto whom God
has granted the inestimable benefit and privilege of his Word, as a sure and
infallible Guide to lead them into the knowledge of all useful and saving
Truth, do openly neglect it, not accounting it worthy their searching, study,
and diligent Examination. How woefully will this rise up in Judgment against
them at the last day, is not difficult to conceive. And how much greater will
be their misery, who under various pretenses for their own corrupt ends, do
deter, yea and drive others from the study of it.

II. It is the duty of all Believers to rejoice in the Glory, Honor and
Dominion of Jesus Christ. The Church in the Psalm takes by faith a prospect at
a great distance of his Coming and Glory; and breaks out thereon in a way of
Exultation and Triumph into those words; Thy Throne O God is for ever. And if
this were a matter of such joy unto them, who had only an obscure Vision and
Representation of the glory which many Ages after was to follow, 1 Pet.
1.11.12. what ought the full Accomplishment and manifestation of it, be unto
them that believe now in the days of the the Gospel. This made them of old
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, even because they saw and heard
the things which Kings Wise men and Prophets desired to see, and saw them not;
God having prepared some better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect, Chap. 11.40. For,

1. Herein God is glorified: The Kingdom of Christ is the glory of God; thereby
is his Name and Praise exalted in the world; and therefore upon the Erection
and setting of it up, are all his People so earnestly invited to rejoice and
triumph therein, Psalm. 95.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 96.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 97.1, 2, etc.
This I say is a cause of Eternal Joy unto all his Saints, that God is pleased
to glorify himself, and all the infinite Excellencies of his Nature in the
Kingdom and Rule of Jesus Christ.

2. Herein does the Honor and Glory of Christ as Mediator consist, which is a
matter of great rejoicing unto all that love him in sincerity. He tells his
Disciples, John 14.28. That if they loved him, they would rejoice because he
said he went unto the Father. They considered only their own present condition
and distres, being filled with sorrow, because he had told them of his
Departure from them: but says he, Where is your Love to me? Ought you not to
have that in your hearts as well as care of your selves? for your Condition I
shall take care, and provide for your security; and if you love me, you cannot
but rejoice because I go to my Father to receive my Kingdom. That he who loved
us, that gave himself for us, that underwent every thing that is reproachful or
miserable for our sakes, is now exalted, glorified, enthroned in an everlasting
immovable Kingdom, above all his Enemies, secure from all Opposition, is a
matter of inexpressible Joy, if we have any love unto him.

3. Our own concernment, security, safety, present and future happiness lies
herein. Our All depends upon the Kingdom and Throne of Christ. He is our King
if we are Believers; our King to Rule, Govern, Protect and Save us; to uphold
us against Opposition, to supply us with strength, to guide us with Counsel, to
subdue our Enemies, to give us our Inheritance and Reward, and therefore our
principal interest lies in his Throne, the Glory and Stability thereof. Whilst
he reigns we are safe, and in our way to Glory. To see by faith this King in
his Beauty, upon his Throne, high and lifted up, and his train filling the
Temple, to see all Power committed unto him, all things given into his hands,
and herein disposing of all and ruling all things for the Advantage of his
Church, must needs cause them to rejoice, whose whole interest and concernment
lies therein.

4. The whole world, all the Creation of God are concerned in this Kingdom of
Christ. Setting aside his cursed Enemies in Hell, and the whole Creation is
benefited by this Rule and Dominion; for as some men are made partakers of
saving Grace and salvation thereby, so the residue of that race, by and with
them, do receive unspeakable Advantages in the Patience and Forbearance of God;
and the very creature it self is raised as it were into an Hope and Expectation
thereby of Deliverance from that state of Vanity whereunto now it is subjected,
Romans 8.20, 21. So that if we are moved with the Glory of God, the Honor of
Jesus Christ, our own only and eternal interest, with the Advantage of the
whole Creation, we have cause rejoice in this Throne and Kingdom of the Son.

III. It is the Divine Nature of the Lord Christ, that gives Eternity,
Stability and Unchangeableness to his Throne and Kingdom. Thy Throne O God is
for ever. Concerning this see what has formerly been delivered about the
Kingdom of Christ.

IV. All the Laws, and the whole Administration of the Kingdom of Christ by his
Word and Spirit, are all equal, righteous and holy. His Scepter is a Scepter of
Righteousness The world indeed likes them not; all things in his Rule seem unto
it, weak, absurd, and foolish, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. but they are otherwise, the
Holy Ghost being judge, and such they appear unto them that do believe; yea
whatever is requisite to make Laws and Administrations righteous, it does all
concur in those of the Lord Jesus Christ. As

1. Authority, a just and full Authority for enacting is requisite to make Laws
righteous. Without this, Rules and Precepts may be good materially, but they
cannot have the formality of Law, which depends on the just Authority of the
Legislator; without which nothing can become a righteous Law. Now the Lord
Christ is vested with sufcient Authority for the enacting of Laws and Rules of
Administration in his Kingdom; All Authority, all Power in Heaven and Earth, is
committed unto him, as we have before proved at large. And hence those that
will not see the Equity of his Rule, shall be forced at last to bow under the
Excellency of his Authority. And it were to be wished, that those who undertake
to make Laws and Constitutions in the Kingdom of Christ, would look well to
their Warrant. For it seems that the Lord Christ unto whom all Power is
committed, has not delegated any to the sons of men, but only that whereby
they may teach others to do and observe what he has commanded, Matthew. 28.20.
If moreover they shall command or appoint ought of their own, they may do well
to consider by what Authority they do so; seeing that is of indispensible
necessity unto the Righteousness of any Law whatever.

2. Wisdom is required to the making of Righteous Laws. This is the eye of
Authority, without which it can act nothing rightly or equally. Effects of
Power without Wisdom are commonly unjust and Tyranical, always useless and
burdensome. The Wisdom of Lawmakers is that which has principally given them
their renown. So Moses tells the Israelites, that all Nations would admire them
when they perceived the Wisdom of their Laws, Deuteronomy. 4. Now the Lord Christ is
abundantly furnished with Wisdom for this purpose. He is the foundation stone
of the Church, that has seven eyes upon him, Zech. 3.9. A perfection of Wisdom
and Understanding in all Affairs of it; being anointed with the Spirit unto
that purpose, Isa. 11.3, 4. Yea, in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Col. 2.3. it having pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell, Col. 1.19. So that there can be no defect in his Laws and
Administrations on this account. He is Wise of heart, and knows perfectly what
Rules and Actings are suited to the Glory of God, and the condition of the
subjects of his Kingdom; and what tends to their spiritual and eternal
Advantage. He knows how to order all things unto the great end which in his
Government he aims at. And thence do all his Laws and Administrations become
righteous. And this also well deserves their consideration, who take upon them
to appoint Laws and Rules within his Dominion unto his Subjects, for the ends
of his Rule, and substance of his Worship. Have they Wisdom sufficient to
enable them so to do? does the Spirit of the Lord Christ rest upon them, ^o
make them of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord? Are they acquainted
with the state and condition, the Weakness, Temptations, Graces of all the
people of Christ? If they are not, how know they but that they may command and
appoint them things greatly to their disadvantage, when they think to profit
them? It seems a great self-assuming, for men to suppose themselves wise enough
to give Laws to the Subjects of Christ, in things directly appertaining to his
Kingdom.

3. They are Righteous, because they are Easy, gentle, and not burdensome. The
Righteousness and uprightness here mentioned, does not denote strict, rigid,
severe Justice, extending its self unto the utmost of what can be required of
the subjects to be ruled; but Equity mixed with Gentleness, tenderness and
condescension; which if it be absent from Laws, and they breath nothing but
severity, rigor and arbitrary impositions, though they may not be absolutely
unjust, yet they are grievous burdensome: Thus Peter calls the Law of
commandments contained in the Ordinances of old, a yoke which neither their
Fathers nor themselves were able to bear, Acts 15.10. that is could never
obtain rest or peace in the precise rigid observation required of them. But now
for the Rule of Christ, he tells us, that his yoke is easy, and his burden
light, Matthew. 11.30. and that his commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.
And this gentleness and easiness of the rule of Christ consists in these
three things.

1. That his Commands are all of them Reasonable, and suited unto the
principles of that natural Obedience we owe to God; and so not grievous unto
any thing in us, but that principle of sin and darkness which is to be
destroyed. He has not multiplied Precepts merely arbitrary, and to express his
Authority; but given us only such as are in themselves Good, and suitable unto
the Principles of Reason; as might be evinced by the particular considerations
of his Institutions. Hence our Obedience unto them is called our reasonable
service, Romans 12.1.

2. His commands are easy, because all of them are suited to that principle of
the new Nature, or new Creature which he works in the hearts of all his
Disciples. It likes them, loves them, delights in them, which makes them easy
unto it. The Lord Christ rules, as we said, by his Word and Spirit, these go
together in the Covenant of the Redeemer, Isa. 59.20, 21. And their work is
suited and commensurate one to the other. The Spirit creates a new Nature
fitted for Obedience according to the Word; and the Word gives out Laws and
Precepts suited unto the inclination and disposition of that Nature: and in
these two consist the Scepter and Rule of Christ. This suitableness of
Principle and Rule one to the other makes his Government easy, upright and
righteous.

3. His commands are easy, becauses he continually gives out supplies of his
Spirit, to make his subjects to yield obedience unto them. This is that which
above all other things sets a luster upon his Rule. The Law was holy just and
good of old; but whereas it exhibited not strength unto men to enable them unto
Obedience, it became unto them altogether useless and unprofitable, as to the
end they aimed at in its observation. It is otherwise in the Kingdom of Christ;
what ever he requires to have done of his subjects, he gives them strength by
his Spirit and grace to perform it; which makes his rule easy, righteous,
equal, and altogether lovely. Neither can any of the sons of men pretend to the
least share or interest in this privilege.

4. This Rule and Administration of Christ's Kingdom is righteous, because
useful and profitable. Then are Laws good, wholesome and equal, when they lead
unto the benefit and advantage of them that do observe them. Laws about slight
and trivial things, or such as men have no benefit or advantage by their
observation, are justly esteemed grievous and burdensome. But now all the Laws,
and whole Rule of the Lord Christ, are every way useful and advantageous to his
subjects. They make them holy, righteous, such as please God and are useful to
mankind. This is their nature, this their tendency. Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, they
are all ingenerated in the soul, by and in the observance of these Laws of
Christ's Rule. They free the soul from the power of lust, the service of sin,
fear of death hell and the world, guide it in the truth, make it fruitful
amongst mankind, and amiable unto God himself.

5. Their end manifests them to be righteous. The worth and equity of Laws is
taken off, when low and unworthy ends are proposed unto their observation: But
these of the Lord Christ direct unto the highest end, propose and promise the
most glorious reward; so that whatsoever may be done or suffered in an
adherence unto them, bears no proportion to that exceeding rich and eternal
reward which they are attended withal, which renders them highly righteous and
glorious. And many other considerations of the like nature may be added. And
hence a threefold Corolary may be taken.

1. That our submission to this Scepter of the Lord Christ, our obedience to
the Laws of his Kingdom, and the Administration thereof, is very righteous,
equal and reasonable. What can be farther desired to render it so, or to
provoke us unto it?

2. That the condemnation of those that refuse the Reign of Christ over them,
that will not yield obedience unto his Laws, is most just and righteous. On
these accounts will their mouths be stopped for ever, when he comes to deal
with them, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel.

3. It is our wisdom to content our selves with the Laws of Christ, in things
that belong unto his Kingdom. They alone, as we have seen, have those
properties which make our obedience useful or profitable; whatever we do else
in reference unto the same end with them, is needless and fruitless drudging.

V. The righteous Administrations of the Lord Christ in his Government proceed
all from his own habitual righteousness and love thereunto. See this declared
by the Prophet, Isa. 11. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

VI. God is a God in especial covenant with the Lord Christ, as he is the
Mediator; God thy God. Of this Covenant I have treated largely elsewhere; and
therefore shall not here insist upon it.

VII. The collation of the Spirit on the Lord Christ, and his glorious
Exaltation, are the peculiar works of God the Father. God thy God has anointed
thee. It was God the Father who designed and appointed him unto his work, who
actually sent him, and set him forth in the fullness of time; and therefore on
him was it incumbent both to furnish him unto his work, and to crown him upon
its performance. And herein these several Acts, partly Eternal, partly
Temporal, are considerable. 1. The engagement of the Eternal Will, Wisdom, and
Counsel of the Father with the Son about his work. Prove. 8.22, 23, 30, 31. Isa.
40.10, 11, 12. 2. His fore-ordination of his coming, by an eternal free act of
his will, 1 Pet. 1.20. Act. 2.23. 3. His Covenant with him to abide by him in
the whole course of his work. Isa. 49.6, 7, 8, 9. chap. 50.7, 8, 9. 4. His
Promise of him from the foundation of the world, often reiterated and repeated,
Genesis 3.15. 5. His actual Mission and sending of him in his Incarnation, Zech.
2.8, 9, 10. 6. The exerting of his Almighty power unto that purpose and effect,
Luke 1.35. 7. His giving of him command and commission for his work, Joh.
10.18. Joh. 20.21. 8. Furnishing him with all the gifts and graces of his
Spirit, to fit him and enable him unto his work, Isa. 11.2, 3. Isa. 61.1, 2.
Matthew. 3.16, 17. Joh. 1.32, 33. Col. 1.19. 9. Abiding by him in Care, Love,
Power and Providence, during the whole course of his Obedience and Ministry,
Isa. 49.2, 8. 10. Speaking in him, working by him, and in both bearing witness
unto him, Heb. 1.1. Joh. 5.19, 20, 21, 22: 11. Giving him up unto death, Romans
8.32. Act. 2.23. 12. Raising him from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.21. Act. 2.24. 13.
Giving all Power, Authority and Judgment unto him, Joh. 5.22. Matthew. 28.18. 14.
Exalting of him by his Assumption into heaven, and glorious session at his
right hand, Act. 2.32, 33. Phil. 2.9, 10. 15. Giving him to be the Head over
all unto the Church, and subjecting all things under his feet, Ephesians. 1.20, 21,
22. 16. In all things crowning him with eternal glory and honor, Joh. 17.5.
Heb. 2.9. All these and sundry other particulars of the like nature, are
assigned unto the Father, as part of his work, in reference unto the Mediation
of the Son. And amongst them his Exaltation and Unction with the Oil of
gladness has an eminent place. And this are we taught, that in this whole work
we might see the Authority, Counsel, and Love of the Father, that so our faith
and hope through Jesus Christ might be in God, who raised him up from the dead,
and gave him glory, 1 Pet. 1.21.

VIII. The Lord Jesus Christ is singular in this Unction. This is that which
the Apostle proves in sundry instances, and by comparing him with others, who
in the most eminent manner were partakers of it. And this we are in the
consideration of, as the particulars of it do occur. Neither shall I at present
farther insist on the ensuing Observations, because I will not longer detain
the Reader from the Context, namely, that

IX. All that serve God in the work of building the Church, according to his
appointment, are anointed by his Spirit, and shall be rewarded by his Power,
Dan. 12.3.

X. The Disciples of Christ, especially those who serve him in his Church
faithfully, are his companions in all his grace and glory.

Verse X, XI, XII.
IN the following Verses, the Apostle by another illustrious Testimony taken
out of Psalm. 102. confirms his principal Assertion in the words ensuing.

Verse. 10, 11, 12. Verse. 10. (...). Verse. 11. (...); Verse. 12. (...).
In the last verse for (...) one copy has (...), to answer unto (...). And
M.S.T. (...).

The words are the same in the Greek Bibles as in this place of the Apostle,
nor is there any foot-step of any other old Translation of them in the Psalm.
The Syriack differs little, (...).
(...) it renders (...), and again, to show that (...) is no part of the
testimony cited, but serves only to the introduction of another. v. 11. For
(...), they shall perish; (...), they shall pass away; alluding to that of 2
Pet. 3.10. (...), the heavens shall pass away with a noise: (...), but thou
abidest, thou continuest, (...), and tu stans es, and tu stas, and tu stabilis
es; and Thou stand, thou art standing; answering the Hebrew, (...) in the
Psalm. (...), thou shall roll them up. (...), which words Interpreters render
variously, though to the same purpose; involves, Boderianus, roll them;
complicabis, Tremelius, fold them, Duplicabis; D' Dieu, double them up. And it
is manifest, that the Translator reads (...), and not (...); and I doubt not
but the same word was inserted into the Translation of the Psalm from this
place of the Apostle, (...), thou art the same, or thou art, I am. (...);
Boderia: Et tu sicut existens es; and thou art as thou existest. Tremel. Tu
autem sicut es, cris; But thou shall be as thou art. Properly, And thou, as
thou art, art; that is, art the same.

(...).
The Translation of the Apostle in all things material answers the Original in
the Psalm; (...).
v. 26, 27. (...), thou, O Lord, is supplied out of the verse foregoing, I
said, O my God. (...), of old, before it was; that is, (...), or (...), in the
beginning. (...)
And our Translation needed not to have used any difference of expression in
the Psalm and this place of the Apostle, as they do; there, of old; here, in
the beginning. Thou have founded (not laid the foundation of) the earth. And
the heavens are the works: (...), the work, which the Greek renders works,
because of their variety; of thy hands.

(...).
They shall perish, (...); but thou shall stand, or do abide. The word used
in our Translation of the Psalm, (endure) does ill answer the Original, but the
margin gives relief. Psalm. Yea all of them shall wax old like a garment; here,
And they shall all wax old as does a garment. A little variety without
difference, and that needless; the Greek Text exactly expressing the Hebrew.
And as a vesture shall thou fold them up, (...); (...).
shall thou change them. The change of a vesture, whereunto the change of the
Heavens is compared, being by folding up, and laying aside, at least from
former use; (...).
the Apostle instead of (...), thou shall change, renders the word by (...),
thou shall fold, or roll them up: (...), and tu ipse, and thou art he; (...);
and thy years shall have no end; shall not fail, (...), shall not consume.

There is no question but that these words do sufficiently prove the
Pre-eminence of him of whom they are spoken, incomparably above all Creatures
what ever. Two things therefore are questioned by the Enemies of the Truth
contained in them: 1. Whether they were originally spoken at all of Christ,
which the present Jews deny. 2. Whether they are spoken all of Christ, which is
questioned by the Socinians. These Enquiries being first satisfied, the words
shall be opened, and the force of the Apostles Argument from thence declared.

1. That what is spoken in this Psalm does properly respect the Messiah is
denied by the present Jews. That it was owned by the ancient Hebrews is
sufficiently evident from hence, that the Apostle dealing with them on their
own Principles, urges them with the testimony of it. The Psalm also it
self-gives us light enough into the same instruction. It is partly Euctical,
partly Prophetical; both parts suited unto the condition of the Church when the
Temple was wasted, and Sion lay in the dust during the Babylonish Captivity. In
the Prophetical part there are three things signal.

1. The Redemption of the people, with the Re-edification of the Temple, as a
Type of that Spiritual Temple and Worship which was afterward to be erected.
As v. 13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor
her, yea the set time is come. And v. 16. When the Lord shall build Sion, he
shall appear in his glory.

2. The Calling of the Gentiles to the Church and Worship of God, v. 15. The
Heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth thy
glory. V. 21, 22. To declare the name of the Lord in Sion, and his praise in
Jerusalem, when the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms to serve the
Lord.

3. Hereby the creation of a new people, a new world, is brought in: v. 18.
This shall be written for the generation to come, (the world to come) and the
people that shall be created (the new creation of Jews and Gentiles) shall
praise the Lord. These are the heads of the Prophetical part of the Psalm, and
they all respect things every where peculiarly assigned unto the Son who was to
be incarnate; or the days of the Messiah, which is all one. For,

1. The Redemption and deliverance of the Church out of trouble is his proper
work. Where ever it is mentioned, it is he who is intended. Psalm. 98.18. so
signally, Zech. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and other places innumerable.

2. The bringing in of the Gentiles is acknowledged by all the Jews to respect
the time of the Messiah, it being he who was to be a light unto the Gentiles;
and the salvation of God unto the ends of the earth.

3. Also the Generation to come, and people to be created, the Jews themselves
interpret of the (...), world to come, or the new state of the Church under the
Messiah. These two last put together, the gathering of the people, and the
world to come, created for the praise of God, makes it evident that it is the
Son whom the Psalmist has respect unto.

Grotius in this place affirms, that the Apostle accommodates unto the Messiah
what was spoken of God. And he thinks it a sufficient argument to prove, the
words were not spoken of the Messiah, because they were spoken of God: whereas
they are produced by the Apostle to prove his Excellency from the properties
and works of his Divine Nature. And he adds, as the sense of the words, as
accommodated unto Christ, Thou have laid the foundation of the earth, that is,
the world was made for thy sake. But this Interpretation, or violent detortion
of the words destroys it self. For if they are spoken of God absolutely, and
not of the Messiah to whom they are accommodated, how can it be said that the
world was made for his sake, and not by him? both senses of the words cannot be
true. But this is indeed plainly to deny the Authority of the Apostle.

It appears then, that many things in this Psalm are spoken directly and
immediately of the Son; though it be probable also that sundry things in it are
affirmed distinctly of the Person of the Father. And hence it may be are those
frequent variations of speech from the Second to the Third Person, that occur
in this Psalm.

2. As to the second Enquiry, the Socinians, who grant the Divine Authority of
this Epistle, and therefore cannot deny but that these words some way or other
belong unto the Lord Christ, yet plainly perceiving that if they are wholly
understood of him, that there is an end of all their Religion; (the creation,
not of a new, but of that world which was made of old, and which shall perish
at the last day, being here ascribed unto him) fix here upon a new and peculiar
Evasion. Some words, they say, of this testimony belong unto Christ, (so much
they will yield to the authority of the Apostle) but not all of them; whereby
they hope to secure their own error. Now because if this pretense hold not,
this testimony is fatal to their persuasion, I hope it will not be
unacceptable, if in our passage we do consider the distribution they make of
the words according to their supposition, and the Arguments they produce for
the confirmation of their Exposition, as they are managed by Crellius or
Schlictingius in their Comment on this place.

1. He says, that this testimony does so far belong unto Christ, as it
pertains unto the scope of the Writer of the Epistle. This Scripture, says
he, as appears from v. 4. is to prove, that after Christ sat down at the right
hand of God, he was made more excellent than the Angels; whereto the affirming
that he made heaven and earth, does no way conduce.

Answ. 1. Suppose that to be the scope of the Apostle which is intimated; how
does this Author know that it suits not his purpose to show that the Lord
Christ is God, by whom Heaven and Earth were made, seeing it is manifest that
himself thought otherwise, or he had not produced this testimony thereof. 2.
The Testimony is not unsuited unto the scope pretended. For whereas in the
Administration of his Office the Son was apparently for a while made lower than
the Angels, he may in these words discover the equity of his after Exaltation
above them, in that in his Divine Nature and Works he was so much more
excellent than they. 3. The true and proper design of the Apostle we have
before evinced, which is to prove the Excellency of the Person by whom the
Gospel was revealed, and his Pre-eminence above Men and Angels, which nothing
does more unquestionably demonstrate than this, that by him the world was
created; whence the Assignation of a Divine Nature unto him does undeniably
ensue.

2. To promote this Observation, he adds a large discourse about the use and
application of testimonies out of the Old Testament in the New, and says, That
they are made use of by the writers of it, either because of some agreement and
likeness between the things intended in the one and the other, or because of
some subordination. In the former way, that which is spoken of the Type, is
applied unto the Antitype; and sometimes for likeness sake, that which was
spoken of one thing is applied unto another, as Matthew. 15.7, 8. our Savior
applies those words of Isaiah to the present Jews, which were spoken of their
forefathers.

Answ. That which is spoken in the first place of an instituted Type, is also
spoken of the Antitype or things pre-figured by it, so far as it is
represented by the Type; so that one thing teaches another, and thereon the
words have a double application; first to the Type; ultimately to the
Antitype. But herein such testimonies as this have no concernment. 2. The
Scripture sometimes makes use of Allegories, illustrating one thing by another,
as Gal. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. Neither has this any place here. 3. That what is
spoken of one, should because of some similitude be affirmed to be spoken of
another, and nothing agree properly unto him, is untrue, and not to be
exemplified with any seeming instance. 4. The words of Isaiah, chap. 29.13.
which our Savior makes use of, Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. were a Prophecy of the Jews
who then lived, as both our Savior expressly affirms, and the Context in the
Prophet does plainly declare.

Some things he adds, Are applied unto others than they are spoken of, because
of their subordination to him or them of whom they are spoken. Thus things that
are spoken of God are applied unto Christ, because of his subordination to him;
and of this, says he, we have an instance in Acts 13.47. where the words
spoken of the Lord Christ, Isa. 49.6. I have set thee to be a light to the
Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation to the ends of the earth; are
applied unto the Apostles because of their subordination unto Christ. And in
this case the words have but one sense, and belong primarily unto him of whom
they are first spoken, and are secondarily applied unto the other.

Answ. According to this Rule, there is nothing that ever was spoken of God,
but it may be spoken of and applied unto any of his Creatures: All things being
in subordination unto him. At least it may be so in that wherein they act under
him, and are in a peculiar subordination to him. And yet neither can such a
subordination, according to this man's Opinion, be applied unto Christ, who in
the Creation of Heaven and Earth was in no other subordination to God, than any
other things not yet made or existing; so that this Rule, that what is spoken
of God is applied unto them who are in subordination unto him, as it is false
in it self, so it is no way suited to the present business; Christ being in
this man's judgment in no subordination to God when the world was made, being
absolutely in all respects in the condition of things that were not. Nor does
the instance given at all prove or illustrate what is pretended. The Apostle in
the citing of those words to the Jews, does not in the least apply them to
himself, but only declares the ground of his going to preach the Gospel unto
the Gentiles; which was, that God had promised to make Him whom he preached to
be a Light, and to bring salvation unto them also.

Wherefore he adds, 3. what is direct to his pretension, That all the words,
or things signified by them in any testimony, which are firstly spoken of one,
and then are for some of the causes mentioned, (that is, convenience,
similitude or subordination) applied unto another, are not to be looked on as
proper to him to whom they are so applied; but so much of them is to be
admitted as agrees to the scope of him by whom the testimony is used: as in the
testimony produced, v. 7. I will be unto him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son; the words immediately following are, If he shall offend against me, I will
chastise him with the rod of men; which words being spoken of Solomon, can no
way be applied unto Christ.

Answ. What is spoken of any Type and of Christ jointly, is not so spoken for
any natural convenience, similitude or subordination, but because of Gods
institution, appointing the Type so to represent and shadow out the Lord
Christ, that what he would teach concerning him should be spoken of the Type
whereby he was represented. Now no person that was appointed to be a Type of
that, being in all things a Type, it is not necessary that what ever was spoken
of him was also spoken of Christ, but only what was spoken of him under that
formal consideration of an instituted Type. This we showed the case to have
been with Solomon, of whom the words mentioned were spoken, as he bare the
Person of Christ: Other things being added in the same place, that belonged
unto him in his own personally moral capacity. And therefore those things (as
that, if he offend against me) are not at all mentioned by the Apostle, as not
being spoken of him as a Type. And this plainly over-throws the pretension of
our Commentator. For if the Apostle would not produce the very next words to
the testimony by by him brought, because they did not belong unto him of whom
he spoke, it proves undeniably that all those which he does so urge and produce
were properly spoken of him. And I cannot reach the strength of this inference,
because in a place where all that was spoken was not spoken of Christ, the
Apostle makes use of what was so spoken of him, and omits that which was not;
therefore of that which he does produce in the next place, somewhat does belong
to him, and somewhat does not. If any thing be offered to this purpose, it must
be in an instance of a testimony produced, in the words whereof, which are
produced, and not in what may follow in the same Chapter and Psalm, there is
that affirmed, which does now no more belong unto Christ, than the making of
heaven or earth belongs to this Writer, which is the case in hand.

Having premised these general considerations, he makes Application of them in
particular to his Interpretation of this Testimony used by the Apostle.

These words, says he, being first expressly spoken of God, and here by this
Writer referred unto Christ, we must consider what in them makes to his scope
and purpose, what is agreeable to the nature and condition of Christ, who
certainly was a man; and such certainly is not He which the Psalm speaks of,
about the Creation of heaven and earth. And this was well known to them with
whom the Apostle had to do.

But any one may perceive that these things are spoken gratis, and upon the
supposition that Christ was a mere Man, and not God by Nature. When the words
themselves ascribing a prae-existence to the World, and Omnipotency unto him,
do prove the contrary. What is the scope of the Apostle in the whole discourse
under consideration, has been showed; as also how directly this whole
Testimony tends to the proof of what he had proposed. It is true, that the
words are spoken of him who is God, but no less true, the Apostle being judge,
that it is the Son of God who is that God. It is true, that he also was Man,
and nothing is ascribed unto him but what belongs unto him, who was Man, but
not as he was man. And such was the Creation of Heaven and Earth.

The opinion of these men is, that whereas two things are mentioned in the
words, the Creation of the world, which was past; and the dissolution or
destruction of it, which was to come, that the latter is assigned unto Christ,
but not the former: and for this division of the words, which confessedly is
not in the least intimated by the Apostle, he gives these reasons.

1. All the words of the Psalm being manifestly spoken of the high God, and no
word in the Psalm declaring Christ to be that God, yet of necessity if these
words be applied unto Christ, he must be supposed to be the high God there
spoken of. But if this Divine Writer had taken this for granted, he had been
eminently foolish to go about to prove by Arguments and Testimonies, that the
Creator does excel all creatures. He should use in a matter no way doubtful
witnesses no way necessary.

This is the first Reason whereby he would prove that the Apostle did not apply
the words to Christ, though himself say plainly that he does; for his Preface
to them is, But to the Son he said: Or that if he does so, he does it wondrous
foolishly; for such liberty do poor worms take to themselves. That the Psalm so
speaks of the high God, that it directly and peculiarly intends Christ the
Son of God, has been in part declared, and shall farther afterward be
evinced. And the Elogium in these words given unto him proves him to be so. And
though he affirm that it was a foolish thing in the Apostle to prove from the
works of him that is God, that he is above the Angels, the most glorious of
made creatures, yet God himself most frequently from these his works, his
Omniscience, Omnipresence, and other Attributes declared in them, proves his
excellency in comparison of Idols, which have no existence but in the
imagination of men. See Isa. 41.20, 21, etc.

By this testimony then, the Holy Ghost with infinite Wisdom proves, that he
who was made less for a little while than the Angels, in one respect, was
absolutely and in his own person infinitely above them, as being the Creator of
Heaven and Earth.

He adds, Secondly, Those Hebrews to whom he wrote were either persuaded that
Christ was God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, or they were not; if they
were, what need of all these Arguments and Testimonies? one word might have
dispatched this whole controversy, by affirming that Christ was the Creator,
Angels creatures, between whom there could be no comparison; nor any reason to
fear that the Law given by the Administration of Angels should be preferred to
the Gospel whereof he was the Author: if we shall say the latter, that they did
not yet believe it; how do we suppose that he takes a great deal of pains to
little purpose? for he assures and takes for granted, that that was true which
was alone in question. What need He then to prove by so many Arguments that
Christ was more excellent than the Angels, and to take that for granted which
would have put it out of question, namely that he was God who made heaven and
earth.

Answ. This Dilemma has as much force against the other testimonies produced
in this Chapter or elsewhere by the Apostle, as it has against this; so that
the using of it does scarce argue that Reverence to the Holy Word of God which
is required of us. But the truth is, grant whether of the suppositions you
please, nothing of inconveniency as unto the Apostles argumentation will ensue.
Let it be granted that they did believe, and that expressly Christ to be God;
Have Believers no need to have their faith confirmed by testimonies out of the
Word, that may not so readily occur to themselves? Have they no need to be
strengthened in the faith, especially in such points as were in those days
greatly opposed, as was this of the Eternal Glory of the Messiah, concerning
which the believing Hebrews had to do with learned and stubborn Adversaries
continually. And if the Apostle might have ended the whole controversy, by
plainly affirming that he was the Creator of all things, and the Angels
creatures; might he not as well have ended the dispute about his Pre-eminence
above Angels with one word, without citing so many testimonies to prove it? But
had he then unfolded the mysteries of the Old Testament to the Hebrews, which
was his design? Had he manifested that he taught nothing but what was before
revealed (though obscurely) to Moses and the Prophets, which he aimed to do,
thereby to strengthen and confirm in the faith those that did believe, and
convince gainsayers? Again, suppose some of them to whom he wrote did not yet
expressly believe the Deity of Christ, as the Apostles themselves did not for a
while believe his Resurrection; could any more convincing way be fixed on to
persuade them thereunto, than by minding them of those testimonies of the Old
Testament, wherein the Attributes and Works of God are ascribed unto him? Nor
was it now in question whether Christ was God or no; but whether he were more
Excellent than the Angels that gave the Law: And what more effectual course
could be taken to put an end to that Enquiry, than by proving that he made the
Heaven and Earth; that is, producing a testimony, wherein the creation of all
things is assigned unto him, is beyond the wisdom of man to invent.

3. He adds, That Christ might be spoken of in this place, either in respect
of his Human^ Nature, or of his Divine; if of the former, to what end should he
make mention of the creation of Heaven and Earth; Christ as a man, and as made
above the Angels, made not Heaven and Earth. If as God, how could he be said to
be made above the Angels?

But the answer is easy; Christ is said to be made above, and more excellent
than the Angels, neither absolutely as God, nor absolutely as man, but as he
was God-Man, the Mediator between God and man; in which respect as Mediator for
the discharge of one part of his Office, he was a little while made lower than
they; and so the Creation of Heaven and earth does demonstrate the Dignity of
his Person, and the Equity of his being made more excellent than the Angels in
his Office. And this fully removes his following exceptions, that the
remembering of his Deity could be no argument to prove that the Humanity was
exalted above the Angels: for it is not an argument of the Exaltation of his
Humanity, but the demonstration of the Excellency of his Person that the
Apostle has in hand.

4. He alleges, That it is contrary to the perpetual use of the Scripture, to
affirm absolutely of Christ that he created any thing. When any creation is
ascribed unto him, it is still applied to him as the immediate cause, and said
to be made by him, or in him; he is no where absolutely said to create. And if
he created the world, why did not Moses as plainly attribute that unto him, as
the Writers of the New Testament do the new Creation?

Answ. Were it affirmed in this only place that Christ made all things, yet the
words being plain and evident, and the thing it self agreeable to the Scripture
in other places, and not repugnant to any testimony therein contained, there is
no pretense for them who truly reverence the Wisdom and Authority of the Holy
Ghost in the Word, to deny the words to be spoken properly and directly: Nor if
we may take that course will there be any thing left sacred and (...) in the
Scripture. Besides, we have showed already the vanity of that distinction, of
God's making things by Christ, as though it denoted any subordination in
causality; nor will the Socinians themselves admit of any such thing, but
confute that notion in the Arians. But this is not the only place wherein it is
affirmed that Christ made all things that are in the Heaven and the Earth, Joh.
1.1, 2. Col. 1.16. v. 3. of this Chapter, with sundry other places affirm the
same. For what they exact of Moses, did we not believe that God knew what
Revelation of himself became that dark dispensation better than they, we might
consider it. But yet there are even in Moses himself many, and his Expositors
the Prophets more Testimonies of the Creation of the world by the Word, that
is, the Son of God, which have elsewhere been opened and vindicated.

5. He concludes; That the Order and Method of the Apostles procedure do
evince, that this Creation of Heaven and Earth is not attributed unto him. For
we see that he proves the excellency of Christ above Angels from his name that
he is by the way of eminency called the Son of God; and then he proceeds to his
adoration by Angels; and in the third place, he goes on to the Kingly Honor
and Throne of Christ; after which he produces the testimony we insist upon,
and then adds the end of that Kingdom which Christ now administreth in the
Earth; to what end in this discourse should he mention the Creation of Heaven
and Earth; when if that be omitted all the series of the discourse agrees and
hangs well together? For having declared the Kingdom of Christ, with the
continuance of his person for ever, he asserts an eminent effect of the Kingdom
in the abolition of Heaven and Earth, and then the end of that Kingdom it self.

But this Analysis of the Apostles discourse, agrees not to the mind of the
Apostle, or his Design in the place; nor to the Principles of the men that
formed it, nor is indeed any thing but vain words, to persuade us that the
Apostle did not say that which he did say, and which is written for our
instruction: It is not first agreeable to their own Principles; For it places
the naming of Christ, the Son of God, and his Adoration by the Angels, as
antecedent to his being raised to his Kingly Throne, both which, especially the
latter, they constantly make consequent unto it, and effects of it. Nor is it
at all agreeable to the Apostles design, which is not to prove by these
Testimonies directly that Christ was exalted above Angels; but to show the
Dignity and Excellency of his person who was so exalted, and how reasonable it
is that it should be so; which is eminently proved by the Testimony under
consideration. For the proof of this Excellency, the Apostle produces those
Testimonies that are given unto him in the Old Testament; and that as to his
Name, his Honor and Glory, and his Works in this place. Neither is there any
Reason of ascribing the Destruction of Heaven and Earth unto the Kingly Power
of Christ, excluding his Divine Power in their Creation; for the Abolition of
the world, (if such it is to be) or the change of it, is no less an effect of
Infinite Power than the Creation of it; nor does it directly appertain to the
Kingdom of Christ, but by accident, as do other works of the Providence of God.

These Exceptions then being removed, before we proceed to the Interpretation
of the words, we shall see what Evidence may be added unto what we have already
offered from the Psalm, to evince and prove, that this whole Testimony does
belong unto him, which were there no other, (as there are very many)
Testimonies to this purpose, were abundantly sufficient to determine this
Controversy.

1. We have the Authority of the Apostle for it, ascribing it unto him; the
word And, in the beginning of the Verse relates confessedly unto; but unto the
Son he says, v. 8. as if he had said: but unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; and to the Son he said, Thou O God, in the beginning
have founded the earth. Again, the whole Testimony speaks of the same person:
there being no color of thrusting another person into the Text not intended in
the beginning: so that if any part of what is spoken do belong to Christ, the
whole of necessity must do so. To suppose that in this sentence, thou have laid
the Foundation of the earth, and thou shall fold them up as a garment, that one
person is understood in the first place, another in the latter, no such thing
being intimated by the Psalmist or the Apostle, is to suppose what we please,
that we may attain what we have a mind unto. One person is here certainly and
only spoken unto; if this be the Father, the words concern not Christ at all,
and the Apostle was deceived in his Allegation of them; if the Son, the whole
is spoken of him, as the Apostle affirms. Nor 3. Can any Reason be assigned why
the latter words should be attributed to Christ, and not the former. They say
it is because God by him shall destroy the world, which is the thing in the
last words spoken of; but where is it written that God shall destroy the world
by Christ? If they say in this place; I say then Christ is spoken to, and of in
this place; and if so, he is spoken of in the first words and thou Lord, or not
at all; Besides, to whom do those closing words belong, but thou a^^ the same,
and thy years fail not? If these words are spoken of Christ, it is evident that
all the foregoing must be so also; for his enduring the same, and the not
failing of his years; that is, his Eternity is opposed to the Creation and
temporary duration of the world. If they say, that they belong unto the Father
primarily, but are attributed unto Christ, as that of changing or abolishing
the world, because the Father does it by him, I desire to know what is the
meaning of these words, thou art the same by Christ? and thy years fail not by
Christ? Is not the Father Eternal but in the man Christ Jesus? If they say,
that they belong not at all to Christ; then this is the sum of what they say;
the beginning of the words, and the close of them, if spoken of Christ would
prove his Infinite Power, Eternity and Divine Nature; One passage there is in
the words which we suppose will not do so, therefore we will grant, that that
passage concerns him, but not the beginning, nor end of the testimony, though
spoken undeniably of the same person; which whether it becomes men professing a
Reverence of the Word of God is left to themselves to judge. Besides, should we
grant all these suggestions to be true, the Apostle by his citing of this
Testimony would prove nothing at all to his purpose, no not any thing toward
that which they affirm him to aim at; namely, that he was made more excellent
than the Angels: For whence out of these words shall any such matter be made to
appear? they say in that by him God will fold up the Heavens as a Vesture; but
First, No such thing is mentioned nor intimated. He who made them, is said to
fold them; and if they say that from other places it may be made to appear,
that it shall be done by Christ; then as this place must be laid aside as of no
use to the Apostle, so indeed there is nothing ascribed to Christ, but what the
Angels shall have a share in, and that probably the most principal; namely in
folding up the Creation as a garment, which is a work that servants are
employed in, and not the King, or Lord himself. Indeed he that shall without
prejudice consider the Apostles Discourse, will find little need of Arguments
to manif^st whom he applies this Testimony unto. He calls him (...), in the
beginning, using that word which perpetually in the New Testament denotes the
Lord Christ, as plainly expounding the Text so far, as to declare of whom it
speaks. Nor does this Testimony ascribe any thing to him, but what in general
he had before affirmed of him; namely, that by him the worlds were made; nor
was it ever heard of, that any man in his right wits should cite a Testimony to
confirm his purpose, containing words that were never spoken of him to whom he
applies them; nor is there scarce any thing in them, that can tolerably be
applied unto him; and the most of it would declare him to be that which he is
not at all: so that the words as used to his Purpose must needs be both false
and ambiguous. Who then can but believe on this Testimony of the Apostle, that
Christ the Lord made Heaven and Earth; and if the Apostle intended not to
assert it, what is there in the Text or near it, as a buoy to warn men from
running on a shelf, there where so fair an harbor appears unto them? From all
that has been said it is evident, that this whole Testimony belongs to Christ,
and is by the Apostle asserted so to do.

Proceed we now to the Interpretation of the Words; The Person spoken of, and
spoken unto in them; (...).
is the Lord; (...), thou Lord. The words are not in the Psalm in this Verse,
but what is spoken is referred unto (...), my God, I said, O my God; take me
not away in the midst of my days; comforting himself under the consideration
of the frailty and misery of his Life, with the thoughts and faith of the
Eternity and Power of Christ. For be our Lives never so frail, yet as to life
eternal, because he lives we shall live also; and he is of Power to raise us
up at the last day, John 14.19. 1 Cor. 15. and that is the ground of all our
consolation against the brevity and misery of our lives. Whereby it also
further appears, that it is the Lord Christ whom the Psalmist addresses himself
unto; for from the absolute consideration of the Omnipotency and Eternity of
God, no consolation can be drawn. And indeed, the people of the Jews having
openly affirmed that they could not deal immediately with God, but by a
Mediator, which God eminently approved in them, wishing that such an heart
would always abide in them, Deuteronomy. 5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. So as he suffered them
not to approach his typical presence between the Cherubims, but by a typical
Mediator, their High Priest; so also were they instructed in their real
approach unto God, that it was not to be made immediately to the Father, but by
the Son, whom in particular the Apostle declares the Psalmist in this place to
intend.

Concerning thi^ Person or the Lord he affirms two things; or attributes two
things unto him; 1. The Creation of Heaven and Earth: 2. The Abolition or
change of them: from that Attribution he proceeds to a comparison between him
and the most glorious of his creatures; and that as to Duration or Eternity:
Frailty and Change in and of himself, one of the creatures, being that which in
particular be addresseth himself to the Lord about.

2. The Time or season of the Creation is first intimated; (...), for (...),
(...)
that is, (...), in the beginning, or as the word is here, (...), of old;
before they were, or existed. They had their being and beginning from thee; of
old they were not; but in thy season thou gave Existence or being unto them.

Verse 10. Thou have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the
works of thy hands.
TWo things are observable in this Expression of the Creation of all things:
(1.) The Distribution made of them into Heaven and Earth; being distinctly
mentioned. In the consideration of the works of God, to admire his Greatness
Power and Wisdom in them, or to set forth his praise for them, it is usual in
the Scripture to distribute them into parts, the more to fix the Contemplation
of the mind upon them, and to excite it unto Faith Admiration and Praise. So
deals the Psalmist with the works of Gods Providence in bringing the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, Psalm. 136. He takes as it were, that whole curious
work into its several pieces, and subjoyns that Inference of praise to every
one of them, for his mercy endures for ever. And so he deals with the works
of Creation, Psalm. 19. and in sundry other places. (2.) What is peculiar in the
Expressions with respect unto each of them. Of the Earth it is said, he founded
it; because of its stability and unmoveableness; which is the Language of the
Scripture; He set it fast, he established it, that it should not be moved for
ever. It may be also the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth is compared to an
Aedifice or Building; whereof the Earth as the lowest and most depressed part
is looked on as the Foundation of the whole; but the stability, unmoveableness
and firmness of it, is that which the word expresses, and which is most
properly intended. (2.) Of the Heavens, that they are the Works of his hands;
alluding to the curious frame and garnishing of them with all their Host or
Glorious Lights wherewith they are adorned. The (...), ( Job 26.13.) the
beautifulness, adorning, or garnishing of the Heavens, in the Curious Glorious
forming and fashioning of them, is that which in a way of Distinction the
Psalmist aims to express in these words, the Heavens are the works of thy
hands; that which thy Hands, thy Power with infinite Wisdom has framed so as
to set off, and give luster and beauty to the whole Fabric; as a
Master-Workman does the upper and more noble parts of his building; This is the
first thing assigned to the Lord in this Testimony of his Glory.

The second is in the Change or Abolition of them. Most suppose that the
Heavens and the Earth at the last day shall only be changed, altered, or
renewed, as to their quality and beauty; some that they shall be utterly
destroyed, consumed and abolished. The discussing of that doubt belongs not
directly to the Interpretation or Exposition of this place; neither sense of
the words conducing particularly to the Apostles purpose and design in reciting
this Testimony. It is enough to his Argument, that the work which was of old in
the Creation of the world, and that which shall be in the mutation or abolition
of it, which is no less an effect of Infinite Power then the former is ascribed
unto the Lord Christ. What ever the work be, he compares them to a Garment no
more to be used, or at least not to be used in the same kind wherein it was
before; and the work it self to the folding up, or rolling up of such a
garment, intimating the Greatness of him by whom this work shall be performed,
and the facility of the work unto him. The whole Creation is as a Garment,
wherein he shows his Power clothed unto men. Whence in particular he is said
to cloth himself with Light as with a Garment. And in it, is the hiding of his
power: hid it is, as a man is hid with a garment; not that he should not be
seen at all, but that he should not be seen perfectly, and as he is; it shows
the man, and he is known by it; but also it hides him that he is not perfectly
or fully seen. So are the works of Creation unto God; he so far makes them his
garment or clothing, as in them to give out some instances of his Power and
Wisdom; but He is also hid in them, in that by them no creatures can come to
the full and perfect knowledge of him. Now when this work shall cease, and God
shall uncloath or unvail all his glory to his Saints, and they shall know him
perfectly, see him as he is, so far as a created nature is capable of that
comprehension, then will he lay them aside, and fold them up, at least as to
that use, as easily as a man lays aside a garment that he will wear or use no
more. This lies in the Metaphor.

On this Assertion he insinuates a Comparison between this glorious fabric of
Heaven and Earth and him that made them, as to Durableness and Stability; which
is the thing he treats about, complaining of his own misery or mortality. For
the Heavens and the Earth, he declares that they are in themselves of a flux
and perishing nature; (...), isti, they shall perish. The word immediately
relates to the Heavens, but by the figure Zeugma comprehends and takes in the
Earth also; the Earth and the Heavens shall perish. This fading nature of the
fabric of Heaven and Earth with all things contained in them, he sets forth,
First, By their future End, they shall perish: Secondly, Their tendency unto
that end; they wax old as a garment. By their perishing the most understand
their perishing to their present condition and use, in that Alteration or
change that shall be made of them. Others their utter Abolition. And to say the
truth, it were very hard to suppose that an Alteration only, and that to the
better, a change into a more glorious condition, (...).
should be thus expressed, (...) that word, as the Greek also, being always
used in the worst sense for a perishing by a total Destruction. Their tendency
unto this condition is their waxing old as a garment. Two things may be denoted
in this Expression; 1. The gradual Decay of the Heavens and Earth waxing old,
worse, and decaying in their worth and use; 2. A near Approximation, or drawing
nigh to their End and Period. In this sense, the Apostle in this Epistle
affirms that the Dispensation of the Covenant which established the Judaical
Worship and Ceremonies did wax old and decay, Chap. 8.13. Not that it had lost
any thing of its first Vigor Power and Efficacy before its Abolition. The
strict Observation of all the Institutions of it by our Savior himself,
manifests its Power and Obligation to have continued in its full force. And
this was typified by the continuance of Moses in his full strength and vigor,
until the very day of his death. But he says, it was old and decayed, when it
was (...) near to a disappearance, to its End, Period, and an utter uselesness,
as then it was; even as all things that naturally tend to an end, do it by Age
and decays. And in this, not the former sense are the Heavens and Earth said
to wax old, because of their tendency to that period, which either in
themselves, or as to their use, they shall receive; which is sufficient to
manifest them to be of a changeable perishing nature. And it may be, that it
shall be with these Heavens and Earth at the last day, as it was with the
Heavens and Earth of Judaical Institutions (for so are they frequently called,
especially when their dissolution or abolition is spoken of) in the day of Gods
creating the new Heavens and the Earth in the Gospel according to his promise.
For though the use of them and their power of obliging to their Observation was
taken away and abolished, yet are they kept in the world, as abiding monuments
of the Goodness and Wisdom of God in teaching his Church of old. So may it be
with the Heavens and Earth of the old creation; though they shall be laid aside
at the last day from their use, as a Garment to cloth and teach the Power and
Wisdom of God to men, yet may they be preserved as eternal monuments of them.

In opposition hereunto it is said of Christ, that he abides, he is the same,
and his years fail not. One and the same thing is intended in all these
Expressions; even his Eternal and absolutely immutable Existence. Eternity is
not amiss called a nunc stans; a present existence wherein, or whereunto,
nothing is past or future; it being always wholly present in and to its self.
This is expressed in that (...), thou stand, abidest, endurest, alterest
not, changest not: The same is also expressed in the next words; (...), thou
art he, or art the same, or as the Syriack has it; the same that thou art.
There is an Allusion in these words unto, if not an expression of that name of
God, I am; that is, who is of himself; in himself always absolutely and
unchangeably the same. And this (...), tu ipse, the Hebrews reckon as a
distinct name of God. Indeed (...), are all the same name of God, expressing
his Eternal and immutable self-subsistence.

The last Expression also though Metaphorical is of the same importance. Thy
years fail not. He who is the same Eternally, properly has no years which are
a measure of transient time, denoting its Duration, Beginning and Ending. This
is the measure of the world, and all things contained therein. Their
Continuance is reckoned by years. To show the Eternal subsistence of God in
Opposition to the frailty of the world, and all things created therein; it is
said, his years fail not; that is, theirs do and come to an end; of his Being
and Existence there is none.

How the Apostle proves his Intendment by this Testimony has been declared in
the opening of the words, and the force of it unto his purpose lies open to
all; we may now divert unto those Doctrinal Observations which the words offer
unto us. As,

I. All the Properties of God, considered in the Person of the Son the head of
the Church, are suited to give Relief Consolation and supportment unto
Believers in all their distresses. This Truth presents it self unto us from the
use of the words in the Psalm, and their Connection in the design of the
Psalmist. Under the consideration of his own mortality and frailty, he relieves
himself with thoughts of the Omnipotency and Eternity of Christ; and takes
Arguments from thence to plead for relief.

And this may a little further be unfolded for our use in the ensuing
Observations.

1. The Properties of God are those whereby God makes known himself to us; and
declares both what he is, and what we shall find him to be in all that we have
to deal with him: He is infinitely Holy, Just, Wise, Good, Powerful, etc. And
by our Apprehension of these things, are we lead to that Acquaintance with the
Nature of God which in this life we may attain, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7.

2. God oftentimes declares and proposes these properties of his nature unto
us for our supportment Consolation and Relief in our Troubles, Distresses and
endeavors after Peace and Rest to our souls. Isa. 40.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

3. That since the Entrance of sin, these Properties of God absolutely
considered will not yield that Relief and satisfaction unto the souls of men,
which they would have done and did, whilst man continued obedient unto God
according to the Law of his Creation. Hence Adam upon his sin knew nothing that
should encourage him to expect any help pity or relief from him, and therefore
fled from his presence and hid himself. The Righteousness, Holiness, Purity and
Power of God all infinite, eternal, unchangeable, considered absolutely, are no
way suited to the Advantage of sinners in any condition, Romans 1.32. Heb. 1.12.

4. These Properties of the Divine Nature are in every person of the Trinity
entirely; so that each Person is so infinitely holy, just, wise, good and
powerful, because each person is equally partaker of the whole Divine Nature
and Being.

5. The Person of the Word, or the Eternal Son of God, may be considered either
absolutely as such, or as designed in the Counsel, Wisdom and Will of the
Father, by and with his own Will and Consent, unto the work of Mediation
between God and Man, Prove. 8.22, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And in him as such, it is
that the Properties of the nature of God are suited to yield relief unto
Believers in every condition: For,

1. It was the Design of God in the Appointment of his Son to be Mediator to
retrieve the communion between himself and his creature that was lost by sin.
Now man was so created at first, as that every thing in God was suited to be a
Reward unto him, and in all things to give him satisfaction. This being wholly
lost by sin, and the whole Representation of God to man becoming full of dread
and terror, all gracious intercourse in a way of special love on the part of
God, and spiritual willing Obedience on the part of man was intercepted and cut
off. God designing again to take sinners into a communion of Love and Obedience
with himself, it must be by Representing unto them his blessed Properties as
suited to their encouragement, satisfaction and reward. And this he does in the
Person of his Son, as designed to be our Mediator, Heb. 1.2, 3. For,

2. The Son is designed to be our Mediator, and the Head of his Church, in a
way of Covenant, wherein there is an Engagement for the exerting of all the
Divine Properties of the nature of God for the Good and Advantage of them, for
whom he has undertaken, and whom he designed to bring again into favor and
communion with God. Hence Believers do no more consider the Properties of God
in the Person of the Son absolutely, but as engaged in a way of Covenant for
their Good, and as proposed unto them for an everlasting satisfactory Reward.
This is the ground of his calling upon them so often to behold see and consider
him; and thereby to be refreshed. They consider his Power, as he is mighty to
save: His Eternity, as he is an everlasting Reward; his Righteousness, as
faithful to justify them: All his Properties, as engaged in Covenant for their
Good and Advantage. What ever he is in himself, that he will be to them in a
way of Mercy. Thus do the holy Properties of the Divine Nature become a means
of supportment unto us, as considered in the Person of the Son of God. And this
is,

1. A great encouragement unto Believing; The Lord Christ as the Wisdom of God
inviting sinners to come in unto him, and to be made partakers of him, lays
down all his Divine Excellencies as a motive thereunto, Prove. 8.14, 15, etc.
For on the account of them, he assures us that we may find Rest Satisfaction
and an abundant Reward in him. And the like invitation does he give to poor
sinners, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be saved all the ends of the Earth, for
I am God, and there is none else. They may justly expect Salvation in him who
is God, and in whom all Divine Attributes are proposed to their Benefit; as
they find who come unto him, v. 24.25. The consideration hereof prevents all
the Fears, and answers all the Doubts of them that look up unto him.

2. An instruction how to consider the Properties of God by faith for our
Advantage, that is, as engaged in the Person of the Son of God for our Good.
Absolutely considered they may fill us with dread and terror, as they did them
of old, who concluded when they thought they had seen God, or heard his voice,
that they should dye. Considered as his Properties, who is our Redeemer, they
are always relieying and comforting, Isa. 54.4, 5.

II. The whole Old Creation, even the most glorious parts of it, hastening unto
its period, at least of our present interest in it, and use of it, calls upon
us not to fix our hearts on the small perishing shares which we have therein,
especially since we have him who is Omnipotent and Eternal for our Inheritance.
The Figure or fashion of this world, the Apostle tells us, is passing away;
that lovely Appearance which it has at present unto us; it is hastening unto
its period, it is a fading dying thing, that can yield us no true satisfaction.

III. The Lord Christ the Mediator, the Head and Spouse of the Church; is
infinitely exalted above all creatures whatever, in that he is God over all,
Omnipotent and Eternal.

IV. The whole World, the Heavens and Earth, being made by the Lord Christ, and
being to be dissolved by him, is wholly at his disposal, to be ordered for the
good of them that do believe. And therefore,

V. There is no just cause of fear unto Believers, from any thing in Heaven or
Earth, seeing they are all of the making, and at the disposal of Jesus Christ.

VI. Whatever our changes may be, inward or outward, yet Christ changing not,
our eternal condition is secured, and relief provided against all present
troubles and miseries. The Immutability and Eternity of Christ is the spring of
our consolation and security in every condition.

The sum of all is, that,

VII. Such is the frailty of* the nature of man, and such the perishing
condition of all created things, that none can ever obtain the least stable
consolation, but what arises from an interest in the Omnipotency Sovereignty
and Eternity of the Lord Christ. This I say is that which the words insisted on
as they are used in the Psalm do instruct us in; and this therefore we may a
little farther improve.

This is that which we are instructed in by the Ministry of John Baptist, Isa.
40.6, 7, 8. The voice cried, all flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof
is as the flower of the field; the grass withers, and the flower fades,
because the Spirit of God blows upon it; surely the People is grass: The
grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand for
ever. All is grass, fading grass; though it bloom and appear goodly for a
little season, yet there is no continuance, no consistency in it. Every Wind
that passes over it, causes it to wither: This is the best of flesh; of all
that in and by our selves, we are, we do, we enjoy, or hope for. The Crown of
the Pride of man, and his glorious Beauty, is but a fading flower, Isa. 28.1.
What Joy, what Peace, what Rest can be taken in things that are dying away in
our hands, that perish before every breath of Wind that passes over them?
Where then shall this poor Creature, so frail in its self, in its Actings, in
its Enjoyments, seek for Rest, Consolation and satisfaction? in this alone,
that the Word of the Lord abides for ever; in the eternally abiding Word of
God; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ as preached in the Gospel: so Peter applies
these words, 1 Ep. 1.25. By an Interest in him alone, his Eternity and
Unchangeableness, may relief be obtained against the consideration of this
perishing dying state and condition of all things. Thus the Psalmist tells us,
that verily every man living in his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm.
39.5. and thence takes the Conclusion now insisted on, v. 7. And now Lord,
seeing it is thus: Seeing this is the condition of mankind, what is thence to
be looked after? What is to be expected? nothing at all; not the least of use
or comfort? What wait I for? My hope is in thee; from thee alone as a God
Eternal, pardoning and saving, do I look for Relief.

Man indeed in this Condition seeks oftentimes for satisfaction from himself,
from what he is, and does, and enjoyes; and what he shall leave after him;
comforting himself against his own frailty with an Eternity that he fancieth to
himself in his Posterity, and their Enjoyment of his Goods and Inheritance; So
the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that their Houses
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places unto all generations; and
they call their Lands after their own names. They see indeed that all men dye,
Wise men and Fools, v. 10. and cannot but from thence observe their own
frailty. Wherefore they are resolved to make provision against it; they will
perpetuate their Posterity, and their Inheritance. This they make use of to
relieve them in their inmost Imaginations. But what censure does the Holy Ghost
pass upon this Contrivance, v. 12. Nevertheless, says he, notwithstanding all
these imaginations, Man being in honor abides not, he is like the Beasts that
perish; which he farther proves, v. 17, 18, 19, 20. showing fully that he
himself is no way concerned in the imaginary perpetuity of his Possessions;
which as they are all of them perishing things, so himself dies and fades away,
whilst he is in the contemplation of their Endurance. And the Truth proposed
may be farther evidenced by the ensuing considerations.

1. Man was made for Eternity. He was not called out of nothing, to return unto
it again. When he once is, he is for ever; not as to his present state, that is
frail and changeable; but as to his Existence in one condition or other. God
made him for his Eternal Glory, and gave him therefore a subsistence without
End. Had he been created to continue a day, a month, an year, a th^usand
years, things commensurate unto that space of time might have afforded him
satisfaction. But he is made for ever.

2. He is sensible of his Condition. Many indeed endeavor to cast off the
thoughts of it: They would faign hope that they shall be, no longer than they
are here. In that case they could find enough as they suppose to satisfy them,
in the things that are like themselves. But this will not be; They find a
Witness in themselves to the contrary; somewhat that assures them of an
after-reckoning; and that the things which now they do, will be called over in
another world. Besides the conviction of the Word with them that enjoy it, puts
the matter out of question. They cannot evade the Testimony it gives unto their
eternal subsistence.

3. Hence men are exposed to double trouble and perplexity. First, That whereas
their Eternal subsistence, as to the Enjoyment of good or bad, depends upon
their present Life, that that is frail, fading, perishing. They are here now,
but when a few days are come and gone, they must go to the place from whence
they shall not return. They find their subsistence divided into two very
unequal parts, a few days and Eternity; and the latter to be regulated by the
former. This fills them with Anxiety, and makes them sometimes weary of life,
sometimes hate it, always almost solicitous about it, and to bewail the
frailty of it. Secondly, That no perishing thing will afford them Relief or
supportment in this Condition. How should it? They and these are parting every
moment, and that for Eternity. There is no comfort in a perpetual taking leave
of things that are beloved. Such is the life of man as unto all earthly
Enjoyments. It is but a parting with what a man has; and the longer a man is
about it, the more trouble he has with it. The things of this Creation will
not continue our lives here, because of our frailty; they will not accompany us
unto Eternity, because of their own frailty; we change, and they change; we are
Vanity, and they are no better.

4. An interest in the Omnipotency Sovereignty and Eternity of the Lord Christ
will yield a soul relief and satisfaction in this Condition. There is that in
them, which is suited to relieve us under our present frailty, and to give
satisfaction unto our future Eternity. For,

1. What we have not in our selves, by an interest in Christ we have in
another. In him we have Stability and Unchangeableness: For what he is in
himself he is unto us, and for us. All our concernments are wrapped up and
secured in him. He is ours, and though we in our own persons change, yet he
changes not, nor our interest in him which is our life, our All. Though we
dye, yet he dies not; and because he lives, we shall live also. Though all
other things perish and pass away, that we here make use of, yet he abides a
blessed and satisfying portion unto a believing soul. For as we are his, so all
his is ours; only laid up in him, and kept for us in him. So that under all
Disconsolations that may befall us from our own frailty and misery, and the
perishing condition of outward things, we have sweet relief tendered us in
this, that we have all good things treasured up for us in him. And Faith knows
how to make use of all that is in Christ, to the comfort and supportment of the
soul.

2. When our frailty and changeableness have had their utmost effect upon us;
when they have done their worst upon us, they only bring us to the full
Enjoyment of what the Lord Christ is unto us, that is an exceeding great
Reward, and a full satisfaction unto Eternity. Then shall we live for ever in
that which we now live upon; being present with him, beholding his Glory, and
made partakers of it. So that both here, and hereafter, there is relief,
comfort and satisfaction for Believers laid up in the Excellencies of the
Person of Jesus Christ. And this should teach us,

1. The misery of those who have no interest in him; and have therefore nothing
to relieve themselves against the evils of any condition. All their hopes are
in this life; and from the Enjoyments of it. When these are once past, they
will be Eternally and in all things miserable; miserable beyond our Expression,
or their Apprehension. And what is this life? a vapor that appears for a
little while: What are the enjoyments of this life? dying perishing things, and
unto them, fuel to Lust, and so to Hell. Suppose they live twenty, thirty,
forty, sixty years; yet every day they fear, or ought to fear, that it will be
their last. Some dye ost every day from the first to last, of the utmost extent
of the life of man: so that every day may be the last to any one; and whose
then will be all their treasures of earthly things. And the Relief which men
have against the tormenting fears that the frailty of their condition does
expose them unto, is no whit better than their troubles. It is sinful security,
which gives the fullness of their misery an advantage to surprise them, and
themselves an advantage to aggravate that misery, by the increase of their sin.
In the mean time spes sibi quisque; every ones hope is in himself alone; which
makes it perpetually like the giving up of the ghost. Surely the contentment
that dying man can take in dying things, is very contemptible. We must not stay
to discover the miseries of the life of man, and the weakness of the comforts
and joys of it: But what ever they be, what becomes of them, when they have
serious thoughts of their present frailty, and future Eternity? This following
Eternity is like Pharaohs lean kine, which immediately devours all the fat
pleasures of this present life, and yet continues as lean and miserable as
ever. The Eternal misery of men will not be in the least eased, yea, it will be
greatned by the Enjoyments of this life, when once it has devoured them. And
this is the portion of them that have no interest in the Eternity and
Immutability of the Son of God. Their present frailty makes them continually
fear Eternity, and their fear of Eternity embitters all things that they should
use for the relief of their frailty; and that security which they provide
against both, increases their misery, by sin here, and suffering hereafter.

2. This also will teach us how to use these earthly things; how dying Persons
should use dying creatures. That is, to use them for our present service and
necessity, but not as those that look after rest or satisfaction in them, which
they will not afford us. Use the world, but live on Christ.

3. Not to despond under a sense of our present frailty; we see what blessed
relief is provided against our fainting on that account.

Verse XIII.
THe next Verse contains the last Testimony produced by the Apostle for the
confirmation of the Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ above Angels, in the words
ensuing.

Ver. 13. (...).
There is no difference about the reading of these words. As they are here
expressed by the Apostle, so are they in the Translation of the LXX, and the
Original Text is exactly rendered by them.

Verse 13. But unto which of the Angels said he at anytime, Sit thou on my
right hand, until I make (put, place) thine enemies thy footstool, (the
footstool of thy feet.)
The usefulness of this testimony for the confirmation of the Dignity and
Authority of the Messiah, is evidenced by the frequent quotation of it in the
New Testament; as by our Savior himself, Matthew. 22.42. by Peter, Acts 2.34,
35. and twice by our Apostle in this place, and 1 Cor. 15.28.

As the words are here used we may consider the Introduction of the Testimony,
and the Testimony it self.

The Introduction of the Testimony is by way of Interrogation; Unto which of
the Angels said he at any time? And herein three things may be observed.

1. That in the Interrogation, a vehement negation is included; He said not at
any time to any Angels; he never spoke these words or the like concerning them:
there is no testimony unto that purpose recorded in the whole Book of God. The
way of Expression puts an emphasis upon the denial. And the speaking here
relates unto what is spoken in the Scripture, which is the only means of our
knowledge, and rule of our faith in these things.

2. That he makes application of this testimony to every Angel in heaven
severally considered. For whereas he had before sufficiently proved the
Pre-eminence of the Messiah above the Angels in general, to obviate their
thoughts about the especial Honor and Dignity of any one or more Angels, or
Angels in a singular manner, such as indeed they conceived, he applies the
present testimony to every one of them singly and individually considered. Unto
which of the Angels said he at any time?

3. A tacit Application of this testimony unto the Son, or the Messiah; unto
the Angels he said not, but unto the Son he said, Sit thou on my right hand.

That the testimony it self does clearly prove the intendment of the Apostle,
provided the words were originally spoken of him, or to him, unto whom they are
applied, is beyond all exceptions. For they contain an Elogium of him of whom
they are spoken, and an assignation of Honor and Glory to him, beyond what
ever was or can be ascribed unto any Angel what ever. It remains therefore that
this be first proved, and then the importance of the testimony it self
explained.

1. For those that believe the Gospel, the Authority of the Lord Christ and his
Apostles applying this testimony unto him, is sufficient for their conviction.
By our Savior as was observed it is applied unto the Messiah in Thesi, Matthew.
22.42, 43, 44. And had not this been generally acknowledged by the Scribes and
Pharisees, and whole Church of the Jews, as it had not been to his purpose to
have mentioned it, so they had not been reduced unto that conviction and shame
by it as they were. The Apostles apply it unto the true Messiah in Hypothesi;
and herein does our faith rest.

2. But a considerable part of the controversy which we have with the Jews
relating much unto this Psalm, we must yet farther clear the application of it
unto the Messiah from their exceptions.

Of the Targum or Chaldee Paraphrase there are two Copies, one printed in Arias
Bible, the other in the Basil Edition by Buxtorf. The Title of the Psalm in
both of them is, (...), A song by the hand of David. And the beginning of it is
thus rendered by the former of them, The Lord said by his word that he would
give me the Kingdom, because I studied the doctrine of the Law of his right
hand; wait thou until I make thine enemies thy footstool. By the other thus,
The Lord said by his word, that he would appoint me the Lord of all Israel; but
he said unto me again, Stay for Saul who is of the Tribe of Benjamin until he
die, for a Kingdom will not admit of a Companion; and after that I will make
thine enemies thy footstool.

Besides what appears from other considerations, it is hence sufficiently
evident, that this Targum was made after the Jews began to be exercised in the
controversy with Christians, and had learned to corrupt by their glosses all
the testimonies given in the Old Testament unto the Lord Christ, especially
such as they sound to be made use of in the New. Their corrupting of the sense
of the Holy Ghost in this place by a pretended Translation, is openly malicious
against evident light and conviction. The Psalm they own from the Title to be
written by David, but they would have him also to be the subject of it, to be
spoken of in it. And therefore those words, The Lord said unto my Lord, they
translate, The Lord said unto me; which assertion is contrary to the Text, and
false in it self; for who ever were the Penman of the Psalm, he speaks of
another person. The Lord said unto my Lord; say they, The Lord said unto me.
And thereunto are annexed those imaginations about studying the Law, and
waiting for the death of Saul, which in no case belongs to the Text or matter
in hand.

Others therefore to avoid this Rock affirm, that the Psalm speaks of David,
but was not composed by him, being the work of some other who calls him Lord.
So David Kimchi on the place. And this he endeavors to prove from the
inscription of the Psalm, (...), that is says he, A Psalm spoken to David; for
it denotes the third, and not the second Case or variation of Nouns.

But this is contrary to the use of that Prefix throughout the whole Book of
Psalms; and if this observation might be allowed, all Psalms with this Title,
(...), le David, which are the greatest part of those composed by him, must be
adjudged from him, contrary to the received sense and consent of Jews and
Christians. But fully to manifest the folly of this pretense and that the
Author of it contradicted his own light out of hatred unto the Gospel, there
are sundry Psalms with this Title, (...), le David, which are expressly affirmed
to be composed and sung by him unto the Lord; as Psalm. 18. whose Title is, To
the chief Musician, (...), (where the Prefix is repeated) to David the servant
of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of this song. So directly do the
modern Rabbis contradict their own light, out of hatred unto the Gospel.

Evident then it is that David is not treated of in this Psalm, in that he
being the Penman of it, calls him his Lord; concerning whom he treats.
Besides, to omit other instances of alike cogency, how or when did God swear
unto David that he should be a Priest, and that for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck? The Jews knew well enough that David had nothing to do with the
Priesthood. So that David had no concernment in this Psalm, but only as he was
the Penman of it. He was not herein so much as a Type of the Messiah, but
speaks of him as his Lord.

Wherefore others of them, as Jarchi, and Lipman, and Nizzachon affirm* that it
is Abraham who is spoken of in this Psalm, of whom the one says it was composed
by Melchizedech, the other by his servant Eliezer of Damascus. But the fondness
of these presumptuous figments is evident. Melchiz^dech on all accounts was
greater than Abraham, above him in Degree, Dignity and Office, as being a King
and Priest of the High God, and therefore blessed him, and received Tithes of
him; and on no account could call him his Lord. Eliezer did so, being his
servant, but how could he ascribe unto him the sitting at the Right Hand of
God? how the sending forth the rod of his power from Sion? how being a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedeck, or indeed any one thing mentioned in
the Psalm? These things deserve not to be insisted on, but only to manifest the
woeful pretenses of the present Judaical infidelity.

It appears from the Dialogue of Justin Martyr with Trypho, that some of them
of old applied this Psalm to Hezekiah. But not one word in it can rationally be
conceived to respect him, especially that Which is spoken about the Priesthood
utterly excludes him; seeing his Great Grandfather a man of more power than
himself, was smitten with Leprosy, and lost the Administration of his Kingdom
for one single attempt to invade that Office, 2 Chronicles. 26.

It remains then that this Psalm was written concerning the Messiah and him
alone, for no other subject of it can be assigned. And this use in our passage
we may make of the Targum, that whereas those words, The Lord said, do not
intend a word spoken, but the stable purpose or decree of God; as Psalm. 2. v.
7. its Author has rendered them, (...), The Lord said in or by his word; that
is his Wisdom, his Son, with whom and to whom he speaks, and concerning whom
his Decree and Purpose is here declared.

It remains only that we consider the Objections of the Jews against our
Application of this Psalm unto the Messiah. And these are summed up by Kimchi
in his Exposition of the Text. The Heretics, says he, expound this Psalm of
Jesus; and in the first verse they say the Father and Son are designed; and
they read Adonai with Camets under Nun, in which use the true God is signified
by that Name. And verse the third, in (...) they read Chirick under Ain, so
making it signify with thee. And what is there said of the beauty of Holiness,
they ascribe unto that which is from the womb. But in all Copies that are
found, from the rising of the Sun to the going down of it, Chiric is with Nun
in Adoni, and Patha with Ain in Hammeka. And Gerolmus (Hierom) erred in his
Translation. And for the error, if the Father and Son be the Godhead, how
does one stand in need of the other? and how can he say unto him, Thou art a
Priest? He is a Priest who offers sacrifice, but God does not. Of the like
nature are the rest of his exceptions unto the end of his Notes on that Psalm.
To this Lipman adds a bitter blasphemous discourse about the application of
those words, from the womb, v. 3. unto the womb of the blessed Virgin.

Answ. Our cause is not at all concerned in these mistakes, whether of Jews or
Christians. For the Jews, their chief enmity lies against the Deity of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and therefore what ever testimony is produced concerning him,
they presently imagine that it is for the proof of his Divine Nature. This lies
at the bottom of these exceptions of Kimchi. Hence he conceives, that our
argument from this place lies in the word (...), and the pointing it with
Camets, Adonai, so making it to be the proper Name of God; when we acknowledge
that it is Adoni pointed with Chiric, and signifies my Lord; so it is rendered
by the Evangelist, Matthew. 22. v. 45. so by the LXX. and by Hierom, Domino meo.
And the argument of our Savior lies not in the word (...), but that he being
the Son of David was also then the Lord of David, which he could no otherwise
be but upon the account of his Divine Nature.

In the words reflected on by Kimchi, it is confessed that there have been
mistakes amongst Translators and Expositors. Those words (...) are rendered by
the LXX (...), and by the Vulgar from them tecum principium, with thee is the
beginning; which has misled many Expositors. But Kimchi knew that Hierom had
translated them, Populi tui duces spontanei, Thy people shall be willing
leaders: giving both the significations of (...), though one would suffice; Thy
people are, or shall be willing. But this pertains not to the cause under
consideration.

In like manner have those other words been misrendred by the same Translation,
(...), say the LXX; and the Vulgar, Exutero ante luciferum genui te; From the
womb before the morning Star have I begotten thee; which gave occasion to many
uncouth Expositions, in Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Austin, and
others. But the words are rightly rendered, The dew of thy birth is from the
womb of the morning; and express the rise and flourishing of the Kingdom of the
Messiah. These things prove indeed that it is dangerous to interpret the
Scripture without heedful attending unto the Original Text; but that the
Messiah is not intended in this Psalm, they prove not.

For what they farther object on our supposition of the Divine Nature of
Christ, That there was no need that God should promise God his assistance, it
is but an open effect of their ignorance or malice. Assistance is not promised
the Messiah as God, but as made Man for our sakes; and so as a Priest did he
offer that Sacrifice without an interest wherein both they and we must
eternally perish.

To conclude this discourse, we have many of their own Masters concurring with
us in the assignation of this Psalm unto the Messiah; and to that purpose they
freely express themselves, when their minds are taken off from the
consideration of the difference that they have with Christians. Thus the Author
(...), in his signs of the coming of the Messiah: Armillus shall stir up all
the world, says he, to war against the Messiah; (...), whom the holy God shall
not compel to war, but shall only say unto him, Sit thou at my right hand;
referring unto this place. So Saadias Gaon, on Dan. 7.13. (...), This is
Messiah our righteousness, as it is written, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
thou on my right hand. They affirm the same in Midrash Tehillim, on Psalm. 18.
v. 35. (...), Rabbi Joden said, In the world to come, the holy blessed God
shall cause Messiah the King to sit on his right hand, as it is written, The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand. And to the same purpose are
the words, of R. Moses Haddarsan in Bereshith Rabba, on Genesis 18. v. 1. (...).
Rabbi Berechia in the name of Rabbi Levi opened that which is spoken, Thou
shall give me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand shall sustain me,
(Psalm. 18.36.) In the world to come the holy blessed God shall cause Messiah
the King to sit on his right hand, as it is written, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand. And Abraham shall sit at his left hand; and
the face of Abraham shall be pale, and he shall say, The Son of my Son sits on
the right hand, and I on the left. But God shall appease him, and say unto him,
The Son of thy Son sits at my right hand, and I am at thy right hand, as it is
written, Thy loving kindness shall increase me. And so on Psalm 17. Rabbi Joden
in the name of R. Chijah, (...), The holy blessed God shall place Messiah the
King at his right hand, as it is said, The Lord said unto my Lord.

Thus setting aside the mixture of their follies and impieties wherein we are
not concerned, we have a sufficient suffrage from the Jews themselves unto our
assignation of this Prophetical Psalm to the Messiah; which is enough to stop
the mouths of their modern gainsayers, who neither are able to assign any
other Person unto whom it should belong. Having then removed their Objections
we may return unto the Interpretation of the words.

The matter intended in the first part of these words, or sitting at the right
hand of God, has been somewhat spoken unto already, and I shall add but
little in the further Explanation of it in this place.

Some things controverted on these words we may well omit the consideration of;
as whether were the more honorable place of old the right hand or the left:
besides they have been sufficiently spoken unto already on verse 3. For whereas
there is no mention made any where of sitting at the left hand of God, as was
observed, there is no comparison to be feigned between the one and the other.
Besides the pretense of the left hand to have been the most honorable place of
old, is most vain; insisted on by some who had a desire to vent new
observations of old matters to little purpose. And Bellarmine shows what good
leisure he had in managing of Controversies, when he spent more time and labor
in answering an Objection against the Popes Supremacy, from Peter's being placed
in old Seals on the left hand of Paul, than of many Texts of Scripture plainly
overthrowing his pretensions.

Neither shall we consider their claim unto this testimony, who understanding
the Human Nature of Christ to be to be only intended and spoken to, affirm that
its sitting at the right hand of God consists in a real communication of all
Divine Properties and Attributes unto that Nature; a pretense very remote from
the Apostles design and importance of the words.

For the Introductory Preface of this Testimony, Unto which of the Angels said
he at any time, we have already considered it. In the testimony it self we must
consider, 1. The Person speaking, the Lord. 2. The Person spoken unto, my Lord.
3. The Nature and Manner of this speaking, said. 4. The thing spoken, Sit on my
right hand. 5. The end hereof as to Work and Operation, make thine enemies thy
footstool. 6. The Limitation of it as unto duration, until.


1. The Person speaking is the Lord, The Lord said. In the Greek both the
Person speaking, and the Person spoken unto, are expressed by the same name,
(...), Lord; only the person spoken unto is not absolutely called so, but with
relation to the Psalmist, (...), to my Lord; David calls him his Lord, Matthew.
22.43. But in the Hebrew they have different denominations; the Person speaking
is Jehovah, (...), that is, God the Father; for though the Name be often used
where the Son is distinctly spoken of, and sometimes in the same place each of
them are mentioned by that name, as Genesis 19. v. 24. Zech. 2. v. 8, 9. because
of their equal Participation of the same Divine Nature signified thereby, yet
where Jehovah speaks unto the Son, or of him as here, it is the Person of the
Father that is distinctly denoted thereby; according as was showed at the
entrance of this Epistle.

2. The Person spoken unto is the Son; (...), the Lord, David's Lord; in what
respect we must now enquire. The Lord Christ the Son is in respect of his
Divine Nature of the same Essence Power and Glory with the Father, Joh. 10. v.
30. Absolutely therefore and naturally in that respect he is capable of no
Subordination to the Father, or Exaltation by him, but what depends on and
flows from his Eternal Generation, Joh. 5. v. 26. By dispensation he humbled
himself and emptied himself of this Glory, Phil. 2. v. 7, 8. not by a real
parting with it, but by the Assumption of Humane Nature into personal Union
with himself, being made flesh, Joh. 1. v. 14. wheren his Eternal Glory was
clouded for a season, Joh. 17. v. 5. and his Person humbled to the discharge of
those Acts of his Mediation which were to be performed in the Humane Nature:
Phil. 2. v. 9, 10. This Person of Christ is here spoken unto, not in respect of
his Divine Nature only, which is not capable of Exaltation or Glory by the way
of free gift or donation; nor in respect of his Humane Nature only, which is
not the King and Head of the Church; but with respect unto his whole Person,
wherein the Divine Nature exerting its Power and Glory with the Will and
Understanding of the Humane Nature, is the principle of those Theandrical acts,
whereby Christ rules over all in the Kingdom given him of his Father, Rev. 1.
v. 17, 18. As he was God he was David's Lord, but not his Son. As he was Man he
was David's Son, and so absolutely could not be his Lord. In his Person as he
was God and Man he was his Lord and his Son: which is the intention of our
Saviors Question, Matthew. 22. v. 45.

3. For the Nature and Manner of this speaking, when and how God said it, four
things seem to be intended in it. 1. The Eternal Decree of God concerning the
Exaltation of the Son incarnate. So David calls this Word the Decree, the
Statute or Eternal Appointment of God, Psalm. 2. v. 7. This is (...), the
Internal and Eternal Word, or speaking of the Mind Will and Counsel of God;
referred unto by Peter, 1 Epist. 1. v. 20. God said this in the Eternal Purpose
of his Will, to and concerning his Son. 2. The Covenant and Compact that was
between the Father and Son about and concerning the Work of Mediation, is
expressed also in this saying. That there was such a Covenant, and the nature
of it, I have elsewhere declared. See Prove. 8. v. 30, 31. Isa. 53. v. 10, 11,
12. Zech. 6. v. 12, 13. Joh. 17. v. 4, 5, 6; In this Covenant, God said unto
him, Sit thou at my right hand; which he also pleaded in and upon the discharge
of his work, Isa. 50. v. 8, 9. Joh. 17. v. 4, 5. 3. There is also in it the
Declaration of this Decree and Covenant, in the Prophesies and Promises given
out concerning their accomplishment and execution from the foundation of the
world, Luke 1. v. 40. 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. Genesis 3.15. He said it by the mouth of
his holy prophets which have been since the world began. And in this sense
David only recounts the prophesies and promises that went before, Luke 24. v.
25, 26, 27. And all these are comprised in this speaking here mentioned, Thus
the Lord said unto him. And all these were past, when recorded by David. But he
yet looks forward by a Spirit of prophecy into the actual accomplishment of
them all, when upon the Resurrection of Christ, and the fulfilling of his work
of Humiliation, God actually invested him with the promised Glory; which is the
fourth thing intended in the expression, Acts 2. v. 33.36. chap. 5.33. 1 Pet.
1. v. 20, 21. All these four things center in a new Revelation now made to
David by the Spirit of Prophecy. This he here declares as the stable Purpose
Covenant and Promise of God the Father, revealed unto him: The Lord said.

And this also gives us an account of the manner of this Expression, as to its
imperative Enunciation, Sit thou: It has in it the force of a promise, that he
should do so, as it respected the Decree Covenant and Declaration thereof from
the foundation of the world; God engaging his Faithfulness and Power for the
effecting of it in its appointed season, speaks concerning it as a thing
instantly to be done. And as those words respect the glorious accomplishment of
the thing it self, so they denote the acquiescence of God in the work of
Christ, and his Authority in his glorious Exaltation.

4. The thing spoken about is Christ's sitting at the right hand of God;
wherein that consists has been declared on verse 3. In brief, it is the
Exaltation of Christ into the glorious Administration of the Kingdom granted
unto him, with Honor, Security and Power, or as in one word our Apostle calls
it, his Reigning, 1 Cor. 15.25. Concerning which we have treated already at
large.

And herein we shall acquisce, and not trouble our selves with the needless
curiosity and speculation of some about these words. Such is that of Maldonat
on Matthew. 16. before remarked on verse 3. says he, Cum filius dicitur sedere
ad dextram Patris, denotatur comparatio virtutis filii and Patris, and potentia
filii major dicitur ratione functionis Officii and administrationis Ecclesiae.
Paterque videtur fecisse filium quodammodo se superiorem, and donasse illi
nomen etiam supra ipsum Dei nomen, quod omnes Christiani tacit significant,
cum audito nomine Jesu detegunt caput, audito autem nomine Dei, non item. Than
which nothing could be more presumptuously nor foolishly spoken. For there is
not in the words the least intimation of any comparison between the Power of
the Father and the Son, but only the Father's Exaltation of the Son unto Power
and Glory expressed. But, as was said, these things have been already
considered.

5. There is in the words the End aimed at in this sitting down at the right
hand of God, and that is, the making of his Enemies the footstool of his feet.
This is that which is promised unto him in the state and condition whereunto he
is exalted. For the opening of these words we must enquire, 1. Who are these
Enemies of Christ. 2. How they are to be made his footstool. 3. By whom.


For the first, we have showed that it is the glorious Exaltation of Christ in
his Kingdom that is here spoken of; and therefore the Enemies intended must be
the Enemies of his Kingdom, or Enemies unto him in his Kingdom; that is, as he
sits on his Throne carrying on the work designed, and ends of it. Now the
Kingdom of Christ may be considered two ways. First, in respect of the Internal
Spiritual Power and Efficacy of it, in the hearts of his subjects. Secondly,
with respect unto the outward glorious Administration of it in the world. And
in both these respects it has enemies in abundance: all and every one whereof
must be made his footstool. We shall consider them apart.

The Kingdom, Rule or Reigning of Christ in the first sense, is the Authority
and Power which he puts forth for the conversion sanctification and salvation
of his Elect. As he is their King he quickens them by his Spirit, sanctifies
them by his grace, preserves them by his faithfulness, raises them from the
dead at the last day by his power, and gloriously rewards them unto Eternity
in his righteousness. In this work the Lord Christ has many enemies; as the
Law, Sin, Satan, the World, Death, the Grave and Hell: all these are enemies
to the Work and Kingdom of Christ, and consequently to his Person, as having
undertaken that work.

1. The Law is an enemy unto Christ in his Kingdom; not absolutely, but by
accident, and by reason of the consequents that attend it, where his subjects
are obnoxious unto it. It slays them, Romans 7. v. 9, 10, 11. which is the work
of an enemy; is against them, and contrary unto them, Col. 2. v. 14. and
contributes strength to their other adversaries, 1 Cor. 15. v. 56. which
discovers the nature of an enemy.

2. Sin is universally and in its whole nature an enemy unto Christ, Romans 8. v.
7. Sinners and enemies are the same, Romans 5. v. 8, 10. Col. 1. v. 21. It is
that which makes special direct and immediate opposition to the quickening
sanctifying and saving of his his people, Romans 7. v. 21, 23. Jam. 1. v. 14, 15.
1 Pet. 2. v. 11.

3. Satan is the sworn enemy of Christ, the adversary that openly, constantly,
avowedly opposes him in his Throne, Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 6. v. 12. 1 Pet. 5.8.
And he exerts his enmity by temptations, 1 Cor. 7. v. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 3. v. 5.
accusations, Rev. 12. v. 10. persecutions, Rev. 2. v. 10. All which are the
works of an enemy.

4. The World is also a professed enemy of the Kingdom of Christ, Joh. 15. v.
18. in the Things of it, the Men of it, the Rule of it, it sets it self against
the work of the Lord Christ on his Throne. The things of it as under the curse
and subject to vanity, are suited to alienate the hearts of men from Christ,
and so act an enmity against him, Jam. 4. v. 4. 1 John 2. v. 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy
6. v. 9, 10, 11. Matthew. 13. v. 22: The men of the world act the same part,
Matthew. 10. v. 22. chap. 24. v. 9. By examples, by temptations, by reproaches,
by persecutions, by allurements, they make it their business to oppose the
Kingdom of Christ. And to that end is the Rule of it for the most part directed
or overruled, 1 Cor. 15. v. 24, 25.

5. Death is also an enemy, so it is expressly called, 1 Cor. 15.26. it designs
execution of the first Curse against all believers; and therein contributes aid
and Assistance unto all other Adversaries; giving up its self to the service of
Satan, and therefore said to be in his power, Chap. 2.14. of this Epistle; and
borrows a sting of sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. to make its self the more terrible and
sharp.

6. The Grave is an Adversary also; It fights against the faith of the Subjects
of Christ; by reducing their Mortality into Corruption, and holding fast the
dead until they are powerfully rescued from the jaws of it.

7. Lastly, Hell is that Enemy in a subordination whereunto all these others do
act. They all aim to bring men into Hell; which is an Eternal Enemy where it
prevails. This attends the workings and successes of those other Adversaries to
consume and destroy, if it were possible, the whole Inheritance of Christ, Rev.
6.8. All these are Enemies to Christ in his Work and Kingdom, with every thing
that contributes aid or Assistance unto them, every thing that they make use of
in the pursuit of their Enmity against him.

Now all these Enemies as far as they oppose the spiritual internal carrying on
of the work of Christ, must be made the footstool of his feet.

The Expression is Metaphorical, and is to be interpreted and applied
variously, according to the Nature and Condition of the Enemies with whom he
has to do. The Allusion in general is taken from what was done by Joshua his
Type, toward the Enemies of his people, Josh. 10. v. 24. To show the ruin of
their power, and his absolute prevalency against them, he caused the people to
set their feet upon their necks: See 2 Samuel 22.39. Psalm. 8.6. To have his
Enemies then brought under his feet, is to have an absolute complete conquest
over them; And their being made his footstool, their perpetual and unchangeable
Duration in that condition, under the weight of what ever burden he shall be
pleased to lay upon them.

This being that which is to be done, we may consider how it is accomplished;
now this whole work of conquest and prevalency over all his enemies is done, 1.
Meritoriously. 2. Exemplarily. 3. Efficiently.


1. Meritoriously; By his Death and bloodshedding he has procured the
sentence of Condemnation in the Cause depending between him and them, to be
pronounced against them: so that they shall have no more Right to exert their
Enmity against him or his. He has given them all their deaths wounds, and
leaves them to dye at his pleasure. So has he prevailed against the Law, Gal.
3.13. Col. 2.14. Romans 7.6. He has removed that strength which it gave to sin,
1 Cor. 15.55, 56. So that it has no right to disquiet or condemn any of his
Subjects for the future; And (2.) Against sin, Romans 8.2, 3. So that it should
not reign in, nor condemn his any more: And (3.) Satan also; Heb. 2.14, 15. as
to all pretense of Liberty or Right unto any part of his cursed work. And (4.)
So likewise the World, Joh. 16.33. Gal. 1.4. And against (5.) Death, Heb. 2.14,
15. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. with (6.) The Grave; and (7.) Hell; or the wrath to come,
1 Thessalonians. 1.10. They are all meritoriously conquered in his death and
Resurrection. And all this has he done for his Church.

2. Exemplarily: All these Adversaries peculiarly exercised their Enmity
against, and tried their strength and power upon his own person. The Law
brought its curse upon him, Gal. 3.13. Sin its Guilt, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 8.2, 3.
Satan put forth all his power against him, Col. 2.15. as also did the World, in
all sorts of things and persons, in all kinds of Opposition and Persecutions;
Death also he tasted of, Heb. 2.9. and lay in the Grave, descending into the
lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9. And he was not unassaulted by the pains
of Hell when he bare our Iniquities, Isa. 53.5, 6, 10. Now all of them did he
absolutely conquer in his own person. For he satisfied the Law, removed the
Curse, and took it away, Romans 8.3. made an end of sin, Dan. 9.24. destroyed the
Devil, Heb. 2.14. and triumphed over him, Col. 2.15. subdued the world, John
16.^3. conquered death, Acts 2.24. and the Grave, v. 27. and Hell also; And in
his own person has he set an Example of what shall be done in and for the
whole Church.

3. It is done Efficiently in, by and for his whole Church; and this in three
instances. (1.) Initially in their Union with himself. When, and as he unites
any of them unto himself, he begins the conquest of all Enemies in them, and
for them, giving them a Right to the complete total and final Victory over them
all. (2.) Gradualy he carries them on in their several seasons toward
perfections, treading down their Enemies by degrees under them. And (3.)
Perfectly at the last day; when having freed them from the Law, and sin,
trodden down Satan, prevailed against the World, recovered them from death,
rescued them from the Grave, and delivered them from Hell, he shall be himself
perfectly victorious in them, and they made completely sharers in his Victory;
wherein* the making of all his Enemies his Footstool consists.

Secondly, The Kingdom of Christ respects his Administration of it visibly in
this world, in the Profession and Obedience of his Subjects unto him; and this
also with the Opposition made unto it, is respected in this Expression. God the
Father in the Exaltation of Jesus Christ has given unto him all Nations for
his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession, Psalm.
2.8. Upon this grant a twofold Right ensued. (1.) A Right to call gather and
erect his Church, in any Nation, in any part of the World; to give unto it his
Laws and Ordinances of Worship, to be owned and observed by them in a visible
and peaceable manner, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. (2.) A Right, Power and Authority
to dispose of and Order all Nations and Persons, for the Good Benefit and
Advantage of his Kingdom. In pursuit of this Grant and Right, erecting his
Church, and therein his visible Kingdom in the world, great Opposition is made
unto him by all sorts of persons stirred, excited and instigated thereunto by
Satan. And as this Enmity was first acted against himself in his own Person,
Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. So it has continued against him in his Church in all Ages and
Places, and will do so unto the End of the world. The world understands not his
Right, hates his Government, and would not have him to reign. Hence has been
all that Rage which has been executed upon the Professors of his name. Kings,
Rulers, Potentates, Counselors, the multitude have set themselves against him.
They are many of them, and have been his Enemies. Great havoc and Destruction
have they made of his subjects all the world over, and continue to do so in
most places unto this very day. Especially in these latter Ages after other
means failed him, Satan has stirred up a fierce, cruel, subtle Adversary unto
him, who he has foretold his Disciples of under the name of Antichrist, the
Beast, and false Prophet. After the ruin of many other, this Enemy by various
subtilties and pretenses has drawn the world into a new combination against
him; and is at this day become the greatest and most pernicious Adversary that
he has in this world. Now the aim and design of all these, is to dethrone him
by the ruin of his Kingdom which he has set up in the world. And this in
every Age they have hoped to accomplish, and continue to do so unto this day;
but in vain; For as hitherto, his Kingdom and Interest in the world has been
maintained against all their enmity and opposition, themselves been frustrated
and brought to destruction one after another; so by virtue of this Promise he
shall reign in Security and Glory, until all their hearts be broken, their
strength ruined, their Opposition finished, and themselves brought under his
feet unto all Eternity, as our Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. And this may
suffice to declare the meaning of these words.

Thirdly, We are to consider by whom these Enemies of Christ shall be made thus
his footstool: I will make them, says God the Father unto him. And this
Expression wants not its difficulty. For is it not the work of Christ
himself, to subdue and conquer his Enemies? Is it not said, that he shall do
so? So doing is he described in the Revelation with Glory and Power, Chap.
19.11, 12, 13, 14. From Isa. 63.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Who should this work more
become, or belong unto than him, who was persecuted and opposed by them? And
does it not directly belong unto his Kingly power? Whence is it then, that he
is here described as one resting in glory and security at his Fathers Right
Hand, whilst he subdues his Enemies.

Answer, There is no doubt but that the Work of subduing the Enemies of the
Mediation and Kingdom of Christ, is immediately wrought by himself. All
Prophecies of him, all Promises made unto him, the nature of his Office, do all
require that so it should be; and so the Apostle directly expresses it, 1 Cor.
15.26. But yet there are sundry Reasons why that Work which is immediately
wrought by the Son, may by the way of Eminency be ascrib^d unto the Father, as
we see this to be.

First, Power and Authority to subdue and conquer all his Enemies, is given
unto the Lord Christ by the Father in the way of Reward; and it is therefore
said to be his work, because the Authority for it is from him. See Isa. 53.12.
Joh. 5.27. Phil. 2.9. Romans 14.9. This Power then I say of subduing all his
Enemies, being granted unto the Lord Christ in the love of the Father, as a
Reward of the Travail of his soul which he underwent in his work on the earth,
is ascribed unto the Father as his. And this Expression signifies no more, but
that as God has given him Authority for it, so he will abide by him in it,
until it be accomplished: And on this account he takes it on himself as his own.

Secondly, The Work of subduing Enemies is a work of Power and Authority. Now
in the Economy of the Holy Trinity, among the works that outwardly are of God,
those of Power and Authority are peculiarly ascribed unto the Father; as those
of Wisdom, or Wisdom in the works of God, is unto the Son, who is the Eternal
Wisdom of the Father. And on this account the same works are ascribed unto the
Father and the Son. Not as though the Father did them first, or only used the
Son as an immediate instrumental cause of them; but that he works by him as
his own Eternal and Essential Wisdom, John 5.17, 19. But there is also more in
it as the Son is considered as Mediator, God and man, for so he receives and
holds his especial Kingdom by grant from his Father, and therefore the works of
it may be said to be his.

VI. The last thing remaining for the Exposition of these words, is the
consideration of the appearing Limitation of this Administration of the Kingdom
of Christ, in his sitting at the right hand of God. (...), until; until I
make thine enemies, etc.

First, It is confessed, and may be proved by Instances, that those Particles
thus used, are sometimes exclusive of all things to the contrary before the
time designed in them, but not assertive of any such thing afterward. In that
sense no limitation of the Duration of the Kingdom of Christ is here intimated;
but only his secure and glorious Reign unto the accomplishment of his work in
the subduing of his Enemies is asserted. The only time of Danger is, whilst
there is Opposition; but this says God, I will carry it through unto the end.
And this sense is embraced by many, to secure thereby the Promises that are
made unto the Lord Christ of the Perpetuity of his Kingdom. So Isa. 9. v. 7. Of
the increase of his Government there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David
and his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it, with judgment and justice,
from henceforth even for ever. His Kingdom shall not be destroyed, but stand
for ever, Dan. 2.24, it is an everlasting Kingdom, Chap. 7.27.

Others suppose that this Perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ is not absolutely
exclusive of all Limitation, but that these two things only are intimated in
those Prophecies and Promises.

1. That his Kingdom shall not be like the Kingdoms of the earth, obnoxious to
change and mutation, by intestine divisions, or outward force, or secret
decays, by which means all the Kingdoms of the earth have been ruined and
brought to naught. In Opposition hereunto, the Kingdom of Christ is asserted to
be perpetual, as that which no Opposition shall ever prevail against, no means
ever impair; which yet hinders not, but that a day may be prefixed unto its end.

2. The Continuance of it unto the total full Accomplishment of all that is to
be performed in it or by it in the Eternal Salvation of all his subjects, and
final Destruction of all his Enemies, is in these and the like places foretold;
but yet when that work is done, that Kingdom and Rule of his may have an end.

And in this sense, the Term of Limitation here expressed seems to be expounded
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.24. At the end, he shall deliver up the Kingdom unto
God the Father. For although those words may admit of another Interpretation,
namely, that he shall give up an account unto the Father of the accomplishment
of the whole work committed unto him as King of his Church, which he may do and
not cease from holding the same Kingdom still; yet as they are further
interpreted by the Sons coming into a new subjection unto the Father, that God
may be all in all, as v. 28. They seem to imply directly the ceasing of his
Kingdom.

Though this matter be not indeed without its Difficulty, yet the different
Opinions about it seem capable of a fair Reconciliation; which we shall attempt
in the ensuing Proposals.

1. The Lord Christ as the Son of God shall unto all Eternity continue in the
Essential and Natural Dominion over all Creatures, and they in their dependence
upon him, and subjection unto him. He can no more divest himself of that
Dominion and Kingdom, than he can cease to be God. Suppose the being of any
creatures, and that subjection unto him which is the Rise of this Kingdom is
natural and indispensible.

2. As to the Oeconomical Kingdom of Christ over the Church, and all things in
order unto the protection and salvation thereof, the immediate Ends of it will
cease. All his Saints being saved, all his Sons brought unto Glory, all his
Enemies subdued, the End of that Rule which consisted in the Guidance and
Preservation of the one, in the Restraint and Ruin of the other, must
necessarily cease.

3. The Lord Christ shall not so leave his Kingdom at the last day, as that the
Father should take upon himself the Administration of it. Upon the giving up of
his Kingdom, what ever it be, the Apostle does not say, the Father shall Rule,
or reign, as though he should exercise the same Kingdom; but that God shall be
all in all; that is, God the Father Son and Holy Ghost without the use or
intervention of such ways or means as were in use before, during the full
continuance of the dispensatory Kingdom of Christ, shall fill and satisfy all
his Saints, support and dispose of the remnant Creation.

4. This ceasing of the Kingdom of Christ is no way derogatory unto his Glory,
or the perpetuity of his Kingdom; no more than his ceasing to intercede for his
people is to that perpetuty of his Priesthood, which he has by Oath confirmed
unto him. His Prophetical Office also seems to cease, when he shall teach his
people no more by his Word and Spirit.

5. In three respects the Kingdom of Christ may be said to abide unto Eternity.
First, In that all his Saints and Angels shall eternally adore and worship him
on the account of the Glory which he has received as the King and Head of the
Church, and be filled with joy in beholding of him, Joh. 17.22, 24. Secondly,
In that all the Saints shall abide in their state of Union unto God, through
him as their Head; God communicating of his fullness to them, through him; which
will be his eternal Glory, when all his Enemies shall be his Footstool.
Thirdly, In that as the Righteous Judge of all, he shall to all Eternity
continue the punishment of his Adversaries.

And this is the last Testimony insisted on by the Apostle to prove the
pre-eminence of Christ above Angels, and consequently above all that were used
or employed of old in the Disposition and Administration of the Law; which was
the thing he had undertaken to make good. And therefore in the close of this
Chapter, having denied that any of these things are spoken concerning Angels,
he shuts up all with a Description of their Nature and Office, such as was then
known and received among the Jews; before the consideration whereof, we must
draw out from what has been insisted on, some Observations for our own
Instruction, which are these that follow.

I. The Authority of God the Father in the Exaltation of Jesus Christ as the
Head and Mediator of the Church, is greatly to be regarded by Believers. He
says unto him, sit thou at my right hand. Much of the consolation and security
of the Church depends on this consideration.

II. The Exaltation of Christ is the great pledge of the Acceptance of the
work of Mediation performed in the behalf of the Church. Now, says God, sit
thou at my right hand; the Work is done wherein my soul is well pleased.

III. Christ has many Enemies unto his Kingdom; says God, I will deal with
all of them.

IV. The Kingdom and Rule of Christ is perpetual and abiding, notwithstanding
all the Opposition that is made against it. His Enemies rage indeed, as though
they would pull him out of his Throne; but altogether in vain; He has the
Faithfulness and Power, the Word and Right hand of God, for the security of his
Kingdom.

V. The end whereunto the Lord Jesus Christ will assuredly bring all his
Enemies, let them bluster whilst they please, shall be unto them miserable and
shameful, to the Saints joyful, to himself victorious and triumphant.

It is the Administration of the Kingdom of Christ in the world that this Truth
principally respects. Great is the enmity of this world against it; great the
Opposition that is and has always been made unto it: But this will be the
assured issue of it, Ruin to the Enemies, Joy to the Saints, Glory to Christ.
This is that which is typed unto us in the Prophecy of Gog. That Prophecy is
a Recapitulation of all the Enmity that is acted in the world against the
interest of Christ. What his Counsel is, the Prophet declares, Ezekiel. 38.11. I
will go up to the Land of unwalled Villages; I will go up to them that are at
rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither
bars nor gates. They look upon the Church of Christ as a feeble people, that
has no visible Power or Defense, and therefore easy to be destroyed; this
encourages them to their work; who or what can deliver them out of their hand?
With this Resolution they come upon the breadth of the earth, and compass the
Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City, Rev. 20.9. They go about their work
with Glory and Terror, as if they would do it in a day. So they have done in
all Ages, so they continue to do to this day; and what is the issue? This City
which they look on as an unwalled Town, no way defensible or tenable, is not
yet taken by them, nor ever shall be; but there they fall before it, one after
another, and their bones lie under the walls of the City they oppose. They fall
upon the Mountains of Israel, and leave a stink behind them, the shame and
reproach of their Names unto Eternity. Sometimes they seem to have prevailed,
and to have done their work* but still the issue is, that they dye, or are
destroyed and go down to the Pit, and come under the feet of Christ, leaving
the City untaken. Disappointment, shame and everlasting punishment is their
Portion. And they find at last by experience that this feeble folk whom they so
despise, are Wise, and have their Habitation in a Rock. This pledge we have
already of the Truth proposed; that all who have formerly risen up in Enmity to
the Kingdom of Christ, are dead, gone, perished, under his feet, and have left
their work undone; as far from Accomplishment as the first day they undertook
it; The same shall be the Lot of those that are, and those that foll^w, to the
end of the world. And when they have all done their utmost, then shall the end
be; Then shall all their misery be completed, the Joy of the Saints filled,
and the Glory of Christ exalted.

For the Enemies themselves; What can be more shameful unto them, than to be so
stupid, as not to learn from the Experience of so many hundred of years to give
over a work wherein never any prospered? more miserable than to engage in that
design, wherein they must necessarily fall and be ruined? More woeful than to
work out their own Eternal Destruction under the Wrath of Christ, in a business
wherein they had no success? And what profit is it if for the present they grow
a little rich with the gain of Oppression, if there be a Worm in it that will
devour both it and them? What Advantage if they drink a little precious blood
and find sweetness in it, if it make them sick and swell and dye. The beloved
City still abides, and their misery shall never end.

For the Saints; what more joyful thing can there be, than for them to take a
view of these things; to look backwards and see all the Nimrods of the earth
that have opposed the Kingdom of Christ, lying in shame and misery with their
necks under the footstool of his feet? There they may see Pharaoh lie, and
Nebuchadnezzar, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, with all their multitudes, and all
that have walked in their steps, brought down to the sides of the Pit, in shame
and Eternal Misery, for their Opposition to the Kingdom of Christ; There are
they fallen and perished all of them, who laid their sword^ under heads, and
caused terror in the Land of the living.

And the like Prospect may they take of what is to come; They may by faith see
Babylon fallen, the whole Conspiracy that is in the world against them and
their Lord disappointed, and all his Enemies that shall arise even to the
Consummation of all things, brought to ruin. How may they triumph in a
glorious Prospect of this certain and unavoidable Issue of the Opposition that
is made to the Kingdom of their Redeemer? And this must be the issue of these
things. For,

1. God has promised unto the Lord Christ from the foundation of the world,
that so it should be. It was part of his Eternal Covenant and Compact with him,
as has been declared. And after the first promise of breaking the Serpents
head, and prevailing therein against the Enmity of his seed; no season of the
Church passed, wherein the promises of the same success and issue were not
renewed; and hereunto do the Writings of Moses, the Psalms and the Prophets
bear witness. And hereof it was that Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied so
expressly unto the Old world before the flood, Jude, v. 14, 15. other Prophecies
and Promises to the same purpose occurr every wherein the Scripture. And this
God also in several Ages for the greater pledge of his veracity, typed out; as
in the Victory of Abraham over the four Kings, representing the great
Monarchies of the world; wherein he had a pledge, that he should be Heir of the
World in his seed: in the Conquest of Canaan the seat and inheritance of the
Church by Joshua; in the Successes and Victories of David, and by many signal
Instances given in the Visible ruin of the most potent Opposers of his
interest in the world. And it cannot be that this Word of God should be of none
effect.

2. The Lord Christ expects this Issue and Event of all things, and shall not
be frustrated in his Expectation. Having received the Engagement and faithful
Promises of his Father, he rests in the foresight of its accomplishment. And
thence it is that he bears all the Affronts that are put upon him, all the
Opposition that is made unto him and his Kingdom, with Patience Long-suffering
and Forbearance. When we consider the injuries, reproaches, oppressions,
persecutions, blasphemies, that he is exposed unto in his Ways, his Servants,
his Spirit and Worship, we are ready to admire at his patience (as we ought to
do) that he breaks not forth against his enemies as a consuming fire. But he
knows the time and season that is allotted for the Execution of Vengeance upon
them; and nothing of their Pride, Rage, boasting or triumphing against him
shall ever provoke him to anticipate their ruin; so secure he is of their
Destruction in the appointed season, and so certain of their Day that is coming.

3. He is himself furnished with Authority and Power for the accomplishment of
this Work; when and how he pleases. He has not only Assurance of the Fathers
Concurrence, but is himself also thoroughly armed and furnished with Power to
destroy all his Enemies even in a moment. And he will not fail to put forth his
power in the appointed season; he will bruise them all with a rod of Iron, and
dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. If all his Enemies should at once
combine themselves against him, should the world receive the utmost
contribution of craft subtilty and strength that Hell is able to afford unto
it, what is it all to stand before the incomprehensible power of Jesus Christ?
See Rev. 6.16.

4. His Glory and Honor require that it should be so: This is a thing that he
is very tender in. God has raised him up, and given him Glory and Honor, and
care must be taken that it be not lost or impaired. Now if his Enemies should
go free, if they could by any means subduct themselves from under his Power, or
be delivered from his Wrath, where would be his Glory, where his Honor? Here
they reproach him, blaspheme him, despise him, persecute him, shall they escape
and go free? Shall they always prosper? What then would he do to his great
name? The Glory of Christ indispensibly requires that there be a season, a day
appointed for the Eternal Ruin of all his stubborn Adversaries.

5. His Saints pray that it may be so; and that both upon his account and their
own. Upon his, that his Glory which is dearer to them than their lives may be
vindicated and exalted; their own, that their Miseries may be ended, that the
Blood of their fellow servants may be revenged, that the whole Church may be
delivered, and all Promises fulfilled. Now he will not disappoint their
Prayers, nor frustrate their Expectations in any thing, much less in those that
are of so great importance. He will avenge his Elect, he will avenge them
speedily.

6. His Enemies deserve it unto the utmost; so that as well his Justice as his
Glory and Interest and People are concerned in their destruction. In the most
of them their Outrage against him is notorious, and visible in the eyes of men
and Angels; in all of them there is a cruel, old, lasting Enmity and hatred,
which he will lay open and discover at the last day, that all shall see the
Righteousness of his Judgments against them; God has given him a Kingdom,
appointed him to reign; they declare that he shall not do so, and endeavor
their utmost to keep him from his Throne, and that with scorn despite and
malice; so that whilst God is Righteous, and the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom a
Scepter of Righteousness, themselves call aloud for their own Destruction.

The Uses of this Truth in the comfort of the Disciples of Christ, against all
fears, despondencies, and other effects of unbelief, with the terror of wicked
men, are obvious and exposed unto all.

Verse XIV.
THe Apostle having proved the Pre-eminence of the Son as Mediator of the New
Testament above all the Angels, from those Attributions of Honor and Glory
that are made unto him in the Scriptures, the like whereunto are no where made
or given unto Angels; that he may not appear to argue merely negatively from
what is not said concerning them, adds in this last Verse such a description of
their Natures and Office, or Work and Employment, as shows that indeed no such
thing can be rightly spoken or affirmed concerning them, as he has before
manifested to be spoken and recorded concerning the Son.

Ver. 14. (...);
There is no difference in the Reading, nor much about the Translation of those
words. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent out to Minister to (unto a
Ministry for) them that shall inherit salvation. This was the common received
Doctrine of the Church concerning Angels, suitable unto the Scripture, and to
the purpose of the Apostle, as manifesting their dis-interest in the Glory
before ascribed unto the Son.

Sundry things are here expressed concerning Angels, which we must briefly pass
through the Consideration of. As,

1. Their Nature. They are (...); Ruchoth, Spirits. Spiritual subsistences,
(...).
not Qualities, or Natural Faculties, as the Sadduces imagined; and which by an
Homonomy of the Name, Maimonides, More Nebuch. p. 2. cap. 3. admits also to be
Angels, but falsely, and without Authority from Scripture or Reason. This is
their Nature, this the Hebrews acknowledge so to be; they are Created Spirits,
not to be compared with, or equalled unto him that made and created all things.

2. Their Office; They are (...), ministering Spirits; (...)
So are they termed, Psalm. 103.21. Praise the Lord all his Hosts, (...), LXX.
(...), his Ministers doing his will. Hence in general the Jews call them,
(...), Ministers; and among other Titles assign this unto God, that he is,
(...), the Creator of Ministering Spirits or Angels. And expressly in the Talmud
they are called, (...), as more frequently by the Rabbis in the Hebrew
Dialect, (...), Angels of Ministry; above whom that the Messiah was to be, we
have formerly showed from themselves.

Now what kind of Office or Ministry it is that is ascribed unto them, the Word
it self does in part declare. (...), is to Minister, principally about holy
things; Nor is it above once applied unto any other Ministry. And such a
Ministry it signifies, as is performed with Honor and Ease, and is opposed
unto (...), which is to Minister with Labor and Burden. So the Ministry of the
Levites in bearing the Burden of the Tabernacle is called (...), a Ministry
with Labor, Numb. 8. When the more easy and honorable Employment, which was
attended by them who by reason of their Age were exempted from bearing of
burdens, is called (...), v. 16. and Deuteronomy. 18.7. Such is the Ministry of
Angels; It is in and about holy things, and unto themselves honorable and
easy. And this (...), is rendered (...), which expresses some times such a
general Ministry as comp^izeth the whole Service and Worship of the Church,
Acts 13.2. (...), as they ministered unto the Lord; that is attended unto the
performance of all the Duties of the Church.

This then in general is the Office of the Angels; they are (...) or (...),
Ministering Spirits, that wait on God in and about his Holy Services for the
good of the Church; which also in the like manner ministers unto God in its
own state and condition. And hence it is that the Church and they do make up
one Family, Ephesians. 4.15. and that they are all fellow servants in the same
Family with them that keep the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 22.9.

And this some of the latter Jews have retained the Tradition of. Whence is
that of Maimonides, More Nebuch. part. 2. cap. 6. which he cites out of the
Talmud. (...), The holy blessed God d^^h nothing unless he consult with his
superior family. Only not knowing the rise of the word (...), nor what it
should signify; he tells us, (...), that in the Greek Tongue it signifies an
Host; whereas it is purely the Latin familia without the least alteration. And
the description of this superior part of the Family of God is given us, Dan.
7.10. Thousand thousands did minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him. In which words Pseudo-Dionysius, Gregory, and
Aquinas, with sundry of the Schoolmen, have coined a distinction of Angels
into ministrantes, those that minister unto God, and assistentes, those that
stand before him. Whereas the whole intendment of the expression is, that all
the Angels stood ministering before him, as John declares the matter, Rev. 5.11.
And therefore the Apostle expressly here affirms that they are all ministering
spirits, cutting off one member of their distinction. Neither is there more
intended in the ministry of that upper part of the Family of God than is
expressed concerning the lower part of it of old, Deuteronomy. 18.5. God chose the
Priests and the Levites (...), to stand and to minister in the Name of the
Lord. The same persons were both assistentes and ministrantes, they stood to
minister before the Lord.

Now because of this standing and ministering of Angels, that is their waiting
on God in a readiness to do his Will, they may be said in some sense to be the
Throne of God, from whence he executes Justice and Judgment; for as he is
called (...), Psalm. 80. v. 1. He that dwells between the Cherubims; as also
Psa^. 99. v. 1. So the Jews say that the Thrones mentioned Dan. 7. were (...),
the higher Princes or Angels, as Abarbinel on the place. This then is their
Office, they are all ministering spirits.

(...).
3. Their Execution of their Office in their actual employment is here also
expressed. They are ministering spirits, (...), sent out unto a ministry; sent
out, that is they are daily so, continually so, the word denoting the present
time which is always. They stand before the presence of God, and are
continually sent out by him, sometimes some, sometimes others, always those
that are sufficient for his work.

Now as we observed before that (...) denotes the whole family service of God,
which in general is ascribed unto these children and servants of his in the
upper part thereof, they being (...), Ministering spirits; So here the execution
of their work is expressed by two words which comprize the whole Ministry of
the Church; (...) and (...), Apostleship and laboring Ministry; and therein
the Harmony is still preserved that is between both parts of the family of God.
And as in the service of the Church, the Ministers thereof do not minister unto
men but unto the Lord, for and in the behalf of men, Acts 13.2. So is it with
th^se spirits also, they are sent out to minister for the good of men, but it
is the Lord unto whom they minister; his Ministers they are, not ours, Psalm.
103. v. 21. though in their ministry, belonging unto the same Family with
Believers, they are their fellow servants. As all the servants of a King,
though otherwise greatly differenced, agree in this, that they are all servants
unto the same Person. And these two words express both their Honor, that they
are immediately sent out from the presence of God, they are his Apostles, as
also their Obedience and diligence, they undertake (...), a Ministry to be
discharged with Care and due Observance of him by whom they are sent.

4. There is expressed the Restriction of their Ministry unto the especial
Object of their work and employment; (...).
it is for them that shall be heirs of salvation; (...); for them, for their
sakes, for their good, in their behalf, who shall inherit salvation. Heirs they
are at present, and hereafter shall inherit or actually obtain salvation by
virtue of their Heirship, that is, elect Believers. Yet the Apostle speaks
not of them as Elect, nor yet absolutely as Believers; but as of Heirs, which
they obtain by the privilege of Adoption. This gives them Heirship and an
interest in the Family of God. And the ministry of the superior part of the
Family in behalf of the lower, respects them as such, that is, as Adopted, as
Children, as Heirs, as Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. v. 16, 17. This privilege
I say amongst others innumerable and inexpressible we have by our Adoption,
that being admitted into the Family of God, those blessed Angels whose special
ministry respects that Family have us under their constant care.

It is true, that the ministry of Angels is not always absolutely restrained
unto the Church or Family of God; they are employed also in the government of
the world. So the Angel that was sent unto Daniel affirms, That in the first
year of Darius he stood to confirm and strengthen him, Dan. 11.1. that is, to
assist him in the weilding of his new gotten Empire. As also chap. 10. v. 13,
20, 21. he declares how he acted in opposition to the Prince of Persia, and
stirred up the Prince of Grecia; that is, how he should do so in the appointed
time. And so also doubtless are they employed about other Affairs in the world,
from whence much good redounds unto many who yet belong not unto the Family of
God. But yet two things we may here observe: First, That though this Ministry
of theirs was not immediately, yet it was ultimately for the Church. For their
sakes were those mighty Empires first raised, and afterward razed to the
ground. And this is that which they consider in their ministry. See Zech. 1.8,
9, 10, 11. And thence it appears that the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, who
withstood the Angel, was not any Angel of God but the King of Persia himself,
who labored to obstruct the work committed unto him. Secondly, That the
Apostle treats in this place of that immediate respect which the ministry of
the Angels had unto the Church, because in that regard alone he carries on his
comparison between them and the Son, that only being unto his purpose in hand.

But it may be objected, that this their Ministry will not clearly evince
their inferiority and subordination unto Christ, seeing he himself also was
sent, and that for the good of them who shall inherit salvation; and is thence
called the Apostle of our profession. But the differences between him and them
in their being sent are so great and manifest, that his superiority unto them,
and pre-eminence above them, is not in the least thereby impeached. He was sent
by his own voluntary previous choice and condescension; they are so, in pursuit
of the state and condition of their creation. He was sent to minister in the
form of a servant, only for a short season, in the days of his flesh; they
continue to be so from the Beginning to the End of the world. He was sent unto
that great and mighty work of Mediation which none was worthy to undertake,
none able to go through withal but himself alone, the only begotten Son of
God; they are sent about the ordinary concernments of the Saints. He as the
Son; they as servants. He as the Author of the whole work of the Redemption and
Salvation of the Church; they as subordinate assistants in the particular
promotion of it. The general Agreement then of his and their being sent for the
good of the Church, has so many and so great differences in the Mann^r Causes
and Ends of it, that it no way takes off from the evidence of their
subordination and subjection unto him. And with this Demonstration the Apostle
closes the Argument he had so long insist^d on.

Of the nature of this Ministry of Angels for the good of them that shall
inherit salvation, because it belongs not directly unto the present design of
the Apostle, and would in the full consideration of it cause a long diversion
from the work in hand, I shall not treat, although it be a matter singularly
deserving our meditation. For the present it may suffice us to observe, That in
the government and protection of his Saints here below, both as to the
dispensation of Grace and Providence, God is pleased to make use of the
Ministry of Angels, wherein much of their Honor and our Safety does consist.
For a close of the whole, we may only observe the Way and Manner whereby the
Apostle proposes this doctrine of the Ministry of Angels unto the Hebrews;
Are they not? says he; he speaks of it as a matter well known unto them, and
acknowledged by them. Their Nature, their Dignity, their Office was declared in
the Old Testament. Thence were they instructed, that as to their Nature they
were Spirits; in Dignity, Thrones Principalities and Powers; in Office,
Ministers unto God, sent out for the good of his Church. And therefore these
things the Apostle in sundry places takes for granted, as those that were
already known and received in the Church of God, Romans 8. v. 32. Ephesians. 1. v.
20, 21. Col. 1. v. 16. This Doctrine then I say was propagated from the Jews
unto the Christians. And from them also came forth much of that curiosity and
superstition about Angels, which afterward infected the minds of many in the
Christian Church. For after they were forsaken of God, and began to give up
themselves unto vain speculations, there was not any thing wherein the vanity
of their minds did more early manifest it self, than in their imaginations
about Angels, wherein they exercise themselves unto this day. For to omit their
monstrous figments about the Original of Devils, most of whom they affirm to
have been begotten by Adam on Lilith before God formed Eve, and many to have
issued from Adam and Eve severally whilst they lived separate an 150 years
after the death of Abel, as later follies; it is certain that some of them
began to vent curiosities about Angels in the Apostles time, Col. 2.18. and to
express their fancies about their Names, Orders, Degrees and Employments. And
this they continue yet to do, although they peremptorily deny that they are to
be invocated or prayed unto, wherein they are outdone by others. Names they
have invented for them innumerable, and those many of them uncouth and
insignificant. Orders also or Degrees they assign unto them, some four, some
five, some seven, some nine, some thirteen, according as it has seemed good
unto this or that Great Master among them. From them the Pseudodionysius about
the fourth or fifth Century after Christ, took the occasion and rise of his
operous figment about the Celestial Hierarchy, though he mixed their inventions
with many Peripatetical and Pythagorean notions. Aristotle proportioned the
number of the Intelligencies unto the Spheres of the Heavens, more he granted
not. The Pythagoreans and Platonicks asserted all things here below to be
influenced by the Planets in their Orbs, the inferior receiving a
communication of virtue from the higher, and imparting it unto them beneath. So
they interpreted the Exsection of Saturn by Jupiter, as that of Coelum by
Saturn to be the interception of their procreative influence, that it should
not immediately be communicated unto things below but by them. Out of all these
fancies did Dionysius raise his Hierarchy. From the Jews he took the
Disposition of his Angels into Orders of Superiority and Rule; from Aristotle
their number, placing an Order instead of a single Intelligence, to answer what
is taught in the Scripture concerning their multitude; and from the Pythagorean
Platonicks the communication of Light Knowledge and Illumination from God by
the highest to the lowest Series or Order, and from them to Men on earth. And
on this foundation, such as it is, are built the Discourses of many
Commentators on this place; in their Enquiries, whether Angels of the Superior
Orders are sent forth to minister for the good of Believers; which is denied by
many, though by some later Expositors, as Estius, Ribera, Tena, A Lapide
granted, and proved not without much ado. So hard is it sometimes for men to
cast down sear-crows of their own setting up.

It remains only that we close our whose discourses on this Chapter with some
Observations for our own use and instruction from this last Verse; as,

1. The highest Honor of the most glorious Spirits in Heaven, is to minister
unto the Lord in the service whereunto he appoints them. This is the Office,
this the work of Angels; and this is their Honor and Glory. For what greater
Honor can a Creature be more partaker of, than to be employed in the service
of his Creator? What greater glory than to stand in the Presence, and to do the
Will of the King of Heaven? If it be an Honor on earth to stand before
Princes, dying perishing men, and that unto men in nature and kind equal unto
those before whom they stand, what is it for them, who by nature are at an
infinite distance from the Glory of God, to stand before him who lives for ever
and ever? And surely it will be unconceivably woeful unto poor souls at the last
day, to find how they despised in this world a share and interest in that
service, which is and ever was the Glory and Honor of Angels.

2. Such is the love and care of God toward his Saints laboring here below,
that he sends the most glorious Attendants on his Throne to minister unto him,
in taking care of them. He who gave his only Son for them, will not spare to
send his holy Angels unto them. Heaven and earth shall be witnesses of his care
of them, and the value that he puts upon them.

Now this being a matter of so great importance as it is unto the Churches
consolation, and the Doctrine directly taught in the Text, we may a little
farther enquire into it, in answer unto these two Questions.

First, Wherefore God is pleased to use the Ministry of Angels in the
dispensation of his care and good will unto the Church, the Heirs of salvation,
seeing he can by an Almighty facility exert all the effects of it by his own
immediate Power?

Secondly, Unto what especial end and purpose does God make use of the
Ministry of Angels for the good of them that believe?

For the first of these, the principal account of it is to be resolved into his
own Sovereign Will Wisdom and Pleasure. Thus are we always to live in an holy
Admiration of him, when ever we consider any of his works or ways, Romans 11. v.
33. Herein are we to rest, and to put a stop unto all our enquiries: So it
pleased him, Matthew. 11. v. 25. And he gives no account of his matters, Job 33.
v. 12, 13. This we are to acquiesce in as the great Reason of all God's
dispensations and ways, even his own infinite Wisdom and sovereign Pleasure. He
alone knows what becomes his own Goodness and Greatness, and of creatures not
one, but as he is pleased to reveal it. For can we find out the Almighty unto
perfection? can we by searching find out God? Job 11. v. 7. How shall poor
limited finite creatures come to know what beseems the Infinite Holy One to do,
any otherwise but as himself declares that he has done it? And then we know
the work is holy and wise, and such as becomes Infinite Perfection, because he
has done it. Herein then we principally rest, as to the meetness and
condecency of the ministry of Angels; God has appointed it. Whereunto we may
add those other Reasons which the Scripture suggests unto us, as,

1. God does it for the preserving and manifestation of the Glorious Order of
his Kingdom. God is pleased to rule his Creation as a Supreme Lord and King.
Hence there is so often mention made in the Scripture, that he is the King, the
only Potentate, the Lord of Lords and King of Kings; as also of his Throne, his
Kingdom, Dominion, Reign and Government. And God does this, that he might
thereby give an Understanding of his Sovereignty unto his creatures, and make
way thereby for the manifestation of his Glory. Now unto a Kingdom there are
three things essential; Rule, Obedience, and Order. In this Kingdom, the
Sovereign Ru^e is in the hand of God alone, the Kingdom or Monarchy is his.
Obedience is the work and duty of the whole Creation, every thing according to
its nature capacity and condition. The Glory of both these lies in Order.
Hereof there are two parts: first, that which respects the Being of the
Creatures in their dependence on God: secondly, that which respects their*
Operation in Obedience unto him. God has in infinite Wisdom endowed the works
of his hands with such various natures, whereon their uses do depend, as that
they are placed thereby in several ranks series and Orders, in an useful
subserviency unto one another, so far as they are advantaged thereby in their
common and absolute subjection to himself. This is the Order of their Being;
the Order of their Operation is such as they are fitted for by their natures,
and whereby they set out the Glory of this Kingdom of God. Thus he takes the
Angels, being fitted thereunto in that place which they hold in the Order of
Nature and Being, unto the next and immediate attendance upon the Throne of his
Kingdom. There they wait upon him, to receive and execute his commands in all
the affairs of his Kingdom. So are they every where described in the Scripture,
Psalm. 68. and 103. Dan. 7. Revel. 5. Isa. 6. and elsewhere. And by this
Ministry of Angels does God insinuate unto us the Glory and Order of his
Kingdom. His glorious and fiery Throne being attended with millions of these
mighty Angels ready to accomplish his will. And whereas God has erected
imperium in imperio, a Kingdom in a Kingdom, like the wheels within the wheels
in Ezekiel's Vision; namely the Oeconomical Dispensatory Kingdom of Christ in
his Ecumenical Kingdom over the whole Creation; and has annexed thereunto the
principal manifestation of his Glory Rule and Dominion, those blessed Ministers
do principally attend the Affairs thereof. And thus, though God can govern and
dispose of all things, solo nutu, by the Almighty immediate Emanations of his
own Power, yet for the manifestation of the glory of his Kingdom, especially of
that Rule which is committed unto the Lord Christ, he uses the ministry of
his creatures, in that Order which his infinite Wisdom had disposed them unto
at the first Creation.

2. God is pleased to do this to exercise the Obedience of the Angels
themselves; and that upon a threefold account. First, to keep preserve and
rule them fitly to their state and condition. Being Creatures, they have a
natural and necessary dependence on God their Creator; and being Intellectual
creatures they have a moral dependence on him according to a Law and Rule, with
reference unto the utmost End whereunto they were created. This requires their
constant Obedience unto the Will of God, without which they leave and forsake
the Law of their Creation and Condition, and also deviate from the End for
which they were made. Wherefore to exercise them unto and in this their
Obedience, God makes use of their ministry and service in his Government of
the Church. And this they shall continue to do unto the end of the world, when
the course of their Obedience being accomplished, they shall be everlastingly
satiated with the contemplation of God's infinite Excellencies, and enjoyment
of him as their Reward. Secondly, That in them he might give an Example of
ready Obedience unto the Church. These Angels of God being in their nature
excellent, and great in power, always ready, watchful, and free from all
Diversions or Avocations, eminent in Light and Holiness as always beholding the
face of God, and filled with his Grace, are proposed unto us in their Obedience
and readiness to do the Will of God, as an Example and pattern which we are to
imitate unto our utmost, though we are never able perfectly to express. And
thence are we directed by our Savior to pray, that we may do the will of God
on earth, as it is done by them in heaven. Thirdly, That they themselves may be
made partakers of this singular Honor and Glory to serve the most High God in
his most glorious work; the preservation and salvation of his Church; for that
this is their Honor was before declared.

3. God emploieth them in an especial manner in this ministry for the good of
them that are Heirs of salvation, to manifest unto them the Greatness and Glory
of the work of the gathering, preserving and redemption of his Church, with the
value that he puts upon all the fruits of the Death and Concernments of the
Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ. For as of themselves they desire to look
particularly into these things, which in general appear so glorious unto them,
1 Pet. 1. v. 12. that their delight in the Wisdom and Love of God may be more
and more increased; so by God's dealings with his Church, in whose behalf they
are employed, they learn therein the manifold Wisdom of God, and riches of his
grace, Ephesians. 3. v. 10. And thus in all their employment about the Saints
wherein they are sent out to minister for their good, they learn much of the
Wisdom and Love of God, and are thereby excited to honor, applaud, glorify
him and praise him. Somewhat of this they shall see in the least and meanest
work toward any Believer that is committed unto them. And they eternally
rejoice in the over-flowings of the Love and Grace of God, taking care of all
the concernments of the poorest and meanest of his servants.

4. This is done, that God may in an especial manner give glory and honor unto
Jesus Christ thereby. This is his will, that all men should honor the Son as
they honor the Father, Joh. 5.23. He has therefore raised him up, and given
him Honor and Glory; and in particular exalted him far above the Angels,
putting them in subjection unto him as their Head, Prince, Ruler and Governor,
Ephesians. 1. v. 21, 22. Neither is it a show of Glory, or a titular Kingdom and
Dominion that he has given to Jesus Christ, but a real and absolute
Sovereignty, wherein all things subject unto him are at his absolute disposal:
and therefore must the Angels themselves be at his service in the affairs of
his Kingdom, and so they acknowledge themselves to be, and the fellow servants
of them that keep his testimony, Rev. 22.9. Now the Heart and Love of Jesus
Christ is greatly upon that part of his Church and People which are laboring
with Sin, Affliction and Persecution here below, Heb. 2.17. chap. 4.15. It is
then greatly for his honor and glory (which in all things the Father aims
at, Col. 1.18, 19.) that the gl^rious Angels should be employed for the good
and in the behalf of all his poor laboring Saints. This honor is done to
Jesus Christ in heaven, when all the Attendants of the Throne of God do see
that care that is taken about the meanest that believe in him.

5. The Love, and Care, and Condescension of God unto his Saints is hereby
manifested unto the Saints themselves. God emploieth the Angels for their good,
that they may know how he cares for them, and be comforted thereby, Psalm.
91.10. The Saints of God have mean and low thoughts of themselves, as it
becomes them to have. They know and confess that they are less than all the
mercies of God, and unworthy that he should have any regard of them. Such
thoughts as these their mean terrene condition, and their manifold sins and
failings do fill them withal. Of the glorious Angels, their thoughts and
apprehensions are high and honorable. Their Nature, their State and condition,
their Power and Greatness, their Holiness, and Enjoyment of the Presence of
God, do all present them unto their minds under a notion of much Excellency and
Glory. Hence some weak, superstitious, and curious minds have been drawn to
adore them with Religious Worship and Adoration; the Saints know sufficiently
the folly hereof. But yet when they consider that God is pleased to use employ
and send out these glorious spirits to take care of them, to do them good, to
watch over them, and round about them, to keep them from evil: this fills them
as with an holy Admiration of the infinite Love and Condescension of God
toward them, so also of the Excellency of the Mediation of the Lord Christ,
who has brought them into this condition of favor, from both which much
spiritual comfort and rejoicing in the Lord do arise. And for this end also
does God choose to do that mediately by the ministry of Angels, which
otherwise by an inconceivable facility he could do by his own immediate Power.

6. A blessed Intercourse, Society, Communion and Fellowship is hereby
maintained and kept up between the several parts of the Family of God; that of
Angels above, and this of Believers below. It has been formerly declared, how
the Angels in Heaven, and all elect Believers were reduced into one Family,
when God reconciled the things in heaven and earth unto himself, and brought
them all into subjection unto and dependence upon one common Head Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 1.10. From hence are Angels and Men reduced into one Family; the Family
in heaven and earth; the Angels by Transition, Men by Adoption. Now it is the
will of God, that for the Honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, the immediate Head
of this Family, that there should be an Intercourse and an helpful communion
between the several parts of it; for to this end are we brought into the
society of the innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22. Now because our
Goodness, our Usefulness, our Helpfulness is confined and limited unto the
Saints that are in the earth, Psalm. 16.3. not extending it self unto God, or
any of his holy ones above, we cannot help, assist, counsel nor advise the
Angels, nor do they in any thing stand in need of our aid or assistance. And
since the communication of our minds unto them by way of Religious Subjection,
Adoration, Faith, Trust, Affiance, is absolutely forbidden unto us; it
remains that this fellowship and society must be maintained by the aid help
and assistance which they are able to afford unto us, and which we stand in
need of. And on this account does God employ them about the affairs and
concernments of Believers, that so a becoming fellowship may be kept up in the
Family of Christ, and an usefulness between the several parts thereof.

7. God makes use of the ministry of Angels in the service of the Church to
reproach, awe, restrain and torment the Devil. It is a continual reproach cast
upon Satan, when he sees those unto whom he is like in Nature, and with whom
he was sometimes a Companion in Glory, willingly, cheerfully, triumphantly
obeying the will of God in the service of Christ, having by his wickedness cast
out himself from the same honorable Employment, and mancipated himself to the
vilest services that any part of the Creation of God is cast down unto. The
whole work of the Angels is a continual reproach unto Satan, for his sin and
folly. It cries unto him, This might have been thy work, this might have been
thy condition; the gnawing of which consideration is no small part of his
torment and present restless vexation. They also put an awe upon him in all his
Attempts. He knows well their Power, their Authority, their Commission, and
that it is not for him to contend with them. With one word they can at any time
defeat him: The Lord rebuke thee, Satan; the Lord rebuke thee. And he knows
not where he may meet with them in his Attempts. And this keeps him in
continual awe, and perpetual uncertainties of success in all that he undertakes
or goes about. And hereby God also in many things frustrates his endeavors,
restrains his power, and disappoints his malice. It is inconceivable what
havoc he would make of the Lives, and Liberties, and Estates of the Saints,
did not these Watchers from the Holy One disappoint him. And all these things
add to his torment. Much of his present punishment consists in the endless
workings of Wrath, Envy, Malice, Blood-thirstiness and Rage; Now as these where
ever they are found but in the least degree are tormenting passions, so where
they are all in their height rage and fury, and are not by any considerable
vent abated or slacked, what can be worse in hell it self but only the
immediate wrath of God? But thus is it with Satan from this ministry of
Angels. He sees the Church and every Member of it, all whom he seeks to devour,
encamped about, protected and defended by this Heavenly Host, so that he cannot
in any measure have his will at them; nay, that he cannot touch the soul of any
one of them, nor cause an hair of the head of any one of them to perish. This
fills him with self-devouring rage envy and wrath. And thus does God by this
way accomplish his judgment upon him. And these are some of the Reasons which
the Scripture intimates unto us, why the Lord is pleased thus to make use of
the ministry of Angels; which may suffice for an Answer to the first Question
before proposed.

II. The second is, Unto what Ends and Purposes does God make use of the
ministry of Angels, for the good of them that do believe.

The thing it self we suppose in both these Questions. It is so directly
asserted in the words of the Apostle, and so many instances are given of it
elsewhere in the Scripture, that it needs not any especial confirmation. It
will also be farther declared in our annumeration of the ends and purposes of
it ensuing. As,

1. In general, God does it to communitate by them the Effects of his Care and
Love unto the Church by Jesus Christ. This God represented unto Jacob in the
Vision that he gave him of the Ladder which stood upon the earth, and whose top
reached unto heaven, Genesis 28.12, 13. For although the Jews say somewhat to the
purpose, when they affirm this Ladder to have denoted the dependence of all
things here below on them above under the Rule of the Providence of God, yet
they say not all that was signified thereby. Our Savior tells us, Joh. 1.52.
That from thence his disciples should see heaven opened, and Angels ascending
and descending upon the Son of man. Plainly alluding unto this Vision of Jacob.
For those words, (...), upon the son of man, cannot denote merely the Object of
Angelical ministration, that they should be exercised in their work about his
Person, but also that by him, by means of his mediation the Angels ascend and
descend in the work of ministering unto the Saints. It is true, the great
instance of their ministry was given in and about the Person of Christ as Head
of the Church. They declared his Conception and Nativity, Matthew. 1.20. Luke
1.35. Luke 2 11, 12. They ministered unto him after his temptation, Matthew. 4.11.
They strengthened him in his Agony, Luke 22.43. They were Witnesses of his
Resurrection and Ascension, Luke 24.4. Acts 1.10, 11. But by him and on his
account they perform the Offices of their mission toward others also, even all
the Heirs of salvation; but this still upon the account of Christ. They ascend
and descend on his mediation, sent by his Authority, aiming at his glory, doing
his work, carrying on his interest, as in the following particulars will
appear: For,

1. They are sent in an extraordinary manner to make Revelations of the Will of
God, about things tending unto the obedience and spiritual advantage of them
that do believe. Hereof we have many instances in the Old Testament, especially
in God's dealing with the Patriarchs before the giving of the Law. For although
the Second Person of the Trinity the Son of God himself did often appear unto
them, as to Abraham, Genesis 18.1, 2. with chap. 19.24. and unto Jacob, chap.
32.24. whom he calls (...), Genesis 48.16. yet God also made frequent use of
created Angels in the revelation and discovery of his Mind and Will unto them,
as is evident from many passages in their story. That he used their
ministration in the giving of the Law, we have before abundantly showed, the
Holy Ghost declaring and affirming of it, Psalm. 68.17, 18. Acts 7.63. The like
also he continued to do in the Visions of them granted unto the Prophets that
ensued unto the end of that Dispensation, especially unto Ezekiel and
Zechariah. So also the same was done under the New Testament, as to omit
others, we have an especial instance, Rev. 1.1. How far God is pleased to
continue this ministration of Angels unto this day is hard to determine. For as
many have pretended unto Revelations by Angels, which have been mere delusions
of Satan, or imaginations of their own brains: So to say that God does not, or
may not send his Angels unto any of his Saints to communicate his mind unto
them, as to some particulars of their own duty according unto his word, or to
fore-shew unto them somewhat of his own approaching work, seems in my judgment
to be unwarrantably to limit the Holy One of Israel. Howbeit such things in
particular are to be duly weighed with sobriety and reverence.

2. God by them suggests good motions into the minds of his Saints. As the
devil sets himself on work to tempt them unto evil, by suggestions suited unto
the principle of sin within them; so God employs his holy Angels to provoke
them to that which is good, by suggesting that unto them which is suitable unto
the principle of spiritual life and grace that is in them. And as it is
difficult to discover the suggestions of Satan in most cases from the workings
of our own minds, and our unbelief in them, partly because of their
connaturalness one to the other, and partly because his impressions are not
sensible nor produce any effects but as they mix themselves with our own
darkness and lusts; so it is no less difficult distinctly to take notice of
these Angelical motions upon the like account on the other hand. For being
suitable unto the inclinations of that principle of Grace which is in the
hearts of believers, and producing no effect but by them, they are hardly
discerned. So that we may have the benefit of many Angelical suggestions of
good things, which we our selves take no notice of. And if it be enquired how
these good motions from Angels are or may be distinguished from the motions of
the holy Ghost, and his actings in Believers; I answer, that they are
differenced sundry ways; as, 1. These Angelical are ab extra, from without;
Angels have no inbeing in us, no residence in our souls, but work upon us as an
external principle. whereas the Holy Spirit abides with us, and dwells in
us, and works ab intra, from within the very principles of our souls and minds.
Whence it follows, 2. That these Angelical motions consist in occasional
impressions on the mind fancy and imagination, by advantages taken from
outward objects and present disposition of the mind, rendering it meet to
receive such impressions; and so disposing it to affect the Heart, the Will and
the Affections, whereas the Holy Ghost closes in his Operations with all the
faculty, of the soul, really and immediately exciting every one of them to
gracious actings according to their nature and quality. Whence also it appears,
3. That Angelical motions communicate no strength power or ability unto men to
act do or perform the Good which they guide and direct unto. Only they provoke
and stir up men to act and exert the strength which they have, in the duties
that they are minded of. But the Holy Ghost in his motions does really
communicate spiritual Grace strength and power unto the faculties of the soul,
enabling them unto a right performance of the duties proposed unto them: And 4.
Whereas Angelical impressions are transient, and abide not at all in
themselves, but only in the Effects which the Mind warned and excited by them
does produce; there is a constant, abiding, effectual Work of the Holy Ghost in
the hearts of Believers, enabling them to will and to do, according unto his
good pleasure. And this is a second part of the Ministry of Angels in
particular, the benefit whereof we are oftener made partakers of than perhaps we
are aware. And these motions which are an Effect of their Ministry, the
Sadducees of old took to be Angels, denying all spiritual subsistences from
whom they should proceed.

3. God sends forth his Angels unto this Ministry for the good of Believers, to
preserve them from many dangers, and ruinous casualties, that would otherwise
befall them. Much of the Design of Psalm. 91. is to acquaint us therewithal; for
though the charge of Angels is expressed only in ver. 11. and 12. yet as the
Expression there, of keeping us in all our ways, that we stumble not, is
comprehensive of all the Dangers which we are or may be exposed unto, so the
same work of theirs respects all the evils and casualties enumerated in the
beginning of the Psalm. And to this purpose also is it said, that the Angel of
the Lord encampeth about them that fear him, as they did about Elisha of old;
namely, to preserve them from the Dangers that they are exposed unto. Nor is
this impeached by the observations of the Evils, Troubles, Calamities and
miseries that befall the people of God; for God has not given his Angels a
Commission to act ad ultimum virium, to the utmost of their strength, viis and
modis for the preservation of his; but only to act according to his especial
Good Pleasure; and this they always do. Now it is the Will of God, that his
Saints should be exercised with various troubles and calamities, for the trial
of their Faith and Obedience. But yet in the ordering and management of these
calamitous Accidents or troubles, they have no less benefit by the Ministry of
Angels, than they have in respect of those from which they are preserved by
them. For inasmuch as they also are designed and ordered for their Good, their
exposing to them in their seasons, supportment under them during their
continuance, and deliverance from them in the appointed time thereof, are all
signal mercies which they receive by the Ministry of Angels.

4. By this Ministry of Angels, does God in particular preserve us from the
sudden and violent incursions of Satan. Satan in the Scripture is called a
Serpent from his subtilty and lying in wait to do mischief; and a Lion, from
his rage and fury and spoiling from his lurking places. And as the one, and the
other, he continually seeks the harm, mischief, and ruin of the whole man; not
only of our souls in sin and desert of punishment, but of our bodies in our
lives health and welfare. Hence we find so many in the Gospel troubled with
bodily infirmities from the assaults and impressions of Satan. And what he
prevails to do against any one, that he is continually attempting against all
the whole seed of Abraham. Hereunto also belong all those hurtful Terrors,
Affrightments and Surprizals, which he endeavors by himself and his Agents
to cast upon us. Had he his Liberty, he would make our whole Lives to be filled
with Disappointments, Horrors, vain Fear and perplexities, if he could proceed
no farther. Now in all these designs it is more probable that he is prevented
by the Ministry of Angels. We find in the first of Job, that in all the Devils
walks in the earth for the executing of his malice, the Angels still observe
him, and are ready to answer him when he comes with his Accusations against the
Saints into the presence of the Lord. And hereon depends the safety and
security of our lives; without which Satan would by all means continually
attempt to fill them with Terrors, Vexations, Losses and Troubles. Not one of
us should escape him any better than Job did, when God for a season suspended
his Protection over his Relations Possessions and Enjoyments.

5. They are in their Ministry appointed to be Witnesses of the Obedience,
Sufferings, and Worship of the Disciples of Christ; that they may give
Testimony unto them before God, and in the great Assembly of the last day, so
glorifying God for the Grace bestowed upon them, and the assistance afforded
unto them. Thus Paul tells us that the Apostles in their Preaching and
Sufferings, were made a spectacle unto Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9. The Holy Angels of
God looked on, rejoicing to behold how gloriously they acquitted themselves in
the work and Ministry committed unto them. And to this end does he charge
Timothy before the elect Angels, to look unto and discharge aright the Work of
an Evangelist, 1 Timothy 5.21. because they were appointed of God to be Witnesses
of his faithfulness and diligence therein. And it is not improbable but he has
respect unto the presence of Angels in the assemblies of the Saints for the
Worship of God, where he enjoins Modesty and Sobriety unto Women in them on
their account, 1 Cor. 11.10. And from that particular instance, a general Rule
may be drawn, for the Observation of Comeliness and Order in all our
Assemblies; namely from the presence of these holy Witnesses at all our solemn
Worship. For Church Assemblies are the Court, the dwelling place, the Throne of
Jesus Christ, and therefore in them he is in an especial manner attended by
these glorious Ministers of his presence. And therefore although an holy regard
unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ himself be the first and principal motive
unto a right and holy acquitment of our selves in all our Obedience Sufferings
and Worship; yet in subordination thereunto, we may have also respect unto the
Angels, as those who are employed by him to be Witnesses of our ways and
carriage. Such a respect I mean, as may administer Occasion unto them to
glorify God in Christ on our behalf; that so all the Honor may finally
redound unto him alone.

6. God uses the Ministry of Angels, to avenge his Elect of their enemies and
Persecutors, to render unto them a Recompense and Vengeance even in this world,
in the due and appointed season. Thus by an Angel he destroyed the Army of
Sennacherib when he intended and threatened the destruction of Jerusalem. And by
an Angel he smote Herod in the midst of his pride and persecution, Acts 12. And
this Ministry of theirs is in an especial manner pointed unto in several places
of the Revelation, where the Judgments of God are foretold to be executed on
the persecution of the world. And this work they wait for in an holy Admiration
of the Patience of God toward many a provoking Generation; and are in a
continual readiness to discharge it unto the uttermost, when they shall receive
their Commission so to do, Dan. 7.

7. They carry the souls departed into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22.

8. Lastly, The Ministry of Angels respects the general Resurrection and Day of
Judgment. The Lord Christ is every where described coming to Judgment at the
last day, attended with all his holy and glorious Angels, Matthew. 24.31. Chap.
25.31. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. Jude 14.15. And great shall be their work toward the
Elect in that day, when the Lord Christ shall be admired even by them, in all
those that do believe. For although the work of the Resurrection, like that of
the Creation, is to be effected by the immediate Operation of Almighty Power,
without the interveniency of any secundary finite Agents limited in their Power
and operation; yet many things p^eparatory thereunto, and consequents thereof,
shall be committed unto the Ministry of Angels. By them are the signs and
tokens of it to be proclaimed unto the world, to them is the sounding of the
last Trumpet, and general summons given out unto all flesh to appear before
Jesus Christ committed, with all the glorious solemnity of the Judgment it
self. And as they bear and accompany the departing souls of the Saints into the
receptacles of their rest in Heaven, so doubtless also shall they accompany
them in their joyful return unto their beloved old Habitations. By them also
will the Lord Christ gather them together from all parts wherein their redeemed
bodies have been reduced into dust; and so also at length by them bring all the
heirs of salvation triumphantly into the full Possession of their inheritance.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken about the Ministry of Angels here
mentioned by the Apostle; by all which it farther appears, how neither in their
Nature, nor their Office they are any way to be compared with the Son of God in
his Ministry toward the Church. Some deductions also for our especial Use and
Instruction may here be added from what has been spoken. As,

1. That we ought to be very careful to use sobriety in our Speculations and
Meditations about this matter. Herein does the Caution of the Apostle take
place in an especial manner, that we should be wise unto sobriety, Romans 12.3.
and not to think our selves wise above that which is written. This some
neglecting of old, and endeavoring to intrude themselves into the things which
they had not seen, Col. 2.18. that is boasting of the knowledge and
acquaintance with Angels, which they had no ground for, nor any safe
Instruction in, fell into Pride, Curiosity, Superstition and Idolatry, as the
Apostle in that place declares. And almost in all Ages of the Church, men have
failed on this account. The Curiosity of the Jews we did in some measure before
manifest. To them in their Imaginations succeeded the Gnostics; whose
portentous Aeones and Genealogies of inferior Deities, recounted by Irenaeus,
Origin, Tertullian, Epiphanius and others of the Ancients, were nothing but
wicked and foolish Imaginations about Angels. Unto them succeeded those about
the beginning of the fourth Century; who flatly Worshipped Angels, and had
Conventicles, or private meetings for that purpose, who are expressly condemned
in the thirty fifth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, An. 364. in these words,
(...); wherein they plainly adjudge, that practice to be Idolatry and Apostasy
from Jesus Christ. After these, about the end of the fourth, or beginning of
the fifth Century, He vented his curious speculations about their Hierarchy
Orders and Operations, who personated Dionysius the Areopagite, of whom we
spoke before. From them all did that sink of Idolatry Superstition and Heresies
the Church of Rome, derive her present Speculations, Adoration, Worship and
Invocation of Angels. But as these things are all of them without, besides and
against the Word in general, so they are in particular expressly prejudged and
condemned by the Apostle in the place to the Colossians before mentioned: And
of such kind of needless, useless, unprofitable, dangerous Speculations we are
to beware; and many of them I could in particular recite, but that I would not
teach them unto any, by condemning them before all; but yet,

2. Danger should not deter us from Duty. Because some have miscarried in this
matter, we ought not therefore wholly to neglect it; there being so great a
concernment of the glory of God, and our own good enwrapped therein. Had others
erred or wandered indeed, because they had neither Way to walk in, or Guide to
attend unto, it had been sufficient to restrain us from attempting any thing in
this matter: but whereas it is evident, that they wilfully neglected the Way,
or pressed farther than the paths of it lead them, and despised their Guide,
following their own imagination instead thereof, shall others be discouraged in
their Duty, whereas they may avoid their miscarriages? Wary indeed this may and
ought to make us in our enquiries, but not neglective of our duties. We have
the Word of God for our Way and Guide; if we go not besides it, if we go not
beyond it, we are as safe when we treat of Angels, as if we treated of Worms.
We have seen in part of what signal use their Ministry is as unto our good, and
the glory of Jesus Christ. And it is pride to the height, not to enquire after
what may be known, because there are many things that we may not know nor
comprehend. If that take place it will debar us from all search into the
Mysteries of the Gospel. For upon our utmost Seize we know but in part.
Gods Revelation is the Object of our knowledge. So far as that is made and
given, so far we may enquire and learn. Besides it is the height of Ingratitude
not to search after what may be known of this great Privilege and Mercy
whereof we are made partakers in the Ministry of Angels. God has neither
appointed nor revealed it for nothing. He expects a reverence of Praise and
Glory for it: and how can we bless him for it, when we know nothing of it? This
Ministry then of Angels is that which with sobriety we are in a way of Duty to
enquire into.

3. Let us on this account glorify God and be thankful. Great is the
Privilege, manifold are the Blessings and Benefits that we are made partakers
of by this Ministry of Angels. Some of them have been before recounted. What
shall we render for them, and to whom? Shall we go and bow our selves down to
the Angels themselves, and pay our homage of Obedience unto them? They all cry
out with one accord, see you do it not, we are your fellow servants: What shall
we then do? Why say they, Worship God: Glorify and praise him, who is the God
of all Angels; who sends them, who employes them, unto whom they Minister in
all that they do for us. Let us bless God I say for the Ministry of Angels.

Moreover, these words afford us other Instructions, which I shall only name,
and put a close unto our Discourses on this Chapter: as,

III. The Socratical fancy of one single Guardian Angel attending every one; as
it is if admitted a real impeachment of the Consolation of Believers, so a
great inducement unto Superstition and Idolatry. The further evidencing of this
truth, I remit unto what has been already delivered about the Ministry of
Angels in general.

IV. Believers obtain Heaven by inheritance, and free gift of their Father, and
not by any merit of their own. Heirs among men claim their inheritance jure
nascendi, because they are born unto it, not because they deserve it better
than others. Believers look for theirs jure adoptionis, by right of Adoption,
whereby they become Sons, Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Jesus Christ.

End of the first Chapter.
CHAP. II.
IN this Second Chapter the Apostle declares his Design, and what his especial
Aim was, with respect unto them to whom he wrote. It was not merely their
Instruction, or the Information of their Minds and Judgments that he intended;
though that also was in his eye, and necessary unto his principal Purpose. They
had by their Instability and fainting in Trials administered Occasion unto him
of other Discourse. Besides, he foresaw that they had great Difficulties and
Temptations to contend withal; and was jealous lest they should miscarry under
them; as he also was over other Professors, 1 Cor. 11.34. His principal End
therefore in this whole Epistle (as has been declared) was to prevail with the
Hebrews unto Stedfastness in the faith of the Gospel, and Diligence in
attendance unto all those Ways and Means whereby they might be established.
The Foundation of his Exhortations unto this Purpose, he lays in the
incomparable Excellency of the Author of the Gospel. Hence just and cogent
Inferences unto constancy in the Profession of his Doctrine, and Obedience unto
him, both absolutely and in respect of the Competition set up against it by
Mosaical Institutions, do naturally flow. And these Considerations does the
Apostle divide into several parts, interposing in great Wisdom between the
handling of them, those Exhortations which pressed toward his especial End
before mentioned. And this course he proceeds in for several Reasons. For,

First, He minds them and us in general, that in handling of the Doctrines of
the Gospel concerning the Person and Offices of Jesus Christ, we should not
satisfy our selves in a bare Notional Speculation of them; but endeavor to
get our Hearts excited by them unto Faith, Love, Obedience and Stedfastness in
our Profession. This does he immediately apply them unto. Instances unto this
purpose does he give us in this Chapter upon his foregoing Declaration of the
Excellencies of Christ, and the Glory of his Kingdom; that so his Hearers might
not be barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of him.

Secondly, As to the Hebrews in particular, he had as it were so overwhelmed
them with that flood of Divine Testimonies which he had powered out in the
Beginning of his Epistle, and that heavenly glorious Declaration which he had
made of the Person of the Messiah, that he thought it needful to give them time
to consider what was the Tendency of that sublime Discourse, and what was their
especial concernment therein.

Thirdly, The Apostle interposeth his Exhortation in this place, as to be an
Application of what was before delivered, so to lead them on thereby unto the
Consideration of Arguments of another nature, (though of the same use and
tendency) taken from the Sacerdotal or Priestly Office of Christ, and the Works
or effects thereof. And herein does a great part of the Apostolical Wisdom, in
the various Intertexture of Doctrines and Exhortations in this Epistle consist;
that as every Exhortation flows naturally from the Doctrine that does precede
it; so always the principal matter of it leads directly unto some other
Doctrinal Argument, which he intends nextly to insist upon. And this we shall
see evidenced in the Transition that he makes from the Exhortation laid down in
the beginning of this Chapter, unto the Sacerdotal Office of Christ, v. 6, 7, 8.

The first Verses then of this Chapter are purely Paraenetical, or Hortatory,
with a mixture of some Considerations serving to make the Exhortation weighty
and cogent.

Verse I.
THe first Verse contains the Exhortation it self intended by the Apostle,
those following the especial Enforcements of it.

Ver. 1. (...).
(...).
(...), Abundantius: V.L. Arias: More abundantly: eo amplius, Beza; so much the
more. (...); Sir. Magis, the rather: ut magis, ut abundantius, as the rather;
as more abundantly, Summa attentione: Arab. with all attention. The word
denotes somewhat more than ordinary in the Act it relates unto, or the Persons
to whom it is applied. And Diligence being especially required in Attention
unto any thing, or in those that attend, which extends it self unto the whole
deportment of the mind in that work (if that be respected herein which we shall
consider) it may be not unmeetly rendered more diligently, directly; more
abundantly.

(...).
(...). Observare; V.L. to observe, improperly: Adhibere Ar.M. a Word of an
imperfect sense, unless supplied with our Minds or Understandings, or
diligence; Adhibere animum, adhibere diligentiam; but immediately affecting the
Object, as adhibere auditis, it gives no perfect sense: attendere; Beza; to
attend unto; to give heed. (...) simus cauti* attenti, Sir. That we be wary, or
heedfull. (...), is usually in other Authors when it refers to Persons,
ausculto, or obtempero; to hearken, attend and give heed to any one with an
observant or obedient mind. And sometimes it signifies to hope or place Trust
or Confidence in him that is attended unto. It is also used for to Assent, to
Agree, or subscribe unto what is spoken by another. In the New Testament it is
principally used in two senses. (1.) To beware, or look to our selves, as to
things or Persons that might hurt us; and then it is attended with (...) or
(...), as Matthew. 7.25. Chap. 10.17. Chap. 16.6, 11, 12. Luke 12.1. Or so to
beware, or to look diligently unto our own Concernments absolutely, Luke 17.3.
Chap. 21.34. Matthew. 6.1. Acts 20.28. (2.) To Attend with diligence and
submission of mind unto the words of another; or unto any business that we are
employed in, Acts 8.6. Chap. 16.14. 1 Timothy 1.4. Chap. 4.1, 13. Titus. 1.14. So
it is said of the Samaritans, that they much heeded Simon Magus; (...), Acts
8.10. And it is the same word, whereby the reverential Obedience of that people
unto the preaching of Philip is expressed, v. 6. An Attendance then with a mind
ready for Obedience is that which the word imports.

(...).
(...), Auditis, to the things heard. (...), Sir. in eo quod audivimus; in that
which we have heard. To the things heard, that is, by us, who are required to
attend unto them.

(...).
(...), This Word is no where else used in the New Testament. In other Authors
it is as much as praeterfluo; to run by. So Xenoph. Cyropaed. lib. 4. (...), to
drink of the River running by; pereffluamus, V.L. ne forte pereffluamus, lest
perhaps we should run out. (...), ne forte, lest perhaps: improperly; it
respects times and seasons; lest at any time. (...), ne forte cadamus;
decidamus; lest we fall; fall down; that is perish. So is the word also
interpreted by Chrysostom, (...), that we perish not; that we fall not. And he
confirms this sense from that saying in the Proverbs, Chap. 3.21. (...), My Son
fall not. So he interprets the word. In the Original it is, (...); let them not
depart; the word respecting not the Person spoken unto, but the thing spoken
of. Nor do the LXX. in any other place render (...), by (...), but by (...), as
in the next Chapter, v. 21. and words of the like signification; to decline,
draw back, give over by negligence or weariness. Other Ancient Translations
read, ne decidamus ab honestate; that we fall not from Honesty; and and
nequaquam rejicias; and by no means to reject. What sense of the Word is most
proper to the Place, we shall afterward consider.

Verse 1. Therefore (for this cause) the more abundantly ought we to attend (or
give heed) to the things heard (by us) lest at any time we should flow out (or
pass away.)
(...), For this Cause; as much as (...), therefore, wherefore; (...).
There is in the words an Illation from the precedent Discourse; and the whole
Verse is an hortatory Conclusion from thence. From the Proposition that he has
made of the Glory and Excellency of the Author of the Gospel; he draws this
inference, therefore ought we; for the reason and causes insisted on. And thus
the word (...), flow out, expresses their losing by any ways or means the
Doctrine of the Gospel wherein they had been instructed, and the Benefits
thereof. Seeing the Gospel has such a blessed Author, we ought to take care
that we forfeit not our interest in it. But if we take (...), in the sense
chosen by Chrysostom, to express the fall, and perishing of them that attend
not as they ought unto the Word, (which Interpretation is favored by the
Syriack Translation) Then the word, therefore, for this cause, respects the
Commination or Threatening included therein. As if the Apostle had said,
therefore ought you to attend; that is, look to it, that you do attend, l^st
you fall and perish. I rather embrace the former sense, both because the
Interpretation of the word used by Chrysostom is strained, as also because the
Apostle does evidently in these words enter upon an Exhortation unto Obedience,
upon his former discourse about the Person of Christ; nor without an especial
regard thereunto, had he laid any foundation for such a Threatening unto
Disobedience, as is pretended to be in the words; of which yet farther
afterward.

(...), Ought we; (...).
the Persons unto whom he makes the Application of his Doctrine, and directs
his Exhortation. Some think that Paul joins himself here with all the Hebrews
upon the account of Cognation and Country, as being himself also an Hebrew,
Phil. 3.8. and therefore affectionately respecting of them, Romans 9.3. But the
Expression is to be regulated by the words that follow; all we, who have heard
the Gospel preached, and made profession thereof. And the Apostle joins himself
with them, not that there was any danger on his part lest he should not
constantly obey the Word, or were of them whose wavering and Instability gave
Occasion to this Caution; but (1.) To manifest that the Duty which he exhorts
them unto, is of general concernment unto all to whom the Gospel is preached,
so that he lays no singular burden on them; and (2.) That he might not as yet
discover unto them any jealousy of their Inconstancy, or that he had
entertained any severe thoughts concerning them: Apprehensions whereof, are apt
to render Exhortations suspected; the minds of men being ready enough to
disregard that which they are persuaded unto, if they suspect that undeserved
blame lies at the bottom of the Exhortation. The like Condescension hereunto,
upon the like account, we may see in Peter, 1 Pet. 4.3.

These are the Persons spoken unto; That which is spoken to them consists in an
Exhortation unto a duty, and an especial Enforcement of it. The Exhortation and
Duty in the first words, the more abundantly to attend unto the things heard;
and the Enforcement in the close of them, lest at any time we should flow out.

In the Exhortation is expressed an especial Circumstance of it, the Duty it
self, and the manner of its performance.

The first is included in that Word more abundantly; which may refer either
unto the Causes of the attendance required, or unto the manner of its
performance.

In the words as they lie in the Text, (...), the word (...), more abundantly,
is joined unto (...), therefore, for this cause, and seems immediately to
respect it; and so to intimate the excellent and abundant Reason that we have
to attend unto the Gospel. But if we transpose the words, and read them as if
they lay thus, (...), then the word (...), more abundantly, respects the
following word (...), to attend unto, and so expresses somewhat of the manner
of the performance of the Duty proposed. And so our Translators report the
sense, We ought to give the more diligent heed, or give heed the more
diligently. The Reader may embrace whether sense he judges most agreeable to
the scope of the place. The former construction of the word, expressing the
necessity of our attention to be intimated from the cogency of the reasons
thereof before insisted on, is not without its probability. And this the
meaning of the word agrees unto, whether we take it absolutely, (for so, as
Chrysostom observes, it may be taken, though of it self it be of another form)
or comparatively, in which form it is. Take it absolutely, and the Apostle
informs them that they have abundant cause to attend unto the things spoken or
heard, because of him that spoke them; for concerning him alone came that Voice
from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, hear him. So also in the
other sense, the Apostle is not comparing the manner of their attending unto
the Doctrine of the Law, (which certainly they ought to have done with all
diligence) and their attendance unto the Gospel, but shows the reasons which
they had to attend unto the one and the other, as the following verses clearly
manifest. This then may be that which the Apostle intimates in this word,
namely that they had more abundant cause and a more excellent reason for their
attending unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, than they had unto that of the Law;
on this account that he by whom the Gospel was immediately preached unto us,
was the Son of God himself. But the other application of the word is more
commonly received, wherein it intends the duty enjoined.

(...).
In reference unto the Duty exhorted unto, there is expressed the Object of it,
The things heard. Thus the Apostle chooses to express the Doctrine of the
Gospel, with respect unto the way and manner whereby it was communicated unto
them, namely by preaching; for faith comes by hearing, and hearing is of the
word preached, Romans 10.14, 15. And herein does he magnify the great Ordinance
of preaching, as every where else he makes it the great means of begetting
faith in men. The Lord Christ himself first preached the Gospel, Acts 1.1. and
verse 4. of this chapter. Concerning him it was said from heaven, Hear him,
Matthew. 17.5. as he who revealed the Father from his own bosom, Joh. 1.18. From
him the Gospel became to be the Word heard. When he had finished the course of
his Personal Ministry, he committed the same work unto others, sending them as
the Father sent him. They also preached the Gospel, and called it the Word,
that is that which they preached. See 1 Cor. 1. So in the Old Testament it is
called (...), Isa. 53.1. Auditus, an hearing, or that which was heard, being
preached. So that the Apostle insists on, and commends unto them not only the
things themselves wherein they had been instructed, but also the way whereby
they were communicated unto them, namely by the great Ordinance of preaching,
as he farther declares, verse 4. This as the means of their believing, as the
ground of their profession, they were diligently to remember consider and
attend unto.

The Duty it self directed unto, (...).
and the manner of its performance, are expressed in the word (...), to attend,
or give heed. What kind of attendance is denoted by this word was in part
before declared. An attendance it is with Reverence Assent and Readiness to
obey. So Acts 16.14. God opened the heart of Lydia, (...), to attend unto the
things that were spoken, not to give them the hearing only; there was no need
of the opening of her heart for the mere attention of her ear: but she attended
with readiness humility* and resolution to obey the Word. The effect of which
attention is expressed by the Apostle, Romans 6.17. To attend then unto the Word
preached, is to consider the Author of it, the Matter of it, the Weight and
concernment of it, the Ends of it, with Faith, Subjection of spirit, and
Constancy, as we shall with our Apostle more at large afterward explain.

The Duty exhorted unto being laid down, a Motive or Enforcement unto it is
subjoyned, taken from the danger that would ensue the neglect thereof. And this
is either from the Sin or Punishment that would attend it, (...).
according unto the various interpretations of the word (...), flow out, or
fall, before mentioned. It it signifies to fall or perish, then the punishment
of the neglect of this Duty is intimated. We shall perish as water that is
poured on the earth. Thereunto is the frail life of man compared, 2 Samuel 14.14.
This sense of the word is embraced by few Expositors, yet has it great
countenance given unto it by the ensuing discourse, verse 2, and 3. and for
that reason is not unworthy our consideration. For the design of the Apostle in
those verses is to prove, that they shall deservedly and assuredly perish who
should neglect the Gospel. And the following particles, (...), and if, in verse
2. may seem to relate unto what was before spoken, and so to yield a reason why
the Unbelievers should so perish as he had intimated; which unless it be
expressed in this word, the Apostle had not before at all spoken unto. And in
this sense the Caution here given is, That we should attend unto the word of
the Gospel, left by our neglect thereof, we bring upon our selves inevitable
ruin, and perish as water that is spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again.

But the truth is, (...).
that the word (...) prefixed will not be well reconciled unto this sense and
interpretation; unless we should suppose it to be redundant and
insignificative, and so (...), lest at any time we should flow out, should be
the same with (...) absolutely, that we fall not. But there is no just reason
to render that word so useless. Allow it therefore significative, and it may
have a double sense; 1. To denote an uncertain time; quando, aliquando, at any
time. 2. A conditional event; forte, ne forte, lest it should happen. In
neither of these senses will it allow the words to be expounded of the
Punishment that shall befall Unbelievers, which is most certain both as to the
Time, and the Event. Neither does the Apostle in the next Verses threaten them
that neglect the Gospel, that at some time or other they may perish; but lets
them know that their destruction is certain, and that from the Lord.

It is then our sinful losing of the Word and the benefits thereof which the
Apostle intends. And in the next verses he does not proceed to prove what he
had asserted in this verse, but goes on to other Arguments to the same purpose,
taken from the unquestionable event of our neglect of the Word, and losing the
benefits thereof. The especial reason therefore why the Apostle thus expresses
our losing of the doctrine of the Gospel by want of diligent attendance unto
it, is to be enquired after. Generally the expression is looked on as an
allusion unto leaking vessels, which suffer the water that is poured into them
one way, to run out many. As he speaks in the Comedian, who denied that he
could keep secret some things if they were communicated unto him. Plenus
rimarum sum, huc atque illuc effluo: I am full of chinks, and flow out on every
side. And the word relates unto the persons, not to the things, because it
contains a crime. It is our duty to retain the word which we have heard; and
therefore it is not said that the Word flows out, but that we as it were pour
it out. And this crime is denoted by the addition of (...) to (...). For as the
simple Verb denotes the passing away of any thing as water, whether it deserve
to be retained or no; so the compound does the losing of that perversely which
we ought to have retained.

But we may yet enquire a little farther into the reason and nature of the
Allegory. The Word or Doctrine of the Scripture is compared to showers and
rain; Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as
the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, as the showers upon the grass.
Hence the same word (...) signifies a Teacher, and Rain; so that Translators do
often doubt of its special sense, as Psalm. 84.7. (...), the rain fills the
pools, as in our Translation; others, as Hierom and Arias Montanus render them,
Benedictionibus operietur docens, The Teacher shall be covered with blessings;
both the words being ambiguous. So also Isa. 30.20. (...), which we translate
thy Teachers, is by others rendered thy showers or rain. So those words, Joel
2.23. (...), which our Translators render in the Text, He has given you the
former rain moderately; in the Margin they render, a Teacher of righteousness.
And the like ambiguity is in other places. And there is an elegant metaphor in
the word. For as the drops of rain falling on the earth do water it and make it
fruitful, whilst it takes no notice of it, so does the Doctrine of the Word
insensibly make fruitful unto God the souls of men, upon whom it does descend.
And in respect unto the Word of the Gospel it is, that the Lord Christ is said
to come down as the showers on the mowen grass, Psalm, 72. So the Apostle calls
the preaching of the Gospel unto men, the watering of them, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. And
compares them unto whom it is preached unto the earth that drinks in the
rain, Heb. 6.7. In pursuit of this Metaphor it is, that men are said to pour
out the Word preached unto them, when by their negligence they lose all the
benefits thereof. So when our Savior had compared the same Word unto seed, he
sets out men's falling from it by all the ways and means whereby seed cast into
the earth may be lost, or become unprofitable, Matthew. 13. And as he shows that
there are various ways and means whereby the seed that is sown may be lost and
perish, so there are many times and seasons, ways and means, wherein and
whereby we may lose and pour out the Water or Rain of the Word which we have
received. And these the Apostle regards in that expression, lest at any time.

We are now entered on the Practical part of the Epistle, and that which is of
great importance unto all Professors at all times; especially unto such as are
by the good providence of God called into the condition wherein the Hebrews
were, when Paul thus treated with them; that is a condition of temptation
affliction and persecution. And we shall therefore the more distinctly consider
the useful truths that are exhibited unto us in these words, which are these
that follow.

(...).
1. Diligent attendance unto the word of the Gospel is indispensably necessary
unto perseverance in the profession of it. Such a profession I mean as is
acceptable unto God, or will be useful unto our own souls. The profession of
most of the world is a mere not renunciation of the Gospel in words, whilst in
their hearts and lives they deny the power of it every day. A saving profession
is that which expresses the efficacy of the Word unto salvation, Romans 10.10.
This will never be the effect of a lifeless attendance unto the Word. And
therefore we shall first consider what is required unto the giving beed to the
Gospel here commended unto us; and there are in it (amongst others) the things
that follow.

1. A due valuation of the grace tendered in it, and of the Word it self on that
account. (...) denotes such an attendance unto any thing, as proceeds from an
estimation and valuation of it answerable unto its worth. If we have not such
thoughts of the Gospel, we can never attend unto it as we ought. And if we
consider it not as that wherein our chief concernment lies, we consider it not
as we ought at all. The field wherein is the Pearl of price is so to be heeded,
as to be valued above all other Possessions whatsoever, Matthew. 13.45, 46. They
who esteemed not the Marriage Feast of the King above all Avocations and
worldly Occasions, were shut out as unworthy, Matthew. 22.7. If the Gospel be not
more unto us than all the world besides, we shall never continue in an useful
profession of it. Fathers and Mothers, Brothers and Sisters, Wives and
Children, must all be despised in comparison of it, and competition with it.
When men hear the Word, as that which puts it self upon them, whose attendance
unto they cannot decline without present or future inconveniences, without
considering that all the concernments of their souls lie bound up in it, they
will easily be won utterly to neglect it. According as our esteem and valuation
of it is, so is our heeding of it, and attendance unto it, and no otherwise.
Harkening unto the Word as unto a song of him that has a pleasant voice, which
may please or satisfy for the present, is that which profits not men, and
which God abhors, Ezekiel. 33.34. If the ministration of the Gospel be not looked
on as that which is full of glory, it will never be attended unto. This the
Apostle presses, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. Constant high thoughts then of the necessity,
worth, glory and excellency of the Gospel, as on other accounts, so especially
of the Author of it, and the grace dispensed in it, is the first step in that
diligent heeding of it which is required of us. Want of this was that which
ruined many of the Hebrews to whom the Apostle wrote. And without it we shall
never keep our faith firm unto the End.

2. Diligent study of it, and searching into the mind of God in it, that so we
may grow wise in the mysteries thereof, is another part of this Duty. The
Gospel is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. In it are laid up all the stores and
treasures of that wisdom of God, which ever any of the sons of men shall come
to an acquaintance with in this world, Col. 2.2, 3. And this wisdom is to be
sought for as silver, and to be searched after as hid treasures, Prove. 2.4.
that is, with pains and diligence like unto that of those who are employed in
that enquiry. Men with indesatigable pains and danger pierce into the bowels of
the earth, in the search of those hid treasures that are wrapped up in the vast
womb of it. Silver and treasures are not gathered by every lazy passenger on
the surface of the earth; they must dig seek and search who intend to be made
partakers of them, and they do so accordingly: And so must we do for these
treasures of heavenly wisdom. The mystery of the grace of the Gospel is great
and deep, such as the Angels desire to bow down and look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.
which the Prophets of old, notwithstanding the advantage of their own especial
Revelations, enquired diligently after, verse 11. Whereas now if any pretend,
though falsely, to a Revelation, they have immediately done with the Word, as
that which by the deceit of their imaginations they think beneath them, when
indeed it is only distant from them, and is really above them. As if a man
should stand on tip-toe on a molehill, and despise the Sun appearing newly
above the Horizon as one beneath him. Diligent sedulous searching into the Word
belongs unto this heeding of it, Psalm. 1.1. Or a laboring by all appointed
means to become acquainted with it, wise in the mystery of it, and skilled in
its doctrine. Without this, no man will hold fast his profession. Nor does any
man neglect the Gospel, but he that knows it not, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. This is the
great principle of Apostasy in the world, men have owned the Gospel but never
knew what it was, and therefore leave the profession of it foolishly, as they
took it up lightly. Studying of the Word is the security of our faith.

3. Mixing the Word with faith is required in this attention. See chap. 4.2. As
good not hear as not believe. Believing is the end of hearing, Romans 10.11. And
therefore Lydia's faith is called her attention, Acts 16.14. This is the life
of heeding the Word, without which all other exercise about it is but a dead
carcass. To hear and not believe is in spiritual life, what to see meat and not
to eat is in the natural; it will please the fancy, but will never nourish the
soul. Faith alone realizeth the things spoken unto the heart, and gives them
subsistence in it, Heb. 11.1. without which, as to us, they flow up and down in
loose and uncertain notions. This then is the principal part of our duty in
heeding the things spoken, for it gives entrance to them into the soul, without
which they are poured upon it as water upon a stick that is fully dry.

4. Laboring to express the Word received in a conformity of heart and life
unto it, is another part of this Attention. This is the next proper end of our
hearing. And to do a thing appointed unto an End, without aiming at that End,
is no better than the not doing it at all, in some cases much worse. The
Apostle says of the Romans, that they were cast into the mould of the doctrine
of the Gospel, chap. 6.13. It left upon their hearts an impression of its own
likeness, or produced in them the express image of that Holiness Purity and
Wisdom which it reveals. This is to behold with open face the glory of the
Lord in a glass, and to be changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 4.18. that is,
the image of the Lord Christ, manifested unto us and reflected upon us by and
in the glass of the Gospel. When the heart of the hearer is quickened,
enlivened, spirited with Gospel truths, and by them is molded and fashioned
into their likeness, and expresses that likeness in its fruits, or a
Conversation becoming the Gospel, then is the Word attended unto in a right
manner. This will secure the Word a station in our hearts, and give it a
permanent abode in us. This is the Indwelling of the Word, whereof there are
many degrees, and we ought to aim that it should be plentiful.

5. Watchfulness against all opposition that is made either against the Truth
or Power of the Word in us, belongs also unto this duty. And as these
Oppositions are many, so ought this Watchfulness to be great and diligent. And
these things have we added for the further Explication of the Duty that is
pressed on us by the Apostle; the necessity whereof, for the preservation of
the truth in our hearts and minds, will further appear in the ensuing
Observation.

II. There are sundry times and seasons wherein, (...)
and several ways and means whereby men are in danger to lose the word that
they have heard, if they attend not diligently unto its preservation. (...), at
any time, or by any way or means. This our Savior teaches us at large in the
Parable of the Seed, which was retained but in one sort of ground of those four
whereinto it was cast, Matthew. 13. And this the experience of all Times and Ages
confirms. Yea, few there are at any time who keep the Word heard as they
ought. We may briefly name the Seasons wherein, and the Ways whereby the hearts
and minds of men are made as leaking vessels, to pour out and lose the Word
that they have heard.

1. Some lose it in a time of Peace and Prosperity. That is a season which
slays the foolish. Jesurun waxes sat and kicks. According to men's pastures they
are filled, and forget the Lord. They feed their lusts high, until they loath
the Word. Quails often make a lean soul. A prosperous outward estate has
ruined many a Conviction from the Word, yea and weakened faith and obedience in
many of the Saints themselves. The warmth of Prosperity breeds swarms of
Apostates, as the heat of the Sun does Insects in the Spring.

2. Some lose it in a time of persecution. When persecution arises, says our
Savior, they fall away. Many go on apace in profession until they come to see
the Cross; this fight puts them to a stand, and then turns them quite out of
the way. They thought not of it, and do not like it. We know what havoc this
has made amongst Professors in all Ages; and commonly where it destroys the
Bodies of ten, it destroys the Souls of an hundred. This is the season wherein
Stars fall from the Firmament, in reference whereunto innumerable are the
Precepts for Watchfulness, Wisdom, Patience, Enduring, that are given us in the
Gospel.

3. Some lose it in a time of trial by temptation; it pleases God in his
Wisdom and Grace to suffer sometimes an hour of temptation to come forth upon
the world, upon the Church in the world, for their trial, Rev. 3.10. And he
does it that his own thereby may be made conformable unto their Head Jesus
Christ, who had his especial hour of temptation. Now in such a season
temptation works variously, according as men are exposed unto it, or as God
sees meet that they should be tried by it. Every thing that such days abound
withal shall have in it the force of a temptation. And the usual effect of
this work is, that it brings Professors into a slumber, Matthew, 25.5. In this
state, many utterly lose the Word. They have been cast into a negligent slumber
by the secret power and efficacy of temptation; and when they awake and look
about them, the whole power of the Word is lost and departed from them. With
reference unto these and the like seasons it is, that the Apostle gives us this
caution, to take heed lest at any time the word which we have heard do slip out.

2. The ways and means also whereby this wretched effect is produced are
various, yea innumerable: some of them only I shall mention, whereunto the rest
may be reduced. As, 1. Love of this present world. This made Demas a leaking
vessel, 2 Timothy 4.10. and choaks one fourth part of the seed in the Parable,
Matthew. 13. Many might have been rich in grace, had they not made it their end
and business to be rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6.9. But this is too well known,
as well as too little regarded. 2. Love of sin. A secret lust cherished in the
heart will make it plenum remarum, full of chinks, that it will never retain
the showers of the Word; and it will assuredly open them as fast as convictions
stop them. 3. False Doctrines, Errors, Heresies, false Worship, Superstition
and Idolatries will do the same. I place these things together, as those which
work in the same kind upon the Curiosity Vanity and Darkness of the minds of
men. These break the vessel, and at once pour out all the benefits of the Word
that ever were received. And many the like instances might be given.

And this gives us the reason of the necessity of that heeding the Word which
we before insisted on. Without it, at one time or other, by one means or other,
we shall lose all the design of the Word upon our souls. That alone will
preserve us, and carry us through the course and difficulties of our
Profession. The Duty mentioned then is of no less concernment unto us than our
souls, for without it we perish. Let us not deceive our selves, a slothful
negligent hearing of the Word will bring no man to life. The commands we have
to watch, pray, strive, labor and fight, are not in vain. The warnings given
us of the Opposition that is made to our faith, by indwelling sin Satan and
the world, are not left on record for nothing: no more are the sad examples
which we have of many, who beginning a good Profession have utterly turned
aside to sin and folly.

All these things, I say, teach us the necessity of the Duty which the Apostle
enjoyneth, and which we have explained.

M(...)
III. The Word heard is not lost without the great sin as well as the inevitable
ruin of the souls of men. Lost it is when it is not mixed with faith, when we
receive it not in good and honest hearts, when the end of it is not
accomplished in us, and toward us. And this befalls us not without our sin,
and woeful neglect of duty. The Word of its own nature is apt to abide, to
incorporate it self with us, and to take root: but we cast it out, we pour it
forth from us. And they have a woeful account to make, on whose souls the guilt
thereof shall be found at the last day.

IV. It is in the nature of the Word of the Gospel to water barren hearts, and
to make them fruitful unto God. Hence, as was showed, was it compared to Water,
Dews and Rain, which is the foundation of the Metaphorical expression here
used. Where this word comes, it makes the parched ground a pool, and the
thirsty land springs of water, Isa. 35.7. These are the waters of the
Sanctuary, that heal the barren places of the earth, and make them fruitful,
Ezekiel. 47. The River that makes glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.7. That River of
living water that comes forth from the Throne of God, Rev. 22.1. And the places
and persons which are not healed or benefited by these waters, are left to
barrenness and burning for evermore, Ezekiel. 47.11 Heb. 6 8. With the dew hereof
does God water his Church every moment, Isa. 27.3. And then does it grow as a
Lilly, and cast forth its roots as Leban^n, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Abundant
fruitfulness unto God follows a gracious receiving of this dew from him.
Blessed are they who have this dew distilling on them every morning, who are
watered as the Garden of God, as a land that God cares for.

V. The consideration of the Revelation of the Gospel by the Son of God, (...)
is a powerful motive unto that diligent attendance unto it, which we have
before described. This is the inference that the Apostle makes from the
Proposition that he had made of the Excellency of the Son of God. Therefore.

And this is that which in the greatest part of the ensuing Chapter he does
pursue. This is that which God declares, that he might so justly expect and
look for, namely that when he sent his Son to the Vineyard, he should be
regarded and attended unto.

And this is most reasonable upon many accounts.

1. Because of the Authority wherewith he spoke the word. Others spoke and
delivered their message as servants, he as the Lord over his own house, chap.
3.6. The Father himself gave him all his Authority for the revealing of his
Mind, and therefore proclaimed from heaven, that if any one would have any
thing to do with God, they were to hear him, Matthew. 17.10. 2 Pet. 1.17. The
whole Authority of God was with him, for him did God the Father seal, or put
the stamp of all his Authority upon him; and he spoke accordingly, Matthew. 7.29.
And therefore he spoke both in his own Name, and the Name of his Father; so
that this Authority sprung partly from the Dignity of his Person, for being God
and Man, though he spoke on the earth, yet he who was the Son of man was in
heaven still, Joh. 3.13. and therefore is said to speak from heaven, Heb.
12.21. and coming from heaven was still above all, Joh. 3.31. having power and
authority over all: And partly from his Commission that he had from his Father,
which, as we said before, gave all Authority into his hand, Joh. 5.26. Being
then in himself the Son of God, and being peculiarly designed to reveal the
Mind and Will of the Father, (which the Prophet calls his standing and feeding
in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God,
Mic. 5.4.) All the Authority of God over the souls and consciences of men is
exerted in this Revelation of the Gospel by him. It cannot then be neglected
without the contempt of all the Authority of God. And this will be a sore
aggravation of the sin of Unbelievers and Apostates at the last day. If we
attend not unto the word on this account, we shall suffer on it. He that
despises the word despises him, and he that despises him despises him also
who sent him.

2. Because of the Love that is in it. There is in it the love of the Father in
sending the Son, for the revealing of himself and his mind unto the children of
men. There is also in it the love of the Son himself, condescending to teach
and instruct the sons of men, who by their own fault were cast into error and
darkness. Greater love could not God nor his Eternal Son manifest unto us, than
that he should undertake in his own Person to become our Instructor. See 1 John
5.20. He that shall consider the brutish stupidity and blindness of the
generality of mankind in the things of God, the miserable fluctuating and
endless uncertainties of the more enquiring part of them; and withal the
greatness of their concernment in being brought unto the knowledge of the
truth, cannot but in some measure see the greatness of this love of Christ in
revealing unto us the whole counsel of God. Hence his words and speech are said
to be gracious, Luke 4.22. and grace to be poured into his lips, Psalm. 45.2.
And this is no small motive unto our attention unto the word.

3. The fullness of the Revelation it self by him made unto us, is of the same
importance. He came not to declare a part or parcel, but the whole will of God,
all that we are to know, all that we are to do, all that we are to believe. In
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. He opened all
the dark sentences of the will of God hidden from the foundation of the world.
There is in his Doctrine all wisdom, all knowledge, as all light is in the Sun,
and all water in the Sea; there being nothing of the one or the other in any
other thing but by a communication from them. Now if every word of God be
excellent, if every part and parcel of it delivered by any of his servants of
old, was to be attended unto on the penalty of extermination out of the number
of his people; how much more will our condition be miserable, is our blindness
and obstinacy so, if we have not an heart to attend unto this full Revelation
of himself and his will.

4. Because it is final. Last of all he sent his Son, and has spoken unto us
by him. Never more in this world will he speak with that kind of speaking. No
new, no farther Revelation of God is to be expected in this world, but what is
made by Jesus Christ. To this we must attend or we are lost for ever.

(...).
VI. The true and only way of honoring the Lord Christ as the Son of God, is by
diligent attendance and obedience unto his word. The Apostle having evidenced
his Glory as the Son of God, makes this his only Inference from it. So does he
himself; if you love me, says he, keep my Commandments. Where there is no
Obedience unto the Word, there is neither faith in, nor love unto Jesus Christ.
But this whole Argument the Apostle further pursues in the following Verses.

Verse II, III, IV.
IN these three Verses the Apostle follows on his Exhortation laid down in that
foregoing, and gives many peculiar enforcements unto a due compliance with it,
as we shall see in our Exposition of them.

Verse 3. (...);
(...).
(...), si enim, etenim; and if, for if, (...), Sermo dictus, (...), Sir. Sermo
qui dictus est, or pronuntiatius; the word which was spoken or pronounced;
properly as we shall see, (...). Sir. (...), by the hand of Angels; an
Hebraism, for their Ministry. The word pronounced by the Ministry of Angels.
The Arabic refers these words to the Testimonies before insisted on about
Angels, and renders them, if that which is spoken concerning the Angels, be
approved, or confirmed to be true; (...).
that is, (...), not (...); factus est firmus; Ar. V.L. was made firm or
stable; became sure. Fuit firmus; Eras. Beza, was firm; or as ours, steadfast;
(...), Sir. Confirmatus fuit, was confirmed or established: (...), (...).
Et omnis praevaricatio, and inobedientia; V.L. Ar praevarication and
disobedience; Rhem. Omnisque transgressio and contumacia; Beza, every
transgression and stubborn disobedience; the Syriack, a little otherwise;
(...); and every one that heard it and transgressed it; with peculiar respect
as it should seem to (...); which includes a disobedience to that which is
heard. (...), accepit justam mercedis retributionem; V.L. Bez. retulit.
praemii; Eras. all to the same purpose; received a just recompense, reward; a
just compensation; Sir. received a retribution in Righteousness.

Verse 3.

For if the word spoken (pronounced) by Angels, was sure, (steadfast) and every
transgression, and (stubborn) disobedience received a just (meet, equal)
retribution, (or) recompense of reward.

Verse 4.
(...). (...).
(...), si neglexerimus; V.L. Eras. Beza; if we neglect: (...), Sir. si
contemnamus, if we despise; if we care not about; if we take no care of, (...);
(...).
tantam salutem; so great salvation; the Syriack, a little otherwise; (...);
super ea ipsa quae sunt vitae; those things which are our life; or as others
render the words; eos sermones qui vivi sunt; those words which are living. The
former Translation taking the Pronoun in the Neuter Gender, and (...),
substantively with respect unto the Effects of the Gospel most suits the place:
(...); (...).
quae cum primum enarrari caepit, Eras. Bez. Which when it was begun to be
declared; and so the Syriack; which began to be declared; which was first, at
first spoken, declared, pronounced.

Verse 4.

How shall we escape (fly or avoid) if we neglect (not taking care about) so
great salvation which began to be (was first of all) spoken (declared) by the
Lord; and was confirmed (assured, established) unto us, by them that heard, (it
of him.)

Verse 5.
(...). (...), contestante Deo; V.L. attestante Deo, Eras. (...).
Testimonium illis praebente Deo: Beza. God withal testifying, attesting it;
giving Testimony unto them. It is doubtful whether it be the word it self, or
the Preachers of it, that God is said to give Testimony unto. Sir, When God had
testified unto them: Arab. whose Truth was also proved unto us, besides the
Testimony of God with wonders; separating between Gods Testimony to the Word,
and the signs or wonders that accompanied it. (...), Prodigiis, portentis,
miraculis.

Verse 5.

God bearing witness with Signs and Wonders (Prodigies) and diverse (various)
mighty works (powers) and distributions (divisions) of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will.

The design of the Apostle in these three Verses, is to confirm and enforce the
Inference and Exhortation laid down in the first; as that which arose from the
Discourse of the former Chapter. The way he proceeds in for this end, is by
interposing after his usual manner in this. Epistle, subservient Motives,
Arguments, and Considerations, tending directly to his principal end, and
connatural unto the subject treated on. Thus the main Argument wherewith he
presses his preceding Exhortation unto attendance and Obedience unto the Word,
is taken ab incommodo, or ab eventu pernitioso, from the pernicious end and
event of their disobedience thereunto. The chief proof of this is taken from
another Argument a minori, and that is the confessed Event of disobedience unto
the Law, v. 2. To confirm and strengthen which reasoning, he gives us a summary
comparison of the Law and the Gospel; whence it might appear, that if a
disregard unto the Law was attended with a sure and sore revenge, that much
more must and would the Neglect of the Gospel be so. And this comparison on the
part of the Gospel, is expressed; (1.) In the Nature of it, it is Great
Salvation: (2.) The Author of it; it was spoken by the Lord: (3.) The manner of
its Tradition; being confirmed unto us by them that heard them; and the
Testimony given to it, and them; by signs and wonders and distributions of the
Holy Ghost; from all which he infers his purpose, of the pernicious Event of
disobedience unto it, or disregarding of it. This is the sum of the Apostles
Reasoning, which we shall further open as the words present it unto us in the
Text.

The first thing we meet with in the word; is his subservient Argument a
minori, v. 2. wherein three things occur. (1.) The Description that he gives us
of the Law which he compares the Gospel withal; it was the word spoken by
Angels. (2.) An Adjunct of it, which ensued upon its being spoken by them; it
was firm and steadfast. (3.) The Event of disobedience unto it; every
transgression of it, and stubborn disobedience, had a just recompense of
reward. How from hence he confirms his Assertion of the pernicious Consequence
of neglecting the Gospel, we shall see afterward.

The first thing in the words is the Description of the Law, by that
Periphrasis (...); the word spoken or pronounced by Angels. (...).
(...) is a word very variously used in the New Testament. The special senses
of it, we shall not need in this place to insist upon. It is here taken for a
system of Doctrine, (and by the addition of (...)) as published, preached, or
declared. Thus the Gospel, (...).
from the principal subject matter of it, is called (...), 1 Cor. 1.18. the
Word, the Doctrine, the Preaching concerning the Cross, or Christ crucified. So
(...) here, the word, is the Doctrine of the Law; that is the Law it self
spoken, declared, published promulgated. (...).
(...), by Angels; that is, by the Ministry of Angels. It is not the (...), he
from whom the Law was given, that the Apostle intends; but the Ministerial
Publishers of it, by whom it was given. The Law was given from God* but it was
given by Angels in the way and manner to be considered.

Two things we may observe in this Periphrasis of the Law. (1.) That the
Apostle principally intends that part of the Mosaical Dispensation which was
given on Mount Sinai; and which as such was the Covenant between God and that
people, as unto the privilege of the promised Land. (2.) That he fixed on this
Description of it, rather than any other, or merely to have expressed it, by
the Law; (1.) Because the Ministry of Angels, in the giving of the Law by
Moses, was that by which all the prodigious Effects wherewith it was attended,
(which kept the people in such a durable Reverence unto it) were wrought. This
therefore he mentions, that he might appear not to undervalue it, but to speak
of it with Reverence unto that Excellency of its Administration which the
Hebrews even boasted in. (2.) Because having newly insisted on a comparison
between Christ and the Angels; his Argument is much strengthened, when it shall
be considered, that the Law was the Word spoken by the Angels, the Gospel was
delivered by the Son, so far exalted above them. But the manner how this was
done, must be a little farther enquired into.

That the Law was given by the Ministry of Angels, the Jews always confessed,
yea and boasted. So says Josephus, one much antiente^ than any of their
Rabbis extant. (...). lib. 5. (...). We learned the most excellent and most
holy constitutions of the Law from God by Angels. The same was generally
acknowledged by them of old. This Stephen treating with them, takes for
granted, Acts 7.53. You received the Law by the disposition of Angels. And our
Apostle affirms the same, Gal. 3.19. It was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator; a word of the same Original and sense is used in both places, though
by ours variously rendered: (...). This then is certain; but the manner of it
is yet to be considered.

First then, nothing is more unquestionable, than that the Law was given from
God himself. He was the Author of it. This the whole Scripture declares and
proclaims. And it was the impious Abomination of the Valentinians and
Marcionites of old, to ascribe the Original of it unto any other Author.

Secondly, He who spoke in the name of God on Mount Sinai, was no other than
God himself, the second Person in the Trinity, Psalm. 68.17, 18, 19. Him Stephen
calls the Angel, Acts 7.30, 38. Even the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord whom
the people sought, Mal. 3.1, 2. Some would have it to be a Created Angel,
delegated unto that work who thereon took on him the Presence and Name of God,
as if he himself had spoken. But this is wholly contrary to the nature of all
Ministerial work. Never did Ambassador speak in his own name, as if he were the
King himself whose person he does represent. The Apostle tells us, that the
Preachers of the Gospel were Gods Ambassadors, and that God by them does
persuade men to be reconciled in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. But yet if any on that
account, should take on him to personate God, and to speak of himself as God,
he would be highly blasphemous. Nor can this be imagined in this place; where
not only he that speaks, speaks in the Name of God, I am the Lord thy God, but
also elsewhere it is frequently affirmed, that Jehovah himself did give that
Law; which is made unto the people an Argument unto Obedience. And the things
done on Sinai are always ascribed unto God himself.

Thirdly, It remains then to consider, how notwithstanding this, the Law is
said to be the Word spoken by Angels. It is no where affirmed, that the Law was
given by Angels; but that the people received it by the disposition of Angels;
and that it was ordained by Angels, and here spoken by them. From hence it is
evident, that not the Original Authoritative giving of the Law, but the
Ministerial ordering of things in its promulgation, is that which is ascribed
to Angels. They raised the fire and smoke, they shook and rent the rock; they
framed the sound of the Trumpet; they effected the Articulate Voices which
conveyed the words of the Law to the ears of the people; and therein proclaimed
and published the Law; whereby it became the Word spoken by Angels.

Grotius on this place contends, that it was a created Angel who represented
the Person of God on Mount Sinai; and in the confirmation of his conjecture,
after he has made use of the imagination before rejected; he adds, that if the
Law had been given out by God in his own person (as he speaks) then upon that
account, it would have been preferred above the Gospel. But as the Apostle
grants in the first words of his Epistle, that the Law no less than the Gospel
was primitively and originally from God; so we say not, that God gave the Law
immediately without the Ministry of Angels; And the Comparison which the
Apostle is pursuing, respects not the first Author of Law or Gospel, but the
principal Ministerial Publishers of them, which of the one, was Angels, of the
other, the Son himself.

And in these words lies the spring of the Apostles Argument; as is manifest in
those Interrogatory Particles, (...); for if; (...).
for if the Law that was published unto our Fathers by Angels was so vindicated
against the disobedient; how much more shall the neglect of the Gospel be
revenged.

Secondly, He affirms concerning this word thus published, that it was (...),
(...).
firm, or steadfast. That is, it became an assured Covenant between God and the
people. That Peace which is firm and well grounded, is called (...), a firm
unalterable Peace. And (...), is Public Security. The Law's becoming (...),
then, firm, sure, steadfast consists in its being ratified to be the Covenant
between God and that people as to their Typical Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 5.2. The
Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb. And therefore in the greater
transgressions of the Law, the people were said to forsake, to break, to
profane, to transgress the Covenant of God, Levit. 26.15. Deuteronomy. 3.20. Chap.
17.2. Hos. 6.7. Josh. 7.11. 2 Kings 18.12. 1 Kings 19.14. Jerem. 22.9. Mal.
2.10. And the Law thus published by Angels, became a steadfast Covenant between
God and the people, by their mutual stipulation thereon. Exodus 20.19. Josh.
24.22, 24. Being thus firm and ratified, Obedience unto it became necessary and
reasonable; for hence,

Thirdly, The Event of Disobedience unto this word is expressed; every
Transgression, and every stubborn disobedience received a meet retribution.
(...).
Sundry things must be a little enquired into for the right Understanding of
these words. As (1.) The difference between (...), and (...). And the first is
properly any Transgression; (...).
which the Hebrews call (...); the latter includes a refusal so to attend, as
to obey* Contumacy, stubborness, rebellion; (...). And so the latter word may
be exegetical of the former; such Transgressions the Apostle speaks of, as were
accompanied with Contumacy and stubborness; or they may both intend the same
things under diverse respects. (2.) How may this be extended to every sin and
Transgression, seeing it is certain that some sins under the Law, were not
punished but expiated by Attonements. Answ. 1. Every sin was contrary, (...),
to the Doctrine of the Law, (...).
its commands and precepts. 2. Punishment was assigned unto every sin; though
not executed on every sinner. And so the word (...), denotes not the actual
Infliction of Punishment, but the Constitution of it in the sanction of the
Law: (3.) Sacrifices for Atonement manifested punishments to have been due,
though the sinner was relieved against them: But (4.) The sins especially
intended by the Apostle were such, as were directly against the Law as it was a
Covenant between God and the people; for which there was no Provision made of
any Atonement or Compensation: but the Covenant being broken by them, the
sinners were to dye without mercy; and to be exterminated by the hand of God or
man. And therefore the sins against the Gospel, which are opposed unto those,
are not any Trangressions that Professors may be guilty of, but final Apostasy
or Unbelief, which render the Doctrine of it altogether unprofitable unto men.
Thirdly, (...), is a Recompense just and equal, (...).
proportionable unto the crime according to the Judgment of God. That which
answers (...), that Judgment of God, which is, that they which commit sin are
worthy of death, Romans 1.32. And there were two things in the sentence of the
Law against Trangressors. (1.) The Temporal punishment of cutting off from the
Land of the living, which respected that dispensation of the Law, which the
Israelites were subjected unto. And the several sorts of punishment that were
among the Jews under the Law have been declared in our Prolegomena; to discover
the nature whereof, let the Reader consult the twenty first Exercitation. And
(2.) Eternal Punishment which was figured thereby, due unto all Transgressors
of the Law, as it is a Rule of Obedience unto God, from all mankind Jews and
Gentiles. Now it is the first of these, which the Apostle directly and
primarily intends: because he is comparing the Law in the Dispensation of it
on Horeb unto the Jews with all its Sanctions, unto the present Dispensation of
the Gospel; and from the Penalties wherewith the breach of it, as such, among
that people, was then attended, argues unto the sorer punishment that must
needs ensue upon the neglect of the dispensation of the Gospel, as he expounds
himself, Chap. 10.28, 29. For otherwise the penalty assigned unto the
Transgression of the Moral Law as a Rule; is the very same in the nature and
kind of it, with that which belongs unto despisers of the Gospel; even death
eternal. 4. Chrysostom observes some impropriety in the use of the word (...),
because it rather denotes, a Reward for a good work, than a punishment for an
evil one. But the word is indifferent; (...); (...).
and notes only a Recompense suitable unto that whereunto it is applied. So is
(...), used by our Apostle, Romans 1.27. excellently expressed by Solomon, Prove.
1.31. Sinners shall eat of the fruit of their own ways, and be filled with
their own devises. Such Rewards we have recorded. Numb. 15.30. 1 Samuel 6.6. 1
Kings 13.4. and Chap. 20.36. 2 Kings 2.23, 24. 2 Chronicles. 30.20.

This the Apostle lays down, as a thing well known unto the Hebrews; namely,
that the Law which was delivered unto them by Angels, received such a Sanction
from God, after it was established as the Covenant between him and the people,
that the Transgression of it, so as to disannul the terms and conditions of it,
had by Divine Constitution the punishment of death temporal, or Excision
appointed unto it. And this in the next words he proceeds to improve unto his
purpose by the way of an Argument a minori ad majus; How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation, etc.

There is an Antithesis expressed in one branch as we observed before between
the Law and the Gospel; namely, that the Law was the Word spoken by Angels; the
Gospel being revealed by the Lord himself: But there are also other differences
intimated between them, though expressed only on the part of the Gospel; as
that it is in its nature, or Effects, Great Salvation; that is not absolutely
only, but comparatively unto the benefit exhibited to their fore Fathers by the
Law, as given on Mount Horeb. The confirmation also of the Gospel by the
Testimony of God, is tacitly opposed unto the confirmation of the Law by the
like Witness; and from all these considerations does the Apostle enforce his
Argument, proving the Punishment that shall befall Gospel neglecters.

In the words as was in part before observed, there occurrs: (1.) The Subject
matter spoken of; so great salvation. (2) A further Description of it; 1. From
its principal Author, it began to be spoken by the Lord. 2. From the manner of
its propagation; it was confirmed unto us, by them that heard it: 3. From its
Confirmation by the Testimony of God. Which 4. Is exemplified by a distribution
into 1. Signs: 2. Wonders: 3. Mighty Works; and 4. Various Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; whereof there is, (3.) A neglect supposed; if we neglect; and (4.)
Punishment there intimated; wherein (1.) The Punishment its self; and (2.) The
manner of its expression, how shall we escape, are to be considered; all which
are to be severally explained.

(...).
1. The subject matter treated of, is expressed in those words, so great
Salvation. And it is the Gospel which is intended in that Expression, as is
evident from the preceding Verse. For that which is there called the word which
we have heard; is here called great salvation: As also from the following
words, where it is said to be declared by the Lord; and farther propagated by
them that heard him. And the Gospel is called Salvation, by a Metonymy of the
Effect for the Cause. For it is the Grace of God bringing salvation, Titus
2.11. The Word that is able to save us. The Doctrine, the Discovery, the
instrumentally efficient Cause of Salvation, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. And
this Salvation the Apostle calls Great, upon many accounts, which we shall
afterward unfold. And calling it, so great salvation, he refers them unto the
Doctrine of it wherein they had been instructed; (...) whereby the Excellency
of the Salvation which it brings, is declared.

Now though the Apostle might (...) pressed the Gospel by the word which was
declared unto us by the Lord, as (...) the Law, by the word spoken by Angels;
yet to strengthen his Argument (...) Mo^^^ unto Obedience which he insists
upon, he chose to give a brief Description of i^, from its principal Effect; it
is great Salvation. The Law by reason of sin, proved the Ministry of Death and
Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.9. yet being fully published only by Angels, Obedience
was indispensibly required unto it. And shall not the Gospel, the Ministry of
life and great salvation be attended unto.

2. He farther describes the Gospel from its principal Author* or Revealer; it
began to be spoken by the Lord. (...). (...).
The words may have a twofold sense; for (...), may denote either principium
temporis, the beginning of time; or principium operis, the beginning of the
work. In the first way, it asserts that the Lord himself was the first Preacher
of the Gospel; before he sent or employed his Apostles and Disciples in the
same work. In the latter, that he only began the work, leaving the perfecting
and finishing of it, unto those who were chosen and enabled by him, unto that
end. And this latter sense is also true; for he finished not the whole
Declaration of the Gospel in his own person, teaching viva voce, but committed
the work unto his Apostles, Matthew. 10.27. But their teaching from him, being
expressed in the next words; I take the words in the first sense, referring
unto what he had delivered, Chap. 1.1. Of Gods speaking in these last days in
the Person of the Son. Now the Gospel has had a threefold beginning of its
Declaration. First, In Prediction; by Promises and Types, and so it began to be
declared from the foundation of the world, Luke 1.70, 71. Secondly, In an
immediate Preparation, and so it began to be declared in and by the Ministry of
John the Baptist; Mark 1.1, 2. Thirdly, In its open, clear, actual full
Revelation; so this work was begun by the Lord himself, and carried on to
perfection by those who were appointed and enabled by him thereunto, Joh. 1.17,
18. Thus was it by him declared in his own person, as the Law was by Angels.

And herein lies the stress of the Apostles Reasonings, with reference unto
what he had before discoursed concerning the Son and Angels, and his
Pre-eminence above them. The great Reason why the Hebrews so pertinaciously
adhered unto the Doctrine of the Law, was the glorious Publication of it. It
was the word spoken by Angels; they received it by the disposition of Angels.
If says the Apostle, that were a sufficient cause, why the Law should be
attended unto, and that the neglect of it should be so sorely revenged as it
was, though in it self but the Ministry of death and condemnation; Then
consider what is your Duty in reference unto the Gospel, which as it was in its
self a Word of life and great salvation, so it was spoken, declared, and
delivered by the Lord himself, whom we have manifested to be so exceedingly
exalted above all Angels whatever.

3. He farther describes the Gospel from the way and means of its conveyance
unto us; It was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. And herein also he
prevents an Objection that might arise in the minds of the Hebrews; inasmuch as
they, at least the greatest part of them, were not acquainted with the Personal
Ministry of the Lord; they heard not the word spoken by him. For hereunto the
Apostle replies; that though they themselves heard him not, yet the same word
which he preached, was not only declared, but confirmed unto them, by those
that heard him. And herein he does not intend all of them, who at any time
heard him teaching; but those whom in an especial manner he made choice of, to
employ them in that work* namely, the Apostles. So that this expression, those
that heard him, is a Periphrasis of the Apostles, from that great privilege of
hearing immediately all things that our Lord taught in his own person. For
neither did the Church of the Jews hear the Law as it was pronounced on Horeb
by Angels, but had it confirmed unto them by the ways and means of Gods
appointment. And he does not say merely, that the Word was taught, or preached
unto us by them; but (...), it was confirmed, (...).
made firm and steadfast, being delivered infallibly unto us by the Ministry of
the Apostles. There was a divine (...), firmness, certainty and infallibility
in the Apostolical Declaration of the Gospel* like that which was in the
Writings of the Prophets, which Peter comparing with Miracles calls (...), a
more firm, steadfast and sure Word. And this Infallible certainty of their word
was from their Divine Inspiration.

Sundry Holy and Learned men from this Expression, confirmed unto us; wherein
they say, the Writer of this Epistle, places himself among the number of those
who heard not the word from the Lord himself, but only from the Apostles,
conclude, that Paul cannot be the Penman thereof, who in sundry places denies
that he received the Gospel by Instruction from men, but by immediate
Revelation from God. Now because this is the only Pretense which has any
Appearance of Reason for adjudging the writing of this Epistle from him, I
shall briefly show the invalidity of it: And (1.) It is certain that this term
U S, comprizes and casts the whole under the condition of the generality or
major part, and cannot receive a particular Distribution unto all Individuals.
For this Epistle being written before the Destruction of the Temple, as we have
demonstrated, it is impossible to apprehend, but that some were then living at
Jerusalem who attended unto the Ministry of the Lord himself in the days of
his flesh; and among them was James himself, one of the Apostles, as before we
have made it probable; so that nothing can hence be conc^^de^ to every
individual, as though none of them might have heard the Lord (...). The Apostle
has evidently a respect unto the foundation of the Church (...) at Jerusalem,
by the preaching of the Apostles immediately after the (...) of the Holy Ghost
upon them, Acts 2.3, 4, 5. which as he was not h^^ (...) ^^^ed in, so he was to
mind it unto them as the beginning of their faith and (...) 3. Paul himself did
not hear the Lord Christ teaching Personally on the earth, (...) he began to
reveal the great salvation. 4. Nor does he say that those of whom h^ ^p^^ks
were originally instructed by the Hearers of Christ, but only that by them the
Word was confirmed unto them; and so it was unto Paul himself, Gal. 2.1, 2.
But, 5. yet it is apparent that the Apostle uses an (...), placing himself
among those unto whom he wrote, though not personally concerned in every
particular spoken; a thing so usual with him, that there is scarce any of his
Epistles wherein sundry instances of it are not to be found. See 1 Cor. 10.8,
9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. The like is done by Peter, 1 Epist. 3.4. Having therefore in
this place, to take of all suspicion of jealousy in his Exhortation to the
Hebrews unto Integrity and Constancy in their profession, entered his discourse
in this Chapter in the same way of expression, Therefore ought we; as there was
no need, so there was no place for the change of the persons, so as to say you
instead of us. So that on many accounts there is no ground for this Objection.

4. He farther yet describes the Gospel by the Divine Attestation given unto
it, (...).
which also adds to the force of his Argument and Exhortation, (...). The word
is of a double composition, denoting a concurring testimony of God, a testimony
given unto, or together with the testimony and witness of the Apostles. Of what
nature this testimony was, and wherein it consisted, the next words declare; by
Signs and Wonders, Mighty works, and Distributions of the Holy Ghost: All which
agree in the general nature of works supernatural, and in the especial end of
attesting to the truth of the Gospel, being wrought according to the promise of
Christ, Matthew. 16.17, 18. by the ministry of the Apostles, Acts 2.3, 4. and in
especial by that of Paul himself, Romans 15.19. 2 Cor. 12.12. But as to their
especial differences, they are here cast under four heads.

(...).
The first are (...), Signs; that is, miraculous works, wrought to signify the
presence of God by his power with them that wrought them, for the approbation
and confirmation of the Doctrine which they taught. (...).
The second are (...), Prodigies, Wonders, works beyond the power of Nature,
above the Energie of natural causes, wrought to fill men with wonder and
admiration, stirring men up unto a diligent attention to the Doctrine
accompanied with them; for whereas they surprise men by discovering (...), a
present divine power, they dispose the mind to an embracing of what is
confirmed by them. (...).
Thirdly, (...), mighty works, wherein evidently a mighty power, the power of
God is exerted in their operation. And, (...).
fourthly, (...), gifts of the Holy Ghost, enumerated 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.7.
(...), free gifts, freely bestowed, called (...), divisions or distributions,
for the reason at large declared by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. All
which are intimated in the following words, (...). It is indifferent whether we
read (...) or (...), and refer it to the will of God, or of the Holy Ghost
himself, his own will, which the Apostle guides unto, 1 Cor. 12.11.

As we said before, all these agree in the same general nature, and kind of
miraculous operations; the variety of expressions whereby they are set forth,
relating only unto some different respects of them, taken from their especial
end and effects. The same works were in different respects, Signs, Wonders,
Mighty works, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost. But being effectual unto several
ends, they received these various denominations.

In these works consisted the divine attestation of the Doctrine of the
Apostles, God in and by them giving testimony from heaven by the ministration
of his Almighty Power, unto the things which were taught; and his approbation
of the Persons that taught them in their work. And this was of especial
consideration in dealing with the Hebrews. For the delivery of the Law and the
ministry of Moses having been accompanied with many signs and prodigies, they
made great enquiry after signs for the confirmation of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.22.
which though our Lord Jesus Christ neither in his own Person, nor by his
Apostles, would grant unto them in their time and manner, to satisfy their
wicked and carnal curiosity, yet in his own way and season he gave them forth
for their conviction, or to leave them inexcusable, Joh. 10.38.

Thirdly, The Gospel being of this nature, thus taught, thus delivered, thus
confirmed, (...).
there is a neglect of it supposed, verse. 3. If we neglect; (...); the
conditional is included in the manner of the expression, If we neglect, if we
regard not, if we take not due care about it. The word intimates an omission
of all those duties which are necessary for our retaining the Word preached
unto our profit, and that to such a degree as utterly to reject it; for it
answers unto those transgressions of, and stubborn disobedience unto the Law,
which disannulled it as a Covenant, and were punished with excision, or cutting
off. If we neglect, that is, if we continue not in a diligent observation of
all those duties which are indispensably necessary unto an holy, useful,
profitable profession of the Gospel.

Fourthly, There is a punishment intimated upon this sinful neglect of the
Gospel; (...).
How shall we escape, fly from, or avoid? wherein both the punishment it self,
and the manner of its expression are to be considered. For the punishment it
self, the Apostle does not expressly mention it; it must therefore be taken from
the words going before. How shall we escape, that is (...), a just retribution,
a meet recompense of reward. The breach of the Law had so, a punishment
suitable unto the demerit of the crime was by God assigned unto it, and
inflicted on them that were guilty. So is there unto the neglect of the Gospel,
even a punishment justly deserved by so great a crime; so much greater and more
sore than that designed unto the contempt of the Law, by how much the Gospel
upon the account of its Nature, Effects, Author, and Confirmation, was more
excellent than the Law. (...), a sorer punishment, (...).
as our Apostle calls it, chap. 10. as much exceeding it as eternal destruction
under the curse and wrath of God exceeds all temporal punishments what ever.
What this punishment is, see Matthew. 16.16. chap. 25.46. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. The
manner of ascertaining the punishment intimated, is by an Interrogation, How
shall we escape? wherein three things are intended. 1. A denial of any ways or
means for escape or deliverance. There is none that can deliver us, no way
whereby we may escape. See 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. And, 2. the certainty of the
punishment it self, it will as to the event assuredly befall us: And, 3. the
inexpressible greatness of this unavoidable evil. How shall escape? We shall
not, there is no way for it, nor ability to bear what we are liable unto,
Matthew. 23.33. 1 Pet. 4.18.

This is the scope of the Apostle in these Verses, this the importance of the
several things contained in them. His main design and intendment is, to prevail
with the Hebrews unto a diligent attendance unto the Gospel that was preached
unto them; which he urges by an argument taken from the danger, yea certain
ruin that will undoubtedly ensue on the neglect of it; whose Certainty,
Unavoidableness, Greatness and Righteousness he manifests, by the consideration
of the punishment assigned unto the transgressions of the Law, which the Gospel
on many accounts does excel.

The Observations for our own instruction which these Verses offer unto us, are
these that follow.

1. Motives unto a due valuation of the Gospel, and perseverance in the
prosession of it, taken from the penalties annexed unto the neglect of it, are
Evangelical, and of singular use in the preaching of the Word. How shall we
escape if we neglect? This consideration is here managed by the Apostle, and
that when he had newly set forth the glory of Christ, and the greatness of the
salvation tendered in the Gospel, in the most persuading and attractive manner.
Some would fancy, that all comminations and threatenings do belong unto the Law;
as though Jesus Christ had left himself and his Gospel to be securely despised
by profane and impenitent sinners; but as they will find the contrary to their
eternal ruin, so it is the will of Christ that we should let them know so, and
thereby warn others to take heed of their sins and their plagues.

Now these Motives from Comminations and threatenings I call Evangelical:

1. Because they are recorded in the Gospel: there we are taught them, and by
it commanded to make use of them, Matthew. 10.28. chap. 24.50. chap. 25.41. Mar.
16.16. Joh. 3.36. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. and in other places
innumerrable. And to this end are they recorded, that they may be preached and
declared as part of the Gospel. And if the Dispencers of the Word insist not on
them, they deal deceitfully with the souls of men, and detain from them the
counsel of God. And as such persons will find themselves to have as weak and an
enervous Ministry here, so also that they will have a sad account of their
partiality in the Word to give hereafter. Let not men think themselves more
Evangelical than the Author of the Gospel, more skilled in the mystery of the
Conversion and Edification of the souls of men than the Apostles; in a word,
more wise than God himself, which they must do if they neglect this part of his
Ordinance.

2. Because they become the Gospel. It is meet the Gospel should be armed with
Threatenings, as well as attended with Promises: and that,

1. On the part of Christ himself, the Author of it. However the world
persecuted and despised him whilst he was on the earth, and he threatened not, 1
Pet. 2.23. on his own account; however they continue to contemn and blaspheme
his Ways, and Salvation, yet he lets them know that he is armed with power to
revenge their disobedience. And it belongs unto his Honor to have it declared
unto them. A Scepter in a Kingdom without a Sword, a Crown without a Rod of
Iron, will quickly be trampled on. Both are therefore given into the hand of
Christ, that the Glory and Honor of his Domi^^on may be known, Psalm. 2.9, 10,
11, 12.

2. They become the Gospel on the part of sinners, yea, of all to whom the
Gospel is preached. And those are of two sorts.

1. Unbelievers, Hypocrites, Apostates, impenitent Neglecters of the great
salvation declared in it. It is meet on this account that the Dispensation of
the Gospel be attended with Threatenings and comminations of punishments. And
that,

1. To keep them here in awe and fear, that they may not boldly and openly
break out in contempt of Christ. These are his Arrows that are sharp in the
hearts of his adversaries, whereby he aws them, galls them, and in the midst of
all their pride makes them to tremble sometimes at their future condition.
Christ never suffers them to be so secure, but that his terrors in these
Threatenings visit them ever and anon. And hereby also does he keep them within
some bounds, bridles their rage, and overpowers many of them unto some
usefulness in the world, with many other blessed ends not now to be insisted on.

2. That they may be left inexcusable, and the Lord Christ be justified in his
proceedings against them at the last day. If they should be surprised with
fiery indignation and everlasting burnings at the last day, how might they
plead, that if they had been warned of these things, they would have
endeavored to have fled from the wrath to come. And how apt might they be to
repine against his Justice in the amazing Greatness of their destruction. But
now by taking order to have the Penalty of their disobedience in the
threatenings of the Gospel declared unto them, they are left without excuse, and
himself is glorified in taking vengeance. He has told them beforehand plainly
what they are to look for, Heb. 10.26, 27.

2. They are so on the part of Believers themselves. Even they stand in need to
be minded of the terror of the Lord; and what a fearful thing it is to fall
into the hands of the living God; and that even our God is a consuming fire.
And this,

1. To keep up in their hearts a constant Reverence of the Majesty of Jesus
Christ, with whom they have to do. The threatening sanction of the Gospel
bespeaks the Greatness, Holiness and Terror of its Author, and insinuates into
the hearts of Believers thoughts becoming of them. It lets them know that he
will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him, and so calls upon them for a
due reverential preparation for the performance of his Worship, and unto all
duties wherein they walk before him, Heb. 12.28, 29. This influenceth them also
into a diligent attendance unto every particular Duty incumbent on them, as the
Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 5.11.

2. They tend unto their Consolation and supportment under all their
afflictions and sufferings for the Gospel. This relieves their hearts in all
their sorrows, when they consider the sore vengeance that the Lord Jesus Christ
will one day take of all his stubborn adversaries, who know not God, nor will
obey the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. For the Lord Jesus is no less
faithful in his Threatenings than in his Promises, and no less able to inflict
the one, than to accomplish the other. And he is glorious unto them therein,
Isa. 63. 11, 12, 13.

3. They give them constant matter of praise thankfulness, when they see in
them, as in a Glass that will neither flatter nor causelessly terrify, a
Representation of that wrath which they are delivered from by Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. For in this way every Threatening of the Gospel proclaims the Grace
of Christ unto their souls. And when they hear them explained in all their
terror, they can rejoice in the hope of the glory that shall be revealed. And,

4. They are needful unto them to ingenerate that fear which may give check
unto the remainder of their lusts and corruptions; with that security and
negligence in attending to the Gospel which by their means is apt to grow upon
them. To this purpose is the punishment of despisers and back-sliders here made
use of, and urged by our Apostle. The hearts of Believers are like Gardens,
wherein there are not only flowers, but weeds also; and as the former must be
watered and cherished, so the latter must be curbed and nipped. If nothing but
dews and showers of Promises should fall upon the heart, though they seem to
tend to the cherishing of their Graces, yet the weeds of corruption will be apt
to grow up with them, and in the end to choke them, unless they are nipped and
blasted by the severity of the threatenings. And although their Persons in the
use of means shall be secured from falling under the final execution of
Comminations, yet they know there is an infallible connection signified in them
between sin and destruction, 1 Cor. 6.9. and that they must avoid the one, if
they will escape the other.

5. Hence they have in a readiness wherewith to balance Temptations,
especially such as accompany sufferings for Christ and the Gospel. Great
reasonings are apt to rise in the hearts of Believers themselves in such a
season: and they are biased by their infirmities to attend unto them. Liberty
would be spared, Life would be spared; it is hard to suffer, and to die: How
many have been betrayed by their fears at such a season to forsake the Lord
Christ and the Gospel? But now in these Gospel threatenings we have that in a
readiness, which we may oppose unto all these reasonings and the efficacy of
them. Are we afraid of a man that shall die? Have we not much more reason to be
afraid of the Living God? Shall we, to avoid the anger of a Worm, cast our
selves into his wrath who is a consuming fire? Shall we, to avoid a little
momentary trouble, to preserve a perishing life, which a sickness may take away
the next day, run our selves into eternal ruin? Man threatens me if I forsake
not the Gospel, but God threatens if I do. Man threatens death temporal, which
yet it may be he shall not have power to inflict; God threatens death eternal,
which no back-slider in heart shall avoid. On these and the like accounts are
Comminations useful unto Believers themselves.

3. These declarations of eternal punishment unto Gospel neglecters, do become
the Gospel with respect unto them that are the Preachers and dispensers of it,
that their message be not slighted, nor their persons despised. God would have
even them to have in a readiness wherewith to revenge the disobedience of men,
2 Cor. 10.6. not with carnal weapons, killing and destroying the bodies of men;
but by such a denunciation of the vengeance that will ensue on their
disobedience, as shall undoubtedly take hold upon them, and end in their
everlasting ruin. Thus are they armed for the warfare, wherein by the Lord
Christ they are engaged; that no may be encouraged to despise them, or contend
with them. They authorized to denounce the eternal wrath of God against
disobedient sinners; and whomsoever they bind under the sentence of it on
earth, they are bound in heaven unto the judgment of the Great Day.

On these grounds it is that we say, that the threatenings and denunciations of
future punishments unto all sorts of persons are becoming of the Gospel; and
therefore the using of them as motives unto the end for which they are designed
is Evangelical. And this will farther appear if we shall yet consider,

1. That threatenings of future Penalties on the disobedient, are far more clear
and express in the Gospel than in the Law. The Curse indeed was threatened and
denounced under the Law; and a pledge and instance of its execution were given
in the temporal punishments that were inflic^ (...) ^^ansgressors of it. But in
the Gospel the nature of this curse is explained, (...) ^^nsisteth in is made
manifest. For as Eternal life was obscurely only pro^^ (...) ^ld Testament,
though promised; so death eternal under the curse an^ (...) was only obscurely
threatened therein, though threatened. And there^^ (...) ^^^e and immortality
were brought to light by the Gospel; so death and hell, the pun^^^ment of sin
under the wrath of God, are more fully declared therein. The Nature of the
judgment to come, the duration of the penalties to be inflicted on unbelievers,
with such intimations of the nature and kind of them as our understandings are
able to receive, are fully and frequently insisted on in the New Testament,
whereas they are very obscurely only gathered out of the Writings of the Old.

2. The punishment threatened in the Gospel is, as unto degrees, greater and
more sore than that which was annexed to the mere transgression of the first
Covenant. Hence the Apostle calls it. death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16. by reason
of the sore aggravations which the first sentence of death will receive from
the wrath due unto the contempt of the Gospel. Separation from God under
eternal punishment was unquestionably due to the sin of Adam, and so
consequently unto every transgression against the first Covenant, Genesis 2.17.
Romans 5.12, 13, 14. But yet this hinders not, but that the same penalty for the
nature and kind of it may receive many and great aggravations, upon men's
sinning against that great Remedy provided against the first guilt and
prevarication; which it also does, as shall farther afterward be declared.

And this ought they to be well acquainted withal, who are called unto the
Dispensation of the Gospel. A fond conceit has befallen some, that all
denunciations of future wrath, even unto unbelievers, is Legal, which therefore
it does not become the Preachers of the Gospel to insist upon: so would men
make themselves wiser than Jesus Christ and all his Apostles, yea they would
disarm the Lord Christ, and expose him to the contempt of his vilest enemies.
There is also we see a great use in these Evangelical threatenings unto
believers themselves. And they have been observed to have had an effectual
ministry, both unto Conversion and Edification, who have been made wise and
dextrous in managing Gospel Comminations toward the consciences of their
hearers. And those also that hear the Word may hence learn their duty, when
such threatenings are handled and opened unto them.

(...).
II. All punishments annexed unto the transgression either of the Law or Gospel,
are effects of God's vindictive Justice, and consequently just and equal. (A
meet recompense of reward.) What it is, the Apostle does not declare, but he
does that it is just and equal, which depends on the Justice of God appointing
and designing of it. Foolish men have always had tumultuating thoughts about
the judgments of God. Some have disputed with him about the equity and equality
of his ways in judgments temporal, Ezekiel. 18. and some about those that shall be
eternal. Hence was the vain imagination of them of old, who dreamed that an end
should be put after some season, unto the punishment of Devils and wicked men;
so turning hell into a kind of Purgatory. Others have disputed in our days,
that there shall be no hell at all, but a mere annihilation of ungodly men at
the last day. These things being so expressly contrary to the Scripture can have
no other rise, but the corrupt minds and affections of men, not conceiving the
reasons of God's judgments, nor acquiescing in his Sovereignty. That which they
seem principally to have stumbled at, is the assignation of a punishment
infinite as to its duration, as well as in its nature extended unto the utmost
capacity of the subject, unto a fault temporary, finite and transient. Now that
we may justify God herein, and the more clearly discern that the punishment
inflicted finally on sin, is but a meet recompense of reward, we must consider,

First, That God's Justice constituting, and in the end inflicting the reward
of sin, is essential unto him. Is God unjust? says the Apostle, (...), Romans
3.5. (...), anger or wrath is not that from whence punishment proceeds, but
punishment it self: God inflicteth wrath anger or vengeance. And therefore when
we read of the anger or wrath of God against sin or sinners, as Romans 1.18. the
expression is metonymical, the cause being designed by the effect. The true
fountain and cause of the punishment of sin is the Justice of God, which is an
Essential property of his Nature, natural unto him, and inseparable from any of
his works. And this absolutely is the same with his Holiness, or the infinite
Purity of his Nature. So that God does not assign the punishment of sin
arbitrarily, that he might do so or otherwise, without any impeachment of his
Glory; but his Justice and his Holiness indispensibly require, that it should
be punished, even as it is indispensibly necessary that God in all things
should be just and holy. The holy God will do no iniquity: the Judge of all the
earth will do right, and will by no means acquit the guilty? This is (...), the
judgment of God, that which his Justice requires, that they which commit sin
are worthy of death, Romans 1.32. And God cannot but do that, which it is just
that he should do. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. We have no more Reason then to quarrel
with the Punishment of sin, than we have to repine that God is Holy and Just;
that is, that he is God; for the one naturally and necessarily follows upon
the other. Now there is no Principle of a more uncontrolable and Sovereign
Truth, written in the hearts of all men than this; that what the Nature of God,
or any of his Essential Properties require to be, is holy, meet, equal, just
and good.

Secondly, That this Righteousness or Justice of God, is in the Exercise of it,
inseparably accompanied with infinite Wisdom. These things are not diverse in
God, but are distinguished with respect unto the various manners of his
actings, and the variety of the Objects which he acts toward; and so denote
a different Habitude of the Divine Nature, not diverse things in God. They are
therefore inseparable in all the works of God. Now from this Infinite Wisdom of
God which his Righteousness in the constitution of the punishment of sin is
eternally accompanied withal; two things ensue.

1. That He alone knows what is the true desert and demerit of sin; and but
from his Declaration of creatures not any. And how shall we judge of what we
know nothing but from him, but only by what he does? We see amongst men, that
the guilt of crimes is aggravated according to the Dignity of the Persons
against whom they are committed. Now no creature knowing him perfectly, against
whom all sin is committed, none can truly and perfectly know what is the desert
and demerit of sin; but by his Revelation who is perfectly known unto himself.
And what a madness is it to judge otherwise of that we do no otherwise
understand? Shall we make our selves Judges of what sin against God does
deserve? Let us first by searching find out the Almighty unto Perfection, and
then we may know of our selves what it is to sin against him. Besides we know
not what is the Opposition that is made by sin unto the Holiness, the Nature,
and very Being of God. As we cannot know him perfectly against whom we sin, so
we know not perfectly what we do when we sin. It is the least part of the
malignity and poison that is in sin, which we are able to discern. We see not
the depth of that malicious respect which it has unto God; and are we capable
to judge aright of what is its Demerit? But all these things are open and naked
before that Infinite Wisdom of God, which accompanies his Righteousness in all
his Works. He knows himself against whom sin is; he knows the Condition of the
sinner; He knows what contrariety and Opposition there is in sin unto himself:
in a word, what it is for a finite, limited, dependent creature, to subduct it
self from under the Government, and oppose it self unto the Authority and Being
of the Holy Creator, Ruler and Governor of all things; all absolutely and
perfectly, and so alone knows what sin deserves.

2. From this Infinite Wisdom is the proportioning of the several degrees in
the punishment that shall be inflicted on sin. For although his Righteousness
require, that the final punishment of all sin, should be an Eternal separation
of the sinner from the enjoyment of him, and that in a state of Wrath and
misery; yet by his Wisdom, he has constituted Degrees of that wrath, according
unto the Variety of Provocations that are found among sinners. And by nothing
else could this be done. What else is able to look through the Unconceivable
variety of Aggravating Circumstances which is required hereunto? For the most
part, we know not what is so; and when we know any thing of its being, we know
nothing almost of the true nature of its demerit. And this is another thing
from whence we may learn, that Divine Punishment of sin is always a meet
Recompense of Reward.

Thirdly, In the final punishment of sin, there is no mixture of mercy; nothing
to alleviate, or to take off from the uttermost of its desert. This world is
the time and place for mercy. Here God causes his Sun to shine, and his rain
to fall on the worst of men, filling their hearts with food and gladness. Here
he endures them with much patience and forbearance, doing them Good in
unspeakable variety, and to many of them making a daily tender of that mercy,
which might make them blessed to Eternity. But the season of these things is
past in the Day of Recompense. Sinners shall then hear nothing, but go ye
cursed. They shall not have the least effect of Mercy showed unto them unto all
Eternity. They shall then have judgment without mercy, who showed no mercy.
The Grace, Goodness, Love and Mercy of God shall be glorified unto the utmost
in his Elect; without the least mixture of allay from his displeasure; and so
shall his Wrath, Severity and Vindictive Justice, in them that perish without
any temperature of pity or compassion. He shall rain upon them snares, and fire
and brimstone, this shall be their portion for ever. Wonder then not at the
Greatness or Duration of that Punishment, which shall exhaust the whole wrath
of God without the least mitigation.

And this will discover unto us the nature of sin, especially of Unbelief and
neglect of the Gospel. Men are apt now to have slight thoughts of these things;
but when they shall find them revenged with the whole Wrath of God, they will
change their minds. What a folly, what a madness is it to make light of Christ,
unto which an Eternity of punishment is but a meet Recompense of Reward. It is
good then, to learn the nature of sin from the Threatenings of God, rather than
from the common Presumptions that pass among secure perishing sinners: Consider
what the Righteousness, what the Holiness, what the Wisdom of God has
determined to be due unto sin, and then make a Judgment of the nature of it;
that you be not overtaken with a woeful surprizal, when all means of relief are
gone and past. As also know that,

2. This World alone is the time and place wherein you are to look and seek for
mercy. Cries will do nothing at the last day: not obtain the least drop of
water to cool the tongue in its torment. Some men doubtless have secret
reserves, that things will not go at the last day, as by others they they are
made to believe. They hope to meet with better Quarter than is talked of; that
God will not be inexorable as is pretended. Were not these their inward
thoughts, it were not possible they should so neglect the season of Grace, as
they do. But alas, how will they be deceived? God indeed is gracious, merciful,
and full of Compassion; but this world is the time wherein he will exercise
them. They will be for ever shut up toward unbelievers at the last day. This
is the acceptable day, this is the day of salvation; if this be despised, if
this be neglected, expect no more to hear of mercy unto Eternity.

III. Every concernment of the Law and Gospel, both as to their nature and
promulgation, is to be weighed and considered by Believers, to beget in their
hearts a right and due valuation of them. To this end are they here so
distinctly proposed; as of the Law, that it was spoken by Angels; and of the
Gospel, that it is great salvation, the word spoken by the Lord, confirmed with
signs and miracles; all which the Apostle would have us to weigh and distinctly
consider. Our Interest lies in them, and our Good is intended by them. And to
stir up our attention unto them, we may observe.

First, That God does nothing in vain, nor speaks any thing in vain, especially
in the things of his Law and Gospel, wherein the great concernments of his own
Glory, and the souls of men are enwrapped. And therefore our Savior lets us
know, that there is a worth in the least apex and iota of the word, and that it
must have its Accomplishment. An End it has, and that End shall be fulfilled.
The Jews have a foolish curiosity in reckoning all the letters of the
Scripture, and casting up how often every one does occurr. But yet this
curiosity of theirs, vain and needless as it is, will condemn our negligence,
if we omit a diligent enquiry into all the Things and Circumstances of it, that
are of real importance. God has an holy and wise End in all that he does. As
nothing can be added unto his Word or Work; so nothing can be taken from it, it
is every way perfect. And this in general is enough to quicken us unto a
diligent search into all the Circumstances and Adjuncts both of Law and Gospel;
and of the way and manner, whereby he was pleased to communicate them unto us.

Secondly, There is in all those Concernments of the Law and Gospel, a mixture
of Divine Wisdom and Grace. From this fountain they all proceed, and the living
waters of it run through them all. The Times, the Seasons, the Authors, the
Instruments the manner of their Delivery, were all ordered by the manifold
Wisdom of God, which especially appears in the dispensation of the Gospel,
Ephesians. 3.9, 10. The Apostle places not the Wisdom of God only in the Mystery
of the Gospel, but also in the season of its promulgation. It was hid, says
he, in God, v. 9. that is, in the purpose of God, v. 10, 11. From the Ages
past, but now is made manifest; and herein does the manifold Wisdom of God
appear. Were we able to look into the depth of any circumstance that concerns
the Institutions of God, we should see it full of Wisdom and Grace; and the
neglect of a due consideration thereof has God sometime severely revenged,
Lev. 10.1, 2.

Thirdly, There is in them all a Gracious Condescension unto our weakness. God
knows that we stand in need of an especial remark to be set on every one of
them. Such is our weakness, our slowness to believe, that we have need that the
Word should be unto us, line upon line, and precept upon precept; here a
little, and there a little. As God told Moses, Exodus 4.8. That if the children
of Israel would not believe on the first sign, they would on the second. So it
is with us; one consideration of the Law or the Gospel oftentimes proves
ineffectual, when another over-powres the heart unto obedience. And therefore
has God thus graciously condescended unto our weakness, in proposing unto us
the several considerations mentioned of his Law and Gospel; that by some of
them we may be laid hold upon, and bowed unto his mind and will in them.
Accordingly,

Fourthly, They have had their various Influences and Successes on the souls of
men. Some have been wrought upon by one consideration, some by another. In some
the Holiness of the Law, in others the manner of its Administration have been
effectual. Some have fixed their hearts principally on the Grace of the Gospel;
some on the Person of its Author. And the same persons at several times have
had help and assistance, from these several considerations of the one and the
other. So that in these things, God does nothing in vain; nothing is in vain
toward believers. Infinite Wisdom is in all; and infinite Glory will arise out
of all.

And this should stir us up unto a diligent search into the Word, wherein God
has recorded all the concernments of his Law and Gospel, that are for our use
and advantage. That is the Cabinet wherein all these Jewels are laid up and
disposed, according to his Wisdom and the counsel of his Will. A general view
of it will but little satisfy, and not at all enrich our souls. This is the
Mine wherein we must digg as for hid treasures. One main reason why we believe
no more, why we obey no more, why we love no more, is because we are no more
diligent in searching the Word, for substantial Motives unto them all. A very
little insight into the Word is apt to make men think that they see enough: But
the Reason of it is, because they like not what they see. As men will not like
to look farther into a Shop of Wares, when they like nothing, which is at first
presented unto them. But if indeed we find sweetness, benefit, profit, life, in
the discoveries that are made unto us in the Word about the Law and Gospel, we
shall be continually reaching after a farther Acquaintance with them. It may be
we know somewhat of those things; but how know we, that there is not some
especial concernment of the Gospel, which God in an holy condescension has
designed for our good in particular, that we are not as yet arrived unto a
clear and distinct knowledge of? Here if we search for it with all diligence,
may we find it; and if we go maimed in our Faith and Obedience all our days,
we may thank our own sloth for it.

Again, whereas God has distinctly proposed those things unto us, they should
have our distinct consideration. We should severally and distinctly meditate
upon them; that so in them all we may admire the Wisdom of God; and receive the
effectual influence of them all upon our own souls. Thus may we sometimes
converse in our hearts with the Author of the Gospel; sometimes with the manner
of its delivery; sometimes with the Grace of it; and from every one of these
heavenly flowers, draw nourishment and refreshment unto our own souls. Oh that
we could take care to gather up these fragments, that nothing might be lost
unto us; as in themselves they shall never perish.

IV. What means soever God is pleased to use in the Revelation of his Will; he
gives it a Certainty, Stedfastness, Assurance and Evidence, which our faith may
rest in, and which cannot be neglected without the greatest Sin. ( The word
spoken was steadfast. (...).
) Every word spoken from God, by his Appointment, is steadfast; and that because
spoken from him, and by his Appointment. And there are two things that belong
unto this stedfastness of the Word spoken.

1. That in respect of them unto whom it is spoken, it is the foundation of
Faith and Obedience; The formal Reason of them, and last Ground whereunto they
are resolved.

2. That on the part of God, it is a stable and sufficient ground of
Righteousness in proceeding to take vengeance on them by whom it is neglected.
The punishment of transgressors is a meet Recompense of Reward, because the
word spoken unto them is steadfast. And this latter follows upon the former: For
if the word be not a stable firm foundation for the Faith and Obedience of men,
they cannot be justly punished for the neglect of it. That therefore must be
briefly spoken unto, and this will naturally ensue, as a consequent thereof.

God has, as we saw on the first Verse of this Epistle, by various ways and
means, declared and revealed his mind unto men. That Declaration, what means or
instruments so ever he is pleased to make use of therein, is called his Word.
And that because originally, it is his, proceeds from him, is delivered in his
name and Authority, reveals his mind, and tends to his Glory. Thus sometimes he
spoke by Angels, using their Ministry, either in delivering his Messages, by
words of an outward sound, or by Representation of things in Visions and
Dreams; and sometimes by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, enabling them so
inspired, to give out the word which they received, purely and entirely; all
remaining his Word still. Now what ways soever God is pleased to use, in the
Communication of his Mind and Will unto men for their Obedience, there is that
stedfastness in the Word it self, that Evidence to be from him, as make it the
duty of men to believe in it, with faith divine and supernatural; and that
stability which will never deceive them. It is, I say thus steadfast upon the
account of its being spoken from God, and stands in no need of the contribution
of any strength, Authority or Testimony from men, Church, Tradition, or ought
else that is extrinsecal unto it. The Testimonies given hereunto in the
Scripture it self, which are very many, with the general Grounds and Reasons
hereof, I shall not here insist upon; and that because I have done it
elsewhere. I shall only mention that one consideration, which this place of the
Apostle suggests unto us; and which is contained in our second Observation from
the word steadfast. Take this word as spoken from God, without the help of any
other Advantages, and the stedfastness of it, is the Ground of Gods inflicting
Vengeance on them that receive it not, that obey it not. Because it is his
Word, because it is clothed with his Authority; if men believe it not, they
must perish. But now if this be not sufficiently evidenced unto them, namely
that it is his Word, God could not be just in taking vengeance of them; for he
should punish them for not believing that, which they had no sufficient Reason
to believe, which suits not with the Holiness and Justice of God. The Evidence
then that this Word is from God, that it is his, being the foundation of the
Justice of God in his proceeding against them that do not believe it, it is of
indispensible necessity that he himself also do give that Evidence unto it. For
whence also should it have it? from the Testimony of the Church, or from
Tradition, or from probable moral inducements, that men can tender one to
another; Then these two things will inevitably follow. 1. That if men should
neglect their duty in giving Testimony unto the Word, as they may do, because
they are but men, then God cannot justly condemn any man in the world, for the
neglect of his Word, in not believing it, or not yielding obedience unto it.
And the Reason is evident; because if they have not sufficient Grounds to
believe it to be his, without such Testimonies as are not given unto it, it is
the highest Injustice to condemn them for not believing it; and they should
perish without a cause. For what can be more unjust, than to punish a man,
especially eternally, for not doing that which he had no just or sufficient
Reason to do? This be far from God, to destroy the innocent with the wicked.
(2.) Suppose all men aright to discharge their duty; and that there be a full
Tradition concerning the Word of God; that the Church give Testimony unto it,
and Learned men produce their Arguments for it; if this, all, or any part
hereof, be esteemed as the sufficient Proposition of the Scripture to be the
Word of God, then is the Execution of infinite divine Justice built upon the
Testimony of men, which is not divine or infallible, but such as might deceive.
For God on this supposal must condemn men for not believing with faith divine
and infallible, that which is proposed unto them by Testimonies and Arguments,
humane and fallible; quod absit.

It remains then that the Righteousness of the Act of God in condemning
unbelievers, is built upon the Evidence, that the Object of Faith or Word to be
believed is from him.

And this he gives unto it, both by the Impression of his Majesty and Authority
upon it, and by the Power and Efficacy wherewith by his Spirit it is
accompanied. Thus is every Word of God steadfast as a Declaration of his Will
unto us; by what means soever, it is made known unto us.

V. Every Transaction between God and man, is always confirmed and ratified by
promises and Threatenings, Rewards and Punishments; every trespass.

VI. The most glorious Administrators of the Law do stoop to look into the
Mysteries of the Gospel. See 1 Pet. 1.12.

VII. Covenant transgressions are attended with unavoidable penalties; every
transgression, that is of the Covenant, disannulling of it, received a meet
recompense of reward.

VIII. The Gospel is a Word of Salvation to them that do believe.

IX. The Salvation tendered in the Gospel, is great Salvation.

X. Men are apt to entertain thoughts of escaping the wrath of God, though they
live in a neglect of the Gospel. This the Apostle insinuates in that
interrogation, How shall we escape?

XI. The neglecters of the Gospel shall unavoidably perish the wrath of God:
(How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation.)

These last Observations may be cast into one Proposition, and so be considered
together, namely, That the Gospel is great Salvation, which who so neglects,
shall therefore unavoidably perish without remedy. We shall first enquire how
the Gospel is said to be Salvation, and that Great Salvation; and then show the
equity and unavoidableness of their Destruction by whom it is neglected; and
therein the vanity of their hopes, who look for an escaping in the contempt of
it.

By the Gospel, we understand with the Apostle the Word preached or spoken by
Christ and his Apostles, and now recorded for our use in the Books of the New
Testament; not exclusively unto what was declared of it in the Types and
Promises of the Old Testament. But by the way of Eminency we appropriate the
whole name and nature of the Gospel unto that delivery of the Mind and Will of
God, by Jesus Christ, which included and perfected all that had preceded unto
that purpose. Now the Gospel is salvation upon a double account.

First, Declaratively, In that the Salvation of God by Christ, is declared,
taught and revealed thereby. So the Apostle informs us, Romans 1.16, 17. It is
the power of God unto salvation, because therein the righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith; that is the Righteousness of God in Christ,
whereby Believers shall be saved. And therefore it is called, (...), Titus
2.11. the saving, or salvation bringing, Grace of God. The Grace of God, as
that which teaches and reveals his Grace. And thence they that abuse it to
their lusts, are said to turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, Jude 4.
that is, the Doctrine of it, which is the Gospel. And therefore under the Old
Testament, it is called the Preaching or declaring of glad tidings, tidings of
peace, and salvation, Nahum. 2.1. Isa. 52.7. and is described as a Proclamation
of Mercy, Peace, Pardon and Salvation unto sinners: Isa. 61.1, 2. And life and
immortality are said to be brought to light thereby, 2 Timothy 1.10. It is true;
God had from all Eternity in his infinite Grace contrived the salvation of
sinners; but this Contrivance, and the Purpose of it, lay hid in his own Will
and Wisdom, as in an infinite Abyss of darkness, utterly imperceptible unto
Angels and men, until it was brought to light, or manifested and declared by
the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. Coloss. 1.25, 26, 27. There is nothing more vain,
than the supposals of some, that there are other ways whereby this Salvation
might be discovered and made known. The Works of Nature or Creation and
Providence, the Sun, Moon and Stars, showers from Heaven, with fruitful
seasons, are in their judgment Preachers of the salvation of sinners. I know
not what also they say, that the Reason of man, by the Contemplation of these
things may find out, of I know not what Placability in God, that may incite
sinners to go unto him, and enable them to find Acceptance with him. But we see
what success all the world, and all the Wise men of it, had in the use and
improvement of these means of the salvation of sinners. The Apostle tells us
not only, that by their Wisdom they knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. but also, that
the more they searched the greater loss they were at, until they waxed vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened, Romans 1.21. And
indeed whatever they had amongst them, which had any semblance of an obscure
Apprehension of some way of salvation by Atonement and Intercession, as in
their Sacrifices, and Mediations of inferior Deities; which the Apostle
alludes unto, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6; as they had it by Tradition from those who were
somewhat instructed in the Will of God by Revelation, so they turned it into
horrible Idolatries, and the utmost contempt of God. And this was the issue of
their disquisitions, who were no less wise in the principles of inbred Reason,
and the knowledge of the works of nature, than those who now contend for their
Ability to have done better. Besides, the salvation of sinners is a Mystery,
as the Scripture every where declares, a blessed, a glorious Mystery, Romans
16.25. The Wisdom of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. Ephesians. 1.9. Col. 1.25, 26.
That is, not only a thing secret and mavelous; but such as has no dependence
on any Causes that come naturally within our Cognizance. Now what ever men can
find out, by the Principles of Reason, and the contemplation of the works of
God, in Creation and Providence, it is by natural scientifical conclusions; and
what is so discovered, can be no heavenly, spiritual, glorious Mystery; such
as this salvation is. What ever men may so find out, if they may find out any
thing looking this way, it is but natural science, it is not a Mystery, and so
is of no use in this matter, what ever it be. Moreover, it is not only said to
be a Mystery, but an hidden Mystery; and that hid in God himself; as Ephesians.
3.9, 10. Col. 1.25, 26. 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. That is, in the Wisdom, Purpose, and
Will of God. Now it is very strange that men should be able by the the natural
means forementioned; to discover an heavenly, supernatural Wisdom, and that
hidden on purpose from their finding by any such enquiry, and that in God
himself; so coming unto the knowledge of it, as it were whether he would or no.
But we may pass over these Imaginations; and accept of the Gospel, as the only
way and means of declaring the salvation of God. And therefore every Word and
Promise in the whole Book of God, that intimates or reveals any thing
belonging unto this Salvation, is it self a part of the Gospel, and so to be
esteemed. And as this is the work of the Gospel, so is it in an especial
manner, its proper and peculiar work with respect unto the Law. The Law speaks
nothing of the salvation of sinners; and is therefore called the Ministry of
death and condemnation, as the Gospel is of life and salvation, 2 Cor. 3.9, 10.
And thus the Gospel is salvation declaratively.

Secondly, It is Salvation Efficiently; in that it is the great Instrument
which God is pleased to use, in, and for the Collation and bestowing salvation
upon his Elect. Hence the Apostle calls it the Power of God unto salvation,
Romans 1.16. Because God in and by it exerts his mighty Power in the saving of
them that believe; as it is again called, 1 Cor. 1.18. Whence there is a saving
Power ascribed unto the Word it self. And therefore Paul commits believers unto
the Word of grace, as that which is able to build them up, and give them an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. And James calls it,
the ingrafted Word, which is able to save our souls, Chap. 1.21. The mighty
Power of Christ being put forth in it, and accompanying of it, for that
purpose. But this will the better appear, if we consider the several principal
parts of this Salvation, and the Efficiency of the Word as the Instrument of
God in the communication of it unto us. As*

First, In the Regeneration and Sanctification of the Elect, the first external
Act of this Salvation. This is wrought by the Word, 1 Pet. 1.23. We are born
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible by the Word of God.
Wherein not only the thing it self, of our Regeneration by the Word, but the
manner of it also is declared. It is by the Collation of a new spiritual life
upon us, whereof the Word is the seed. As every life proceeds from some seed,
that has in its self virtually the whole life to be educed from it by natural
ways and means, so the Word in the hearts of men is turned into a vital
principle, that cherished by suitable means puts forth vital acts and
operations. By this means are we born of God and quickened, who by nature are
children of wrath, dead in trespasses and sins. So Paul tells the Corinthians,
that he had begotten them in Jesus Christ by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. I
confess, it does not do this work by any Power resident in its self, and
always necessarily accompanying its Administration. For then all would be so
regenerated unto whom it is preached, and there would be no neglecters of it.
But it is the Instrument of God for this end; and mighty and powerful through
God it is for the accomplishment of it. And this gives us our first real
Interest in the Salvation which it does declare. Of the same Use and Efficacy
is it in the progress of this work in our Sanctification; by which we are
carried on toward the full Enjoyment of this salvation. So our Savior prays
for his Disciples, Joh. 17.19. Sanctify them by thy Word; as the means and
instrument of their Sanctification. And he tells his Apostles, that they were
clean through the word that he had spoken unto them, Chap. 15.3. For it is the
food and nourishment whereby the spiritual Principle of Life, which we revive
in our Regeneration is cherished and increased, 1 Pet. 2.2. and so able to
build us up; until it give us an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Secondly, It is so in the Communication of the Spirit unto them that do
believe, to furnish them with the Gifts and Graces of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and to interest them in all those Privileges of this salvation, which God is
pleased in this life to impart unto us, and to entrust us withal. So the
Apostle dealing with the Galatians about their backsliding from the Gospel,
asks them, wither they received the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
Word of Faith, Chap. 3.2. that is, the Gospel. That was the Way and means
whereby God communicated unto them his Spirit, by whom among many other
Privileges, we are sealed unto the day of Redemption. This is the Covenant of
God, that his Spirit and the Word of the Gospel shall go, and shall abide
together with his Elect, Isa. 59.1. And he is given unto us by the Gospel on
many accounts.

(1.) Because he is the gift and grant of the Author of the Gospel, as to all
the especial Ends and concernments of salvation. John tells us, that the Spirit
was not given when Jesus was not as yet glorified, Chap. 7.39. that is, not in
that manner, as God has annexed unto this salvation: and therefore Peter tells
us, that when the Lord Christ ascended up on high, he received of the Father
the Promise of the Spirit, and poured him forth on them which did believe, Acts
2.33. And this he did, according to his own great Promise and Prediction,
whilst he conversed with his Disciples in the days of his flesh. There was
not any thing that he more supported and encouraged them withal, nor more
raised their hearts to an Expectation of, than this, that he would send unto
them, and bestow upon them the Holy Ghost, for many blessed ends and purposes,
and that to abide with them for ever, as we may see, Joh. 14.15, 16. And this
is the great privilege of the Gospel, that the Author of it, is alone the
donor and bestower of the Holy Spirit; which of what concernment it is in the
business of our Salvation, all men know* who have any acquaintance with these
things:

(2.) He is promised in the Gospel, and therein alone. All the Promises of the
Scripture, whither in the Old Testament or New, whose subject is the Spirit,
are Evangelical; they all belong unto, and are parts of the Gospel. For the Law
had no Promise of the Spirit, or any Privilege by him annexed unto it. And
hence he is called the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. Who next unto the
Person of Christ, was the great subject of Promises from the foundation of the
world.

(3.) By these Promises are Believers actually and really made partakers of the
Spirit, They are vehicula Spiritus; the Chariots that bring this holy Spirit
into our Souls, 2 Pet. 1.4. By these great and precious Promises is the Divine
Nature communicated unto us, so far forth as unto the indwelling of this
blessed Spirit. Every Evangelical Promise is unto a Believer, but as it were
the clothing of the Spirit; in receiving whereof he receives the Spirit
himself, for some of the blessed Ends of this great salvation. God makes use of
the Word of the Gospel, and of no other means, to this purpose. So that herein
also it is the grace of God that brings salvation.

Thirdly, In our Justification. And this has so great a share in this
salvation, that it is often called salvation it self; And they that are
justified, are said to be saved; as Ephesians. 2.8. And this is by the Gospel
alone; which is a point of such importance, that it is the main subject of some
of Paul's Epistles, and is fully taught in them all. And in sundry respects it
is by the Gospel.

(1.) Because therein, and thereby is appointed and constituted the New Law of
Justification, whereby even a sinner may come to be justified before God. The
Law of Justification was, that he that did the Works of the Law should live in
them, Romans 10.5. But this became weak and unprofitable by reason of sin, Romans
8.3. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. That any sinner, (and we have all sinned and come short of
the glory of God) should be justified by this Law or Rule, implies a
contradiction, and is utterly impossible. Wherefore God by the Gospel has
constituted a new Law of Justification, even the Law of faith, Romans 3.27. which
is the holy Declaration of his Will and Grace, that sinners shall be justified
and accepted with him by faith in the blood of Christ, without the Works of the
Law; that he that believes shall be saved. This is equally constituted and
appointed in the Law of faith to be proposed unto all that shall believe. And
on the account hereof, the Gospel is salvation.

(2.) Because in every Justification there must be a Righteousness before God,
on the account whereof, the Person to be justified is to be pronounced and
declared righteous, this is tendered, proposed, and exhibited unto us in and by
the Gospel.

This is no other but the Lord Christ himself and his Righteousness, Isa.
45.21, 22. Romans 8.3, 4. Romans 10.4. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13, 14. Now Christ with
his whole Righteousness, and all the benefits thereof, are tendered unto us,
and given unto, or bestowed on them that do believe, by the Promise of the
Gospel. Therein is he preached and proposed as crucified before our eyes, and
we are invited to accept of him, which the souls of Believers through the
Gospel do accordingly.

And (3.) Faith it self whereby we receive the Lord Christ for all the Ends for
which he is tendered unto us, and become actually interested in all the fruits
and benefits of his Mediation, is wrought in us by the Word of the Gospel. For
as we have declared, it is the seed of all Grace whatever; and in especial,
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by this word of God, Romans 10.17.
Conviction of sin is by the Law: but faith is by the Gospel. And this is the
Way and means which God has appointed on our part, for the giving us an actual
interest in Justification; as established in the Law of the Gospel, Romans 5.1.
Again,

(4.) The Promise of the Gospel conveyed unto the soul by the Holy Spirit, and
entertained by faith, compleats the justification of a believer in his own
conscience, and gives him assured Peace with God. And then the whole work of
this main branch of our salvation is wrought by the Gospel.

Fourthly, There is in this salvation an instruction and growth in spiritual
Wisdom, and an Acquaintance with the Mystery of God, even of the Father and
the Son, which also is an Effect of the Gospel. Of our selves we are not only
dark and ignorant of heavenly things, but darkness it self; that is, utterly
blind, and incomprehensive of spiritual Divine Mysteries, Ephesians. 5.8. and so
under the Power of darkness, Col. 1.13. as that we should no less than the
Devils themselves be holden under the chains of it unto the Judgment of the
great Day. Darkness and ignorance as to the things of God themselves, in
respect of the Revelation of them, and Darkness in the Mind and Understanding
of them in a right manner, being revealed, is upon the whole world. And no
heart is able to conceive, no tongue to express the greatness and misery of
this Darkness. The removal hereof is a mercy unexpressible, the beginning of
our entrance into Heaven, the Kingdom of Light and Glory, and an especial part
of our salvation: For God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all; so
that whilst we are under the power of it, we can have no intercourse with him;
For what communion has light with Darkness? Now the removal hereof is by the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commands light to shine out of darkness, shines in
our hearts to give us the knowledge of his Glory in the face of his Son; and he
does it by the Illumination of the glorious Gospel of Christ, v. 4. For not
only is the Object revealed hereby, Life and Immortality being brought to light
by the Gospel, but also the Eyes of our understandings are enlightened by it,
savingly to discern the Truths by it revealed. For by it, it is, that both the
eyes of the blind are opened, and light shines unto them that sit in darkness;
whence we are said to be called out of darkness into marvelous light, 1 Pet.
2.9. And our Calling is no otherwise but by the Word of the Gospel. And as the
implanting of this heavenly Light in us is by the Word, so the growth and
increase of it in spiritual Wisdom is no otherwise wrought, 2 Cor. 3.18. Col.
2.2. And this spiritual Acquintance with God in Christ, this saving Wisdom in
the Mystery of Grace, this holy Knowledge and Understanding of the Mind of
God, this growing Light and insight into Heavenly things, which is begun,
increased, and carried on by the Gospel, is an especial dawning of that Glory
and immortality, which this salvation tends ultimately unto.

Fifthly, There belongs unto it also that Joy and Consolation, which believers
are made partakers of by the Holy Ghost in this world. Often times their Trials
are many, their troubles great, and their temptations abound in the course of
their obedience. And these things are ready to fill them with Cares, Fears,
Sorrows and Disconsolation. Now though our Lord Jesus Christ has foretold his
Disciples of all the tribulations and sorrows that should attend them in this
world, and taught them to uphold and support their spirits with the thoughts
and hopes of the glory that shall be revealed; yet in the salvation that he
has purchased for them there is provision of comfort, with joy unspeakable and
full of glory, even during their pilgrimage here below. Such joy indeed it is
as the world knows not, nor can know. The principles and causes of it, its
Nature and Effects, are all hidden unto them. Yet such it is, that all the
contentments and enjoyments of this world are no way to be compared with it;
and such do all that have tasted of it esteem it to be. Now this also is
wrought in us and communicated unto us by the Gospel. It is the Word of Promise
whereby God gives strong consolation unto the heirs of salvation, Heb. 6.17,
18. And upon the receiving of this Word by faith it is, that Believers rejoice
with unspeakable and full of glory. Not only supportment and comfort in the
bearing of troubles, but glorious Exultations and Ecstasies of joy are oft-times
wrought in the hearts of Believers by the Gospel. Now they can endure, now they
can suffer, now they can die; joy is upon their heads, and in their hearts, and
sorrow and sighing fly away. Here is Rest, here is Peace, here are
Refreshments, here are Pleasures, here is Life to be desired. The good Lord
sweeten and season all our hearts with all these Consolations, these joys of
his Kingdom, and that by the blessed Word of his Grace.

Lastly, to instance in no more particulars, the Gospel is the Word of
Salvation, and the instrument in the hand of God for the conferring of it upon
Believers, because they shall be taken into the full possession and enjoyment
of it at the last day, by and according unto the word and sentence of it. It is
the Symbol and Tessera that gives men final admission into glory. The secrets
of all hearts shall be judged according to the Gospel, Romans 2.6. And by the
word of it shall the Elect receive their Crown. And in these respects is the
Gospel a word of salvation.

But secondly, it is said in our Proposition as in the Text, to be great
salvation. Now we have seen that the Gospel is called salvation metonymically,
the Cause being called by the name of the Effect. But in this adjunct of Great,
so great, the Effect it self, Salvation it self, preached and tendered by the
Gospel is principally intended. That then in the next place we are to declare,
namely that this Salvation preached in the Gospel is great salvation. Neither
is it absolutely said to be great salvation, but such, or so great salvation.
And it is usual in the Scripture, where it would suggest unto our minds and
thoughts an inconceivable greatness, to use some such expressions as plainly
intimate somewhat more than can be expressed. See 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. Heb. 10.29.
Joh. 3.16. So great, that is absolutely so, and comparatively so, with respect
unto the benefits received by the Law; and inconceivably so, beyond what we can
conceive or express. There ought then to be no expectation that we should
declare the real greatness of this salvation, which the Apostle intimates to be
inexpressible; we shall only point at some of those considerations wherein the
greatness of it does most principally consist and appear.

First, it is great in the Eternal contrivance of it. When sin had defaced the
glory of the first Creation, and the Honor of God seemed to be at a stand, no
way remaining to carry it on unto that End which all things at first tended
unto; all Creatures were, and for ever would have been ignorant of a way for
the retrievment of things into the former, or a better Order, or the bringing
forth a salvation for that which was lost. For besides that there were such
horrible confusions, and such inextricable intanglements brought upon the
Creation and the several parts of it, which none could discern how they might
be joynted and set in order again; there appeared a repugnancy in the very
properties of the Divine Nature, unto any relief or salvation of sinners. Let
sinners be saved, and what shall become of the Justice, Holiness, and Wrath of
God, all which are engaged to see a meet recompense of reward rendered unto
every transgression? And this was enough eternally to silence the whole
Creation, by reason of that indispensible Obligation which is on them always,
and in all things to prefer the Honor and Glory of their Maker, before the
Being or well-being of any creatures what ever. Should the holy Angels have set
upon a contrivance for the salvation of sinners; upon the first discovery that
it would interfere and clash with the Glory of God, (as every contrivance of
Wisdom finite and limited would have done undoubtedly, yea rise up against his
very Blessedness and Being) they would instantly have cast it from them as an
abominable thing, and have rested eternally in the Contemplation of his
Excellencies, for which end they were created. Here therefore infinite Wisdom,
infinite Grace, infinite Goodness, and infinite Holiness discover themselves in
that contrivance of salvation, which solves all those difficulties and seeming
contradictions, keeps entire the Glory of God's Attributes, repairs the Honor
lost by sin, and reduces the whole Creation into a new Order and subserviency
to the Glory of its Maker. Hence this great Projection and design is called the
Wisdom of God, (...); as that wherein he was pleased principally to lay open
the fountain and spring of his eternal Wisdom, Romans 11.33. 1 Cor. 1.24. And not
only so, but the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians.3.10. That is, infinite Wisdom,
exerting it self in great and unspeakable variety of means and ways for the
accomplishment of the end designed. Yea all the Treasures of wisdom are said to
be laid out in this matter, and laid up in Christ Jesus, Col. 2.3. As if he had
said, that the whole store of infinite wisdom was laid out herein. And thus,
though God made all things in wisdom, yet that which he principally proposes
unto our consideration in the creation of all things, is his Sovereign Will and
Pleasure, joined with infinite Power. For his will or pleasure were all things
created, Rev. 5.11. But in this work of contriving the salvation of sinners, he
minds us of the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. that is, the infinite wisdom,
wherewith the Holy Acts of his Will concerning it were accompanied. And the
mystery of his good pleasure, wherein he designed to gather up all things into
one head by Jesus Christ, verse 10. Certainly the product of infinite and
eternal Wisdom, of the Counsel of the Will of the most Holy, wherein the
Treasures of it were laidout, with a design to display it in manifold variety,
must needs be Great, very Great, so great as cannot be conceived or expressed.
Might we here stay to contemplate and admire in our dim and dawning light, in
our weakness, according to the meanness of our apprehensions of the reflections
of it in the Glass of the Gospel, the Eternity of this contrivance, the
transactions between Father and Son about it, the Retrievment of the lost Glory
of God by sin, and ruined creation in it, the security of the Holiness,
Righteousness, Veracity and Vindictive Justice of God provided for in it, with
the abundant overflowings of Grace, Goodness, Love, Mercy and Patience that are
the life of it, we might manifest that there is enough in this Fountain to
render the streams flowing from it great and glorious. And yet alas, what a
little, what a small portion of its Glory, Excellency, Beauty, Riches, is it,
that we are able in this world to attain unto? How weak and mean are the
conceptions and thoughts of little children about the designs and counsels of
the wise men of the earth? and yet there is a Proportion between the
Understandings of the one and the other; but there is none at all between ours
and the infinite depths of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God which are laid out
in this matter; we think as children, we speak as children, we see darkly as in
a glass, and the best acting of our faith in this business is, humble
Admiration and holy Thankfulness. Now certainly it is not in the capacity of a
creature to cast greater contempt on God, than to suppose he would set all his
glorious Properties on work, and draw forth all the Treasures of his Wisdom, to
produce or effect that which should be low, mean, not every way admirable. And
yet unto that height of impiety has unbelief arrived amongst many of them unto
whom theGospel is and has been preached, as to reject and contemn the whole
mystery of it as mere folly, as an empty notion, fit to be neglected and
despised. So has the god of this world blinded the eyes of men, that the light
of the glorious Gospel should not shine into their minds. But when God shall
come to be admired in all them thatbelieve, on the account of this design of
his Grace and Wisdom, they will with astonishment see the glory of it in
others, when it shall be too late for to obtain any benefit by it unto
themselves.

Secondly, The Salvation preached in the Gospel is Great upon the account of
the way and means whereby it was wrought and accomplished; or the great effect
of the infinite Wisdom and Grace of God in the Incarnation Mediation and
Suffering of his Son. Thus was it wrought, and no otherwise could it be
effected. We were not redeemed with silver and gold, and corruptible things, 1
Pet. 1.18. No such price would be accepted with God; Salvation is more precious
than to be so purchased, Psalm. 49.6, 7. But it may be it might be effected and
brought about by the Law, which was God's own Institution; either its Precepts
or its Sacrifices might effect this work, and Salvation may be attained by the
works of the Law? But yet neither will this suffice. For the Law is weak and
insufficient as to any such purpose, Romans 8.23. nor would the Sacrifices of it
be accepted unto that end, Heb. 10.7, 8. How then shall it be wrought? is there
none worthy in heaven or earth to undertake this work, and must it cease for
ever? No, the Eternal Son of God himself, the Word Power and Wisdom of the
Father, the brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his Person, he
has undertaken this work. This renders it Great and glorious, that the Son of
God in his own Person should perform it; it must assuredly be great salvation
which he came himself to work out. And how does he do it, by the mighty word of
hispower, as he made all things of old? No, this work is of another nature, and
in another manner must be accomplished.For,

1. To this purpose he must be Incarnate, made flesh, Joh. 1.14. made of a
Woman, Gal. 4.4. Though hewere in the form of God, and equal to God, yet he was
to humble and empty himself unto and in the form of a man, Phil. 2.6, 7. This
is that great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, that the
Angels desire to look into. That the Son of God should take the Nature of Man
into subsistence with himself in the same Person, which was necessary for the
effecting of this salvation, is a thing that the whole Creation must admire
unto Eternity. And yet this is but an entrance into this work. For,

2. In this Nature he must be made under theLaw, Gal. 4.4. obnoxious to the
commands of it, and boundto the obedience which it required. It became him to
fulfillall righteousness, that he might be our Savior: for though he were a
Son, yet he was to learn and yield obedience. Without his perfect obedience
unto the Law, our salvation could not be perfected. The Son of God must obey,
that we may be accepted and crowned. The difficulties also, temptations and
dangers that attended him in the course of his obedience are inexpressible. And
surely this renders salvation by him very great. But yet there is that remains
which gives it another Exaltation. For,

3. This Son of God, after the course of his obedience to the whole will of
God, must die, shed his blood, and make his soul an offering for sin. And
herein the glory of this salvation breaks forth like the Sun in its strength.
Obedient he must be unto death, the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. If he will
be a Captain of salvation to bring many sons to glory, he must himself be made
perfect by sufferings, Heb. 2.10. There were Law and Curse and Wrath standing
in the way of our salvation, all of them to be removed, all of them to be
undergone, and that by the Son of God. For we were not redeemed with silver and
gold, or corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet.
1.18. And therein God redeemed his Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28. And
herein assuredly was the love of God manifest, that he laid down his life for
us, 1 John 3.16. This belongs unto the means whereby our salvation is procured.
Nor yet is this all, for if Christ had only died for us, our faith in him had
been in vain, and we had been still in our sins. Wherefore,

4. To carry on the same work, he rose from the dead, and now lives for ever to
make intercession for us, and so save unto the uttermost them that come unto
God by him. By these means was the salvation preached in the Gospel obtained,
which surely manifest it to be great salvation. Would God have sent his Son,
his only Son, and that in such a manner, were it not for the accomplishment of
a work as well great and glorious init self, as indispensibly necessary with
reference untoits end? Would the Son himself have so emptied himself of his
glory, condescended to so low a condition, wrestled withsuch difficulties, and
undergone at length such a cursed and shameful death, had not the work been
great wherein he was employed? O the blindness hardness and stupidityof the
sons of men! they profess they believe these things to be true, at least they
dare not deny them so to be; but forth effect of them, for the salvation
wrought by them, they value it the least of all things that they have any
acquaintance withal. If this salvation thus procured do seize on them in their
sleep, and fall upon them whether they will or no, they will not much resist
it, provided that it cross them in none of their lusts purposes or pleasures.
But to see the Excellency of it, to put a valuation upon it according to the
price whereby it is purchased, that they are utterly regardless of. Hear, ye
despisers, wonder and perish. Shall the Son of God shed his blood in vain?
Shall he obey, and suffer, and bleed, and pray, and die, for a thing of naught?
Is it nothing unto you that heshould undergo all these things? Was there want
of Wisdom in God, or love unto his Son, so toemploy him, so to use him, in a
business which you esteem of sovery small concernment, as that you will scarce
turn aside tomake enquiry after it? Assure your selves these things are not so,
as you will one day find unto your eternal ruin.

Thirdly, This salvation will appear to be great, if we shall consider what by
it we are delivered from, and what we are interested in, or made partakers of
by virtue thereof. These also may denominate salvation to be great, and they
may therefore be considered apart.

First, What are we delivered from by this salvation? In a word, Every thing
that is evil in this world, or that which is to come. And all evil may be
referred unto two heads. 1. That which corrupts and depraveth the principles
of our nature in their being and operation. And, 2. That which is destructive
of our nature as to its well-being and happiness. The first of these is sin,
the latter is punishment; and both of them take up the whole nature of evil.
The particulars comprised in them may not here be distinctly and severally
insisted on. The former contains our Apostasy from God, with all the
consequences of it; in darkness, folly, filth, shame, bondage, restlesness,
service of lust the world and Satan, and therein constant rebellion against
God, and diligence in working out our own everlasting ruin; all attended with
a senseless stupidity in not discerning these things to be evil, hurtful,
noisome, corruptive of our natures and beings; and for the most part with
brutish sensuality in the approbation and liking of them. But he who
understands no evil in being fallen off from God, the first Cause, chiefest
Good, and last End of all; in being under the power of a constant Enmity
against him, in the disorder of his whole soul, and all the faculties of it, in
the constant service of sin, the fruit of bondage and captivity in the most
vile condition, will be awakened unto another apprehension of these things,
when a time of deliverance from them shall be no more. The latter of these
consists in the wrath or curse of God, and comprizeth what ever is or may be
poenal and afflictive unto our Nature unto Eternity. Now from both these, with
all their effects and consequences, are Believers delivered by this salvation,
namely from sin and wrath. The Lord Christ was called Jesus, because he saves
his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. And he isalso the Savior who delivers
them from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. And this is great salvation. If a
man be but the means of delivering another from poverty, imprisonment, or a
dangerous disease, especially if such a one could be no otherwise delivered but
by him, how great is the kindness of it esteemed tobe, and that deservedly?
Providential deliverances from imminent dangers of death temporal, are looked
on as great salvations, and that by good men, and so they ought to be, 2 Cor.
1.10. But what are all these unto this salvation? What is the sickness of the
body, unto the disease, yea the death of the soul? What is imprisonment of the
out-ward man, under the wrath of poor worms like our selves, and that for a
fewdays, unto the chains of everlasting darkness? What is alittle outward want
and poverty, to the want of the favor love and presence of God unto Eternity?
What is death temporal, past in a moment, an end of troubles, anentrance into
Rest, unto death eternal, an eternaldying, under the curse wrath and righteous
vengeance of the holyGod? These things have no proportion one to another. So
unexpressibly great is this salvation, that there is nothing left us to
illustrate it withal. And this excellency of Gospel salvation will at length
be known to them by whom at present it is despised, when they shall fall and
perish under the want of it, and that to Eternity.

Lastly, This salvation is Great upon the account of the End of it, or that
which it brings Believers unto. The deliverance of the People of Israel of old
out of Egypt was great salvation; so does God every where set it forth, and so
did the people esteem it, and that justly. They who murmured under it, they who
despised the pleasant land, fell all of them under the sore displeasure of God.
But yet as this deliverance was but from temporal outward bondage, so that
which it brought them unto was but outward rest for a few days, in a plentiful
country; it gave them an inheritance of Houses and Lands and Vineyards in the
Land of Canaan; but yet there also they quickly died, and many of them perished
in their sins. But as we have seen what we are delivered from by this
salvation, so the Excellency of the Inheritance which we obtain thereby is
such, as no heart can conceive, no tongue can express. It brings us into the
favor and love of God, unto the Adoption of children, into durable rest and
peace; in a word, unto the enjoyment of God in glory eternal. Oh the
Blessedness of this Rest, the Glory of this Inheritance, the Excellency of this
Crown, the Eternity and unchangeableness of this Condition, the Greatness of
this Salvation! how mean, how weak, how low, how unworthy are our apprehensions
of it? yet surely through the blessed Revelation of the Spirit of Grace by the
word of the Gospel, we see, we feel, we experience so much of it, as is
sufficient to keep us up unto an holy Admiration and longing after it all the
days of our pilgrimage here on earth.

It remains now that we declare the unavoidableness of their destruction who
neglect this so great salvation. There are three things that make the
punishment, or destruction of any person to be unavoidable. 1. That it be just
and equal. 2. That there be no relief nor remedy provided for him. And, 3. That
he to whom it belongs to inflict punishment, be able and resolved so to do: and
they all concur to the height in this case. For,

1. It is just and equal that such persons should be destroyed; whence the
sentence concerning them is so decretory and absolute. He that believes not
shall be damned, Matthew. 16.16. And the Holy Ghost supposes this case so clear
evident and undeniable, that he refers the proceedings of God therein unto the
judgmentof sinners themselves, Heb. 10.29. And they who are judged on this
account at the last day will be speechless, have nothing to reply, nothing to
complainof. And the sentence denounced against them will appearunto all to be
righteous,

1. Because they despise an overture of a treaty about Peace and Reconciliation
between God and their souls. There is by nature an enmity between God and them,
a state and condition whereby themselves alone would be losers, and that for
ever. God who has no need of them, nor their obedience or friendship, tenders
them a Treaty upon terms of peace. What greater condescension love or grace
could be conceived or desired? This is tendered in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5.19. Now
what greater indignity can be offered unto him, than to reject his tenders,
without so much as an enquiry after what his terms are, as the most do to whom
the Gospel is preached? Is not this plainly to tell him, that they despise his
love, scorn his offers of Reconciliation, and fear not in the least what he can
do unto them? And is it not just that such persons should be filled with the
fruit of their own ways? Let men deal thus with their Rulers whom they have
provoked, that have power over them, and see how it will fare with them.
Neither will God be mocked, nor shall his grace always be despised. When men
shall see and learn by woeful experience what pitiful poor worms they are, and
have some beams of the Greatness Majesty and Glory of God shining upon them,
how will they be filled with shame, and forced to subscribe to the
righteousness of their own Condemnation for refusing his treaty and terms of
Peace.

2. These terms contain salvation. Men in the neglect of them neglect and
refuse their own salvation: and can any man perish more justly than they who
refuse to be saved? If God's Terms had been great, hard, and difficult, yet
considering by whom they were proposed, and to whom, there was all the reason
in the world why they should be accepted; and their destruction would be just
thatshould not endeavor to preserve them unto the utmost. But now itis life
and salvation that he tenders, on whose neglect he complains, that men will not
come unto him that they might have life. Certainly there can be no want of
righteousness in the ruin of such persons. But,

3. That which the Apostle principally builds the Righteousness and
inevitableness of the destruction of Gospel neglecters upon, is the greatness
of the salvation tendered unto them; How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? How it is so, and wherein the greatness and excellency of it does
consist has been be fore declared. Such and so great it is, that there is
nothing which as inner, can fear or suffer, but it will deliver him from it;
nothing that a creature can desire but it will bring him to the possession of
it. And if this be despised, is it not righteous that men should perish? If we
know not, yet God knows how to set a value upon this great Effect of his Love,
Wisdom and Grace, and how to proportion punishment unto its contempt. The truth
is, God alone is able sufficiently to revenge the greatness of this sin and
indignity done unto him. We have before showed how meet it was that the
transgression of the Law should be punished with punishment eternal; and yet
the Law had provided no relief for any in distress or misery, only taking men
as it found them, in the first place it required obedience of them, and then
promised a reward. And a good holy and righteous Law it was, both in its
Commands and in its Promises and Threatenings. It found men in a good estate,
and promised them a better on their obedience; wherein if they failed, it
threatened them with the loss of their present condition, and also with the
superaddition of eternal ruin. And in all this it was a clear effect of the
righteousness holiness and faithfulness of God. But the Gospel finds men in
quite another state and condition, in a condition of misery and ruin, helpless
and hopeless, and is provided on purpose both for their present relief, and
future everlasting happiness. And shall they escape by whom it is despised? Is
it not just and equal that it should prove a savor of death unto death unto
them? Is it meet that God should be mocked, his Grace be despised, his Justice
violated, his Glory lost, all, that sinners may go unpunished? Let them think
so whilst they please, God thinks otherwise, all the Angels in Heaven think
otherwise, all the Saints from the beginning of the world unto the end of it
think otherwise, and will glorify Godto eternity for the righteousness of his
judgments on them thatobey not the Gospel. But,

Secondly, Suppose the destruction of these persons be in itself righteous, yet
there may be some remedy and relief provided for them, that they maynot
actually fall under it; there may yet some way of escape remain for them, and
so their ruin not be so unavoidable as is pretended. It has been showed that
itwas a righteous thing that the transgressors of the Law should perish, and
yet a way of escape is providedfor them; God is merciful, and things may be
found atthe last day otherwise than now they are reported: at least allthat
Faith, Diligence, Obedience and Holiness which is spoken of, is not required to
free men from being neglecters of the Gospel; so that they who come short of
them may nevertheless escape. I answer, that we are not now discoursing of the
Nature of that Faith and Obedience which is required tointerest men in Gospel
salvation. But certain it is, that it will be found to be that which the Word
requires, and no other; even that faith which purifieth the heart, that faith
which reformeth the life, that faith which is fruitful in good works, that
faith which brings forth universal Holiness, without which no man shall see
God. A faith consisting with the love and service of sin, with neglect of
Gospel duties, with conformity to the Word, with a sensual profane or wicked
life, will stand men in no stead in this matter. But this is not the subject of
our present discourse. It may suffice in general that the Faith and Obedience
which the Gospel requires are indispensably necessary to free men from being
Gospel despisers; what they are is all our concernment to enquire and learn:
for where they are wanting there is no relief nor remedy, what ever wind and
ashes of vain hopes men may feed upon and deceive themselves withal. It is
true, there was a remedy provided for the transgression of the Law, and this
remedy was, 1. Reasonable, in that there was no mixture of mercy or grace in
that dispensation. And God saw meet to glorify those properties of his Nature,
as well as those which before shone forth in the Creation of all things, and
giving of the Law. Pardoning mercy was not sinned against in the breach of the
Law, and therefore that might interpose for a relief, which was done
accordingly. And yet, 2. Neither would this have been either reasonable or
righteous, if that only and last way of satisfying the Righteousness and the
Law by the sufferings and Sacrifice of the Son of God had not intervened.
Without this, Mercy and Grace must have eternally rested in the bosom of God,
without the least exercise of them; as we see they are in respect unto the
Angels that sinned, whose Nature the Son of God assumed not, thereby to relieve
them. And, 3. This relief was declared immediately upon the entrance of sin,
and the promises of it renewed continually until it waswrought and
accomplished. And hereby it became the subject of the whole Book of God, and
the principal matter of all intercourse between God and sinners. But all these
things fully discover, that there neither is, nor can any relief be provided
for them that sin against the Gospel. For, (1.) From what spring, what fountain
should it proceed? Mercy and Grace are principally sinned against in it, and
their whole design of it therein defeated. The utmost of mercy and grace is
already sinned against, and what remains now for the relief of a sinner? Is
there any other Property of the Divine Nature whose consideration will
administer unto men any ground of hope? Is there any thing in the Name of God
in that Revelation that he has made of himself by his Works, or in his Word,
to give them encouragement? Doubtless nothing at all. But yet suppose that God
had not laid out all the riches and treasures of his Wisdom Grace Love and
Goodness in Gospel salvation by Jesus Christ, which yet he affirms that he
has; suppose that in Infinite Mercy there were yet a reserve for pardon; by
what way and means (2.) Should it be brought forth and made effectual? We have
seen that God neither would nor could ever have exercised pardoning mercy
toward sinners, had not way been made for it by the Blood of his Son: what
then? Shall Christ die again that the despisers of the Gospel may be saved? Why
besides that the Scripture affirms positively, that henceforth he dies no
more, and that there is no more sacrifice for sin, this is the most
unreasonable thing that can be imagined. Shall he die again for them by whom
his death has been despised? Is the Blood of Christ such a common thing, as to
be so cast away upon the lusts of men? Besides, when should he make an end of
dying? They who have once neglected the Gospel may do so upon a second trial,
nay undoubtedly would do so, and thence should Christ often die, often be
offered, and all still in vain. Neither has God any other Son to send to die
for sinners; he sent his only begotten Son once for all, and he that believes
not on him must perish for ever. In vain then will all men's expectations be
from such a mercy as there is nothing to open a door unto, nor to make way for
its exercise. Nay this mercy is a mere figment of secure sinners, there is no
such thing in God. All the mercy and grace that God has for his creatures is
engaged in Gospel salvation; and if that be despised, in vain shall men look
for any other. Neither, 3. Is there any word spoken concerning any such relief
or remedy for Gospel neglecters. Pardon being provided for transgressions of
the Law, instantly it is promised, and the whole Scripture is written for the
manifestation of it; but as for a provision of mercy for them that despise
theGospel, where is any one word recorded concerning it? Nay does not the
Scripture in all places fully and plainly witness against it? He that believes
not shall be damned. There remains no more sacrifice for sin. He that believes
not, the wrath of God abides on him. And will men yet feed themselves with
hopes of mercy whilst they neglect the Gospel? Well fare them who being not
able to retrieve secure sinners, against this light and evidence of the want of
any relief reielved for them, have carried the whole matter behind the curtain,
and invented a Purgatory for them to help them when they are gone from hence,
and cannot return to complain of them by whom they are deceived. But this also
as all other reliefs will prove a broken reed to them that lean on it; for they
who neglect the Gospel must perish, and that eternally, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.

Thirdly, Then all hopes of escaping must arise from hence, That he whose right
it is, and on whom it is incumbent totake vengeance on them that n^glect the
Gospel, will not be able so to do, or at least not to such a degree, as to
render it so fearful as is pretended. This need not much to be insisted on. It
is God with whom men have to do in this matter. And they who allow his Being,
cannot deny him to be Omnipotent and Eternal. Now what cannot he do who is so?
It will at length be found to be a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. There is unto wicked men the same everlasting cause of Being and
Punishment. The same hand that upholds them, shall afflict them, and that for
ever. What his Righteousness requires, his Power and Wrath shall execute unto
the uttermost, so that there will be no escaping. And th^se are the holy
foundations on which all Gospel Threatenings and Comminations are built, which
will all of of them take place and be accomplished, with no less certainty than
the Promises themselves. Now from all that has been spoken unto this
Proposition we may learn,

1. To admire the Riches of the Grace of God, which has provided so great
salvation for poor sinners. Such and so great as it is, we stood in need of it.
Nothing could be abated without our eternal ruin. But when Divine Wisdom,
Goodness, Love, Grace and Mercy shall set themselves at work, what will they
not accomplish? And the effect of them does the Scripture set forth in those
expressions. So God loved theworld; God commends his love unto us; Greater
love has nonethan this; Riches of grace; Treasures of wisdom; Exceeding
greatness of Power; and the like. In this will God be glorified and admired
unto all Eternity. And in the contemplation hereof are we to be exercised here
and hereafter; and thereby may we grow up into the image of God in Christ; 2
Cor. 3.18. Which way soever we look, what ever we consider in it, here is that
which will entertain our souls withdelight and satisfaction. The Eternal
Counsel of God, the Person of Christ, his Mediation and Grace, the Promises of
the Gospel, the evil and wrath we are freed from, the Redemption and Glory
purchased for us, the Privileges we are admitted unto a participation of, the
Consolations and Joys of the Spirit, the Communion with God that we are called
unto: how glorious are they in the eyes of Believers? or assuredly at all times
ought they so to be. How can we enough bewail that vanity whence it is, that
the mind suffers it self to be possessed and filled with other things? Alas,
what are they if compared to the excellency of this Love of God in Christ
Jesus? Here lies our treasure, here lies our inheritance, why should not our
hearts be here also? Were our minds fixed on these things as they ought, how
would the glory of them cast out our cares, subdue our fears, sweeten our
afflictions and persecutions, and take off our affections from the fading
perishing things of this world? and make us in every condition rejoice in the
hopes of the glory that shall be revealed. And indeed we lose the sweetness of
the life of faith, the benefit of our profession, the reward that is in
believing, and are made a scorn to the world, and a prey unto temptations,
because we dwell not enough in the contemplation of this great salvation. To
stir us up then hereunto we may consider, 1. The excellency of the things
themselves that are proposed unto our meditations; they are the Great, the
Deep, the hidden things of the Wisdom and Grace of God. Men justify themselves
in spending their time and speculations about the things of Nature; and indeed
the employment is better and more noble than what the generality of men do
exercise themselves about. For some seldom raise their thoughts above the
dunghills whereon they live; and some stuff their minds with such filthy
imaginations, as make them an Abomination to God, Mich. 2.1, 2. They are
conversant only about their own Lusts, and making Provision to fulfill and
satisfy them. But yet what are these things which the better and more refined
part of mankind does search and enquire into, things that came out of nothing,
and are returning thitherward apace; things which when they are known, do not
much enrich the mind, nor better it at all as to its eternal condition, nor
contribute any thing to the Advantage of their souls. But these things are
eternal, glorious, mysterious, that have the characters of all Gods
Excellencies enstamped upon them; whose knowledge gives the mind its
perfection, and the soul its blessedness; John 17.3. This made Paul cry out
that he accounted all things to be but loss and dung in comparison of an
acquaintance with them, Phil. 3.8. And the Prophets of old to search diligently
into the nature of them; 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. as the things which alone deserved to
be enquired after; and which enquiry renders them noble in whom it is, Acts
17.11. and that which alone differenceth men in the sight of God, Jer. 9.23, 24.

2. Our Interest and Propriety in them. If we are believers these are our
things. The Rich man is much in the contemplation of his Riches, because they
are his own; and the Great man of his Power, because of his propriety in it.
Men take little delight in being conversant in their minds about things that
are not their own. Now all these things are ours if we are Christ's, 1 Cor.
3.22. This salvation was prepared for us from all Eternity, and we are the
heirs of it, Heb. 1.13. It was purchased for us by Jesus Christ; we have
redemption and salvation by his blood; It is made over unto us by the promise
of the Gospel, and conferred upon us by the Spirit of Grace. Are these things
to be despised? Are they to be cast aside among the things wherein we are least
concerned? Or can there be any greater evidence, that we have no Propriety in
them, than that would be, if our hearts should not be set upon them? What, all
these Riches ours, all these Treasures, this goodly Inheritance, this Kingdom,
this Glory; and yet we not be constant in thoughts and meditations about them?
It is doubtless a sign at least, that we question our Title unto them, and that
the Evidences we have of them will not endure the trial. But woe unto us if
that should be the end of our profession; and if it be otherwise, why are not
our minds fixed on that which is our own, and which no man can take from us.

3. The Profit and Advantage which we shall have hereby; which will be much
every way: for (1.) By this means we shall grow up into a likeness and
conformity unto these things in our inward man. Spiritual Meditation will
assimulate our minds and souls unto that which is the object of it. So the
Apostle tells the Romans, that they were delivered into the form of the
Doctrine preached unto them, Chap. 6.17. obeying it by faith, the likeness of
it was brought forth upon their souls; and by the renewing of their minds,
transformed quite into another image in their souls, Chap. 12.2. This the
Apostle most excellently expresses, 2 Cor. 3.18. A constant believing
contemplation of the Glory of God in this salvation by Christ, will change the
mind into the image and likeness of it, and that by various degrees until we
attain unto perfection, when we shall know as we are known. Accustoming of our
minds unto these things, will make them heavenly; and our affectious which will
be conformed unto them, holy. This is the way to have Christ dwell plentifully
in us, and for our selves to grow up into him who is our head. And is it
nothing to get our minds purged from an evil habit, enclining unto earthly
things, or continually forging foolish and hurtful Imaginations in our hearts?
This Meditation will cast the soul into another mould and frame; making the
heart a good treasure, out of which may be drawn at all times, Good things new
and old.

2. Consolation and supportment under all Afflictions will from hence spring up
in the soul. When the Apostle would describe that property of faith whereby it
enables a Believer to do and suffer great things joyfully and comfortably, he
does it by its work and effect in this matter; it is says he, the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Chap. 11.1. that is, it
brings into the soul, and makes evident unto it, the great things of this
salvation, the great things of the Love and Grace of God therein; and thus it
does no otherwise, than by a constant contemplation and holy admiration of
them; and when this is once done, he multiplyes instances to evince what great
Effects it will produce, especially in its enabling of us to go through
difficulties, trials and afflictions. And the same also he ascribes unto Hope;
which is nothing but the souls waiting and expectation to be made partaker of
the fullness of this salvation, whose greatness and satisfactory Excellency it
does admire, Romans 5.2, 3, 4, 5. When any Affliction or Tribulation presses
upon a believer, h^ can readily divert his thoughts from it, unto the rich
grace of God in this salvation, which will fill his heart with such a sense of
his love, as shall carry him above all the assaults of his trouble. And a
direction to this purpose the Apostle pursues at large, Romans 8.16, 17, 18, 24,
25, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. This is a safe harbor for the soul to betake it self
unto in every storm; as he teaches us again, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. Whatever
befalls us in our outward man, though it should press so sore upon us as to
ruin us in this world, yet we faint not, we despond not; and the reason is,
because these things which we suffer, bear no proportion unto what we enjoy or
expect; and the way whereby this consideration is made effectual unto us, is by
a constant Contemplation by faith on the great unseen things of this salvation,
which takes off our minds and spirits from a Valuation of the things which we
presently suffer and endure. And this experience assures us to be our only
relief in afflictions, which undoubtedly it is our wisdom to be provided for.

3. The same may be said concerning Persecution, one especial part of
Affliction, and commonly that which most entangles the minds of them that
suffer. Now no man can endure Persecution quietly, patiently, constantly
according to the Will of God, especially when the Devil pursues his old design
of bringing it home unto their persons, Job. 2.5. unless he has in readiness a
greater Good which shall in its self, and in his own mind, out-ballance the
evil which he suffers. And this the Grace of this Salvation will do. The soul
that is exercised in the contemplation and Admiration of it, will despise and
triumph over all his outward sufferings which befall him on the account of his
interest therein, as all Persecution does. This the Apostle declares at large,
Romans 8.31, 32, 33, 34. He directs us to an holy Meditation on Gods electing
Love, the Death and Mediation of Christ, the two springs of this Meditation.
And thence leads us, v. 35, 36. to a supposition of the great and sore
persecutions that may befall us in this world; and from the former
consideration triumphs over it all, v. 37. with a joy and exaltation beyond
that of Conquerors in a battle, which yet is the greatest that the nature of
man is capable of, in and about temporal things. When the soul is prepossessed
with the Glory of this Grace, and his interest therein, it will assuredly bear
him up against all the threatenings, reproaches and persecutions of this World;
even as it did the Apostles of old; making them esteem, that to be their Honor
and Glory which the World looked on as their shame; Acts 5.41. and without this
the heart will be very ready to sink and faint.

4. This also will greatly tend unto the confirmation of our faith, by giving
us a full Experience of the things that we do believe. Then the Heart is
immovable, when it is established by Experience; when we find a substance, a
reality, a spiritual nourishment in things proposed unto us. Now how can this
be obtained, unless we are conversant in our minds about them? unless we dwell
in our thoughts and affections upon them? For thereby do we taste and find how
good the Lord is in this work of his Grace. Thus this duty being on many
accounts of so great importance, we may do well to consider wherein it
consists; and there are these four things belonging unto it.

First, Intense Prayer for a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to give us an
Acquaintance with the Mystery and Grace of this great salvation. In our selves
we have no inbred knowledge of it, nor can we by our own endeavors attain unto
it. We must have a new understanding given us, or we shall not know him that is
true, 1 Job. 5.20. For notwithstanding the Declaration that is made of this
Mystery in the Gospel, we see that the most men live in Darkness and Ignorance
of it. It is only the Spirit of God which can search these deep things of God
and reveal them unto us, 1 Cor. 2.10. By him must he, who commanded light to
shine out of darkness, shine into our hearts to give us the light of the
knowledge of this glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And
therefore the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that God would give unto them
the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of
their understandings being opened, they may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and
what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who believe, Chap.
1.17, 18, 19. And for the Colossians, that they might come unto all riches of
the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the Mystery of
God, and of the Father, and of Christ, Chap. 2.2. that is, that they might have
a spiritual and saving acquaintance with the Mystery of this great salvation,
the Love, Grace, and Wisdom of God therein; which without this Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation from above we shall not attain unto. This then in the first
place is to be sought after; this are we to abide in; constant Prayers and
supplications for the teaching, instructing, revealing, enlightening Work and
Efficacy of this Spirit; that we may be enabled to look into these deep things
of God; that we may in some measure with all Saints comprehend them, and grow
wise in the Mystery of salvation. Solomon tells us how this wisdom is to be
obtained, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for understanding, if thou seek for her as for silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God; It is by praying, crying, supplications, with
diligence, and perseverance, that we attain this Wisdom; abide herein, or all
other attempts will prove but vain. How many poor souls otherwise weak and
simple, have by this means grown exceeding wise in the Mystery of God? And how
many more, wise in this world, through the neglect of it, do walk in darkness
all their days?

Secondly, Diligent study of the Word wherein this Mystery of God is declared
and proposed unto our faith, and holy contemplation; but this has been spoken
unto in part already, and must again be considered, and so need not here to be
insisted on.

Thirdly, Sincere love unto, and delight in the things that are by the Spirit
of God revealed unto us, is another part of this duty. Herein our Apostle
declares what was his frame of heart, Phil. 3.8. How does his heart triumph in,
and rejoice over the knowledge he had obtained of Jesus Christ? and then indeed
do we know any thing of the Grace of God aright, when our hearts are affected
with what we know. Peter tells us, that the Saints of old, in their believing,
rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Ep. 1.8. They discovered
that in Christ which ma^^ their hearts leap within them, and all their
affections to overflow with delight and joy. And this is an Essential part of
this Holy Admiration, which distinguishes it from that barren, fruitless,
notional speculation of it, which some are contented withal. This are we to
stir up our hearts unto in all our Meditations of the Grace of God, and not to
rest until we find them affected, satisfied and filled with an holy
complacency, which is the most eminent evidence of our interest in, and Union
unto the things that are made known unto us.

Fourthly, All these things are to be attended with thankfulness and praise.
This the Apostle was full of, and brake forth into, when he entered upon the
description of this Grace, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and this will be the frame of his
heart, who is exercised unto an holy admiration of it. When our Lord Jesus
Christ considered the Grace of God in revealing the mysteries of this salvation
unto his Disciples, it is said of him, that he rejoiced in Spirit, Luke 10.21.
(...) his Spirit leaped in him; and he breaks forth into a solemn Doxologie,
giving Praise and Glory unto God. And is it not their duty to whom they are
revealed, to do that, which out of love unto them, our Lord Christ Jesus did on
their behalf? Thankfulness for the things themselves, thankfulness for the
Revelation of them, thankfulness for the Love of God, and the Grace of Jesus
Christ in the one and the other, is a great part of this duty.

Secondly, This will teach us, what esteem we ought to have of the Word of the
Gospel, by which alone this great salvation is revealed and exhibited unto us;
the great means and instrument which God is pleased to use in bringing us unto
a participation of it. This one consideration is enough to instruct us unto
what valuation we ought to make of it, what price we should set upon it, seeing
we cannot have the pearl without the purchase of this Field. Some neglect it,
some despise it, some persecute it, some look upon it as foolishness, some as
weakness, but unto them that believe, it is the power of God, and the wisdom of
God. To further us in this duty, I shall take up some of those considerations,
which the words we insist upon do offer unto us, and thereby also pass through
what yet remains for our instruction in them. And we may consider,

1. The Excellency and Pre-eminence of the Gospel, which arises from the first
Revealer, that is, the Lord Christ the Son of God. It was begun to be spoken
unto us by the Lord; Herein the Apostle prefers it before the Law. It is that
Word, which the Son came to reveal and declare from the bosom of the Father;
and surely he deserves to be attended unto; Hence it is so often called the
Word of Christ, and the Gospel of Christ, not only because it treats of him,
but because it proceeds from him, and on that account is worthy of all
Acceptance. And (2.) To neglect the Gospel is to neglect and despise the Son
of God who was the Author of it, and consequently the Love and Grace of God in
sending him. So the Lord Christ tells them that preach the Gospel, he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. Neglect of the Gospel reflects immediately upon the Lord Christ and the
Father; and therefore our Apostle bids us take heed that we despise not him who
spoke from Heaven, which can be no otherwise done, but by neglect of his word.
Some pretend to honor Christ, but they have no regard for his Word; yea, they
may say of it as Ahab of Micaiah, that they hate it; and have therefore some of
them endeavored to extirpate the preaching of it out of the world, as the
Papists have done: at least, have looked on it as an useless thing, that the
Church might be well enough without. But such men will find themselves
mistaken, when it is too late to seek after a remedy; the true Cause of their
hatred unto the word, is because they can find no other way to express their
hatred unto Christ himself. Neither did ever any man hate or loath the Gospel,
but he that first hated and loathed Jesus Christ: but against the Word they
have many pretenses, against the Person of Christ none, that are as yet
passable in the world; This makes the Word to bear that which is intended
against Christ himself, and so will he interpret it at the last day. (3.)
Consider, that this Word was confirmed and witnessed unto from Heaven, by the
mighty Works and Miracles which attended the dispensation thereof. So our
Apostle here informs us; and though we saw not those Miracles, yet we have them
left on infallible Record for our use, that by them we might be yet stirred up
to value and attend unto the Word in a due manner. God has so ordered things
in his holy Providence, that none can neglect the Word, without shutting his
eyes against such Light and Evidence of conviction, as will leave them
abundantly inexcusable at the last day. Now from these and the like
considerations; the duty proposed may be enforced.

Verse V, VI, VII, VIII, IX.
THe Apostle in these Verses proceeds in the pursuit of his former design. From
the Doctrine of the first Chapter, he presses the Exhortation at the beginning
of this, which we have passed through. The Foundation of that Exhortation was
the Pre-eminence of the Lord Christ, the Author of the Gospel, above the Angels
by whom the Law was spoken and delivered. This he now farther confirms, and
that by an instance suited to his present Purpose, and not as yet by him
insisted on. And he does it the rather, because by the Testimonies wherewith he
proves his Assertion, he is lead to the Consideration of other concernments of
the Mediation of Christ, which he thought meet to declare unto these Hebrews
also. And this method he is constant unto throughout this whole Epistle. In the
midst of his Reasonings, and Testimonies for the Explanation or Confirmation of
what he delivers dogmatically, he lays hold on some Occasion or other, to
press his Exhortation unto Faith, Obedience, with Constancy and Perseverance in
the Profession of the Gospel. And in the Arguments which he enterweaveth, and
Testimonies which he produces for the enforcement of his Exhortations,
something still offers it self, which accordingly he lays hold upon, leading
him to some farther Explication of the Doctrine which he had in hand; so
insensibly passing from one thing unto another; that he might at the same time
inform the Minds, and Work upon the Affections of them with whom he dealt. All
which will appear in our ensuing Exposition of these Verses.

Verse 5. (...).
(...).
(...); subjecit; in ordinem coegit; put into subjection; brought into order
under rule. (...): Vul. orbem terrae futurum; the habitable earth to come.
Arias; habitatam futuram; to the same purpose; improperly. Sir. (...), Mundum,
or seculum futurum. The world or age to come* Bez^; mundum illum futurum; that
world to come. And indeed the repetition of the Article, with the words
following, concerning which we speak, require that it be so expressed. That
world to come; (...).
or, the world that is to come; (...), Heb. (...). So most commonly expressed
by the LXX. as sometimes, though seldom, by (...), the earth; and sometimes by
(...), the things under the Heavens. The Apostle uses this word from Psalm. 8.
where it denotes a mixture of Inhabitants there described. (...).
(...). That is, (...), concerning which we treat, about which we reason. The
Vulgar Latin adds Deus, to the Text. Deus non subjecit. God has not put in
subjection, needlessly, as is acknowledged. De quo; Christo, says the
interlinear Gloss; but (...), is not, of Christ.

Verse 5.

For unto the Angels has he not made subject that world to come, whereof we
speak; (concerning which we treat.)

Verse 6. (...).
Sir. (...); But as the Scripture witnesses and says: limiting what was
spoken indefinitely by the Apostle; needlessly; the words themselves declaring
who spoke them and where. (...)
(...), Vul. in quodam loco; in a certain place. Beza. alicubi; somewhere; that
is, Psalm. 8.5. (...), quid homo mortalis; (...), frail, mortal man, or the Son
of man; (...), filius hominis terreni; (...), e terra editus; man of the earth;
or an earthly man.

Verse 6.

But one (a certain man) testified, (has witnessed) in a certain place,
(somewhere, that is, in the Scripture from whence he is arguing) saying, what
is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him.

Ver. 7. (...).
The latter words which are commonly placed at the beginning of the eighth
Verse, I have added unto this seventh, the sense and Hebrew Text so requiring
it.

(...).
(...); so the Apostle renders, (...) in the Psalmist, and that properly. Vul.
Minuisti; which is not, thou have made less; but thou have lessened, which has
another sense than that here intended. Sir. (...), depressisti; thou have
depressed, or made him less, or lower than he was. Beza; fecisti eum
inferiorem; thou have made him lower; and so ours. Rhemists; thou did minish
him a little less; obscurely: (...), is imminuo, diminuo, to make less, to take
from, as to state and condition. So in Isocrates, (...), is to lessen the
Dignity, State and Condition of the People. As in Latin, Capitis diminutio, is
lessening of State or dignity; as by loss of Liberty. For when one was made a
captive by the enemy, he lost his dignity, until he recovered it jure
postliminii. So Regulus is termed by the Poet, Capitis minor, when a Prisoner
to the Garthaginians; or by change of Family; as when Clodius a Patrician was
adopted by a Plebeian; or by Banishment; all such are (...), lessened in State
or Dignity. (...), the word used by the Psalmist has the same signification;
(...).
and though it be variously rendered by the LXX. yet they never much depart
from its native signification. (...), to minish, make less, take from; (...),
the same, (...), to become indigent. (...); to be in want: (...), all to the
same purpose. (...), to deprive; (...), to want, to be indigent, to come short:
and (...), and (...), to make empty; that is, (...), the word used, Phil. 2.7.
I observe this various rendering of the Word by the LXX. only to show, that it
does constantly denote a diminution of state and condition, with an addition of
Indigency, which will give us light into the Interpretation of the place.

(...), breve quiddam: Vul. paulo minus. Sir. (...), paululum, a little, or
paulisper, (...).
a little while: (...), is frequently by the LXX. rendered (...), parvum,
paululum, a little, intending quantity. Sometimes (...), which they refer to
number, a few, and sometimes (...), and then it constantly respects time; a
little while. So that (...), is as much as (...), that is, (...); as in that
saying, (...), life is short; that is of short continuance; whether a little in
degree, or a short time be here intended, we shall afterward enquire.

(...), Sir. (...), prae Angelis, more than Angels, above the Angels; (...).
more destitute than the Angels: Heb. (...), the Angels of God. So all Old
Translations render the words. And to render it a Deo, in the Psalm, is
needless, groundless, contradictory to the Apostle.

(...), gloria and honor coronasti eum: (...).
with glory and honor have thou crowned him. Sir. (...), Glory and honor have
thou placed on his head: (...): thou have crowned him, or adorned his head,
with Glory and Beauty, or honor: the first word denotes the Weight and worth,
the latter the Beauty and Splendour of this Crown.

(...); thou have set him over. (...).
That is appointed him to be in Authority; as Pharaoh set Joseph over the Land
of Egypt. Sir. (...), authoritatem, potestatem ei tribuisti; thou have given
him power or Authority; made him Sultan or Lord; Heb. (...), made him Lord or
Ruler; as Genesis 1.18. so (...), is used, Acts 6. Luke 12.

(...), have put, put down, (...).
subjected all things under his feet; the words all of them emphatically denote
subjection and depression; and as thus conjoined the most absolute subjection
that can be apprehended.

Verse 7.

Thou made him lower for a little while than the Angels, thou crownedst him
with glory and honor, and did set him, (give him authority) over the works
of thy hands; all things have thou put in subjection under his feet.

Verse 8.

(...).

Verse 8.

For in that, he made all things subject unto him, he has left nothing not put
in sabjection; but now we see not all things made subject unto him.

Verse 9. (...).
(...).
The words of this (...), have most of them been considered in the (...); and
they must have the same sense in both places, or the reasoning of the Apostle
would be Equivocal. For (...), some old Copies read, (...), besides God, God
excepted. The Syriack Copies also vary: Some read, For God himself by his Grace
tasted death: Others, for he, God excepted, tasted death; which came from
(...), and shows that variety to be ancient. Hence some have imagined it to be
a corruption of the Nestorians, who dividing the Person of Christ, would not
grant that God might be said to dye contrary to Acts 20.28. (...), is gratia,
beneficentia, beneficio Dei: by the grace, goodness, good will of God,
expressing the first spring, and moving cause of the sufferings of Christ;
(...).
(...), should taste of death; an Hebraism for to dye; intimating withal, the
truth, reality, and kind of his death, which was bitter; and which was called
his Cup; (...).
(...), in the Masculine not Neuter Gender; for (...), by an Enallage of
number; that is, (...), of whom he treats; all and every one of the children
unto whom he was a Captain of Salvation.

Verse 9.

But we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, who for the suffering of death
was a little while made lower than the Angels, that he by the grace of God
might taste of death for all.

Verse V.
(...).
THe first words of the fifth Verse, (...), for, declare that the Apostle is in
the pursuit of his former Argument. (...), for; does not always intimate the
Introduction of a Reason in the confirmation of what is past; but sometimes a
Progression unto somewhat else in the like kind with that which precedeth, and
so has not respect unto any especial words or sayings before going, but unto
the whole matter in hand, especially that which does ensue: as nam also is used
in Latin; nam quis te juvenum confidentissime, nostras jussit adire domos. A
new Argument therefore to the same purpose with that before, is intimated by
this particle, For.

The whole Verse contains an Assertion laid down in a negative Proposition, the
Assumption of the Apostles Argument, or the proof of it supposed in a
pro-syllogism, consisting in the ensuing Testimony with his Explication of it.
And it is to this purpose. The World to come is not made subject unto Angels;
but it was made subject to Jesus, and therefore he is exalted above them. This
he proves from the Testimony of the Psalmist, to this purpose; All things were
made subject to man, who for a little while was made lower than Angels; but
this man was Jesus; and this Assumption he proves from the Event: First, On the
part of man absolutely considered; we see that all things were not made subject
unto him; therefore he cannot be intended. Secondly, On the part of Jesus; All
things in the event agree unto him: First, He was made for a little while lower
than the Angels; which he shows the reason of, and thence takes occasion to
discourse of his Death and Sufferings, according to the method before declared;
and then, he was crowned with Glory and Dignity, all things being made subject
unto him; from all which it appears, that it is he, and not Angels, unto whom
the world to come is put in subjection. This is the series of the Apostles
Discourse, wherein are many things difficult and hard to be understood, which
must be particularly considered.

The first Verse, as was said, lays down the principal Assertion in a Negative
Proposition. The world to come is not made subject unto Angels. One Proof
hereof is included in the words themselves. For that Expression, he has not
put in subjection; is the same with our Apostle, as, it is no where written or
recorded in the Scripture; There is no Testimony of it. God is no where said to
have done it, See Chap. 1.5. with the Exposition of it. And these Negative
Arguments from the Authority of the Old Testament, He esteemed in this matter,
cogent and sufficient.

In the Proposition it self, (1.) The Subject of it, the World to come, with
(2.) Its limitation, whereof we treat; and (3.) The Praedicate, negatively
expressed, is not put in subjection to Angels, are to be considered.

The Subject of the Proposition is, the World to come: (...). The New Heavens
and New Earth ((...),) which God promised to create, Isa. 65.17. Chap. 66.22.
which refers unto (...), the days of the Messiah. The latter Jews sometimes
call it, (...), the future world; though usually by that expression, they
intend the World of future bliss. But the world here intended is no other but
the promised state of the Church under the Gospel. This with the Worship of God
therein, with especial Relation unto the Messiah, the Author and Mediator of
it, administering its heavenly things before the Throne of Grace, thereby
rendering it spiritual and heavenly, and diverse from the state of the Worship
of the Old Testament which was worldly and carnal, was the World to come, that
the Jews looked for, and which in this place is intended by the Apostle. This
we must farther confirm, as the foundation of the ensuing Exposition. That this
then is the intendment of the Apostle; appears,

First, From the limitation annexed; (...), concerning which we treat. This is
the world whereof he treats with the Hebrews in this Epistle; namely, the
Gospel-State of the Church; the Worship whereof he had in the words immediately
foregoing pressed them unto the observation of: And not only so, but described
it also, by that State wherein the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were
given and enjoyed. And the mention of them, in the words directly preceding, is
that description of the World to come, which the Apostle in these words refers
unto, concerning which we speak. And the Tradition of this New World, or the
Restoration of all things under the Messiah, was one of the principal Reports
of Truth received among the Jews, which the Apostle presses them withal.

Some suppose that (...), we speak, is put for (...), we have spoken, and would
have it refer unto Chapter 1.6. But what the Apostle there intends by the World,
we have sufficiently evinced and declared. The World there by an usual
Synechdoche is put for the habitable earth; the (...), which the Son of God
made and came unto, John 1.11. Here a certain state and condition of things in
the world, about which he treated with the Hebrews, is intended.

Besides they who would thus change the word, (Grotius, Crellius,
Schlictingius) by the world, Chap. 1.6. understand Heaven it self, the state of
Glory, which is not here insisted on by the Apostle: For,

Secondly, He treats of that which was already done in the crowning of Jesus
with Glory and Honor, as the words following do manifest. This crowning of him
was upon his Ascension, as we have before proved at large. Then, was not the
state of Glory made subject unto him, because it was not then, nor is yet in
being. And therefore they who turn, we speak, into, we have before spoken, are
forced also to pervert the following words, and to interpret; he has made all
things subject unto him, he has purposed or decreed so to do; both without
cause or reason. The World whereof the Apostle treats was immediately made
subject to Jesus; that is, the Church of the New Testament, when God anointed
him King upon his holy Hill of Sion; and therefore in the Psalm is there
mention made of those other parts of the Creation to be joined in this
subjection, that have no Relation unto Heaven.

Thirdly, The Apostle does not treat directly any where in this Epistle
concerning Heaven, or the world of the blessed to come; he frequently indeed
mentions Heaven, not absolutely, but as it belongs unto the Gospel world, as
being the place of the constant residence of the High Priest of the Church, and
wherein also the Worship of it is through faith celebrated.

Fourthly, The Apostle in these words insists on the Antithesis which he
pursues in his whole discourse between the Judaical and Evangelical
Church State; for what ever power Angels might have in and over things
formerly, this World to come, says he, is not made subject unto them. Now it
is not Heaven and Glory that he opposes to the Judaical Church State and
Worship, but that of the Gospel, as we shall find in the progress of the
Epistle, which is therefore necessarily here intended.

Fifthly, If by the World to come, the eternal blessed state of Glory be
designed, to begin at or after the general Judgment; then here is a promise,
that that blessed estate shall de novo be put in subjection to Jesus Christ as
Mediator; but this is directly contrary unto what is elsewhere revealed by the
same Apostle, concerning the transactions between the Father and the Son as
Mediator at that day, 1 Cor. 15.28. And when all shall be subdued unto him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him who put all things under
him, that God may be all in all. Which words if they do not absolutely assert
the ceasing of the Kingdom of the Mediator, but only the order of all things
unto Eternity in their subjection unto God by Christ, yet they are plainly
exclusive of the grant of a new Power or Authority unto him, or of anew making
subject of all things unto him. Add unto all this, that the Apostle proves the
subjection of this world unto the Lord Christ, and not unto Angels, by a
testimony expressing directly the present things of this world, antecedent unto
the day of Judgment. From what has been discoursed we conclude, that the World
to come here expressed, is the State and Worship of the Church under the
Messiah, called so by the Apostle according to the usual appellation which then
it had obtained among the Jews, and allowed by him until the Mosaical
Church State was utterly removed. And he afterward declares how this comprised
Heaven it self also, because of the Residence of our High Priest in the Holiest
not made with hands, and the continual admission of the Worshippers unto the
Throne of Grace. This is the subject of the Apostles Proposition, that
concerning which he treats.

Concerning this World the Apostle first declares negatively, that it is not
made subject unto Angels. The subjecting of this World to come unto any is such
a disposal of it, as that he or they unto whom it is put in subjection, should,
as the Lord of it, erect institute or set it up, rule and dispose of it being
erected, and judge or reward it in the end of its course and time. This is
denied concerning Angels, and the denial proved tacitly, because no such thing
is testified in the Scripture. And herein the Apostle either preventeth an
Objection that might arise from the power of the Angels in and over the Church
of old, as some think; or rather proceeds in his design of exalting the Lord
Jesus above them, and thereby prefers the Worship of the Gospel before that
prescribed by the Law of Moses. For he seems to grant that the old Church and
Worship were in a sort made subject unto Angels; this of the World to come
being solely and immediately in his power, who in all things was to have the
preeminence. And this will farther appear, if we consider the instances before
mentioned, wherein the subjection of this World to come unto any does consist.

First, It was not put in subjection unto Angels in its Erection or
Institution. That work was not committed unto them, as the Apostle declares in
the entrance of this Epistle. They did not reveal the Will of God concerning
it, nor were entrusted with Authority to erect it. Some of them indeed were
employed in messages about its preparatory work, but they were not employed
either to reveal the mysteries of it wherewith they were unacquainted, nor
authoritatively in the Name of God to erect it. For the Wisdom of God in the
nature and mystery of this work they knew not, but by the effects in the work
it self, Ephesians. 3.9, 10. which they looked and enquired into, to learn and
admire, 1 Pet. 1.12. and therefore could not be entrusted with authority for
its Revelation, and the building of the Church thereon. But things were
otherwise of old. The Law, which was the foundation of the Judaical
Church State, was given by the Disposition of Angels, Acts 7.53. Gal. 3.19. And
our Apostle here calls it the Word spoken by Angels. They were therefore
entrusted by God to give the Law and the Ordinances of it unto the people in
his Name and Authority, which being the foundation of the Mosaical
Church State, it was so far put in subjection unto them.

Secondly, It is not put in subjection unto Angels, as to the Rule and disposal
of it being erected. Their Office in this world is a Ministry, chap. 1.13. not
a Rule or Dominion. Rule in or over the Church they have none, but are brought
into a coordination of service with them that have the testimony of Jesus, Rev.
19.10. chap. 22.9. being equally with us subjected unto him, in whom they and
we are gathered into one head, Ephesians. 1.10. And from their ministerial presence
in the Congregations of Believers, does our Apostle press women unto modesty
and sobriety in their habit and deportment, 1 Cor. 11.10. And the Church of old
had an apprehension of this truth, of the presence of an Angel or Angels in
their Assemblies, but so as to preside in them. Hence is that caution relating
to the Worship of God, Eccles. 5.5, 6. Better it is that thou should not vow,
than thou should vow and not pay; suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin, neither say thou before the Angel that it was an error; why should God be
angry at thy voice and destroy the work of thine hands. By vowing and not
paying, a man brought upon his flesh, that is, himself and his posterity, a
guilt not to be taken away with excuses of haste or precipitation made unto the
Angel presiding in their Worship, to take an account of its due performance. It
is true, the absolute sovereign power over the Church of old, was in the Son of
God alone; but an especial immediate power over it was committed unto Angels.
And hence was the Name of (...), God, Judge, Mighty One, communicated unto
them, namely from their Authority over the Church, that Name expressing the
Authority of God, when unto him ascribed. And because of this, their acting in
the Name, and representing the Authority of God, the Saints of old had an
apprehension, that upon their seeing of an Angel they should die, from that
saying of God, that none should see his face and live, Exodus 33.20 So Manoah
expressly, Judge. 13.22. He knew that it was an Angel which appeared unto him,
and yet says to his wife, We shall surely die because we have seen (...), an
Angel, vested with the Authority of God. And hence it is not unlikely, but that
there might be a respect or Worship due unto the Angels under the Old
Testament, which themselves declare not to be meet for them under the New, Rev.
19. not that they are degraded from any Excellency or Privilege which before
they enjoyed, but that the Worshippers under the New Testament, through their
Relation unto Christ, and the Exaltation of their nature in his Person, are
delivered from that under-age estate, wherein they differed not from servants,
Gal. 4.1. and are advanced into an equality of liberty with the Angels
themselves, Heb. 12.24, 25. Ephesians. 1.10 chap. 3.14, 15. As amongst men there
may be a respect due from an inferior to a superior, which may cease when he
is advanced into the same condition with the other, though the superior be not
at all abased. And to this day the Jews contend that Angels are to be adored
with some kind of Adoration, though they expressly deny that they are to be
invocated or prayed unto. Furthermore about their Power and Authority in the
disposal of the outward concernments of the Church of old, much more might be
declared from the Visions of Zechary and Daniel, with their works in the two
great typical deliverances of it from Egypt and Babylon. But we must not here
insist on particulars.

Thirdly, as to the power of judging and rewarding at the last day, it is
openly manifest, that God has not put this world to come in subjection unto
Angels, but unto Jesus alone.

This then is the main Proposition that the Apostle proceeds upon in his
present Argument. The most glorious effect of the Wisdom Power and Grace of
God, and that wherein all our spiritual concernments here are enwrapped,
consists in that blessed Church state, with the eternal consequences of it,
which having been promised from the foundation of the world, was now to be
erected in the days of the Messiah. That you may, says he, no more cleave unto
your old institutions, because given out unto you by Angels, nor hearken after
such works of wonder and terror as attended their Disposition of the Law in
the Wilderness, consider that this world, so long expected and desired, this
blessed estate, is not on any account made subject unto Angels, or committed
unto their disposal; the Honor thereof being entirely reserved for another.

Having thus fixed the true and proper sense of this verse, we may stop here a
little to consult the Observations that it offers for our own instruction. Many
things in particular might be hence educed; but I shall insist on one only,
which is comprehensive of the design of the Apostle, and it is, That

This is the great privilege of the Church of the Gospel, that in the things
of the Worship of God, it is made subject unto, and immediately depends upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, and not any other, Angels or Men.

That this is the privilege thereof, and that it is a great and blessed
privilege, will both appear in our consideration of what it is, and wherein it
does consist. And among many other things, these ensuing are contained therein.

1. That the Lord Christ is our Head. So it was promised of old, that their
King should pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them, Mic. 2.13. He
shall be their King Head and Ruler. God has now gathered all things, all the
things of his Church, into an Head in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. They were all
scattered and disordered by sin, but are now all recollected and brought into
order under one Head. Him has he given to be Head over all things unto the
Church, verse 22. The whole Sovereignty over all the whole Creation that is
committed unto him, is only for this end, that he may be the more perfect and
glorious Head to the Church. He is that Head on which the whole body has its
orderly and regular dependence, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. The head of the body the
Church, Col. 1.18. The head of every man, that is of every believer, 1 Cor.
11.3. Ephesians. 5.23. And this is every where proposed both as our great Honor,
and our great Advantage. To be united unto him, subjected unto him as our Head,
gives us both honor and safety. What greater honor can we have, than to be
freemen of that Corporation whereof he is the Head, than to be subjects of his
Kingdom? What greater safety than to be united unto him ins^parably, who is in
Glory, invested with all Power and Authority over the whole Creation of God,
every thing that may do us good or evil.

2. That he is our only Head. The Church is so put in subjection unto the Lord
Christ, as not to be subject unto any other. It is true, the Members of the
Church, as men on the earth have other Relations, in respect whereof they are,
or may be subject one to another; Children unto Parents, Servants unto Masters,
People unto Rulers; but as they are Members of the Church, they are subject
unto Christ and none other: If any other were or might be an Head unto them,
they must be Angels or men. As for Angels, we have it here plainly testified,
that the Church is not made subject in any thing unto them. And amongst men,
the Apostles of all others might seem to lay the justest claim to this
Privilege and Honor. But they openly disclaim any pretense thereunto. So does
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.24. We have no Dominion, Rule, Lordship, Headship, over your
faith, any thing that concerns your obedience to God, and your Worship, but are
helpers of your joy. And again says he, We preach not our selves but Jesus
Christ, the Lord, the only Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake, 2
Cor. 4.5. And Peter as it should seem, foreseeing that some who should come
after would pretend unto such Pre-eminence, warns the Elders that they should
not think themselves Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. And this they did in
pursuit of the instructions and charge which their Lord and Master gave them,
Matthew. 23.25, 26, 27. where he warns them, that they should neither think of
Dignity nor Dominion over the Church, but apply themselves with all Humility
unto the service of it; for which he elsewhere adds his reason, namely that
all his Disciples have one Lord and Master, and no more, Joh. 13.13. Matthew.
23.9, 10. And it is a woeful confusion that the Papists run themselves into in
this matter. For first, they put the whole Church into subjection unto a man,
whom they call the Pope, the common Father and Master of Christians, the Head
of the Church; and then subject both him and it unto Angels, in the Adoration
and Invocation of them, the greatest subjection possible; when the Scripture
assigns one only Head of the Church expressly, even the Lord Jesus, and fully
declares that it is not put in subjection unto Angels at all. But to pass them
by, the Lord Christ is not only thus the only Head in general unto the whole
Church, but also unto every individual Believer in the Church; The Head of
every man is Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. He is so to every believer respectively and
severally; and that in both those senses wherein he is an Head, that is
according to the natural and metaphorical use of the word: For,

1. He is the only Head of Vital Influence to the whole Church, and every
member thereof. As from the natural Head all influences of life, for
subsistence, motion, acting, guidance and direction are communicated unto the
whole body, and to every member thereof: so from the Lord Christ alone, as he
is the spiritually vital Head of the Church, in whom are the springs of life
and all quickening grace, there are communicated unto the whole Church, and
every believer therein, both the first quickening vital principle of life it
self, and all succeeding supplies and influences of grace, for the enlivening,
strengthening, acting, guiding and directing of them. This himself declares by
comparing the Relations of all believers unto him, unto that of branches unto
the Vine, Joh. 15.2, 4. which have no life but by virtue of their union unto
the Vine, nor sap for fruitfulness but what is derived therefrom, which he
teaches expressly, verse 5. Without me, says he, ye can do nothing. And this
the Apostle lively sets out unto us, in the similitude of the natural body,
Col. 2.19. And this placing of all fullness in the Lord Christ, as the Head of
the Church, that thence the whole and every member of it might derive needful
supplies to themselves, is fully taught us in the Gospel. Hence the Church is
called the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 1.2, 3. or that whereunto Christ
communicates of his All-fulness of Grace, until it comes unto the measure or
degree of growth and perfection, which he has graciously assigned unto it. And
none I suppose will contend, but that the Lord Christ is the alone and only
Head of the Church in this sense. It has not a spiritual dependence on any
other for grace. There is indeed I know not what monster lies in the Opinion of
them, who take upon themselves to confer grace unto others by virtue of such
things as they do unto them, or for them; but this we do not now consider. If
any man think he may have grace from any but Christ alone, be they Angels or
men, let him turn himself unto them, but withal know assuredly, that he
forsakes the Fountain of living waters for broken cisterns, which will yield
him no relief.

2. He is the only Head of Rule and Government unto the whole Church, and every
member thereof. This Rule or Government of the Church concerns all that
Obedience which it yields unto God in his Worship. And unto an Head herein it
is required, that he give perfect Rules and Laws for all things necessarily
belonging thereunto, and to take care that they be observed. And here a great
contest arises in the world. The Papists in behalf of their Pope and others
under him, contend to be sharers with the Lord Christ in this his Headship; and
fain they would persuade us, that he himself has appointed that so it should
be. The Scripture tells us, that he was faithful in the whole house of God, as
was Moses, and that as a Lord over his own house, to erect, rule, and establish
it; and himself when he gives commission unto his Apostles, bids them to teach
men to do and observe all that he had commanded them: And accordingly they tell
us, that they delivered unto us what they received from the Lord; and command
us not to be wise above what is written. But I know not how it is come to pass,
that these men think, that the Lord Christ is not a complete Head in this
matter, that he has not instituted all Rules and Laws that are needful and
convenient for the right discharge of the Worship of God, and Obedience of the
Church therein; at least that somewhat may be added unto what he has
appointed, that may be much to the advantage of the Church. And this they take
to be their work, by virtue of I know not what unsealed warrant, unwritten
commission. But to add any thing in the Worship of God unto the Laws of the
Church, is to exercise Authority over it, dominion over its faith; and to
pretend that this world to come, this blessed Gospel Church State is put in
subjection unto them, although it be not so to Angels. A vain and proud
pretense, as at the last day it will appear. But you will say, Christ gives his
Laws only unto his whole Church, and not to individual believers, who receive
them from the Church, and so he is not an immediate Head unto every one in
particular. I answer, That the Lord Christ commits his Laws unto the Churches
ministry to teach them unto believers; but his own Authority immediately
affects the soul and conscience of every believer. He that subjects himself
aright unto them, does it not upon the authority of the Church by whom they are
taught and declared, but upon the authority of Christ by whom they are given
and enacted.

3. It appears from hence, that as he is our only Head, so he is our immediate
Head. We have our immediate dependence upon him, and our immediate access unto
him. He has indeed appointed means for the communicating of his grace unto us,
and for the exercising of his Rule and Authority over us. Such are all his
Ordinances with the Offices and Officers that he has appointed in his Church;
the first whereof he requires us to be constant in the use of, the latter he
requires our obedience and submission unto. But these belong only unto the way
of our dependence, and hinder not but that our dependence is immediate on
himself, he being the immediate Object of our Faith and Love. The soul of a
believer rests not in any of these things, but only makes use of them to
confirm his faith in subjection unto Christ. For all these things are ours; it
is appointed for our use, and we are Christ's, as he is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22,
23. And so have we our immediate access unto him, and not as some foolishly
imagine by Saints and Angels, and by him to God, even to the Throne of Grace.

4. This privilege is greatly augmented, in that the Church being made subject
unto Christ alone, and cast into a dependence upon him, he will assuredly take
care of all its concernments, seeing unto him only does it betake it self. The
Church made it of old part of her plea, that she was as one fatherless, Hos.
14.3. that is every way helpless, that had none to relieve or succor her. And
the Lord Christ gives this as a reason why he stirs up himself unto the
assistance of his people, because there was no man that appeared for their
help, no Intercessor to interpose for them, Isa. 59.16. Now God having placed
the Church in this condition, as to be oft-times altogether Orphans in this
world, to have none to give them the least countenance or assistance, and the
Church it self choosing this condition, to renounce all hopes and expectations
from any else beside, betaking it self unto the Power Grace and Faithfulness of
the Lord Christ alone, it cannot as it were but be a great Obligation upon him
to take care of it, and to provide for it at all times. They are members of his
Body, and he alone is their Head; they are Subjects of his Kingdom, and he
alone is their King; they are Children and Servants in his Family, and he alone
is their Father Lord and Master; and can he forget them, can he disregard them?
Had they been committed to the care of men, it may be some of them would have
fought and contended for them; though their faithfulness is always to be
suspected, and their strength is a thing of naught: Had they been put into
subjection unto Angels, they would have watched for their good; though their
Wisdom and Ability be both finite and limited, so that they could never have
secured their safety; and shall not the Lord Jesus Christ, now they are made
his special care, as his Power and Faithfulness is infinitely above those of
any mee^ creature, excel them also in care and watchfulness for our good? And
all these things do sufficiently set out the Greatness of that privilege of
the Church which we insist upon. And there are two things that make this
Lib^rty and Exaltation of the Church necessary and reasonable.

1. That God having exalted our nature in the Person of his Son, into a
condition of Honor and Glory, so as to be worshipped and adored by all the
Angels of Heaven, it was not meet nor convenient that it should in our persons,
when united unto Christ as our Head, be made subject unto them. God would not
allow, that whereas there is the strictest union between the Head and the
Members, there should be such an interposition between them, as that the Angels
should depend on their Head, and the Members should depend on Angels; which
indeed would utterly destroy the Union and immediate intercourse that is and
ought to be between them.

2. God is pleased by Jesus Christ to take us into an holy communion with
himself, without any other medium or means of communication, but only that of
our nature, personally and inseparably united unto his own Nature in his Son.
And this also our subjection unto Angels is inconsistent withal. This order of
dependence the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. As there is no interposition between God and
Christ, no more is there between Christ and us; and in and by him alone do we
relate unto God himself. And this should teach us,

1. The equity and necessity of our universal obedience unto God in Christ. He
has freed us from subjection unto men and Angels, that we might serve him, and
live unto him. He has taken us to be his peculiar ones, his lot and portion,
from whom he expects all his Reverence of Glory out of this world. And he has
left us no pretense, no excuse for the neglect of any duties of obedience that
he requires of us. We cannot plead that we had other work to do, other Lords
and Masters to serve; he has set us free from them all, that we might be his.
If a King take a servant into his family, and thereby free and discharge him
from being liable unto any other duty or service what ever; may he not justly
expect that such a one will be diligent in the observation of all his commands;
especially considering also the Honor and Advantage that he has by being
taken near unto his person, employed in his affairs; And shall not God much
more expect the like from us, considering how exceedingly the privilege we
have by this relation unto him surpasses all that men can attain by the favor
of earthly Princes. And if we will choose other Lords of our own to serve, if
we are so regardless of our selves as that we will serve our lusts and the
world, when God has had such respect unto us, as that he would not suffer us
to be subject unto the Angels of heaven, how inexcusable shall we be in our sin
and folly? You shall be for me, says God, and not for any other what ever. And
are we not miserable if we like not this agreement?

2. For the manner of our obedience, how ought we to endeavor that it be
performed with all holiness and reverence: Moses makes this his great argument
with the people for Holiness in all their Worship and services; because no
people had God so nigh unto them as they had. And yet that nearness which he
insisted on, was but that of his Institutions, and some visible Pledges and
Representations therein of his Presence among them; now much more cogent must
the considerations of this real and spiritual nearness which God has taken us
unto himself in, by Jesus, needs be to the same purpose. All that we do, we do
it immediately unto this holy God; not only under his Eye, and in his Presence;
but in an especial and immediate relation unto him by Jesus Christ.

Verse VI.
THe Apostle has showed; that the World to come which the Judaical Church
looked for, was not made subject unto Angels, no mention of any such thing
being made in the Scripture. That which he assumes to make good his Assertion
of the Pre-eminence of the Lord Jesus above the Angels, is, that unto him it
was put in subjection. And this he does not expressly affirm in words of his
own, but insinuates in a Testimony out of the Scripture, which he cites and
urges unto that purpose. And this Way he proceeds for these two ends. (1.)
To evidence that what he taught was suitable unto the Faith of the Church of
old, and contained in the Oracles committed unto it; which was his especial way
of dealing with these Hebrews. (2.) That he might from the Words of that
Testimony take occasion to obviate a great Objection against the Dignity of
Christ, and Mysteries of the Gospel, taken from his Humiliation and Death, and
thereby make way to a farther Explication of many other Parts or Acts of ^is
Mediation; many Difficulties there are in the Words and Expressions of these
Verses, more in the Apostles Application of the Testimony by him produced, unto
the Person and End by him intended, all which, God assisting, we shall
endeavor to remove: And to that End shall consider,

1. The way and manner of his introducing this Testimony which is peculiar.

2. The Testimony it self produced; with an Explication of the meaning and
importance of the Words, in the Place from whence it is taken.

3. The Application of it unto the Apostles purpose, both as to the Person
intended, and as to the especial End aimed at. And,

4. Farther unfold, what the Apostle adds about the death and sufferings of
Christ, as included in this Testimony, though not intended as to the first use
and design of it. And,

5. Vindicate the Apostles Application of this Testimony, with our Explication
of it accordingly, from the Objections that some have made against it. All
which we shall pass through as they present themselves unto us in the Text it
self.

First, The manner of his citing this Testimony is somewhat peculiar. One
testified in a certain place: Neither person nor place being specified. As
though he had intended, (...), a certain Person whom he would not name. But the
Reason of it is plain; both Person and Place were sufficiently known to them to
whom he wrote. And the Syriack Translation changes the Expression in the Text
into, but as the Scripture witnesses and says; without Cause. The Hebrews
were not ignorant whose words they were which he made use of, nor where they
were recorded. The one there mentioned is David; and the certain place is the
eighth Psalm; whereof much need not to be added. A Psalm it is (...), of the
High Praises of God; and such Psalms do mostly, if not all of them respect the
Messiah and his Kingdom, as the Jews themselves acknowledge. For the time of
the Composure of this Psalm they have a conjecture which is not altogether
improbable; namely, that it was in the Night whilst he kept his Fathers sheep.
Hence in his Contemplation of the Works of God, he insists on the Moon and
Stars then gloriously presenting themselves unto him, not mentioning the Sun
which appeared not. So also in the Distribution that he makes of the things
here below that amongst others are made subject unto man, he fixes in the
first place on (...), flocks of Sheep, which were then peculiarly under his
care. So should all the works of God, and those especially about which we are
conversant in our particular Callings, excite us to the Admiration of his
Glory, and Praise of his name: And none are usually more void of holy thoughts
of God, than those who set themselves in no way acceptable unto him. This is
the place from whence this Testimony is taken; whose especial Author the
Apostle omitteth, both because it was sufficiently known, and makes no
difference at all who ever was the Penman of this or that Portion of Scripture,
seeing it was all equally given by Inspiration from God, whereon alone the
authority of it does depend.

2. The Testimony it self is contained in the words following, v. 6, 7. What is
man, etc. Before we enter into a particular Explication of the words, and of
the Apostles Application of them, we may observe that there are two things in
general, that lie plain and clear before us: As,

First, That All things whatsoever, are said to be put in subjection unto man;
that is, unto Humane Nature in one or more Persons, in opposition unto Angels,
or nature Angelical. To express the former, is the plain Design and Purpose of
the Psalmist, as we shall see. And whereas there is no such Testimony any where
concerning Angels, it is evident, that the meaning of the word is, unto man,
and not unto Angels; which the Apostle intimates in that adversative (...),
but; but of man it is said, not of Angels.

Secondly, That this Privilege was never absolutely nor universally made good
in, or unto the nature of man, but in, or with respect unto the Person of Jesus
Christ the Messiah. This the Apostle call us to the consideration of,
previously unto his Application of this Testimony in a peculiar manner unto
Jesus; v. 8. We s^e not all things. Now there is not any thing absolutely
necessary to make good the Apostles Reasoning, but what is comprised in these
two general Assertions, which lie evident in the Text, and are acknowledged by
all. We shall therefore distinctly consider the Testimony it self. The whole of
it consists in a Contemplation of the Infinite Love and Condescension of God
toward man; which is set out, (1.) In the manner of the expressing it. (2.) In
and by the words of the Expression; (3.) In the Acts of the Mind and Will of
God, wherein that Condescension and Grace consisted; and (4.) In the Effects
thereof, in his dispensation toward him.

First, In the manner of the Expression; What is man; by way of Admiration,
yea, he cries out with a kind of astonishment. The immediate Occasion hereof is
omitted by the Apostle, as not pertinent unto his purpose; but it is evident in
the Psalm. David having exercised his thoughts in the contemplation of the
Greatness, Power, Wisdom and Glory of God, manifesting themselves in his mighty
works, especially the Beauty, Order, Majesty, and usefulness of the Heavens,
and those glorious bodies which in them present themselves to all the world,
falls thereon into this Admiration, that this great, and infinitely Wise God,
who by the word of his mouth gave Being and Existence unto all those things,
and thereby made his own Exellencies conspicuous to all the world, should
condescend unto that Care and Regard of man, which on this occasion his
thoughts fixed themselves upon. What is man, says he? And this is, or should
be the great Use of all our Contemplation of the works of God; namely, that
considering his Wisdom and Power in them, we should learn to admire his Love
and Grace in setting his heart upon us, who are every way so unworthy, seeing
he might for ever satisfy himself, in those other appearingly more glorious
products of his Power and Godhead.

Secondly, He farther expresses his Admiration at this Condescension of God in
the words that he uses, intimating the Low and mean Estate of man in his own
nature. (...), what is poor miserable mortal man, obnoxious to Grief, Sorrow,
Anxiety, Pain, Trouble and Death: (...); but the Greeks have no name for man,
fully expressing that here used by the Psalmist. (...), comes nearest it, but
is not used in the Scripture. He adds, (...), and the Son of man; of one made
of the earth. This name the Apostle alludes to, yea, expresses, 1 Cor. 15.45,
47. The first man Adam, is (...), Of the earth earthly. So was it recorded of
old, Genesis 2.7. The Lord God formed (...), That man Adam which was the Father of
us all, of the dust of the ground: and so again, Genesis 3.19. Poor man made of
the dust of the ground. When the Scripture would express Man with reference
unto any thing of Worth or Excellency in him, it calls him, (...); and (...),
are Sons of men in Place, Power and esteem. So these words are distinguished,
Psalm 62.9. where we translate (...), Sons of Adam, men of low degree; and
(...), Sons of Ish, men of high degree. Now the Psalmist uses this expression
to heighten his Admiration at the Grace and Condescension of God. And as the
Person of the first Adam cannot be here especially intended; For although he
made himself (...), a miserable man and subject unto death, yet was he not
(...), the Son of man, of any man, for he was of God, Luke 3. ult. So there is
nothing in the words but may properly be ascribed unto the nature of man in the
Person of the Messiah. For as he was called in an especial manner, (...), the
Son of man; so was he made (...) a man subject to sorrow, and acquainted above
all men with grief and trouble, and was born on purpose to dye. Hence in the
contemplation of his own miserable condition, wherein unto the Dolorous
afflicting Passions of Humane Nature, which he had in himself, outward
Oppositions and Reproaches were superadded, he cries out concerning himself,
(...), Psalm. 22.7. I am a worm, and not (...), a man of any consideration in
the world; (...) at best.

Thirdly, He expresses this Condescension of God in the Affections and acting
of his mind toward man; (...), that thou remembrest him, or art mindful of
him. (...), that thou should be mindful of him. To Remember in the Scripture
when ascribed unto God, always intends some Act of his mind, and Purpose of
his Will, and that either for good or evil toward them that are remembered, in
a signal manner. So also is Remembrance it self used; On this account God is
said sometimes to remember us for good, and sometimes to remember our sins no
more. So that it denotes the Affection of the mind of God toward any creature
for Good or Evil, attended with the Purpose of his Will to act toward them
accordingly. In the first way it is here used, and so also by Job, Chap. 7.17.
(...), What is man that thou should magnify him, that thou should set
thine heart upon him? That is, Remember him, or be mindful of him; set thine
heart upon him for Good. The frame of the heart and mind of God toward the
Nature of man in the Person of Jesus Christ, in reference unto all the Good
that he did in it and by it, is intended in this Expression. The whole Council
and Purpose of God, concerning the salvation of mankind, in and by the
Humiliation, Exaltation, and whole Mediation of the man Christ Jesus is couched
herein.

Fourthly, There are in this Condescension the Effects of this Act of Gods Mind
and Will in remembering of man; And they are expressed (1.) Under one General
head, and (2.) In Particular Instances of them.

First, The general effect of Gods remembering man, is that he visits him. As
the same word is used in Job, in the place before mentioned. (...), though
variously used, yet it constantly denotes the acting of a sup^riour toward an
inferior. And though it be often otherwise used; yet commonly it expresses
the acting of God toward his people for good. And in especial is this term of
visiting used to express the acting of of God in doing of us good by sending of
Jesus Christ to take our nature on him, Luke 1.68. He has visited and redeemed
his people. And to the same purpose, v. 78. The day spring from on high has
visited us, both relating to the acting of God toward us in the Person of his
Son incarnate. So Chap. 7.16. This term therefore of visiting does not
precisely design Gods acting in the Exaltation of him visited, but such an
ordering of things toward him, as is attended with great Care, Grace and Love;
So was the nature of man in the Heart of God to do good unto it, in and by the
Person of Jesus Christ, and so he acted toward it, or visited it. This is that
which was the ground of the Psalmists admiration, and which will be so in all
believers unto Eternity. It was not the outward state and condition of mankind
in the world, which since the entrance of sin is sad and deplorable, that
excites this admiration in the Psalmist: But his mind is intent upon the
Mystery of the Grace, Wisdom and Love of God in the Person of the Messiah.

Verse VII.
SEcondly, The especial instances wherein this Visitation of God expressed it
self are contained in ver. 7. and therein referred unto two Heads: (1.) Man's
Depression and Humiliation: (2.) His Exaltation and Glory.

The first is expressed in these words, Thou have made him lower for a little
while than the Angels. This was a part of Gods Visitation; and though not that
which was immediately intended by the Apostle; yet that whereof he intends to
make great use in his Progress. That these words intend not the Exaltation of
the nature of mere man, as if they should intimate that such is his Dignity,
that he is made but a little less than Angels, and how destructive that sense
is unto the Apostles Intention and Application of the words, we shall
afterward declare. Three things are here expressed. (1.) The Act of God, in
making of him low, or lessening of him. (2.) The measure of that Depression,
than the Angels. (3.) His duration in that State and Condition, a little while.

First, (...), the Word used by the Psalmist, is rendered by the Apostle (...),
and that properly; They both signify a Diminution of State and Condition; a
depression of any one from what he before enjoyed. And this in the first place
belongs unto Gods Visitation. And the acting of the Will of Christ in this
matter, suitably unto the Will of the Father, is expressed by words of the same
importance. (...), he emptied himself; and (...), he humbled himself, Phil.
2.7, 8. denoting a voluntary depression from the glory of a former State and
Condition. In this Humiliation of Christ in our nature, how much of that Care,
and (...), Inspection and Visitation of God was contained is known.

Secondly, The measure of this Humiliation and Depression is expressed in
reference unto Angels, with whom he is now compared by the Apostle; he was made
less than the Angels. This the Hebrews had seen and knew; and might from his
Humiliation raise an Objection against what the Apostle asserted about his
Preference above them. Wherefore he acknowledges, that he was made less than
they, shows that it was foretold that so he should be, and in his following
Discourse, gives the Reasons why it was so to be. And he speaks not of the
Humiliation of Christ absolutely, which was far greater than here it is
expressed by him, as he afterward declares, but only with respect unto Angels,
with whom he compares him; and it is therefore sufficient to his purpose at
present to show that he was made lower than they. (...). Hierom renders the
word in the Psalm, a Deo, then God; and Faher Stapulensis had a long contest
with Erasmus to prove that they should be so rendered in this place; which is
plainly to contradict the Apostle, and to accuse him of corrupting the word of
God. Besides the sense contended for by him and others, is absurd and foolish;
namely, that the Humane Nature of Christ was made little l^ss than God, and
humbled that it might be so; when it was infinitely less than the Divine
Nature, as being created. The LXX. and all old Greek Translations read Angels;
That Elohim is often used to denote them we have proved before. The Targum has
(...), Angels. And the scope of the place necessarily requires that sense of
the word. God then in his Visitation of the nature of man, in the Person of his
Son, put it, and therein him that was invested in it, into a condition of wants
and streights, and humbled him beneath the condition of Angels, for the blessed
Ends afterward declared. For although from his Incarnation and Birth, the
Angels adored his Person as their Lord; yet in the outward condition of his
Humane Nature, he was made exceedingly beneath that state of Glory and
Excellency, which the Angels are in a constant Enjoyment of.

Thirdly, There is a space of time, a Duration intended for this condition. He
made him lower, (...), for a little while, or a short season. That (...), is
often used in that sense, and that, that is the proper notation of (...), we
have showed before. But that which renders that sense of the words here
unquestionable, is the Apostles precise restraining them thereunto in v. 9. as
we shall see. It was but for a little while, that the Person of Christ in the
Nature of man was brought into a condition more indigent than the state of
Angels is exposed unto: Neither was he for that season made a little, but very
much lower than the Angels. And had this been the whole of his state it could
not have been an Effect of that inexpressible Love and Care which the Psalmist
so admires. But being it is but for a little continuance, and that for the
blessed Ends which the Apostle declares, nothing can more commend them unto us.

Secondly, There is another Effect of Gods Visitation of man in his Exaltation;
expressed, 1. In the Dignity whereunto he advanced him: and 2. In the Rule and
Domion that he gave unto him.

For the first, He crowned him with Glory and Honor, (...); is insigne regium;
the badge and token of Supreme and Kingly Power. Hence when David complains of
the straightning and Diminution of his Power or Rule, he says, his Crown was
profaned unto the ground, Psalm. 89.39. That is, made contemptible, and trampled
on. To be crowned then, is to be invested with Sovereign Power, or with Right
and Title thereunto; as it was with Solomon, who was crowned during the life of
his Father. Nor is it an ordinary Crown that is intended, but one accompanied
with Glory and Honor. To be crowned with Glory and Honor, is to have a
glorious and honorable Crown, or Rule and Sovereignty. (...). The first
denotes the Weight of this Crown; (...), a weight of glory, from (...), to be
heavy; (...), a weight of glory, as the Apostle speaks in Allusion to the
Primitive signification of this word, 2 Cor. 4.17. The other its Beauty and
Glory; both Authority and Majesty. How Christ was thus crowned, we have at
large showed on the first Chapter.

Secondly, This Sovereignty is attended with actual Rule; Wherein (1.) The
Dominion it self is expressed: and (2.) The Extent of it. First, Thou made
him have Dominion over the works of thy hands: (...), made him to rule.
(...), appointedst him in Authority over. He had actual Rule and Dominion given
him upon his Coronation. And Secondly, The Extent of this Dominion is the Works
of Gods hands. And least any from this indefinite Expression should think this
Rule limited, either to the things mentioned before by the Psalmist, v. 4.
called the work of Gods fingers, that is, the Heavens, the Moon and the Stars,
or in the following Distribution of things here below, into Sheep, Oxen, Fowls
and Fish, v. 7, 8. that is, all the creatures here below, he adds an
Amplification of it in an universal Proposition, (...), he has put all things
without Exception in subjection unto him; and to manifest his absolute and
unlimited Power, with the unconditional subjection of all things unto him, he
adds that they are placed, (...), under his very feet. An Expression setting
forth a Dominion, every way unlimited and absolute.

Verse VIII.
THe Apostle having recited the Testimony which he intends to make use of,
proceeds in the eighth Verse unto some such Explications of it, as may make it
appear to be proper and suited unto the End for which it is produced by him.
And they are two; the first whereof respects the sense of the words which
express the Extent of this Dominion; the latter an instance of some Person or
Persons, unto whom this Testimony as thus explained, cannot be applied.

For the Explication of the Objective Extent of the Rule and Dominion
mentioned, he adds, For in that he has made all subject unto him, he has left
nothing that is not put under him. For whereas it might be objected, that there
is no mention in the Psalm of the World to come whereof he treats; he lets them
know, that that cannot be excepted; seeing the Assertion is universal and
unlimited, that all things whatsoever are put under him. It is true, our
Apostle making use of this very Testimony in another place, 1 Cor. 15.27. adds
there, that there is a manifest Exception in reference unto him who so put all
things under him; and it is evident that it is so indeed; for the Psalmist
treats not of God himself, but of the works of God; and among them, says the
Apostle here; there lies no Exception; they are all brought into Order under
this Rule. And so by this Testimony, thus explained, as necessity requires it
should be, he has fully confirmed, that the World to come being one of the
especial works of God, and not put in subjection unto Angels, is made subject
unto man; which was that he undertook to demonstrate.

Secondly, To direct this Testimony unto its proper End, and to make way for
its Application unto him, who is especially intended therein; he declares
negatively unto whom it is not applicable; but now we see not yet all things
put under him. Man it was, concerning whom the words are spoken; What is man?
This must denote the nature of man; and that either as it is in all mankind in
general and every individual, or in some especial and peculiar instance, in one
partaker of that nature. For the First, He denies that this can belong unto man
in general, all, or any of them on that general account of being men; And in
this Negation; there are two Circumstances considerable: First, The manner of
his asserting it by an appeal to common Experience; we see; this is a matter
whereof every one may judge: We, all of us know by experience, that it is
otherwise; we need neither Testimony nor Argument to instruct us herein. Our
own condition, and that which we behold other men in, is sufficient to inform
us. And this is a way whereby an appeal is made as it were to common sense and
Experience, as we do in things that are most plain and unquestionable.
Secondly, There is a limitation of this Experience, in the word yet; we see
not as yet. And this does not intimate a contrary state of things for the
future, but denies, as to all the time that is past. A long space of time there
has been since the giving out of this Testimony, much longer since the
Creation of man, and all other things, and yet all this while, we see that all
things are far enough from being put under the feet of man; or if there be in
the word a reserve for some season, wherein this word shall in some sense be
fulfilled in mere man also, it is for that time wherein they shall be perfectly
glorified with him, who is principally intended, and so to be admitted as it
were to be sharers with him in his Dominion, Revel. 3.21. These things make
plain what is here denied, and in what sense. All mankind in conjunction are
very remote from being invested with the Dominion here described; from having
the whole Creation of God cast in subjection under their feet. It is true,
there was given unto man at first in his Original condition, a Rule over those
creatures here below, that were made for the use and sustentation of his
natural life, and no other. And this also is in some measure continued unto his
Posterity; though against the present bent and inclination of the creatures,
who groan because of the bondage that they are put unto, in serving of their
use and necessity. But all this at first was but an obscure Type and shadow of
the Dominion here intended, which is absolute, universal, and such as the
creatures have no reason to complain of, their proper condition being allotted
unto them therein. Hence we our selves by our own Observation, may easily
discern that this word respects not principally, either the first man or his
posterity; for we see not as yet after this long space of time since the
creation, that all things are put into subjection unto him.

Having thus unfolded the Testimony insisted on before we proceed unto the
Apostolical Application of it unto the Person to whom it does belong, we may
stay here a little, and gather something from it for our instruction. And it is
in general, that,

The consideration of the Infinitely Glorious Excellencies of the nature of
God, maninifesting themselves in his Works, does greatly set out his
Condescension and Grace, in his regard and respect unto mankind. This the
occasion of the Words, and the Words themselves do teach us.

1. This the method of the Psalmist, I say, leads us unto. He begins and ends
his consideration of the works of God, with an Admiration of his Glorious
Excellency by whom they were made, v. 1.9. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is
thy name: how glorious art thou, and thou manifestest thy self so to be; and
from thence does he proceed to the consideration of his condescension in his
regard and love to man, v. 4. And to direct us in this duty with the Psalmist
we may observe:

First, That the Works of God, those especially which were the peculiar subject
of his Meditation, the heavenly bodies which we behold, are indeed in
themselves exceedingly glorious. Their Frame, Greatness, Beauty, Order, Course,
Usefulness, all speak them admirable and glorious. The naked view of them is
enough to fill the mind of man with Admiration and Astonishment. And the more
we contemplate on them, the more skilful are we in the consideration of their
Nature, Order and Use, the more excellent do they appear unto us; and yet it is
the least part of their Greatness, and beautiful disposition that we can attain
a certain knowledge of; So that still they remain more the objects of our
Admiration and wonder, than of our Science. Hence the wisest among the Heathen
who were destitute of the teachings of the Word and Spirit of God, did with one
consent ascribe of old a Deity unto them, and worshipped them as Gods; yea, the
very name of God in the Greek Language (...), is taken from (...), to run,
which they derived from the constant course of the heavenly bodies. They saw
with their Eyes how glorious they were: they found out by Reason their
Greatness and dreadful motion. Experience taught them their Use, as the
immediate fountains of Light, Warmth, Heat, Moisture, and so consequently of
Life, Growth, and all useful things; It may be they had some Tradition of that
Rule and Dominion, which was at first allotted unto the Sun and Moon over day
and night, Genesis 1.16. On these and the like accounts, having lost the knowledge
of the true and only God, they knew not so well whither to turn themselves for
a Deity, as to those things which they saw so full of Glory, and which they
found to be of so universal a communicative Goodness and usefulness. And in
them did all Idolatry in the world begin. And it was betimes in the world; as
we see in Job, where it is mentioned and condemned, Chap. 31.26, 27. If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart
has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand; he condemns the
Idolatry, but yet withal shows, that the Luster, Brightness and Glory of those
heavenly lights had a great influence on the hearts of men, to entice them unto
a secret Adoration, which would break out into outward Worship, whereof
salutation by kissing the hand was one part and act. And therefore God cautions
his people against this Temptation; Deuteronomy. 4.19. Lest thou lift up thine eyes up
unto Heaven, and where thou see the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars, even all
the Host of Heaven should be driven to worship them, which the Lord thy God
has divided unto all Nations under the whole Heaven; If men forget the true
God, and then lift up their eyes unto, or fall into the contemplation of the
Heavenly Bodies, such is their Glory, Majesty and Excellency, that they will be
driven and hurried unto the Adoration and Worship of them. And so universal was
this folly of old, that from those latter words, which the Lord thy God has
divided unto all Nations: the Jews affirm, that God has given the Sun, Moon
and Stars, to be the Deities of the Gentiles, for them to worship. But the
distribution there mentioned is, as unto their common use unto all Nations, and
not as to their Veneration; nor is God the Author of Idolatry, as they
blasphemously imagine. But this their Glory and Excellency lead them unto. And
when any of them ascended higher, to apprehend living intelligent Spirits for
their Deities; they yet conceived at least that they had their glorious
Habitation in the Heavenly Bodies. Yea, and some Christians have fallen into
vain imaginations, from a false Translation of the latter end of the fourth
Verse of Psalm 19. by the LXX. and the Vulgar Latin; who read the words, he
has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun; instead of, he has set in them; that
is, in the Heavens, a Tabernacle for the Sun, as the words are plain in the
Original. What should I mention the madness of the Manichees, who affirmed that
Christ himself was gone into, if not turned into the Sun. I name these things
only to show what Influence upon the minds of men destitute of the Word, the
Glory and Excellency of these heavenly bodies has had. And what inestimable
Grace God shows unto us in the benefit of his Word; for we are the posterity
of them, and by nature not one jot wiser than they, who worshipped these things
which are not God. But exceeding glorious works of God they are; and the more
we consider them, the more will their Glory and Greatness appear unto us. And
as the children of Israel said of the Sons of Anah, we were before them in our
own sight as Grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight: May we not much more
say concerning our selves, compared with these Glorious Works of the hands of
God, we are all but as Grasshoppers in comparison of them; and whence is it,
that God should set his heart upon us.

Secondly, These glorious works of God do indeed show the infinite Glory of him
that made them. This is the use that men should have made of their
Contemplation of them, and not have chosen them for their Gods, as they did
when their foolish hearts were darkened, and they waxed vain in their
imaginations. This use the Psalmist here makes of them, and this the Scripture
every where directs us unto. This David brings them in Preaching unto all the
world, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. They have a Voice, they speak aloud unto all
the world; and by their Beauty, Greatness, Order, Usefulness, they make known
the incomprehensible glory of him that made them. The (...), that which may be
known of God, is manifest in them, says Paul, Romans 1.19. And what is that;
even his Eternal Power and Godhead, v. 20. That is, his infinite Power,
Alsufficiency, and self-subsistence. These things are clearly seen in them.
Being all made and created by him in their season, does it not manifest, that
he was before them from Eternity, and that existing without them, in perfect
blessedness: And that he has made them; so beautiful, so glorious, so
excellent, and that out of nothing, does it not declare his infinite Power,
Wisdom and Goodness? Do they not all lead us to the contemplation of his
Infinite Excellencies? And whence is it, that he who made all these things of
nothing, should have such regard to the weak, frail nature of man? But that
this consideration may be the more effectual, let us take a little weak view of
some of those Excellencies of the Nature of God, which his works declare, and
which set an especial luster on his condescension unto us; As,

First, His Greatness. His Greatness is unsearchable, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
145.3. That is, it is Infinite. The Immensity of his nature, is his Greatness.
The Heaven of Heavens, says Solomon, cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. The
Infiniteness and Ubiquity of his Essence, is beyond all that the Understanding
and Imagination of man can reach unto. If men would set themselves to think and
imagine a Greatness, they can reach no higher than Heavens above Heavens, and
that as far as they can fancy; but this expresses not Immensity. Those Heavens
of Heavens cannot contain him. Our Thoughts of Greatness are apt to consist in
adding one thing unto another, until that which we think on, be extended unto
the utmost of our Imagination. But this has no Relation unto the Immensity of
God; which is not his filling of all imaginary Place or Space, but an Infinite
Existence in an Infinite Being; so that as he is present with, indistant from
the whole Creation, for says he, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? Jer. 23.24.
So is he no less present, where there is no part of the Creation. And if he
should produce thousands of Worlds, which he can do by* his Power, he would be
no less present in them all, indistant from every thing in them, than he is in
and unto this which he has already created. And this not by the extending of
his Essence and Greatness, but by the infiniteness of his Being. Neither are
there Parts in this Immensity; for that which has Parts cannot be Infinite or
Immense. Somewhat of God is not present in Heaven, and somewhat in earth; but
God is wholly present in his whole Being every where. This leaves no place for
the imagination of men, but calls us for pure Acts of Understanding, and Faith
to assent unto it. And thus far Reason will go; that it will assent unto the
truth of that which it cannot comprehend, because it is convinced that it
cannot be otherwise. What remains, it leaves to Faith, and Reverential
Adoration. Reason having by the help of Divine Revelation lead the mind and
soul thus far; that God is immense, not only present unto the whole Creation,
but existing in his infinite being, where no creature is, and that in his whole
Essence equally, there it gives them up to Admiration, Reverence, Adoration,
and the Improvement by faith of this Excellency of God, where ever they are: so
does the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Thoughts of Gods Omnipresence are
of singular use to the soul in every condition. And who can sufficiently admire
this Excellency of the Nature of God? How astonishable is this his Greatness?
How are all the Nations of the world, as the drop of a bucket, as the dust of
the balance, as Vanity, as Nothing before him? What is a little dust to an
Immensity of Being? To that whose Greatness we cannot measure, whose Nature we
cannot comprehend, whose Glory we can only stand afar off and adore? What is a
poor worm unto him who is every where, and who is every where filled with his
own Excellencies and Blessedness? The issue of all our thoughts on this
Property of Gods Nature, is Admiration and holy Astonishment. And whence is it,
that he should take thought of us, or set his heart upon us? And this Greatness
of God does he set forth by showing what a mean thing the whole Creation which
we behold is unto him. Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand,
and meted out the Heavens with a span, and comprehended the dust of the Earth
in a measure, and weighed the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a balance:
Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing;
all Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted unto him less than
nothing and vanity, Isa. 40.12, 15, 17.

Secondly, His Infinite Self-sufficiency does manifest it self in his works;
for all these things are the absolute product of his Power and Wisdom and
Goodness. From the infinite stores and Treasures of them did he bring them all
forth. They had no previous matter whereof they were made, no Reason, cause, or
end was there, why they should be made, but only what was in himself, and from
himself, Romans 11.36. Rev. 4.11. Now this could not have been without an
Infinite Self-sufficiency in himself; from whence it is, that all things begin
and end in him. And had he not been every way self-sufficient, before the
Existence of all other things out of nothing, nothing could have been produced.
And this arises from his Fullness of Being, which he declares by his names
(...), and (...); which denote his self-Being, his self-existence, his
self-sufficiency. All the Propertyes of his Nature being infinite, have that
which satisfies them and fills them. His Understanding is infinite: And as
nothing could comprehend the Infinite Nature of God, but an Infinite
Understanding, God could not know himself, if his Understanding were not
infinite; so nothing could satisfy an Infinite Understanding but an Infinite
Object; the Understanding of God could not be blessed and in rest, if the
Object of it, the Nature of God were not infinite. God by his Understanding
knows the extent of his Infinite Power, and so knows not only what he has
wrought by his Power, but also, what ever he can so do. And this suitableness
of the Properties of God one to another, as it makes them because infinite, not
really to differ from one another, or from his Nature it self; so it gives them
all Rest, Blessedness, Satisfaction and self-sufficiency. As to continue in our
former instance; the Blessedness of the Understanding of God consists in its
Comprehension of the whole Nature of God; nor is it capable of more, because it
can comprehend no more. Hence is God Alsufficient, and eternally blessed in the
contemplation and enjoyment of his own Excellencies. For Self-sufficiency is
the fountain of Blessedness. Where any thing is wanting, there is no absolute
Blessedness. And hence is the Blessedness of God absolute, eternal, and
essential unto him, because it has its rise and spring absolutely in himself,
his own fullness of Being, his own sufficiency unto, and for himself. All the
Blessedness of the creatures, that we shall or may ever attain unto, is but
dependent, derivative, and communicated; because though nothing shall be
wanting unto us, yet the spring of our supplies shall never be in our selves,
but in God. His Blessedness is absolute, because it is from himself, and in
himself; in his Being every way self-sufficient. This it is to be absolutely
blessed. Hence God made not these things because he had need of them; for if he
had had need of them, he could not have made them: or that they should add any
thing unto him; for that is not infinite unto which any thing can be added: nor
that he might settle that Rest and Satisfaction in them, which he had not in
himself before: for that which is Infinite must necessarily and unavoidably
give eternal satisfaction unto that which is Infinite; but only by a most free
Act of his Will, he chose by the Creation of all things, to express somewhat of
his Power, Wisdom and Goodness; in something without himself. Absolutely he was
self-sufficient from all Eternity; and that both as to Rest, Satisfaction and
Blessedness in himself; as also in respect of any Operation, as to outward
Works which his Will and Wisdom should incline him unto; being every way able
and powerful in, and from himself, to do what ever he pleases. And this
infinite satisfaction and complacency of God in himself, arising from that
fullness of Divine Being which is in all the Properties of his Nature, is
another Object of our holy Admiration and Adoration. This God was, this God
did, before the world was created. Now what is man, that this every way
all-sufficient God should mind, regard and visit him? Has he any need of him,
or his services? Does his Goodness extend to him? Can he profit God as a man
profits his neighbor? If he sin what does he against him? Or if his
transgressions be multiplied what does he against him? That is to his
disadvantage: If he be righteous what gives he unto him, or what receives he
at his hand? Job 35.6, 7. Nothing but Infinite Condescension and Grace is the
fountain of all Gods regard unto us.

Thirdly, His Infinite and Eternal Power is by the same means manifested. This
the Apostle expressly affirms, Romans 1.20. He that made all these things of
nothing, and therefore can also make and create in like manner what ever else
besides he pleases, must needs be infinite in power; or as he is called, the
Lord God Omnipotent Rev. 19.6. This himself sets forth in general, Isa. 40.28.
And to convince Job hereof, he treats with him in particular instances about
some few of his fellow creatures here below; in the Earth and in the Waters,
Chap. 38.39. And if the Power of God in making this or that creature which we
see and behold, be so admirable, declaring his Sovereignty and the infinite
distance of man from him in his best condition, how glorious is it in the whole
Universe; and in the creation of all things visible and invisible, and that by
a secret Emanation of Omnipotency in a Word of Command? The Art of man will go
far in the framing, fashioning and ordering of things; but there are two things
in the least of the creatures of God, that make the creating Energie that is
seen in them, infinitely to differ from all limited and finite power; First,
That they are brought out of nothing; now let all Creatures combine their
Strength and Wisdom together, unless they have some praeexistent matter to work
upon, they can produce nothing, effect nothing. Secondly, To many of his
creatures, of the least of them, God has given life and spontaneous motions;
to all of them an especial inclination and operation following inseparably the
Principles of their Nature. But as all created Power can give neither life, nor
spontaneous motion, nor growth to any thing; no more can it plant in any thing
a new natural principle, that should incline it unto a new kind of Operation,
which was not originally connatural unto it. There is a peculiar impress of
Omnipotency upon all the works of God; as he declares at large in that
Discourse with Job, Chap. 38.39. And this Power is no less effectual, nor less
evident in his sustentation and preservation of all things, than in his
creation of them. Things do no more subsist by themselves, than they were made
by themselves. He sustaineth all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. And
by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. He has not made the World, and then
turned it off his hand, to stand on its own bottom, and shift for it self. But
there is continually, every moment, an emanation of Power from God, unto every
creature, the greatest, the least, the meanest, to preserve them in their Being
and Order; which if it were suspended but for one moment, they would all lose
their station and being, and by confusion be reduced into nothing. In him we
live, and move, and have our being, Acts 7.28. and, He gives unto all life and
breath and all things, verse 25. God needs not put forth any act of his Power
to destroy the Creation; the very suspension of that constant emanation of
Omnipotency which is necessary unto its subsistence, would be sufficient for
that end and purpose. And who can admire as he ought this Power of God, which
is greater in every particular grass of the field than we are able to search
into, or comprehend. And what is man that he should be mindful of him.

Fourthly, His Wisdom also shines forth in these works of his hands. In wisdom
has he made them all, Psalm. 104.24. So also, 136.5. his Power was that which
gave all things their Being, but his Wisdom gave them their Order beauty and
use. How admirable this is, how incomprehensible it is unto us, Zophar declares
in Job, chap. 11. verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The secrets of this Wisdom are double
unto what may be known of it, infinitely more than we can attain to the
knowledge of. Searching will not do it, it is absolutely incomprehensible. He
that can take but a little weak faint consideration of the glorious Disposition
of the Heavenly Bodies, their Order, Course, Respect to each other, their
usefulness and influences, their disposition and connection of Causes and
Effects here below, the orderly concurrence and subserviency of every thing in
its place and operation, to the consistency use and beauty of the Universe,
will be forced to cry out with the Psalmist, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works, in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. But
alas, what can the best and wisest of men attain unto in the investigation of
the Wisdom of God? There is not the least creature, but considered apart by it
self, has somewhat belonging unto it, that will bring them unto wonder and
astonishment. And what shall we say concerning the most glorious, concerning
the Order of them all unto one another, and the whole? there must all men's
considerations end, and among them this of ours.

Fifthly, His Goodness is in like manner manifest in these things. There is in
the whole and every part of God's Creation a fourfold goodness. 1. A goodness
of being and subsistence. That which is, so far forth as it is, is good. So God
saw all things, as he made them, that they were good. The very being of every
thing is its first goodness, on which all other concernments of it do depend.
And this arises from hence, because thereby and therein it participates of the
first absolute Goodness, which is Being; whereunto a nothingness, if I may so
speak, is negatively opposed ad infinitum. 2. A Goodness of Order. This gives
them their Beauty, which is the first principle properly of Goodness, and
convertible with it. Every thing that is good is beautiful, and every thing
that is beautiful is good. Now the pulchritude or beauty of the whole Creation,
and of every part of it, consists in the Order that is given unto it by the
Wisdom of God, whereof we spoke before. This is that (...) of all things, which
of old by the light of nature was so much admired. Beautiful goodness, or
goodly beauty, whereby every thing becomes comely and desirable, both in it
self and its own parts, and in that respect which it has unto all other
things. 3. A Goodness of usefulness, nothing is made in vain. Every thing has
its work service and operation allotted unto it. If the whole Creation had been
uniform, if it had been only one thing, it would have wanted this goodness, and
been but a dead lump, or mass of being. But in this great variety and diversity
of things which we behold, every one has its proper place and service, and
nothing is useless. As the Apostle says, that it is in the several parts and
members of the lesser world, Man, that though some of them seem more worthy and
comely than other, yet all have their proper use, so that they cannot say unto
one another, I have no need of thee: So is it in the Universe, though some
parts of it seem to be very glorious, and others mean and to be trampled on,
yet they cannot say one to another, I have no need of thee, each having its
proper use. The Eye is a most noble part of the body, but, says the Apostle,
If the whole body were an eye, the beauty of the whole were lost, and the very
use of the eye. How glorious is the Sun in the firmament in comparison of a
poor worm in the earth? yet if the whole Creation were one Sun, it would have
neither beauty nor use, nor indeed be a Sun, as having nothing to communicate
light or heat unto. But God has brought forth his works in unspeakable
variety, that they might all have this goodness of usefulness accompanying of
them. 4. A goodness of an orderly tendency unto the utmost and last end; which
is the glory of him by whom they were made. This also is implanted upon the
whole Creation of God; and hence the Psalmist calls upon all the inanimate
creatures to give praise and glory unto God; that is, he calls upon himself and
others to consider how they do so. This is the point, the center where all
these lines do meet, without which there could be neither beauty nor order nor
use in them: for that which errs from its end, is crooked, perverse, and not
good. On all these considerations it is said, that God saw every thing that he
had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. Now what an infinite eternal
Ocean of Goodness must that be, which by the word of his mouth communicated all
this goodness at once unto the whole Creation? How deep, how unfathomable is
this fountain? how unsearchable are these springs? This the holy men in the
Scripture often express by way of admiration, How great is his goodness! how
great is his beauty! The first goodness, the fountain of all goodness must
needs be absolutely and infinitely so; in which sense there is none good but
one, that is God.

In these things consist somewhat of the Glory Excellency and Honor of God,
which the Psalmist falls into an admiration of upon the contemplation of the
works of his hands, and which made him so astonished at his condescension in
the regard that he is pleased to bear unto the nature of man. But besides this
consideration, he adds also an intimation, as we have showed, of the mean
condition of man unto whom this respect is showed, and that both in the manner
of his expression, What is man; and in the words or names whereby he expresses
him, Enosh and Adam; which we shall also briefly add unto our former
considerations of the glory of God.

First, What is man as to his extract? a little dust, made of the dust of the
ground: one that may say to corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worm,
Thou art my mother and my sister, Job 17.14. His fabric was not one jot of any
better materials than theirs. That God put this honor upon him to breath into
the dust whereof he was made, that he should become a living soul, is part of
that goodness wherein he is to be admired. Otherwise we are what God said to
Adam, Dust thou art; poor creature that would be like unto God, thou art
dust and no more. And in the sense of this extraction did holy men of old abase
themselves in the presence of God, as Abraham, Genesis 18.27. How shall I speak
unto the Lord that am but dust and ashes. Poor proud man, which scornest to
touch that which thou art made of, and think thy self I know not what,
whilst the remainder of thee, that which was left in the making of thee, lies
under the feet of all the creatures which thou despisest: what is this handful
of dust that God should regard it? But yet,

Secondly, This fabric being erected, perhaps is durable strong and abiding,
and so may be considerable on that account. But alas, his frailty is
inexpressible. It is true, that before the Flood the life of man was prolonged
unto a great continuance; but as that was not in the least any advantage unto
the most of them, giving them only an opportunity to increase their sin and
misery; nor to the whole society of mankind, seeing by that means the earth was
filled with violence, and became a woeful habitation of distress, so they also
came to their end, and nothing long since remains of their memory but that
they lived so many years and then they died, which is the common end of man.
But since that, in which our concernment lies, how do the holy men of God set
forth, and as it were complain of the woeful frailty of our condition! So does
Moses, Psalm. 90.5, 6. Thou carriest them away with a flood; which he spoke in
contemplation of those thousands which he saw die before his eyes in the
Wilderness: In the morning they are like grass which grows up, in the morning
it flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down and withers. The
like also pleads Job, chap. 14.1, 2. and then turning unto God he says, And
do thou open thine eyes upon such an one, regard such a poor frail perishing
creature? And David does the like, Psalm. 102.24. And indeed no tongue can
express the miserable frail condition of this poor creature; from within, from
without, from himself, from all other creatures, and principally from the rage
and cruelty of those of the same nature with himself, his misery is great, and
his life of short continuance. And God abundantly shows that little weight also
is to be laid on that duration which he has here in this world, in that he
takes many from the very womb, who scarce ever beheld the light, into the
participation of his own eternal Glory.

Thirdly, This earthly frail man has made himself yet more unspeakably vile by
sin; this sets him at the utmost distance from the glory of God, and utterly
foils every thing that is in him, which of it self is worthy of consideration.

All these things being put together, they make the Condescension of God in
remembering man, and setting his heart upon him, exceedingly to be admired and
adored. And this also will farther appear, if we might consider what are the
blessed effects of this mindfulness of him; but these the Apostle insists upon
in the next verses, whether we may refer our meditations on them. Only the Duty
it self arising from hence may be here pressed upon us. And this is, that upon
the accounts mentioned we would live constantly in an holy adoration of this
infinite condescension and grace of God. To this end,

First, let us exercise our selves unto holy thoughts of Gods infinite
Excellencies. Meditation accompanied with holy adoration is the fountain of
this duty. Some men have over-busily and curiously enquired into the Nature and
Properties of God, and have foolishly endeavored to measure infinite things by
the miserable short line of their own reason, and to suit the deep things of
God unto their own narrow apprehensions. Such are many of the Disputations of
the Schoolmen on this subject, wherein though they have seemed wise to
themselves and others, yet indeed for the most part they have waxed vain in
their imaginations. Our duty lies in studying what God has revealed of himself
in his Word, and what is evidently suitable thereunto; and that not with
curious searchings and speculations, but with holy admiration reverence and
fear. This the Apostle advises us unto, Heb. 12.28, 29. In this way serious
thoughts of God's Excellencies and Properties, his Greatness, Immensity,
Self-sufficiency, Power and Wisdom are exceeding useful unto our souls. When
these have filled us with wonder, when they have prostrated our spirits before
him, and laid our mouths in the dust, and our persons on the ground, when the
glory of them shines round about us, and our whole souls are filled with an
holy astonishment; then,

Secondly, Let us take a view of our selves, our extract, our frailty, our
vileness on every account. How poor, how undeservable are we? What is a little
sinful dust and ashes, before or in the sight of this God of glory? What is
there in us, what is there belonging unto us, that is not suited to abase us?
alive one day, dead another; quiet one moment, troubled another; fearing,
caring, rejoicing causelessly, sinning always: in our best condition altogether
vanity. Though much may be said unto this purpose, yet it must be said after
all, that in our selves we are inexpressibly miserable, and as the Prophet
speaks, less than vanity and nothing. Would we be wise, we are like the wild
Asses colt; would we be honorable, we have no understanding, but are like the
beasts that perish; would we be strong, we are as a reed shaken with the wind.
And,

Thirdly, Let the result of these thoughts be, an holy admiration of Gods
infinite Love, Care, Grace, and Condescension, in having any regard unto us. So
does the Psalmist teach us to do; hence will Praise, hence will Thankfulness,
hence will Self-abasement ensue. And this will be a good foundation, as of
obedience, so of comfort and supportment in every condition.

Verse IX.
THese things being spoken indefinitely of Man by the Psalmist, the Apostle in
the application of them unto his present purpose, proceeds to show who it is
that was especially intended, and in whom the words had their full
accomplishment. But, says he, we see Jesus, etc. Many difficulties the words
of this verse are attended withal, all which we shall endeavor to clear:
First, by showing in general how in them the Apostle applies the testimony
produced by him unto Jesus. Secondly, by freeing them from the obscurity that
arises from a (...), or transposition of expression in them. Thirdly, by
opening the several things taught and asserted in them. And fourthly, by a
vindication of the whole interpretation from exceptions and objections.

First, The Apostle positively applies this testimony unto Jesus, as he who was
principally intended therein, or as he in whom the things that God did when he
minded man, were accomplished. And this the Syriack Translation directly
expresses, (...), but him whom he made lower a little while than the Angels,
we see that it is Jesus. That is, it is Jesus concerning whom the Psalmist
spoke, and in whom alone this testimony is verified. Two things are expressed
concerning Man in the words: 1. That he was made lower than the Angels. 2. That
he had all things put in subjection unto him. Both these, says the Apostle, we
see accomplished in Jesus; for that is the meaning of that expression, We see
Jesus, that is, these things fulfilled in him. And as he had before appealed
unto their faith and experience in his negative, that all things are not made
subject to man in general; so does he here in his affirmative, We see Jesus.
Now they saw it, partly by what he had before proved concerning him, partly by
the signs and wonders he had newly spoken of, whereby his Doctrine was
confirmed, and his Power over all things manifested; partly by his Calling and
Gathering of his Church, giving Laws Rules and Worship unto it, by virtue of
his Authority in and over this new world. And as unto the former part of the
testimony, by what they had seen with their eyes, or had been otherwise taught
concerning his low estate and humiliation; These things, says he, we see, they
are evident unto us, nor can be denied whilst the Gospel is acknowledged. Now
this confession on the evidences mentioned he applies to both parts of the
testimony.

First, says he, We see that for a little while he was made lower than the
Angels, or brought into a state and condition of more exigency and want than
they are, or can be exposed unto. And hereby he evidently declares, that those
words in the Psalm do not belong unto the dignity of man spoken of, as if he
had said, He is so excellent, that he is but little beneath Angels; for as he
ascribes unto him a Dignity far above all Angels, in as much as all things
without exception are put under his feet; so he plainly declares that these
words belong to the depression and minoration of Jesus, in that he was so
humbled that he might die. And therefore he proceeds to show, how that part of
the testimony concerned his present purpose, not as directly proving what he
had proposed to confirmation concerning his Dignity, but as evidently designing
the Person that the whole belonged unto. As also he takes occasion from hence
to enter upon the Exposition of another part of Christ's Mediation, as
prophesied of in this place. For though he was so lessened, yet it was not on
his own account, but that by the grace of God he might taste death for every
man.

Secondly, For the other part of the testimony, We see, says he upon the
evidences mentioned, that he is crowned with glory and honor, and consequently
that all things are put under his feet. So that the whole testimony, in both
parts of it, is verified in him, and in him alone. And hereby he fully evinceth
what he had before proposed unto confirmation, namely the pre-eminence of Jesus
the Messiah above the Angels, or principal Administrators of the Law, in this
especial instance, That the world to come was put into subjection unto him, and
not unto them; and therefore in the state of the Church intended in that
expression are his Teachings, his Doctrine, his Worship diligently to be
attended unto, by all those who desire to be partakers of the promises and good
things thereof.

Secondly, There seems to be a (...) in the words, by a transposition of some
expressions from their proper place and coherence, which must be removed.
(...). Some would have those words, (...), to belong to the subject of the
Proposition, whose praedicate alone is, crowned with glory and honor, whereof
the suffering of death is inserted as the meritorious cause. So reading the
words to this purpose, We see that Jesus who was for a little while made lower
than the Angels for his suffering of death, is crowned with glory and honor.
Others would have Jesus alone to be the subject of the Proposition; of whose
praedicate there are two parts, or two things are affirmed concerning him.
First, that he was made lower than the Angels, the reason whereof is added,
namely that he might suffer death; which is farther explained in the close of
the verse, by the addition of the Cause and End of that his suffering, That by
the grace of God he might taste of death for every man; so reading the words to
this purpose, We see Jesus made lower than the Angels for the suffering of
death, crowned (or, and crowned) with glory and honor. The difficulty
principally consists in this only, namely whether the Apostle by (...), for the
suffering of death, intend the final cause of the humiliation of Christ; he was
made low that he might suffer death; or the meritorious cause of his
Exaltation; for, or because he suffered death, he was crowned with glory and
honor. And the former seems evidently the intention of the words, according to
the latter resolution of them, and our application of the testimony foregoing.
For, 1. if the cause and means of the Exaltation of Christ had been intended,
it would have been expressed by (...) requiring a Genitive case, where the
cause or means of any thing is intended; but (...) expresses the end of what
was before affirmed. 2. These words, for the suffering of death, must express
either the minoration and humiliation of Christ, or the end of it; if they
express the end of it, then we obtain that which is pleaded for, he was made
less that he might suffer. If they express his minoration it self, then the end
of it is contained only in the close of the verse, that he might taste of death
for every man. In which exposition of the words, the sense would be, that he
suffered death, that by the grace of God he might taste death, which is no
sense at all. 3. If those words denote only the means or meritorious cause of
the Exaltation of Christ, I enquire what is the medium intended of that end in
the close, (...), that he by the grace of God he might taste death. The word
(...), that so, plainly refers unto some preparatory means preceding, which in
this way can be nothing, but the crowning him with glory and honor, which we
know was not the means, but the effect of it. He was humbled, not exalted, that
he might taste of death. 4. The Apostle does not merely take it for granted,
that Jesus was for a little while made lesser than the Angels, but asserts it
as proved in the testimony insisted on; whereunto he subjoyns the end of that
his comparative minoration, because he intended it as the especial subject of
his ensuing discourse. This therefore is the importance and natural order of
the words, But we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, who was for a little
while made lower than the Angels for the suffering of death, that he by the
grace of God might taste death for every man. And the only reason of the
transposition of the words consists in the Apostles following the order of
the things testified unto by the Psalmist; first his Humiliation, then his
Exaltation; and yet connecting that which he would next treat of unto that
which was first laid down, passing by the other as now sufficiently confirmed.

Thirdly, The general design of the words, and their order being cleared, we
shall open them in particular, seeing that besides the application of the
testimony of the Psalmist unto the Lord Jesus now vindicated, there is an
assertion in them, containing that which of all other things was of most
difficult acceptance with the Jews; upon the account whereof the Apostle
confirms it with many reasons in the verses following, to the end of this
Chapter. And indeed we have here the sum of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of it,
concerning the Person and Office of the Messiah, asserted and vindicated from
the prejudicate opinions of many of the Jews, under these two heads. 1. That
the salvation and deliverance that God had promised and intended to accomplish
by the Messiah, was spiritual and eternal, from death, sin, Satan, and hell,
ending in everlasting glory; not temporal and carnal with respect unto the
world, and the concomitants of it in this life, as they vainly imagined. 2.
That this salvation could be no otherwise wrought nor brought about, but by the
Incarnation Suffering and death of the Messiah, not in especial; by Arms, War,
and mighty Power, as the People was of old led into Canaan under the conduct of
Joshua the Captain of that salvation, and as some of them expected yet to be
saved and delivered by the Messiah. Now the Apostle strengthening his discourse
by multiplicity of reasons and arguments, he does not only in these words apply
his testimony to what he had before proposed, unto confirmation, namely the
subjection of the world to come unto Christ, but also lays in it the springs of
those two other Principles which we have mentioned, and whose proof and
confirmation in the next verses he pursues.

Sundry things, as we have partly seen, are contained in the words; as first,
the Exinanition and Humiliation of Christ; We see Jesus for a little while made
lower, and brought into a more indigent condition than the Angels are, or ever
were obnoxious unto. 2. The general end of that Exinanition and Depression of
Jesus, it was that he might suffer death. 3. His Exaltation unto Power and
Authority over all things, in particular the world to come; crowned with glory
and honor. 4. A numerous Amplification subjoyned, of the end of his
depression, and the death that it tended unto. 1. From the Cause of it, the
Grace of God. 2. The Nature of it, he was to taste of death. 3. The End of it,
it was for others. And, 4. its extent, for all. That he by the grace of God
might taste death for all.

(...).
1. (...) for (...), an Adversative, intimating the introduction of one singular
person in opposition to him or them spoken of in the end of the foregoing
verse, We see not all things put under his feet, (which some against the whole
context apply unto Christ) but we see Jesus. Had the same person been spoken of
in both verses, the expression would have been, (...), but we see him; but a
new Antecedent being here introduced, but we see Jesus, another person is
substituted as the subject spoken of; as the Syriack version declares, we see
him, that it is Jesus.

How and in what sense he was made lower than the Angels has been declared in
opening the words, as they lie in the (...), comprised in that testimony of the
Psalmist. Only it may be enquired whether this Exinanition of Christ, or
Minoration in respect of Angels, did consist merely in his Incarnation and
participation of Humane Nature, which in general is esteemed beneath Angelical;
or in the misery and anxiety which in that nature he conflicted withal. And
the Apostle seems not absolutely to intend the former: 1. Because he speaks of
Jesus as the subject of this Minoration; now that name denotes the Son of God
as Incarnate, who is supposed so to be, when he is said to be made less than
the Angels. 2. Because the Humane Nature in the very instant of its union unto
the Person of that Son of God, was absolutely advanced above the Angelical, and
might have immediately been possessed of Glory, if other works in it had not
been to be performed. And yet neither does it intend the low condition wherein
he was placed exclusively to his Incarnation, though that be afterward ( verse
14.) particularly spoken unto, but his being Incarnate and brought forth, and
in that condition wherein he was exposed to suffering, and so consequently to
death it self. And thus was he made less than Angels in part, in that nature
which he assumed, he was obnoxious unto all the infirmities which attend it, as
Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Pain, Sorrow, Grief; and exposed unto all the
miseries from without, that any person partaker of that nature, is obnoxious
unto; and in sum, death it self, from all which miseries Angels are exempted.
This we see, know, and grant to have been the state and condition of Jesus.

But, says he, this was but for a little while, during his conversation with
us on the earth, ending at his death. The Apostle knew, that he had now fixed
upon that which of all things the Jews most stumbled at; the low and mean
despised condition of Jesus, they having inveterate prejudicate opinions of
another manner of state and condition for the Messiah; wherefore he immediately
subjoyns the end why he was humbled into this condition, which he first
explains, and then vindicates the necessity of it.

The end then is, (...), the suffering of death; (...).
he was so humbled that he might suffer death: This yet more displeased the
Jews, the necessity whereof he therefore immediately proves. Adding by the way,

3. To complete the application of the testimony produced, his Exaltation upon
his suffering, he was crowned with glory and honor, referring us to the
testimony it self, to declare what was contained in that Exaltation, namely an
absolute Dominion over all things, God only excepted, and so consequently over
the world to come, that was not put in subjection to Angels. And in these words
the Apostle closes his argument for the excellency of Christ above the Angels,
from the subjection of all things unto him; and proceeds to the amplification
of that kind of the Humiliation of Christ which he had before intimated; and
that in four things.

1. In the impulsive and efficient cause, which in the acts of God's will are
coincident; (...) for (...), denoting the final cause of what was before
asserted, relating to the whole clause following. That which is here called
(...), the grace of God, is elsewhere explained by (...), Tit. 2.11. the
saving grace of God. And sometimes it is termed his (...) and (...), chap. 3.4.
his Goodness, Kindness, Benignity, and love of mankind; absolutely his (...),
Joh. 3.16. Romans 5.8. 1 John 3.8, 9. Love, intense love; also his (...), Ephesians.
1.5. his good-pleasure, from the riches of his grace, verse 1. and his (...),
verse 9. Romans 8.28. or purpose of his will, being the same with his (...) and
(...), Romans 8.29, 30. his prae-designation and predestination of men unto Grace
and Glory. From all which it appears what this (...), or grace of God is, that
was the moving and impulsive cause of the death of Christ; even the gracious
free sovereign Purpose of the Will of God, suited unto and arising from his
natural Grace, Love, Goodness, and Benignity, Pity, Mercy, Compassion exerting
themselves therein. It was not out of any anger or displeasure of God against
Jesus, in whom his soul was always well pleased; not out of any disregard unto
him, whom he designed hereby to be crowned with glory and honor; but out of
his Love, Kindness, and Goodness toward others, who could no otherwise be
brought unto Glory; as in the next verses the Apostle declares, that he thus
appointed him to die.

In the manner of his death; (...), that he should taste of death: so die as to
experience the sorrows, bitterness, and penalties of death. To taste of death
is, first, Really to die; not in appearance or pretense, in opinion or show, as
some foolishly of old blasphemed about the death of Christ, which could have
had no other fruit but a shadow of Redemption, a deliverance in opinion. See
the phrases used, Mark 9.1. (...); shall not taste of death, that is, not die.
And that which is called, to see death, Joh. 8.51. is called to taste of death,
v. 52. where the Phrase is applied to the second death, or death eternal. And
it being death which was threatened unto those for whom he dyed, and which they
should have undergone; he really tasted of that death also. So Secondly, It is
intimated, that there was bitterness in the death he underwent; himself
compares it unto a Cup, whose bitterness he declares by his aversation from it,
considered absolutely and without reference unto that hand of the Will of God
wherein it was held out unto him, Matthew. 26.39. which (...), or (...), Cup, was
his Lot or Portion, Psalm. 16.4. that which was prepared for him by his Father.
And by the same Metaphor, he calls the Will of God his meat, which he tasted of
in the doing and suffering of it. To taste of death, as is known, is an
Hebraism. So the Rabbis speak Berish. Rab. sect 9. (...), the first Adam was
worthy that he should not taste of death, or dye. And it compriseth somewhat
more than merely to dye; it expresses also to find out and experience, what is
in death. And (...), is sometimes rendered by (...), to know, 2 Samuel 19.36. And
sometimes the Substantiv: by (...), Understanding, Job 12.20. So that Christ by
tasting of death, had experience, knew what was in death, as threatened unto
sinners. He found out and understood what bitterness was in that Cup wherein it
was given him. To which purpose the Rabbis have a Proverb in Jalkut. Fol. 265.
(...), he that eats of the Pot knows the taste of the Meat that is in it.
Thus when Agag thought he he should escape a violent death by the sword, he
expresses his joy by (...), 1 Samuel 15.32. The bitterness of death is removed
or taken away; though dye he must, yet he thought he should not taste the
bitterness of death, or dye b^ the sword. Thirdly, His Conquest over death may
be also intimated in this Expression; for though the Phrase, to taste of death
be used concerning other Persons also, yet as applied unto Christ, the event
shows, that it was only a through taste of it that he had, he neither was,
nor could be detained under the Power of it, Acts 2.24. and so is the word to
taste used, Chap. 6.4. of this Epistle. And thus by the Grace of God, did he
taste of death.

The End of this his tasting of death, it was, for others; (...); of the Extent
of this End of his death, expressed in that word (...), we shall speak
afterward; for the present we consider how he dyed (...), for them, for whom
he dyed. (...), is either pro, or super, or supra, for, or above, or over; the
latter signification belongs not unto this place: As it signifies (...), for,
it is used sometimes as (...), propter; and with respect unto persons, is as
much as alicujus causa, for his sake; or in alicujus gratiam, or bonum; for his
good and advantage; sometimes as (...); in the stead of another; and this is
the constant and inviolable sense of (...) in Greek, pro in Latin, where the
suffering of one for another is expressed by it. And that also is the constant
sense of the Hebrew (...), when used in that case. Some Instances on each word
will illustrate our intention. Thus David expresses his desire to have dyed in
the stead of Absalom, that he might have been preserved alive, 2 Samuel 18.33.
(...), who will grant me to dye; I for thee my Son Absalom; that is, in thy
stead, or so that thou might be alive. So Isa. 43.4. And by that word is
still expressed the succeeding of one to another in Government, or reigning in
the stead of him that deceased, 1 Kings 7.7. Chap. 19.16. 2 Samuel 10.1. And in
general, Children succeeding in the place and room of their Fathers, Numb.
2.12. So that to dye (...), for another, is to dye in his stead, the death he
should have dyed, that he might live; or in general to be substituted in the
room and place of another. So when Jehu commanded his Officers to slay the
Priests and Worshippers of Baal, he tells them, that if any one should let any
one of them escape, (...), his life should go for his life, or he should dye in
his stead, 2 Kings 10.24. So is (...) used, Romans 5.7. expressing the act of an
(...), one that lays down his life instead of another: as Damon for Pithyas,
and Nisus for Eurialus, Me me adsum qui feci. See 1 Pet. 1.21. And it is
explained by (...), perpetually denoting a substitution; where Opposition can
have no place. See Matthew. 20.28. Mark 10.45. 1 Timothy 2.6. (...), pro, also, as
(...) in this case is to be rendered, has no other signification. So often in
the Poet:

Aenead. 5.

Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte Daretis
Persolvo --
He slew and Ox and sacrificed it to Eryx instead of D^res, who was taken from
him. And Mezentius upon the death of Lausus his Son, who undertook the fight
with Aeneas, upon the wounding of his Father, being slain himself, Tantane me
tenuit vivendi nate voluptas,
Vt pro me hostili paterer succedere dextrae,
Quem genui? tuane haec genitor per vulnera servor,
Morte tua vivam. Pro me, in my stead.


And of Palinurus by whose death the rest of his companions escaped, Vnum pro
multis dabitur caput. So the Comoedian; Verberibus caesum te Dave in pristinum
dedam usque ad necem;
Ea Lege atque omine, ut, si inde te exemerim; ego pro te molam;
grind in thy stead. And Juvenal to the same purpose of the Decii, Plebeiae
Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina; pro totis Legionibus hi tamen and pro
Omnibus auxiliis atque omni plebe latina,
Sufficient Diis insernis.
They were accepted in Sacrifice for, or instead of all the rest. So did they
express their doing or suffering, who cast themselves into danger in the stead
of others, that they might go free; as those who sacrificed themselves like
Maeneceus for the safety of their Country; As Papinius expresses his design;
Armorum superi, tuque o qui funere tanto
Indulges mihi Phaebe mori, date gaudia Thebis
Quae pepigi, and toto quae sanguine prodigus emi:
Of which afterward.

In the common constant Use of these words then, to dye for another, signifies
to dye in his room and stead; And this the Jews understood in the use of their
Sacrificees; where the life of the beast was accepted in the stead of the life
of the sinner. Thus Christ tasted of death, (...); he was by the Grace and
Wisdom of God substituted as a Mediator, Surety, (...), in their stead, to
undergo the death which they should have undergone, that they might go free, as
we shall see in the following Verses.

4. This dying of Christ is said to be (...). The Word is either of the
Masculine or Neuter Gender: and in the latter it seems to have been taken by
them, who for (...), read (...); as some Syriack Copies do still, and Ambrose
ad Gradianum, with some other of the Ancients, intimating that Christ dyed for
every thing, God only excepted; alluding it may be unto Ephesians. 1.10. of which
place we have spoken before. For we may not suppose it a corruption of the
Nestorians, when some read so before their days; nor will the Words so read,
give any countenance to their error, none affirming that Christ dyed any
otherwise than in his humane nature, though he who is God, dyed therein. But
this conjecture is groundless and inconsistent with the signification of the
Preposition (...), insisted on; which will not allow that he be said to dye for
any, but those in whose stead he dyed, and which therefore in themselves were
obnoxious to death, as he declares, v. 14, 15. (...) then is put for (...), by
an Enallage of number; the singular for the plural, for all men; that is, all
those many sons, which God by his death intended to bring unto glory, v. 10.
those sanctified by him, whom he calls his Brethren, v. 11, 12. and Children
given him by God, v. 13. whom by death he delivers from the fear of death, v.
15. even all the seed of Abraham, v. 16.

And thus we hope our whole interpretation of these Verses receives light from,
as well as brings some light unto the Text; and that we need no Argument to
confirm it, but its own suitableness throughout to the context and design of
the Apostle. That wherein diverse worthy Expositors are otherwise minded and
differ from us; is the Application of the words of the Psalm immediately unto
the Person of Christ; they say are referred unto him only by way of Allusion.
Now though our Exposition sufficiently confirm and strengthen it self by its
own Evidence; yet because diverse learned men whose Judgment is much to be
regarded, have given another sense of the words than that embraced by us, I
shall by some further considerations confirm that part of our Exposition which
is by them called into Question; premising unto them, for the further clearing
of the place what we grant in reference unto the sense by them contended for.

1. I grant that the Psalmists design in general is to set forth, the Goodness,
Kindness, Love and Care of God unto mankind; so that in those words, What is
man, and the Son of man, though he principally respect the instance of the
Person of the Messiah, yet he does it not exclusively to the nature of man in
others; but has a special regard unto mankind in general in contradistinction
unto other outwardly more glorious works of the hands of God. But it is the
especial instance of the Person of the Messiah, wherein alone he undertakes to
make good, his assertion of mankinds Pre-eminence.

2. I also grant that he has respect unto the Dignity and Honor collated on
the first man at his Creation; not directly and intentionally as his chiefest
scope, but by way of Allusion, as it did prefigure and obscurely represent that
great glory and honor, which mankind was to be advanced unto in the Person of
the Messiah. That primarily and directly he, and he alone according to our
Exposition, is intended in the Psalm. For,

1. That the whole Psalm is Prophetical of the Messiah, the passages out of it
reported in the New Testament and applied unto him, do make evident and
unquestionable; See Matthew. 21.16. 1 Cor. 15.27. with this place; so that he
must needs be the man, and son of man therein treated of; and who alone did
make to cease the enemy and self-avenger, v. 2. as the Apostle declares, v. 14,
15. of this Chapter.

2. The general scope of the Psalm will admit of no other Interpretation; The
Psalmist on his contemplation of the great glory of God in framing the Heavens
and all the host of them, especially those which then appeared unto him, falls
into an Admiration of his Wisdom, Goodness and Love in that which was far
greater and more excellent, as that wherein his Glory was more exalted, which
he rejoices and triumphs in, as that wherein his own, and the interest of
all others did lie. Now this could not be either the state of man, as fallen by
sin, which is far enough from a matter of Exultation and joy; nor yet the state
of Adam in innocence, in no Privilege whereof without a Restitution by Christ,
have we share or interest.

3. There are not any words in the Testimony that can properly be applied unto
any other man, or be verified in him; not in Adam at his first Creation, not in
mankind in general, but only in the instance of the Person of Christ. For how
was Adam diminished and made less than Angels, and therein depressed from
another state and condition than that he had, or was due to him; or how can
this be said of mankind in general, or of Believers in a special sense; And how
could this be spoken of them for a little while, seeing the nature of man in it
self considered, is for ever beneath the Angelical. Again, if the Apostles
Interpretation be allowed, that expression, he has put all things under his
feet, is universal, and extends unto all the works of Gods hands, and among
them the world to come; and these were never put in subjection to Adam, nor any
other man, the man Christ Jesus excepted. And this also the Apostle plainly
avers, v. 8. So that the Scope of the Place, Context of the Words, and
Importance of the Expression do all direct us unto the Messiah, and to him
alone.

4. The Uncertainty and mutual contradictions, yea, self-contradictions of the
most who apply the words of the Psalmist directly unto any other but Christ,
may serve further to fix us unto this Interpretation liable to none of those
inconveniences which they cast themselves upon. Some would have a double
literal sense in the words; the one principal, relating unto Adam or man in
general; the other less principal or subordinate, respecting Christ; which is
upon the matter to affirm that the words have no sense at all: For those words
which have not one certain determinate sense, as those have not, which have
two, have indeed no true proper sense at all; for their sense is their
determinate signification of any thing. Some would have the literal sense to
respect mankind in general, and what is affirmed in them to be mystically
applied unto Christ. How far this is from truth we have already declared, by
showing that the Words cannot so in any measure be verified or made good. By
man, some understand Adam in his integrity, who how he can be called the Son of
man, I know not; besides how was his Honor, not to be thought of or mentioned
without the remembrance of his sin and shameful fall, such a cause of rejoicing
and Exaltation unto the Psalmist? Some, man in his corrupted condition; which
how far he is from the things here mentioned need not be declared. Can we
suppose the Apostle would prove the subjection of the world to come unto
Christ, by a Testimony principally respecting them who have no interest in it;
Some, believers as restored in Christ, which is true consequentially, and in
respect of Participation, Rev. 2.26, 27. but not antecedently unto the
investiture of the Honor that they are made partakers of in the Person of
Christ. Besides which is the great absurdity of this Interpretation, they all
affirm, that the same words are used to express and confirm things directly
contrary and adverse unto one another. For those words in the Psalmist, Thou
have made him little less than the Angels, they would have to signify the
Exaltation of man in his Creation, being made nigh unto, and little less than
Angels, and in the Application of them by the Apostle unto Christ, they
acknowledge, that they denote depression, minoration, humiliation, or
exinanition. How the same words in the same place can express contrary things,
prove the exaltation of one, and the depression of another, is very hard, if
not impossible to be understood. Besides, they are compelled to interpret the
same phrase in diverse senses, as well as the same sentence in contrary; for
those words in the Psalmist (...), as applied unto man, they make to denote
quantity or quality, as unto Christ, time or duration; which that in the same
place, they cannot do both, is needless to prove. But as we said, our
Exposition is wholly free from these entanglements, answering the words of the
Psalmist, and suited to the words and Context of the Apostle throughout.

Schliclingius or Crellius in his Comment on these words, would faign lay hold
of an objection against the Deity of Christ; p. 112. Hinc videmus, says he,
cum D. Author adeo solicit laboret; and Scripturae dictis pugnet eum qui
Angelis suerit ratione naturae minor, nempe Christum; debuisse suprema gloria
and b^nore coronari, angelosque dignitate long superare; nec ipsi Authori nec
cuipiam Christianorum ad quos scribit; divinae praeter humanam in Christo
naturae in mentem venisse, nam si hanc in Christo agnovissent, nullo negotio
etiam Christum Angelis long praestare, naturamque humanam ei minime obstare
vidissent: quid quaeso tanto molimine; tantoque argumentorum apparatu ad rem
omnibus apertissimam persuadendam opus fuisset? Quid argumentis aliunde
conquisi^s laborat author, cum uno ictu, unica naturae istius divinae mentione
rem totam conficere potuisset? The whole ground of this fallacy lies in a
supposition that the Apostle treats of the Person of Christ absolutely and in
himself considered; which is evidently false: he speaks of him in respect of
the Office he underwent as the Mediator of the New Covenant; in which respect
he was both made less than the Angels, not only on the account of his nature,
but of the Condition wherein he discharged his Duty* and also made, or exalted
above them, by grant from his Father; whereas in his Divine Nature he was
absolutely and infinitely so, from the instant of the creation. And whereas
those to whom he wrote, did hear that he was in the discharge of his Office,
for a little while made much lower than the Angels, it was not in vain for him
to prove by Arguments and Testimonies, that in the Execution of the same
Office, he was also exalted above them, that part of his work being finished
for which he was made lower than they for a season. And most needful it was for
him so to do in respect of the Hebrews, who boasting in the Ministry of Angels
in the giving of the Law, were to be convinced of the Excellency of the Author
of the Gospel, as such, in the discharge of his work, above them. And the
express mention of his Divine Nature was in this place altogether needless and
improper; nor would it have proved the thing that he intended; for how easy
had it been for the Jews to have replied; that notwithstanding that, they saw
in how low an outward condition he ministered upon the earth, and therefore that
would not prove his Exaltation above Angels in the discharge of his Office;
seeing notwithstanding that he was evidently made lower than they in that
Office. It would also have been improper for him in this place to have made any
mention thereof; seeing the proof of the Excellency of his Person absolutely
considered, was nothing unto the business he had now in hand. And it was
likewise every way needless, he having so abundantly proved and vindicated his
Divine Nature in the Chapter foregoing. Now to take an Argument against a thing
from the Apostles silence of it in one place, where the mention of it was
improper, useless and needless, he having fully expressed the same matter
elsewhere, yea, but newly before, is an evidence of a bad, or barren cause. Of
the like importance is that which he afterward adds; p. 15. Quemadmodum autem
Jesus homo verus, and naturali condition caeteris hominibus fimilis esse
debuit; neque enim eorum Servator est, qui natura and dii sunt and homines, sed
hominum tantum. For we shall demonstrate, that it was needful he should have a
Divine Nature, who was to suffer and to save them, who had only an humane. And
if this man had acknowledged that End and Effect of his suffering, without
which we know it would have been of no advantage unto them for whom he
suffered, he also would believe the same.

We say not any thing of the sense of the Jews on this place of the Psalmist.
They seem wholly to have lost the design of the Holy Ghost in it, and therefore
in their accustomed manner, to embrace fables and trifles. The Talmudists
ascribe those words, what is man, unto some of the Angels, expressing their
envy and Indignation at his honor upon his first Creation. The latter Doctors,
as Kimchi and Aben Ezra, make Application of it unto man in general, wherein
they are followed by too many Christians, unto whom the Apostle had been a
better guide. But we may here also see what is farther tendered unto us for our
Instruction: As,

I. The Respect, Care, Love and Grace of God unto mankind, expressed in the
Person and Mediation of Jesus Christ, is a matter of singular and eternal
Admiration. We have before showed from the words of the Psalmist, that such in
general is the Condescension of God, to have any regard of man, considering the
infinite Excellency of the Property of his nature, as manifested in his great
and glorious Works. That now proposed follows from the Apostles Application
of the Psalmists words unto the Person of Christ; and consequently the regard
of God unto us, in his Mediation. And this is such, as that the Apostle tells
us, that at the last day, it shall be his great Glory that he will be admired
in all them that do believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. When the work of his Grace shall be
fully perfected in and toward them, than the Glory of his Grace appears and
is magnified for ever. This is that which the Admiration of the Psalmist tends
unto, and rests in. That God should so regard the nature of man, as to take it
into Union with himself in the Person of his Son; and in that nature humbled
and exalted to work out the Salvation of all them that believe on him. There
are other ways wherein the Respect of God toward man does appear, even in the
effects of his Holy Wise Providence over him. He causes his Sun to shine, and
his rain to fall upon him, Mat. 5.45. He leaves not himself without witness
toward us, in that he does good, and gives us rain from Heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14.17. And these ways
of his Providence are singularly admirable. But this Way of his Grace toward
us in the Person of his Son, assuming our nature into union with himself, is
that wherein the exceeding and unspeakable riches of his Glory and Wisdom are
made manifest. So the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. He has that to declare unto them, which because of its Greatness, Glory
and Beauty they are no way able of themselves to receive or comprehend: And
therefore he prays for them, that they may have the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation to give them the knowledge of Christ; or that God by his Spirit
would make them wise to apprehend, and give them a gracious discovery of what
he proposes to them; as also that hereby they may enjoy the blessed effect of
an enlightened Understanding, without which they will not discern the Excellency
of this matter; and what is it, that they must thus be helped, assisted,
prepared for to understand, in any measure? What is the Greatness, the Glory of
it, that can no otherwise be discerned? why, says he, marvel not at the
necessity of this preparation; that which I propose unto you is the glory of
God; that wherein he will principally be glorified, here and unto Eternity; and
it is the Riches of that Glory; the treasures of it. God has in other things
set forth, and manifested his Glory; but yet as it were by parts and parcels;
one thing has declared his Power, another his Goodness and Wisdom; and that in
part, with reference unto that particular about which they have been exercised.
But in this, he has drawn forth, displayed, manifested all the Riches and
Treasures of his Glory, so that his Excellencies are capable of no greater
Exaltation. And there is also in this work, the unspeakable Greatness of his
power engaged; that no property of his nature may seem to be uninterested in
this matter. Now whereunto does all this tend? why it is all to give a blessed
and eternal Inheritance unto believers, unto the hope and expectation whereof
they are called by the Gospel. And by what way or means is all this wrought and
brought about; even by the working of God in Jesus Christ in his Humiliation,
when he dyed; and his Exaltation, in his Resurrection, putting all things under
his feet, crowning him, with glory and honor, which the Apostle shows by a
citation of this place of the Psalmist; for all this is out of Gods regard unto
man; it is for the Church, which is the body of Christ, and his fullness. So
full of glory, such an object of eternal Admiration is this work of the Love
and Grace of God: which as Peter tells us, the very Angels themselves desire to
look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. And this further appears,

First, Because all Gods regard of man in this way is a fruit of mere Sovereign
Grace and condescension. And all Grace is admirable; especially the Grace of
God; and that so great Grace, as the Scripture expresses it. There was no
consideration of any thing without God himself, that moved him hereunto. He had
glorified himself as the Psalmist shows in other works of his hands; and he
could have rested in that Glory. Man deserved no such thing of him, being
worthless and sinful. It was all of Grace; both in the head and members. The
Humane nature of Christ neither did, nor could merit the Hypostatical Union. It
did not, because being made partaker of it, from the instant of his Conception,
all antecedent Operations that might procure it, were prevented; and a thing
cannot be merited by any after it is freely granted antecedently unto any
deserts. Nor could it do so; Hypostatical Union could be no reward of
obedience; being that which exceeds all the order of things, and Rules of
Remunerative Justice. The Assumption then of our nature into Personal Union
with the Son of God, was an Act of mere, free, sovereign, unconceivable Grace.
And this is the foundation of all the following fruits of Gods regard unto us;
and that being of Grace, so must they be also. What ever God does for us, in
and by Jesus Christ as made man for us, which is all that he so does, it must I
say be all of Grace, because his being made man was so. Had there been any
merit, any desert on our part, any Preparation for, or Disposition unto the
Effects of this regard; had our nature, that portion of it which was sanctified
and separated to be united unto the Son of God, any way procured, or prepared
it self for its Union and Assumption, things had fallen under some rules of
Justice and Equality, whereby they might be apprehended and measured; but all
being of Grace, they leave place unto nothing but eternal Admiration and
thankfulness.

Secondly, Had not God been thus mindful of man, and visited him in the Person
of his Son incarnate; every one partaker of that nature must have utterly
perished in their lost condition. And this also renders the Grace of it an
object of Admiration. We are not only to look what God takes us unto by this
Visitation, but to consider also what he delivers us from. Now this is a great
part of that vile and base condition which the Psalmist wonders that God should
have regard unto; namely, that we had sinned and come short of his Glory; and
thereby exposed our selves unto eternal misery. In that condition we must have
perished for ever had not God freed us by this Visitation. It had been Great
Grace to have taken an innocent, a sinless man into Glory; Great Grace to have
freed a sinner from misery; though he should never be brought to the enjoyment
of the least positive Good. But to free a sinner from the utmost and most
inconceivable misery, in eternal ruin, and to bring him unto the highest
happiness, in eternal Glory, and all this in a way of mere Grace; this is to be
admired.

Thirdly, Because it appears that God is more glorified in the Humiliation
and Exaltation of the Lord Christ, and the salvation of mankind thereby, than
in any of, or all the Works of the first Creation. How glorious those works
are, and how mightily they set forth the glory of God, we have before declared.
But as the Psalmist intimates, God rested not in them; He had yet a farther
design, to manifest his Glory in a more eminent and singular manner, and this
he did, by minding and visiting of man in Christ Jesus. None almost is so
stupid, but on the first view of the Heavens, the Sun, Moon and Stars, but he
will confess, that their Fabric, Beauty and Order, is wonderful, and that the
Glory of their framer and builder is for ever to be admired in them: But all
this comes short of that Glory which arises unto God from this Condescension
and Grace. And therefore it may be the day will come, and that speedily,
wherein these Heavens, and this whole old Creation, shall be utterly dissolved
and brought to nothing. For why should they abide as a monument of his power
unto them, who enjoying the blessed vision of him, shall see and know it far
more evidently and eminently in himself. However they shall undoubtedly in a
short time cease as to their Use, wherein at present they are principally
subservient unto the manifestation of the glory of God. But the Effects of this
regard of God to man, shall abide unto Eternity; and the glory of God therein.
This is the foundation of Heaven, as it is a state and condition; as it denotes
the Glorious Presence of God among his Saints and holy ones. Without this there
would be no such Heaven; all that is there, and all the glory of it, depends
thereon. Take away this foundation, and all that beauty and glory disappears.
Nothing indeed would be taken from God, who ever was, and ever will be
eternally blessed in his own Self sufficiency. But the whole Theater which he
has erected for the manifestation of his glory unto Eternity, depends on this
his holy Condescension and Grace; which assuredly render them meet for ever to
be admired and adored.

This then let us exercise our selves unto. Faith having infinite, eternal,
incomprehensible things proposed unto it, acts it self greatly in this
Admiration. We are every where taught, that we now know but imperfectly, in
part, and that we see darkly as in a glass; not that the Revelation of these
things in the Word, is dark and obscure; for they are fully and clearly
proposed; but that such is the nature of the things themselves, that we are not
in this life able to comprehend them; and therefore, faith does principally
exercise it self in an holy admiration of them. And indeed no Love or Grace
will suit our condition, but that which is incomprehensible. We find our selves
by Experience to stand in need of more Grace, Goodness, Love and Mercy, than we
can look into, search to the bottom of, or fully understand. But when that
which is infinite and incomprehensible is proposed unto us, there all fears are
overwhelmed, and faith finds rest with Assurance. And if our admiration of
these things, be an Act, an Effect, a fruit of faith, it will be of singular
use to endear our hearts unto God, and to excite them unto thankful obedience.
For who would not love and delight in the eternal fountain of this
inconceivable Grace? And what shall we render unto him who has done more for
us, than we are any way able to think or conceive.

II. Observe also, that such was the inconceivable Love of Jesus Christ the Son
of God unto the souls of men, that he was free, and willing to condescend unto
any condition for their good and salvation. That was the end of all this
dispensation. And the Lord Christ was not humbled and made less than the
Angels, without his own Will and consent. His Will and good liking concurred
unto this work. Hence when the Eternal Counsel of this whole matter is
mentioned, it is said of him as the Wisdom of the Father, that he rejoiced in
the habitable part of the earth, and his delights were with the Sons of men,
Prove. 8.31. He delighted in the counsel of redeeming and saving them, by his
own Humiliation and suffering. And the Scripture makes it evident, upon these
two considerations.

First, In that it shows, that what he was to do, and what he was to undergo in
this work was proposed unto him, and that he willingly accepted of the terms
and conditions of it, Psalm 40.6. God says unto him, that sacrifice and
offering would not do this great work; burnt-offering and sin-offering would
not effect it; that is, no kind of Offerings or Sacrifices instituted by the
Law were available to take away sin, and to save sinners; as our Apostle
expounds that place at large, Heb. 10, 1, 2, 3, 4. confirming his Exposition
with sundry Arguments taken from their nature and Effects; What then does God
require of him, that this great design of the salvation of sinners may be
accomplished? even that he himself should make his own soul an offering for
sin; pour out his soul unto death, and thereby bear the sin of many, Isa.
53.10.12. That seeing the Law was weak through the flesh, that is, by reason of
our sins in the flesh, that he himself should take upon him the likeness of
sinful flesh, and become an offering for sin in the flesh, Romans 8.3. That he
should be made of a woman made under the Law, if he would redeem them that were
under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. that he should make himself of no reputation, but
take upon him the form of a servant, and be made in the likeness of man, and
being found in fashion as a man to humble himself and to become obedient unto
death, the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7, 8. These things were proposed unto
him, which he was to undergo, if he would deliver and save mankind. And how did
he entertain this proposal? how did he like these Conditions? I was not, says
he, rebellious, I turned not away back; Isa. 50.5. He declined them not; he
refused none of the terms that were proposed unto him, but underwent them in a
way of Obedience; and that with Willingness, Alacrity and delight, Psalm. 40.6,
7, 8. Thou, says he, have opened my ears; or prepared a body for me; wherein I
may yield this obedience; (that the Apostle declares to be the sense of the
expression, Chap. 10.) This Obedience could not be yielded without a body,
wherein it was performed; and whereas to hear, or to have the ear opened, is in
the Scripture to be prepared unto obedience: the Psalmist in that one
Expression, Mine ear have thou opened, comprizeth both these; even that Christ
had a body prepared, by a Synechdoche, of a part for the whole; and also in
that body he was ready to yield obedience unto God in this great work, which
could not be accomplished by Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings. And this readiness
and willingness of Christ unto this work is set out under three heads in the
ensuing words. (1.) His Tender of himself unto this work; then said he, Lo, I
come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me: This thou have promised,
this is recorded in the head, beginning of thy book; namely, in that great
Promise, Genesis 3.15. That the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the
serpent; and now thou have given me, and prepared me in the fullness of time, a
Body for that purpose, Lo, I come, willing and ready to undertake it. (2.) In
the frame of his mind, in this engagement; he entered into it with great
delight, I delight to do thy will O my God; he did not delight in the thoughts
of it only of old, as before, and then grew heavy and sorrowful when it was to
be undertaken: but he went unto it, with chea^fulness and delight, although he
knew what sorrow and grief it would cost him before it was brought unto
perfection. (3.) From the Principle, whence this Obedience and delight did
spring; which was an universal conformity of his Soul, Mind and Will, unto the
Law Will and Mind of God, thy Law is in my heart, in the midst of my bowels;
every thing in me is compliant with thy Will and Law: There is in me an
universal conformity thereunto. Being thus prepared, thus principled, he
considered the Glory that was set before him, the glory that would redound unto
God, by his becoming a Captain of salvation, and that would ensue unto himself:
He endured the Cross and despised the shame, He. 12.2. He armed himself with
those considerations, against the hardships and sufferings that he was to meet
withal; as the Apostle advises us with the like mind when we are to suffer; 1
Pet. 4.1. By all which it appears, that the Good will and Love of Jesus Christ
was in this matter of being humbled and made less than Angels; as the Apostle
says expressly, that he humbled himself, and made himself of no reputation,
Phil. 2.7, 8. as well as it is here said, that God humbled him, or made him
less than Angels.

Secondly, The Scripture peculiarly assigns this work unto the Love and
Condescension of Christ himself. For although it abounds in sitting forth the
Love of the Father in the designing and contriving this work, and sending his
Son into the world, yet it directs us unto the Lord Christ himself, as the next
immediate cause of his engaging into it, and performance of it. So says the
Apostle, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God; that is, by faith in
him, who loved me, and gave himself for me. It was the Love of Christ that
moved him to give himself for us; which is excellently expressed in that
doxology, Rev. 1.5, 6. To him that loved us and washed us in his own blood from
our sins, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, unto him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. All this was the fruit of his
Love; and therefore unto him is all Praise and Honor to be given and ascribed.
And so great was this Love of Christ, that he declined nothing that was
proposed unto him. This the Apostle calls his Grace, 2 Cor. 8, 9. Ye know the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. He condescended unto a
poor and low condition, and to suffer therein for our good, that we might be
made partakers of the Riches of the Grace of God. And this was the love of the
Person of Christ, because it was in, and wrought equally in him, both before
and after his Assumption of our nature.

Now the Holy Ghost makes an especial Application of this truth unto us, as
unto one part of our Obedience, Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was
also in Christ Jesus; and what that mind was, he declares in the ensuing
Verses; laying out his infinite condescension in taking our nature upon him,
and submitting to all misery, reproach and death it self for our sakes. If this
mind were in Christ, should not we endeavor after a Readiness and Willingness
to submit our selves unto any condition for his glory. Forasmuch, says Peter,
as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the
same mind, 1 Pet. 4.1. Many difficulties will lie in our way, many Reasonings
will rise up against it, if we consult with flesh and blood; but, says he, arm
your selves with the same mind that was in Christ; get your souls strengthened
and fenced by Grace, against all Oppositions, that you may follow him, and
imitate him. Some that profess his name, will suffer nothing for him; if they
may enjoy him, or his ways in peace and quietness well and good; but if
Persecution arise for the Gospel, immediately they fall away. These have
neither lot nor portion in this matter. Others, the most, the best, have a
secret lothness and unwillingness to condescend unto a condition of trouble and
distress for the Gospel. Well, if we are unwilling hereunto; What does the Lord
Christ lose by it? Will it be any real Abatement of his honor or glory? Will
he lose his Crown or Kingdom thereby? So far as suffering in this world is
needful for any of his blessed Ends and Purposes; he will not want them who
shall be ready even to dye for his name sake: But what if he had been unwilling
to be humbled and to suffer for us? If the same mind had been in Christ, as was
in us, what had been our state and condition unto eternity? In this Grace, Love
and Willingness of Christ lies the foundation of all our Happiness, of all our
Deliverance from misery and ruin; and shall we reckon our selves to have an
interest therein, and yet find our selves altogether unready to a conformity
unto him? Besides the Lord Christ was really rich when he made himself poor for
our sakes; he was in the form of God, when he took upon him the form of a
servant, and became for us of no reputation; nothing of this was due to him, or
belonged unto him, but merely on our account. But we are in our selves really
poor, and obnoxious unto infinitely more miseries for our own sins, than what
he calls us unto for his name. Are we unwilling to suffer a little light
transitory trouble in this world for him, without whose sufferings for us, we
must have suffered misery and that Eternal whether we would or no: And I speak
not so much about suffering it self, as about the mind and frame of Spirit
wherewith we undergo it. Some will suffer when they cannot avoid it; but so
unwillingly, so unchearfully, as makes it evident, that they aim at nothing;
nor act from no Principle, but merely that they dare not go against their
Convictions. But the mind that was in Christ will lead us unto it, out of Love
unto him, with freedom and enlargedness of heart, which is required of us.

III. The blessed issue of the abasement of Jesus Christ in his exaltation unto
honor and glory, is an assured pledge of the final glory and blessedness of
all that believe in him; what ever difficulties and dangers they may be
exercised withal in the way. His Humiliation and Exaltation, as we have seen
proceeded out of Gods condescension and love to mankind. His Electing Love, the
eternal gracious purpose of his Will to recover lost sinners, and to bring them
unto the enjoyment of himself, was the ground of this dispensation. And
therefore what he has done in Christ, is a certain pledge of what he will do
in and for them also. He is not crowned with Honor and Glory merely for
himself, but that he may be a Captain of Salvation, and bring others unto a
Participation of his Glory.

IV. Jesus Christ as the Mediator of the New Covenant, has absolute and
supreme authority given unto him over all the works of God in Heaven and Earth.
This we have so fully manifested and insisted on upon the foregoing Chapter,
that we shall not here farther pursue it; but only mind by the way, that
blessed is the state and condition, great is the spiritual and eternal security
of the Church; seeing all things are under the very feet of its Head and
Savior.

V. The Lord Jesus Christ is the only Lord of the Gospel state of the Church,
called under the Old Testament the world to come; and therefore he only has
Power to dispose of all things in it, relating unto that Worship of God which
it is to perform and celebrate. It is not put into subjection unto any other,
Angels or men. This privilege was reserved for Christ; this honor is bestowed
on the Church. He is the only Head, King and Lawgiver of it; and nothing is it
to be taught to observe or do, but what he has commanded. But this will fall
more directly under our consideration in the beginning of the next Chapter.

VI. The Lord Jesus Christ in his death did undergo the poenal sentence of the
Law; in the room and stead of them for whom he dyed. Death was that which by
the sentence of the Law was due unto sin and sinners. For them did Christ dye,
and therein tasted of the bitterness of that death which they were to have
undergone; or else the fruit of it could not have redounded unto them; for what
was it toward their discharge, if that which they had deserved was not
suffered; but somewhat else wherein the least part of their concernment did
lie. But this being done, certain deliverance and salvation will be the lot and
portion of them, of all them for whom he dyed; and that upon the rules of
Justice and righteousness on the part of Christ, though on theirs, of mere
Mercy and Grace.

Verse X.
THE Apostle in the Verses foregoing made mention of that, which of all other
things the Jews generally were most offended at, and which was of the greatest
importance to be believed; namely the sufferings of the Messiah, wherein a
great part of the discharge of his Sacerdotal Office, whereunto he here makes a
Transition, did consist. This his own Disciples were slow in the belief of,
Matthew. 16.22. chap. 17.22, 23. Luke 24.25, 26. and the Jews generally stumbled
at. They thought it strange that the Messiah, the Son of God, the Savior of
his people, and Captain of their salvation, concerning whom so great and
glorious things were promised and foretold, should be brought into a low
despised condition, and therein to suffer and die. Hence they cried unto him on
the Cross, If thou be the Christ, come down and save thy self; intimating that
by his suffering he was assuredly proved not to be so; for why any one should
suffer that could deliver himself they saw no reason.

Besides they had inveterate prejudices about the Salvation promised by the
Messiah, and the way whereby it was to be wrought, arising from their love and
over-valuation of temporal or carnal things, with their contempt of things
spiritual and eternal. They expected a deliverance outward glorious and Kingly
in this world, and that to be wrought with Arms, Power, and a mighty hand. And
what should they expect from a Messiah that suffered and died? Wherefore the
Apostle having asserted the sufferings of Christ, saw it necessary to proceed
unto a full confirmation of it, with a declaration of the Reasons, Causes and
Ends of it; partly to evert that false persuasion which prevailed amongst them
about the nature of the salvation to be wrought by Christ; partly to show, that
nothing would thence ensue derogatory unto what he had before delivered about
his pre-eminence above Angels; but principally to instruct them in the
Sacerdotal Office of the Messiah, the Redemption which he wrought, and the
means whereby he accomplished it, which was the great business that he had
designed to treat with them about. For the Salvation it self, he declares that
it was not to be of the same kind with that which they had of old, when they
were brought out of Egypt, and settled in the Land of Canaan, under the conduct
of Joshua; but spiritual and heavenly, in a deliverance from sin, Satan, death
and hell, with a manuduction into life and blessedness eternal. The way whereby
this was to be wrought, he informs them that it was to be by the sufferings and
death of the Messiah, and that no other way it could be accomplished; on which
account they were indispensibly necessary. And the first reason hereof he
expresses in this tenth verse.

Verse 10. (...).
One or two Copies read (...), against the sense and design of the place; (...)
is needlessly repeated, unless put for (...), and then it disturbs the whole
meaning of the verse, and is inconsistent with the passive Verb following in
this Reading: (...) in the singular number relates only unto death, expressed
in the verse foregoing by (...); but here All the sufferings of Christ, as well
those antecedent unto death, as death it self are intended. (...), in the
Passive is followed by some Copies of the Vulgar Translation, reading
consummari; both inconsistent with the sense of the place, as we shall see.

Translations differ but little about these words. (...).
(...), most, Decebat enim cum, For it became him. Beza, Decebat enim ut iste,
For it was meet that he, to make the following words flow regularly. (...),
propter quem omnia; Sir. (...), cui omnia, for whom are all things. Beza,
Propter quem sunt haec omnia, expressing the Article as restrictive to the
things spoken of: For whom are all these things. One Syriack Copy adds, (...),
in his hand, which somewhat corrupts the sense. (...), and per quem omnia;
Beza, haec omnia, as before, without cause; for the Article is frequently
prefixed unto (...), where all things absolutely are intended: as Ephesians. 1.11.
By whom are all things; (...): Vulg. Qui multos filios ad gloriam adduxerat:
Who had brought many sons unto glory. Arias. Multos filios ad gloriam
adducentem: Beza, adducendo, bringing many sons unto glory. Sir. Adduxerat in
gloriam suam; had brought many sons into his glory. (...); Vulg. Autorem, the
Author; Beza, Principem; Sir. (...), The Head or Prince of their salvation.
(...), per passionem consummare; to consummate or complete by suffering. Beza,
per perpessiones, by sufferings. 8yr. perficere, perfectum reddere; to perfect,
to m^ke perfect.

(...).
The proper signification of the words in this Verse is much to be heeded, as
that which will give us much light into the sense of the whole. (...) is decet,
(...), dignum est; it becomes; it is meet convenient or just. (...), in Plato,
is rendered by Cicero, Deo decorum, that which becomes God; and says he,
(...), appellant ^oc Graeci, nos dicamus sane decorum; that which becomes any
one in his state and condition, in a moral sense; as Holiness becomes the
house, that is the people of God. (...), ut decet, ut par est; that which is
equal and right to be done. (...), is Honor justly deserved; and (...), just
loss or punishment. The word then signifies that decency and becomingness which
Justice Reason and Equity require; so that the contrary would be unmeet,
because unequal and unjust. Thus every ones Duty, that which is morally
incumbent on him in his place and station, is that which becomes him: and
thence in the New Testament, that which is not (...), thus decent, is condemned
as evil, 1 Cor. 11.13. 1 Timothy 2.10. And it self is commended as a Rule of
Virtue, Matthew. 3.15. Ephesians. 5.3.

(...).
(...). with an Accusative Case constantly denotes the final cause, propter
quem, for whom. Revel. 4.11. (...), Thou have created all things, (all things
universally with the Article prefixed, as in this place) (...), and for thy
will (thy pleasure, thy glory) they are and were created, Romans 11.36. (...), to
whom, to him, or for him, or his glory, are all things. Prove. 16.4. (...), The
Lord has made all things for himself, his Glory is the final cause of them all.

(...).
(...), and by whom are all things. (...) with a Genitive denotes the efficient
cause. Some from this expression would have the Son to be the Person here
spoken of, because concerning him it is frequently said, that all things are
(...), Joh. 1.3. 1 Cor. 8.6. Heb. 1.3. but it is used also with reference unto
the Father, Romans 11.36. Gal. 1.1. Schlictingius here gives it for a rule, that
when (...) relates unto the Father, it denotes the principal efficient cause;
when unto the Son, the instrumental. But it is a rule of his own coining, a
groundless efflux of his (...), that the Son is not God; on which kind of
presumptions men may found what Rules they please. The principal Efficiency or
supreme Production of all things by God, is intended in this expression.

(...).
(...), bringing; a word of common use and known signification, but in this
place attended with a double difficulty, from a double Enallagie in the use of
it. First, in the Case; for whereas it seems to relate unto (...), it became
him in bringing, it should then regularly be (...), not (...). Hence some by
supposing a (...) in the words, refer it unto (...), the Author; as if the
Apostle had said, (...), to make perfect the Captain of their salvation, who
brought many sons unto glory. But this transposition of the words, neither the
context, nor the addition of (...), their, unto (...), their salvation,
relating unto the Sons before mentioned, will by any means allow. Wherefore an
Enallage of the case is necessarily to be allowed; (...) for (...), unless we
suppose a repetition of (...), which frequently admits of the Accusative case;
but the principal Author is unquestionably intended. Again, (...) is a
Participle of t^^ second Aoristus, which usually denotes the time past; and
thence is it translated by many, adduxit, adduxera^, and filiis adductis; after
he had brought many sons to glory. And this some refer to the Saints who died
under the Old Testament, unto whom the Lord Christ was no less a Captain of
salvation than to us. And so the Apostle shows, that after they were saved on
his account, it was meet that he should answer for them according to his
undertaking. But neither does this restraining the word answer the Apostles
intention. For it is evident that he principally minded them, unto whom the
Lord Jesus became eminently a Captain of salvation, after he was perfected by
sufferings, though not exclusively unto them that went before. (...) then is
put for (...), unless we shall suppose that the act of God here intended was on
purpose thus expressed to comprehend all the sons, both those that lived
before, and those that lived after the sufferings of Christ; bringing, leading
bearing. It concerns the whole execution of the design of God, for the
salvation and glorification of believers. (...), many sons, Jews and Gentiles,
(...).
all that were by says to become his sons; unto glory.

(...), the Author. Where ever this word is used in the New Testament, (...).
it is applied unto Christ. Acts 3.15. he is called (...), the Prince of life.
And chap. 5.31. God is said to make him (...), a Prince and a Savior; that is,
(...), as here, the Prince of our salvation. Heb. 12.13. the Apostle calls him,
(...), as we render it, The author and finisher of faith. As here God is said
(...), to finish or perfect this Author of our salvation. No where else is this
word used in the New Testament: It answers justly the Hebrew (...), which the
LXX render (...) and (...), the signification of both which words are included
in (...) Princeps, Dux, Praeses, Author; a Prince, Captain, Ruler, Author. And
it is used in Writers with respect to works good and bad. (...), Isocrat. The
Author and Teacher of such works. And (...), artisex malesicii, the principal
contriver of mischief. It is also used for the Author of a Stock, Race, or
Kindred of men. In this place it is limited by (...), it denotes the Chief or
Principal Operator, or worker of that salvation; with especial reference unto
the Kingly or Princely Power, whereunto he was advanced after his sufferings.
As he is also absolutely a Prince, a Ruler, and the Author or Spring of the
whole Race and Kind of Believers, according unto the other senses of the words.

(...); this word is variously used, and variously rendered: to consummate,
(...).
to perfect, to make perfect, to consecrate, dedicate, sanctify. Some would
have it in this place to be the same with (...), to bring unto glory. But what
is the precise signification of the word, we shall clear in the Exposition
ensuing, when we declare what Act of God it is that is here intended.

Before we proceed to the Exposition of the several parts of this Text, we must
consider the Order of the words, to prevent some mistakes that diverse Learned
Commentators have fallen into about them. Some suppose an hyperbaton in them;
and that those expressions, For whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many sons to glory, do intend the Son, the Captain of
salvation. The word (...), him, it became him, they confess to relate unto
(...), God, in the verse foregoing, and to relate unto the Father; in which
Order this would be the sense of the words, It became him, that is God, to make
perfect through sufferings the Captain of their salvation, for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, who brings many sons unto glory. But
there is no just reason why we should arbitrarily thus transpose the words. And
that separation of, from whom are all things, and for whom are all things,
from, it became him, takes away one main foundation of the Apostles reasoning,
as we shall see. And the reason alleged for this ordering of the words is
infirm, namely that it is Christ who brings the many sons unto glory, not the
Father; for it is also assigned unto him, as we shall see upon many accounts.

Some refer the whole words unto Christ, to this purpose, it became him, that
is the Son incarnate, for whom, etc. bringing many sons unto glory, to be
consummated or made perfect by sufferings. So Tena, and those whom he
follows. But this exposition of the words is directly contrary to the scope
of the Apostle, declared in the verse foregoing, and that following. It leaves
also (...), him, nothing to relate unto; nor allows the causal (...), for, to
give an account of any act of God before mentioned; and besides the whole of it
is built on the corruption or mistake of one word in the Vulgar Translation;
consummari for consummare, and that but in some Copies, as is acknowledged by
the most learned Romanists, who here adhere unto the Original. For taking that
word actively, and the Object of the Act expressed in it, being the Captain of
salvation, some Agent distinct from him must needs be signified, which is God
the Father.

Some suppose an (...) in the words, and therefore in the reading of those, in
bringing many sons unto glory, they supply by afflictions or sufferings, having
brought many sons to glory by afflictions, it became him to make the Captain of
their salvation perfect through sufferings. So Capellus. But this imaginary
defect arose merely from a mistake, that the (...), or condecency here
mentioned, has a respect unto the things done; that seeing the Sons had
suffered, it was meet and convenient that their Captain should do so in an
eminent manner. But the truth is, it respects only the doer of them, it was on
his part requisite so to do the things mentioned.

Verse 10.

For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings.

There is in the words, 1. The causal connection unto the Verse foregoing,
for. 2. A design of God intimated as the foundation of the discourse, which
was, to bring many sons unto glory. 3. The means he fixed on for the
accomplishment of that design, namely the appointing unto them a Captain of
their salvation. 4. The especial way of his dedicating him unto that Office, he
made him perfect by sufferings. 5. The reason of this his proceeding and
dealing with him, it became him so to do. 6. An amplification of that reason,
in a description of his condition, him for whom are all things, and by whom are
all things.

First, A Reason is rendered in the words, of what he had asserted in the
foregoing verse, namely that Jesus the Messiah was to suffer death, and by the
grace of God to taste of death for all; why he should do thus, on what account,
what ground necessity and reason there was for it, is here declared; it was so
to be, For it became him, etc.

Secondly, The Design of God is expressed in this whole matter, and that was,
to bring many sons unto glory. And herein the Apostle declares the nature of
the salvation which was to be wrought by the Messiah, about which the Jews were
so greatly mistaken, and consequently in and about the way whereby it was to be
wrought. His purpose herein was not now to carry his children into a new
Canaan, to bring them into a wealthy country, an earthly Kingdom, which must or
might have been done by Might, and Power, and Arms, as of old; but his design
toward his sons in and by the Messiah was of another nature; it was to bring
them unto glory, eternal glory with himself in heaven; and so it is no wonder
if the way whereby this is to be accomplished be quite of another nature than
that whereby their temporal deliverance was wrought; namely by the death and
sufferings of the Messiah himself. And here in reference unto this design of
God it is supposed, 1. That some who were created for the glory of God, had by
sin come short of it; so that without a new way of bringing them unto it, it
was impossible that they should ever be made partakers of it. This is here
supposed by the Apostle, and is the foundation of all his Doctrine concerning
the Messiah. 2. That the way whereby God will at length bring them who are
designed unto glory thereunto, is by taking of them first into a state of
Sonship and Reconciliation with himself; they must be sons before they are
brought to glory. There is a double act of Gods Predestination; the first is
his designation of some unto grace, to be sons, Ephesians. 1.5. the other his
appointment of those sons unto glory, both to be wrought and accomplished by
Christ, the Captain of their salvation. The latter, and the execution of it,
namely the bringing of those who by grace are made sons, unto glory, is that
which the Apostle here expresses. He deals not with the Hebrews in this
Epistle about the conversion of the Elect, the traduction of them into a state
of grace and sonship, but of the government of them being made sons, and their
guidance unto glory. And therefore the sufferings of Christ, which absolutely
and in themselves are the cause of our sonship and reconciliation with God, are
mentioned here only as the means whereby Christ entered into a condition of
leading sons into glory, or of saving them who upon the account of his
sufferings are made sons by grace. But yet this is not so precisely respected
neither, but that the Apostle withal intimates the necessity of the sufferings
of Christ, as to the whole effect of it toward the Elect. Now these sons thus
to be brought unto glory are said to be many; not all absolutely, not a few, or
of the Jews only, which they looked for; but all the Elect of God, who are
many, Rev. 7.9. And this work of bringing many sons unto glory, is here
signally assigned by the Apostle unto God the Father, whose Love Wisdom and
Grace, Believers are principally to eye in the whole work of their salvation
wrought out and accomplished by Jesus Christ. This therefore we shall a little
insist upon to declare the grounds and reasons, on the account whereof it is so
ascribed unto him, or what acts are peculiarly assigned unto the Father in this
work of bringing many sons unto glory; which will secure the ascription of it
unto him, and therein our interpretation of the place.

1. The Eternal designation of them unto that glory whereunto they are to be
brought, is peculiarly assigned unto him. He predestinates them to be conformed
to the image of his Son, Romans 8.28, 29, 30. The God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ chooses us before the foundation of the world, and predestinateth
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, Ephesians. 1.3, 4,
5. And he has from the beginning chosen us unto salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.
And this electing love of God, this eternal purpose of his good pleasure, which
he purposed in himself, is the fountain and spring of all other immediate
causes of our salvation. From hence Faith, Acts 13.45. Sanctification, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13. Holiness, Ephesians. 1.4. preservation in grace, 2 Timothy 2.19. the death of
Christ for them, Joh. 3.16. and final glory it self, 2 Timothy 2.10. do all ensue
and proceed; so that on the account hereof, he may be justly said to be the
Bringer of many sons to glory.

2. He was the spring and fountain of that Covenant (as in all other Operations
of the Deity) that was of old between himself and his Son, about the salvation
and glory of the Elect. See Zech. 6.13. Isa. 42.1. Prove. 8.20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Isa. 50.4. chap. 53.11, 12. Psalm. 16.10 to Psalm. 110.1,
6. He in his love and grace is still declared as the Proposer both of the Duty
and of the Reward of the Mediator, the Son incarnate, as the Son accepts of his
Terms and Proposals, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8. And hence the Intenseness of his Love,
the Immutability of his Counsel, the Holiness of his Nature, his Righteousness
and Faithfulness, his Infinite Wisdom, do all shine forth in the Mediation and
sufferings of Christ, Romans 3.25, 26. chap. 5.8. 1 John 4.9. Heb. 6.17, 18. Tit.
1.2. Rather than his Love should not be satisfied, and his Counsel
accomplished, He spared not his own Son, but gave him unto death for us.

3. He signally gave out the first Promise, that great foundation of the
Covenant of Grace, and afterward declared, confirmed, and ratified by his
Oath, that Covenant wherein all the means of bringing the elect unto glory are
contained, Genesis 3.15. Jerem: 31.32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.8. The Person of the Father
is considered as the principal Author of the Covenant, as the Person
covenanting and taking us into covenant with himself; the Son as the Messiah,
being considered as the Surety and Mediator of it, Heb. 7.22. chap. 9.15. and
the Purchaser of the Promises of it.

4. He gave and sent his Son to be a Savior and Redeemer for them, and unto
them, so that in his whole work, in all that he did and suffered, he obeyed the
Command, and fulfilled the Will of the Father. Him did God the Father send, and
seal, and give, and set forth, as the Scripture every where expresses it. And
our Lord Jesus Christ every where remits us to the consideration of the Love,
Will, and Authority of his Father in all that he did, taught or suffered, so
seeking the Glory of God that sent him.

5. He draws his Elect, and enables them to come to the Son, to believe in him,
and so to obtain life salvation and glory by him. No man, says our Savior,
can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, Joh. 6.44. No
man, no not any one of the Elect, can come to Christ, unless the Father, in the
pursuit of that love from whence it was that he sent the Son, do put forth the
efficacy of his grace to enable him thereunto; and accordingly he reveals him
unto some, when he is hidden from others, Matthew. 11.25. For the Revelation of
Christ unto the soul is the immediate act of the Father, Matthew. 16.17.

6. Being reconciled unto them by the blood of his Son, he reconciles them unto
himself, by giving them pardon and forgiveness of sins in and by the Promises
of the Gospel, without which they cannot come to glory, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20,
21. He is in Christ reconciling us unto himself, by the non-imputation, or
forgiveness of our sins; Forgiving us all our trespasses for Christ his sake,
Ephesians. 4.32. There are many things concurring unto the pardon of sin, that are
peculiar acts of the Father.

7. He quickens them and sanctifies them by his Spirit, to make them meet for
the inheritance of the Saints in light; that is, for the enjoyment of glory. He
that raised up Jesus from the dead, quickens us by his Spirit, Romans 8.11. So
saving us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he shed on us richly by Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.5, 6. This sanctification
and renovation by the Holy Ghost, and all supplies of actual grace, enabling us
unto obedience, are every where asserted as the Grant and Work of the Father,
who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. And so in
especial is the saving illumination of our minds, to know the mystery of his
grace, and discern the things that are God, 2 Cor. 4.6. Col. 2.2 Ephesians. 3.13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Matthew. 11.25.

8. As the Great Father of the Family he adopts them, and makes them his sons,
that so he may bring them unto glory: He gives them the power or privilege to
become the sons of God, Joh. 1.11. making them heirs and coheirs with Christ,
Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17. sending withal into their hearts the Spirit of
adoption, enabling them to cry, Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. The whole right of
adopting children is in the Father, and so is the authoritative translation of
them out of the world and kingdom of Satan into his own Family and Household,
with their investiture in all the rights and privileges thereof.

9. He confirms them in Faith, establishes them in Obedience, preserves them
from dangers and oppositions of all sorts, and in manifold wisdom keeps them
through his power unto the glory prepared for them; as 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Ephesians.
3.20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.5 Joh. 17.11.

10. He gives them the Holy Ghost as their Comforter, with all those blessed
and unspeakable benefits which attend that gift of his, Matthew. 7.11. Luke
11.13. Joh. 14.16, 17. Gal. 4.6.

In brief, in bringing the Elect unto Glory, all the Sovereign Acts of Power,
Wisdom, Love and Grace exerted therein, are peculiarly assigned unto the
Father; as all ministerial acts are unto the Son as Mediator. So that there is
no reason why he may not be said by the way of eminency to be the (...), the
leader or bringer of his sons unto glory.

And herein lies a great direction unto Believers, and a great supportment for
their faith. Peter tells us, That by Christ we do believe in God that raised
him from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God,
1 Pet. 1.21. Jesus Christ considered as Mediator is the next, but not the
ultimate Object of our faith and hope. We so believe in him, as by him to
believe in God, that is the Father, whose Love is the supreme fountain and
spring of our salvation; which the Apostle manifests in that double instance of
his raising up Christ, and giving of him glory; thereby declaring himself the
principal Author of the great work of his Mediation. This he directs us unto,
so to believe in Christ, as that discerning in and by him the Grace, Good Will,
and Love of the Father himself toward us, we may be encouraged to fix our
faith and hope on him, seeing he himself loves us. So that Christ himself had
no need to pray for the love of the Father unto us, but only for the
communication of the effects of it, Joh. 16.26, 27. And this is the work of
faith, when as we are directed we pray to the Father in the name of Christ,
Joh. 16.23, 24. And we thus place our faith in God the Father, when we conceive
of him as the Sovereign Leader of us unto glory, by all the instances before
mentioned. And then does faith find rest in him, delight, complacency and
satisfaction, as we have elsewhere declared.

Thirdly, There is in these words intimated the principal means that God fixed
on for the accomplishment of this design of his, for the bringing of many sons
unto glory; it was by appointing a Captain of their salvation. The Jews
generally granted that the Messiah was to be the Captain of their salvation;
but misunderstanding that salvation, they also mistook the whole nature of his
Office. The Apostle does here evidently compare him unto Joshua, the Captain
and Leader of the people into Canaan, (as he had before preferred him above the
Angels, by whose ministry the Law was given unto the people in the Wilderness)
which was a Type of their salvation, as he farther declares, chap. 4. All the
sons of God are put under his conduct and guidance, as the people of old were
under the rule of Joshua, to bring them into the glory designed for them, and
promised unto them in the Covenant made with Abraham. And he is called their
(...), Prince, Ruler and Captain, or Author of their salvation, on several
accounts. 1. Of his Authority and Right to rule over them in order unto their
salvation; so he appeared unto Joshua, as (...), Josh. 5.14. The Captain of the
Lords host; intimating then, that there was another Captain, and other work to
do than what Joshua had then in hand. The General of all the People of God, as
Joab was to Israel, (...). 2. Of his actual leading and Conduct of them by his
Example, Spirit and Grace, through all the difficulties of their warfare; so he
was promised as (...), Isa. 55.4 Princeps, Dux, Antecessor, (...), a Leader and
Commander of the people, one that goes before them for their direction and
guidance, giving them an example in his own person of doing and suffering the
Will of God, and so entering into glory. So is he their (...), Heb. 6.20.
Antecessor, Forerunner; or as Daniel calls him, (...), Dan. 9.25. Messiah the
Prince or Guide. 3. As he is unto them (...), as chap. 5.9. the Author or Cause
of eternal salvation; he procured and purchased it for them. So that the
expression denotes both his acquisition of salvation it self, and his Conduct
or Leading of the people of God unto the enjoyment of it. And the Holy Ghost
hereby also intimates, that the way whereby God will bring the Sons unto Glory,
is full of Difficulties, Perplexities and Oppositions, as that of the
Israelites into Canaan was also; so that they have need of a Captain, Leader
and Guide to carry them through it. But yet all is rendered safe and secure
unto them, through the Power, Grace and Faithfulness of their Leader. They only
perish in the Wilderness and dye in their sins, who either out of love unto the
fleshpots of Egypt, the pleasures of this world, or being terrified with the
hardships of the warfare which he calls them unto, refuse to go up under his
command.

Fourthly, There is expressed in the words, the especial way, whereby God
fitted or designed the Lord Christ unto this Office of being a Captain of
salvation unto the Sons to be brought unto Glory. To understand this aright, we
must observe, that the Apostle speaks not here of the Redemption of the Elect
absolutely; (...).
but of the bringing them to Glory, when they are made Sons in an especial
manner. And therefore he treats not absolutely of the Designation,
Consecration, or fitting of the Lord Christ unto his Office of Mediator in
general, but as unto that part, and the Execution of it, which especially
concerns the leading of the Sons unto glory, as Joshuah lead the Israelites
into Canaan. This will give us light into what Act of God toward the Lord
Christ is intended in this expression, (...). And sundry are here pleaded by
Expositors, not without some probability. As (1.) Some think, that his bringing
him to glory is intended; it became him (...), to bring him to Glory by and
through sufferings, so to perfect him. But besides, that the word is no where
so used, nor has any such signification, the Apostle does not declare what God
intended to bring him unto, but by what in and about him, he intended to bring
many Sons to glory. (2.) Some would have it to denote the finishing of Gods
work about him; whence in his sufferings on the Cross he said (...), it is
finished, John 19.30. This answers indeed the sense of the word (...), used in
that place by our Savior, but not of (...), the word here used by the Apostle,
which never signifies to end or finish, or to perfect by bringing unto an end.
(3.) Some think God made the Lord Christ perfect by sufferings, in that he gave
him thereby a full sense and Experience of the condition of his people; whence
he is said to learn obedience by the things that he suffered, Chap. 5.8. And
this is true, God did so; but it is not formally and directly expressed by this
word, which is never used unto that purpose. This is rather a consequent of the
Act here intended, than the Act it self. (...), then in this place signifies to
consecrate, dedicate, to sanctify unto an Office, or some especial Part or Act
of an Office This is the proper meaning of the word; (...)* are Mysteries; and
(...), sacred Acts and Offices; (...), are those who are initiated and
consecrated unto sacred Offices or employments. See Exodus 29.33, 35. in the
LXX. Hence the Ancients called Baptism (...), or Consecration unto the sacred
Service of Christ: and (...), the word next insisted on by our Apostle, is so
used by Christ himself John 17.19. (...); for their sakes, I sanctify, that is
dedicate, consecrate, separate my self to be a Sacrifice. And his blood is said
to be that, (...), Heb. 10.29. wherewith he was so consecrated. Nor is this
word used in any other sense in this whole Epistle, wherein it is often used,
when applied unto Christ, See Chap. 5.9. Chap. 7.28. And this was the use of
the word among the Heathen, signifying the Initiation and Consecration of a man
into the Mysteries of their Religion, to be a Leader unto others. And among
some of them it was performed through the instigation of the Devil by great
sufferings. (...), says Gregory Nazianzen. Orat. cont. Jul. 1. No man could be
consecrated unto the mysteries of Mithra (the Sun) unless he proved himself
holy, and as it were inviolable, by passing through many degrees of punishments
and trialls. Thus it became God to dedicate and consecrate the Lord Christ unto
this Part of his Office by his own sufferings. He consecrated Aaron to be
Priest of old, but by the hands of Moses; and he was set apart to his Office by
the Sacrifice of other things. But the Lord Christ must be consecrated by his
own sufferings, and the Sacrifice of himself. And thence it is, that those very
sufferings, which as antecedaneous unto his being a Captain of salvation, to
this End that he might lead the Sons unto Glory, are the means of his
dedication or consecration, are in themselves a great part of that means
whereby he procures salvation for them. By all the sufferings then of the Lord
Christ in his life and death, by which sufferings he wrought out the salvation
of the elect, did God consecrate and dedicate him to be a Prince, a Leader and
Captain of salvation unto his people; as Peter declares the whole matter, Acts
5.30, 31. and Chap. 2.36. And from these things last mentioned, of the Lord
Christ being the Captain of our Salvation, and being dedicated unto that Office
by his own sufferings, it appears.

First, That the whole work of saving the Sons of God from first to last, their
guidance and conduct through sins and sufferings unto Glory, is committed unto
the Lord Jesus; whence he is constantly to be eyed by believers in all the
concernments of their Faith, Obedience and Consolation. Behold, says the Lord,
I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the
People, Isa. 55.4. A Witness to testify the truth, in revealing the mind and
Will of God; a Leader going before them as a Prince and Captain, as the word
signifies; and a Commander, that gives out Laws and Rules for their Obedience.
God has set him as a Lord over his whole House, Chap. 3.5. and committed all
the mannagement of all its concernments unto him; There is no Person that
belongs unto Gods design of bringing many sons to glory, but he is under his
Rule and Inspection. Neither is there any thing that concerns any of them in
their passage toward glory, whereby they may be farthered or hindered in their
way, but the care is committed unto him; as the care of the whole Army lies on
the General, or Prince of the host. This the Prophet sets out in his type
Eliakim, Isa. 22.21, 22, 23, 24. He is fastened as a nayl in a sure place; and
all the glory of the house, and every vessel of it from the greatest unto the
least is hanged on him, the weight of all, the care of all is upon him,
committed unto him. When the People came out of Egypt with Moses they were
numbered unto him, and he being the Administrator of the Law, they dyed all in
the Wilderness: but they were delivered again by tale and number unto Joshuah
the type of Christ; and none of them, not one failed of entering into Canaan.
And he discharges this trust as a faithful Captain.

First, With Care and Watchfulness, Psalm. 121.4. Behold he that keeps Israel,
shall neither slumber nor sleep. There is no time nor season wherein the Sons
committed unto his Care, may be surprised through any neglect or regardlesness
in him. His eyes are always open upon them. They are never out of his heart,
nor thoughts; they are engraven on the palms of his hand, and their walls are
continually before him; or as he expresses it, Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep
my Vineyard, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it
night and day. Greater Care and Watchfulness cannot be expressed; night and
day, and every moment in them, he is intent about this work. Oh how great an
encouragement is this to adhere unto him, to follow him in the whole Course of
Obedience that he calls unto. This puts life into Soldiers, and gives them
security, when they know that their Commander is continually careful for them.

Secondly, He discharges this great trust with Tenderness and Love, Isa.
40.11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young. These Sons are of various sorts and degrees; the best and strongest
of them are but sheep; poor infirm and helpless creatures; and amongst them
some are young and tender, as Lambs; some heavy and burdened with sins and
afflictions, like those that are with young. In tender compassion he
condescends unto all their conditions; feeds and preserves the whole flock as a
shepherd; gathers in his arm, and bears in his bosom, those that otherwise by
their infirmity would be cast behind, and left unto danger. Compassion he has
for them that err and are out of the way; seeks for them that wander, heals the
diseased, feeds them when they are even a flock of slaughter. And where these
two concur, Care and Compassion, there can be no want of any thing; Psalm. 23.1.
Indeed Sion is ready sometimes to complain that she is forgotten. The Sons in
great Distresses, Afflictions, Persecutions, Temptations that may befall them
in their way to glory, are apt to think they are forgotten and disregarded,
that they are left as it were to shift for themselves, and to wrestle with
their difficulties by their own strength and Wisdom, which they know to be as a
thing of naught. But this fear is vain and ungrateful. Whilst they are found in
the way, following the Captain of their Salvation, it is utterly impossible
that this Watchfulness, Care, Love and tenderness should in any thing be
wanting unto them.

Thirdly, He leads them with Power, Authority and Majesty, Mic. 5.4. He shall
stand and rule in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the name of the
Lord his God, and they shall abide. The name of God is in him, accompanied with
his Power and Majesty, which he puts forth in the feeding and ruling of his
people, whereon their safety does depend. They shall abide, or dwell in safety,
because in this his Glory and Majesty, he shall be great, or be magnified unto
the ends of the earth. So also is he described in his rule, Zech. 6.13. Even he
shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit
and rule upon his Throne, and shall be a Priest upon his Throne; Having built
the Temple, raised an House and Family to God, he shall be the Ruler of Captain
of it, to preserve it unto Glory; and this in a glorious manner; bearing the
glory of God, sitting upon a Throne, in the whole discharge of his Office both
as a King and Priest. Unto this end is he entrusted with all the Power and
Authority which we have before described, God having given him to be head over
all things unto his Church. There is nothing so high, so great, so mighty, that
lies in the way of his sons to glory, but it must stoop to his Authority, and
give place to his Power. The whole Kingdom of Satan, the strongholds of sin,
the high imaginations of unbelief; the strength and malice of the world, all
sink before him. And thence are they described so glorious and successful in
their way, Mich. 2.13. The breaker is come up before them, they have broken up
and have passed through the Gate, and are gone out by it, and their King, shall
pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them. Many obstacles lie in their
way, but they shall break through them all, because of their King and Lord that
goes before them. And those Difficulties which in this world they meet withal,
that seem to be too hard for them, their Persecutions and Sufferings, though
they may put a stop unto somewhat of their outward Profession, yet they shall
not in the least hinder them in their progress unto glory. Their Captain goes
before them with Power and Authority, and breaks up all the hedges and gates
that lie in their way, and gives them a free and abundant entrance into the
Kingdom of God.

Secondly, As the manner how, so the Acts wherein and whereby this Antecessor
and Captain of salvation leads on the Sons of God, may be considered; and he
does it variously.

First, He goes before them in the whole way unto the end. This is a principal
duty of a Captain or Leader to go before his Soldiers. Hence they that went
unto the War, were said to go at the feet of their Commanders, Judge. 4.10.
Barak went up and ten thousand men at his feet, that is, followed him, and went
where he went before them. And this also became the Captain of the Lords Host;
even to go before his People in their whole way, not putting them on any thing,
not calling them to any thing, which himself passes not before them in. And
there are three things whereunto their whole course may be referred.

(1.) Their Obedience: (2.) Their Sufferings; (3.) Their Entrance into Glory;
and in all these has the Lord Christ gone before them, and that as their
Captain and Leader, inviting them to engage into them, and courageously to pass
thorough them, upon his Example, and the success that he sets before them.

(1.) As unto Obedience; he himself was made under the Law; and learned
obedience fulfilling all righteousness. Though he was in his own Person above
the Law, yet he submitted himself to every Law of God, and righteous Law of
men; that he might give an Example unto them who were of necessity to be
subject unto them. So he tells his Disciples, as to one instance of his
humility, I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done, John
3.15. As he calls on all to learn of him, for he was meek and lowly of heart,
Matthew. 11.29. That is, learn to be like him in those heavenly Graces. This the
Apostles proposed as their pattern and ours, 1 Cor. 11.5. Be followers of me,
as I am of Christ. That is, labor with me to imitate Christ. And the utmost
Perfection which we are bound to aim at in Holiness and Obedience, is nothing
but conformity unto Jesus Christ, and the Pattern that he has set before us;
to mark his footsteps and to follow him. This is our putting on of Jesus
Christ, and growing up into the same Image and likeness with him.

(2.) He goes before the Sons of God in sufferings, and therein is also a
Leader unto them by his Example. Christ, says Peter, has suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps; that is, be ready and
prepared unto patience in sufferings when we are called thereunto; as he
explains himself, Chap. 4.1. Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh, arm your selves therefore with the same mind, that you may follow him in
the same way. And this our Apostle presses much in this Epistle, Chap. 12.2,
3. Look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame; for consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest you be wearied
and faint in your minds. The Sons of God are sometimes ready to think it
strange, that they should fall into calamity and distresses; and are apt to say
with Hezekiah, Remember O Lord we beseech thee how we have walked before thee
in truth, and with an upright heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, and weep sore; supposing that this might have freed them from
oppositions and Persecutions. And as it was with Gideon when the Angel told
him, the Lord was with him. He replies, Whence is all this evil come upon us?
For when they find it is otherwise, and begin to apply themselves unto their
condition, yet if their troubles continue, if they are not in their season
removed, they are ready to be weary and faint in their minds. But, says the
Apostle, consider the Captain of your salvation, he has set you another manner
of Example; notwithstanding all his sufferings, he fainted not. The like
Argument he presses, Chap. 13.12, 13. And the Scripture in many places
represents unto us the same consideration. The Jews have a saying, that a third
part of the afflictions and troubles that shall be in the world, do belong unto
the Messiah. But our Apostle who knew better than they, makes all the
afflictions of the Church, to be the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. who both
before underwent them in his own person, and lead the way to all that shall
follow him. And as the Obedience of Christ which is our pattern, does
incomparably exceed what ever we can attain unto; so the sufferings of Christ
which are our Example, did incomparably exceed all that we shall be called
unto. Our pattern is excellent, inimitable in the substance and parts of it;
unattainable and unexpressible in its degrees, and he is the best Proficient
who attends most thereunto.

But what is the End of all this Obedience and suffering; death lies at the
door, as the Ocean whereunto all these streams do run, and seems to swallow
them up, that there they are lost for ever. No, for (3.) This Captain of our
salvation is gone before us in passing through death, and entering into glory.
He has showed us in his own Resurrection, (that great pledge of our
immortality) that death is not the end of our course, but a passage into
another more abiding condition. He promises, that whosoever believes on him,
that they shall not be lost, or perish, or consumed by death, but that he will
raise them up at the last day, John 6.39.40. But how shall this be confirmed
unto them? Death looks ghastly and dreadful, as a Lion that devours all that
come within his reach: why, says Christ, behold me, entering into his jaws,
passing through his power, rising from under his dominion; and fear not, so
shall it be with you also. This our Apostle disputes at large, 1 Cor. 15.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. He is gone before us through death, and is
become the first fruit of them that sleep. And had Christ passed into Heaven
before he dyed, as did Enoch and Elijah, we had wanted the greatest Evidence of
our future immortality. What then remains, for the finishing of our course?
why, the Captain of our salvation after he had suffered, entered into Glory; and
that as our Leader, or forerunner, Heb. 6.20. Jesus as our forerunner is
entered into Heaven; He is gone before us, to evidence unto us, what is the End
of our Obedience and Sufferings. In all this is he a Captain and Leader unto
the Sons of God.

Secondly, He guides them and directs them in their way. This also belongs unto
him as their Captain and Guide. Two things in this, are they of themselves
defective in: (1.) They know not the way that leads to happiness and glory; and
(2.) They want ability to discern it aright when it is showed unto them; and in
both they are relieved and assisted by their Leader; in the first by his Word;
in the latter by his Spirit. First, Of themselves they know not the way; as
Thomas said, how can we know the way; The Will of God, the Mystery of his Love
and Grace, as to the way whereby he will bring sinners unto Glory, is unknown
to the Sons of men by nature; It was a secret hid in God, a sealed Book which
none in Heaven or Earth could open; But this Jesus Christ has fully declared
in his Word, unto all the Sons that are to be brought unto glory; He has
revealed the Father from his own bosom, John 1.18. and declared those heavenly
things, which no man knew, but he that came down from Heaven, and yet at the
same time was in Heaven, John 3.12, 13. In his Word has he declared the Name
and revealed the whole counsel of God; and brought life and immortality to
light, 2 Timothy 1.10. What ever is any way needful, useful, helpful in their
Obedience, Worship of God, Suffering, Expectation of Glory, he has taught it
them all, revealed it all unto them; Other Teachers they need not. Had there
been any thing belonging unto their way which he had not revealed unto them, he
had not been a perfect Captain of salvation unto them. And men do nothing but
presumptuously derogate from his Glory, who will be adding and imposing their
prescriptions in and about this way.

Again, The Way being revealed in the Word, he enables them by his Spirit, to
see, discern and know it in such an holy and saving manner, as is needful to
bring them unto the End of it. He gives them eyes to see, as well as provides
paths for them to walk in. It had been to no purpose to have declared the way,
if he had not also given them light to see it. This blessed work of his Spirit,
is every where declared in the Scripture, Isa. 43.16. And by this means is he
unto us, what he was unto the Church in the Wilderness, when he went before
them in a Pillar of fire, to guide them in their way, and to show them where
they should rest. And herein lies no small part of the discharge of his Office
toward us, as the Captain of our salvation. What ever acquaintance we have
with the Way to Glory, we have it from him alone; and what ever Ability we have
to discern the way, he is the fountain and Author of it. This God has designed
and called him unto. And all our Wisdom consists in this, that we betake our
selves unto him, to him alone for instruction and direction in this matter,
Mark 17.5. Does not he deservedly wander, yea, and perish; who in war will
neglect the orders and directions of his General, and attend unto every idle
tale of men pretending to show him a way that they have found out, better than
that which his Captain has limited him unto?

Thirdly, He supplies them with strength by his Grace, that they may be able to
pass on in their way. They have much work lies before them; much to do, much to
suffer, and without him they can do nothing, John 15.5. Wherefore he watches
over them to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2 18. and to give out help
unto them all in time of need, Chap. 4.16. and hence they who have no might, no
sufficiency, can do all things through Christ that strengthens them, Phil.
4.13. Nothing is too hard for them, nothing can prevail against them, because
of the constant supplies of Grace, which the Captain of their salvation
communicates unto the^. And this makes the Ways of the Gospel mavelous, both
to the World and to Believers themselves; Their Life is hid with God in Christ,
Col. 3. And they have a new name that no man knows, Rev. 2. The World seeing
poor, mean, weak contemptible Creatures, willing, ready and able to suffer,
endure, and dye for the name of Christ, stand astonished, not knowing where
their great strength lies; as the Philistines did at the might of Sampson, whom
they saw with their eyes to be like other men. Let them in the height of their
Pride and Rage of their madness pretend what they please, they cannot but be,
they really are amazed to see poor Creatures whom otherwise they exceedingly
despise, constant unto the Truth and Profession of the Gospel, against all
their Allurements and Affrightments. They know not, they consider not the
constant supplies of the Strength and Grace which they receive from their
Leader. He gives them the Spirit of Truth which the world neither sees nor
knows, John 14.17. And therefore wonder from whence they have their Ability and
Constancy. They cry, What will nothing turn these poor foolish creatures out of
their way? They by them one way, and then another; add one weight of Affliction
and Oppression unto another, and think surely this will effect their design;
but they find themselves deceived, and know not whence it is. The Ways of
O^edience are hence also mavelous unto Believers themselves. When they
consider their own frailty and weakness, how ready they are to faint, how often
they are surprised, and withal take a prospect of what Opposition lies against
them, from indwelling sin, Satan and the World, which they are acquainted with
in several instances of their Power and Prevalency, they neither know how they
have abode so long in their course as they have done, nor how they shall
continue it unto the end. But they are relieved when they come to the Promise
of the Gospel. There they see whence their Preservation does proceed. They see
this Captain of their Salvation in whom is the fullness of the Spirit, and to
whom are committed all the stores of Grace, giving out daily and hourly unto
them as the matter does require. As the Captain in an Army does not at once
give out unto his Soldiers the whole provision that is needful for their way
and undertaking; which if he should, the most of them would instantly waste it,
and so quickly perish for want; but he keeps provision for them all in his
stores, and gives out unto them according to their daily necessities; So God
gave the people Manna for their daily food in the Wilderness: even so deals
this great Leader with the Sons of God. He keeps the stores of Grace and
spiritual strength in his own hand; and from thence imparts unto them according
as they stand in need.

Fourthly, He subdues their enemies. And this belongs unto his Office as the
Captain of their salvation in an especial manner. Many Enemies they have, and
unless they are conquered and subdued, they can never enter into Glory. Satan,
the World, Death and Sin, are the chief or heads of them, and all these are
subdued by Christ; and that two ways. First, In his own Person. For they all
attempted him, and failed in their enterprise, John 14.30. He bruised the
Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and destroyed him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil, v. 14. of this Chapter; destroyed his Power in a glorious and
triumphant manner, Col. 2.15. He spoiled principalities and powers, and made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in his Cross, adding the utmost
complement unto his Victory in a Triumph. And he overcome the world, John
16.33. Be of good cheer, says he, I have overcome the world. Both it, and the
Prince of it were put under his feet. Death also was subdued by him: He
swallowed it up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. He plucked out its sting, broke its
Power, disannulled its peremptory Law, when he shook it off from him, and rose
from under it, Acts 2.24. Sin also set upon him in his Temptations, but was
utterly foiled; as all sin is destroyed in its very being, where it is not
obeyed. And all this was for the Advantage of the Sons of God.

For (1.) He has given them encouragement in showing them that their Enemies
are not invincible; their Power is not uncontrollable, their Law not peremptory
or eternal; but that having been once conquered, they may the more easily be
dealt withal.

(2.) They know also, that all these Enemies set upon his Person in their
quarrel, and as he was the great Defender of the faithful: So that although
they were not conquered by their Persons, yet they were conquered in their
Cause; and they are called in to be sharers in the Victory, although they were
not engaged in the Battle.

(3.) That he subdued them by Gods Ordinance and Appointment, as their
Representative; declaring in his Person who is the Head, what should be
accomplished in every one of his members.

And (4.) That by his Personal Conquest over them, He has left them weak,
maimed, disarmed and utterly deprived of that power they had to hurt and
destroy, before he engaged with them. For he has thereby deprived them; (1.)
Of all their Right and Title to exercise their Enmity against; or Dominion over
the Sons of God. Before his dealing with them, they had all Right to the utmost
over mankind. Satan to rule, the World to vex, Sin to enslave, Death to destroy
and give up unto Hell. And all this Right was enrolled in the Law, and
handwriting of Ordinances which was against us. This was cancelled by Christ,
nailed to the Cross, never to be pleaded more, Col. 2.14. And when any have
lost their Right or Title unto any thing, what ever their strength be, they are
greatly weakened. But he has herein (2.) Deprived them of their strength also.
He took away the strength of sin as a Law, and the sting of death in sin, the
arms of the world in the curse, and the power of Satan in his works and
strongholds.

But this is not all; He not only subdues these Enemies for them, but also in
them and by them; For though they have neit^^r Title nor Arms, yet they will
try the remainder of their Power against them also. But thanks be to God, says
the Apostle, who gives us the victory by Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. He
enables us in our own Persons to conquer all these enemies. Nay, says he, in
all these things we are more than conquerors, Romans 8.37. Because we have more
Assurance of success, more Assistance in the conflict, more Joy in the trial,
than any other Conquerors have; Or we do not only conquer, but triumph also.
For Satan, he tells Believers, that they have, overcome the wicked one, 1 John
12.13, 14. And shows how it came to pass that they should be able to do so,
Chap. 4. v. 7. It is, because greater is he that is in them, than he that is in
the world. The Good Spirit which he has given unto them to help and assist
them, is infinitely greater and more powerful than that evil Spirit which rules
in the Children of disobedience: And by this means is Satan bruised even under
their feet. A conflict indeed we must have with them; we must wrestle with
principalities and powers in heavenly places, but the success is secured
through the Assistance we receive from this Captain of our salvation.

The World also is subdued in them and by them, 1 John 5.4. Whosoever is born
of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes the world
even our faith. Faith will do this work; it never failed in it, nor ever will.
He that believes shall overcome; the whole strength of Christ is engaged unto
his Assistance. Sin is the worst and most obstinate of all their Enemies. This
puts them hard to it in the Battle, and makes them cry out for aid and help,
Romans 7.24. But this also they receive strength against, so as to carry away the
day. I thank God, says the Apostle, through Jesus Christ our Lord, v. 15.
namely, for deliverance and victory. Sin has a double design in its Enmity
against us. (1.) To reign in us: (2.) To condemn us. If it be disappointed in
these designs, it is absolutely conquered, and that it is by the Grace of
Christ. As to its Reign and Dominion it is perfectly defeated for the present,
Romans 6.14. The means of its Rule, is the Authority of the Law over us; that
being removed, and our souls put under the Conduct of Grace, the Reign of sin
comes to an end. Nor shall it condemn us, Romans 8.1. And what can it then do?
Where is the voice of this Oppressor? It abides but a season; and that but to
endure and dye. Death also contends against us, by its own sting, and our fear;
but the first by the Grace of Christ is taken from it, and the latter we are
delivered from, and so have the Victory over it. And all this is the work of
this Captain of our salvation for us, and in us.

(5.) He does not only conquer all their Enemies, but he avenges their
sufferings upon them, and punishes them for their Enmity. These enemies though
they prevail not absolutely, nor finally against the Sons of God, yet by their
Temptations, Persecutions, Oppressions, they put them often times to unspeakable
hardships, sorrow and trouble. This the Captain of their salvation will not
take at their hands; but will avenge upon them all their ungodly endeavors
from the lowest unto the greatest and highest of them. Some he will deal withal
in this world; but he has appointed a day wherein not one of them shall
escape. See Rev. 20.10, 14. Devil, and Beast, and false Prophet, and Death, and
Hell, shall altogether into the lake of fire.

(6.) He provides a Reward, a Crown for them, and in the bestowing thereof,
accomplisheth this his blessed Office of the Captain of our salvation. He is
gone before the Sons into Heaven, to make ready their Glory, to prepare a place
for them, and he will come and receive them unto himself, that where he is,
there they may be also, John 14.2, 3. When he has given them the Victory, he
will take them unto himself, even unto his Throne, Rev. 3.22. And as a
Righteous Judge give unto them a crown of Righteousn^ss and Glory, 2 Timothy 4.8.
And thus is the whole work of conducting the Sons of God unto Glory, from first
to last, committed unto this great Captain of their salvation, and thus does he
discharge his Office and trust therein; and blessed are all they who are under
his leading and guidance. And all this should teach us;

First, To betake our selves unto him, and to rely upon him in the whole
course of our Obedience, and all the passages thereof. To this purpose is he
designed by the Father, this has he undertaken; and this does he go through
withal. No address that is made unto him in this matter, will he ever refuse to
attend unto; no Case or Condition that is proposed unto him, is too hard for
him, or beyond his Power to relieve: He is careful, watchful, tender, faithful,
powerful, and all these Properties and blessed Endowments will he exercise in
the discharge of this Office. What should hinder us from betaking our selves
unto him continually? Is our Trouble so small, are our Duties so ordinary, that
we can wrestle with them, or perform them in our own strength? Alas, we can do
nothing, not think a good thought, not endure a reproachful word. And what ever
we seem to do or endure of our selves, it is all lost; for in us there dwells
no good thing: Or are our Distresses so great, our Temptations so many, our
corruptions so strong, that we begin to say there is no hope? Is any thing too
hard for the Captain of our salvation? Has he not already conquered all our
enemies? Is he not able to subdue all things by his Power? Shall we faint
whilst Jesus Christ lives and reigns? But it may be, we have looked for Help
and Assistance, and it has not answered our Expectation, so that now we begin
to faint and despond. Sin is not subdued, the World is still triumphant, and
Satan rages as much as ever; his Temptations are ready to pass over our souls;
But have we sought for his Help and Assistance in a due manner with faith and
perseverance, unto right Ends of his Glory, and Advantage of the Gospel? Have
we taken a right measure of what we have received? Or do we not complain
without a cause? Let us not judge according to outward appearance, but judge
righteous judgment. What is it to us, if the World triumph, if Satan rage, if
Sin tempt and vex, we are not promised that it shall be otherwise. But are we
forsaken? Are we not kept from being prevailed against? If we ask amiss, or for
improper Ends, or know not what we do receive, or think because the strength of
Enemies appears to be great, we must fail and be ruined; Let us not complain of
our Captain; for all these things arise from our own Unbelief. Let our
Application unto him be according unto his Command, our Expectations from him
according to the Promise; our Experiences of what we receive be measured by the
Rule of the Word, and we shall find, that we have all grounds of Assurance,
that we can desire. Let us then in every condition look unto Jesus the Author
and finisher of our faith, who has undertaken the leading of us in the whole
course of our Obedience from first to last, and we shall not need to faint, nor
shall we ever fail.

Secondly, To look for Direction and Guidance from him. This in an especial
manner belongs unto him as the Captain of our salvation. There are two things
which we find by Experience, that Professors are apt to be at a great loss in,
whilst they are in this World. The Worship of God, and their own Troubles. For
the first, We see and find that woeful Variance that is among all sorts of men;
and for the latter, we are apt our selves to be much bewildred in them, as unto
our Duty and our Way. Now all this Uncertainty arises from the want of a due
attendance unto Jesus Christ as our Guide. In reference unto both these, he
has peculiarly promised his Presence with us. With the Dispensers of the Word
he has promised to be unto the ends of the world, or consummation of all
things, Matthew. 28.29. And we find him walking in the midst of his Golden
Candlesticks; Rev. 1. In that allegorical description of the Gospel
Church State and Worship, which we have in Ezekiel, there is a peculiar place
assigned unto the Prince. Now one end of his Presence is, to see that all
things are done according unto his Mind and Will. And unto whom should we go
but unto himself alone. His Word here will prove the best Directory, and his
Spirit the best Guide. If we neglect these, to attend unto the Wisdom of Men,
we shall wander in uncertainties all our days. It is so also in respect of our
Troubles; we are ready in them to consult with flesh and blood; to look after
the Examples of others, to take the advice that comes next to hand. When the
Lord Christ has promised his Presence with us in them all; and that as the
Captain of our salvation. And if we neglect Him, his Example, his Direction,
his Teaching, it is no wonder if we pine away under our distresses.

II. We may observe, That the Lord Jesus Christ being Priest, Sacrifice and
Altar himself, the Offering whereby he was consecrated unto the perfection and
complement of his Office, was of necessity to be part of that work, which as
our Priest and Mediator he was to undergo and perform. When other Typical
Priests were to be consecrated, there was an Offering of Beasts appointed for
that purpose, and an Altar to offer on, and a Person to consecrate them. But
all this was to be done in and by Jesus Christ himself. Even the Father is said
to consecrate him, but upon the account of his designing him and appointing him
unto this Office; but his immediate actual consecration was his own work, which
he performed when he offered himself through the Eternal Spirit. By his death
and suffering, which he underwent in the discharge of his Office, and as a
Priest therein offered himself unto God, he was dedicated and consecrated unto
the Perfection of his Office. This would require our further Explication in
this place, but that it will again occur unto us more directly.

III. The Lord Christ being consecrated and perfected through sufferings, has
consecrated the way of suffering, for all that follow him to pass through unto
Glory. All complaints of sufferings, all Despondencies under them, all Fears of
them are rendered unjust and unequal by the sufferings of Christ. It is surely
righteous that they should be contented with his Lot here, who desire to be
received into his Glory hereafter. Now there are sundry things that follow upon
this Consecration of the way of suffering by Jesus Christ. As,

First, That they are made necessary, and unavoidable: Men may hope and desire
other things, and turn themselves several ways in their contrivances to avoid
them, but one way or other, sufferings will be the Portion of them that intend
to follow this Captain of Salvation. The Apostle tells Believers, that they are
predestined to be conformed to the Image of the Son of God, Romans 8.29. And
lets them know in the close of that Chapter, that no small part of this
Conformity consists in their Afflictions and Sufferings. The Head having passed
through them, there is a measure of Afflictions belonging unto the Body, which
every member is to bear his share of, Col. 2.24. And the Lord Jesus himself
has given this Law unto us, That every one who will be his Disciple must take
up his Cross, and follow him. Discipleship and the Cross are inseparably knit
together, by the unchangeable Law and Constitution of Christ himself. And the
Gospel is full of Warnings and Instructions unto this purpose; that none may
complain that they were surprised, or that any thing did befall them in the
course of their profession which they looked not for. Men may deceive
themselves with vain hopes and expectations, but the Gospel deceives none; it
tells them plainly beforehand, That through many tribulations they must enter
into the Kingdom of God; and that they who will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. If they like not of these terms, they may let the way
of Christ alone; if they will not do so, why do they yet complain? Christ will
be taken with his Cross, or not at all. And the folly of our hearts can never
be enough bewailed, in thinking strange of trials and afflictions; when the
very first thing that the Lord Christ requires of them that will be made
partakers of him, is, that they deny themselves, and take up their cross. But
we would be children, and not be chastised; we would be gold, and not be tried;
we would overcome, and yet not be put to fight and contend; we would be
Christians, and not suffer: But all these things are contrary to the Eternal
Law of our Profession. And so necessary is this way made, that though God deal
with his people in great variety, exercising some with such trials and
troubles, that other sometimes in comparison of them seem utterly to go free,
yet every one, one way or other, shall have his share and measure. And those
exceptions that are made in the Providence of God, as to some individual
persons at some seasons, derogate nothing from the general necessity of the way
toward all that do believe.

Secondly, It has made all sufferings for the Gospel honorable. The
sufferings of Christ himself were indeed shameful, and that not only in the
esteem of men, but also in the nature of them, and by Gods constitution. They
were part of the curse, As it is written, Cursed is he that hangs upon a tree.
And as such our Lord Jesus Christ looked on them, when he wrestled with and
conquered the shame as well as the sharpness. But he has rendered all the
sufferings of his that remain very honorable in themselves, what ever they are
in the reputation of a blind perishing world. That which is truly shameful in
suffering, is an effect of the curse for sin. This Christ by his suffering has
utterly separated from the sufferings of his Disciples. Hence the Apostles
rejoiced that they had the honor to suffer shame for his Name, Acts 5.41. that
is, the things which the world looked on as shameful, but themselves knew to be
honorable. They are so in the sight of God, of the Lord Jesus Christ, of all
the holy Angels, which are competent judges in this case. God has a great
cause in the world, and that such a one as wherein his Name, his Goodness, his
Love, his Glory is concerned; this in his infinite Wisdom is to be witnessed,
confirmed, testified unto by sufferings. Now can there be any greater Honor
done unto any of the sons of men, than that God should single them out from
among the rest of mankind, and appoint them unto this work? Men are honored
according to their riches and treasures. And when Moses came to make a right
judgment concerning this thing, he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches than all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 1^.29. We believe that God gave
great honor unto the Apostles and Martyrs of old in all their sufferings. Let
us labor for the same spirit of faith in reference unto our selves, and it
will relieve us under all our trials. This then also has Christ added unto the
way of sufferings by his consecration of it for us. All the glory and honor of
the world is not to be compared with theirs, unto whom it is given in the
behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him, 1 Pet.
4.14, 15, 16.

Thirdly, He has thereby made them us^ful and profitable. Troubles and
afflictions in themselves and their own nature have no good in them, nor do
they tend unto any good end: they grow out of the first sentence against sin,
and are in their own nature poenal tending unto death, and nothing else. Nor
are they in those who have no interest in Christ, any thing but effects of the
wrath of God. But the Lord Christ by his consecrating of them, to be the way of
our following him, has quite altered their nature and tendency; he has made
them good, useful and profitable. I shall not here show the usefulness of
Afflictions and sufferings, the whole Scripture abundantly testifies unto it,
and the experience of Believers in all ages and seasons confirms it. I only
show whence it is that they become so, and that is, because the Lord Christ
has consecrated, dedicated and sanctified them unto that end. He has thereby
cut them off from their old stock of wrath and the curse, and planted them on
that of Love and Good Will. He has taken them off from the Covenant of works,
and translated them into that of Grace. He has turned their course from death,
toward life and immortality; mixing his Grace Love and Wisdom with these
bitter waters, he has made them sweet and wholesome. And if we would have
benefit by them, we must always have regard unto this consecration of them.

Fourthly, He has made them safe. They are in their own nature a Wilderness,
wherein men may endlesly wander and quickly lose themselves. But he has made
them a way, a safe way; That wayfaring men, though fools, may not err
therein. Never did a Believer perish by afflictions or persecutions: never was
good Gold or Silver consumed or lost in this Furnace. Hypocrites indeed and
false Professors, fearful and unbelievers are discovered by them, and discarded
from their hopes. But they that are Disciples indeed, are never safer than in
this way, and that because it is consecrated for them. Sometimes it may be
through their unbelief, and want of heeding the Captain of their salvation,
they are wounded and cast down by them for a season, but they are still in the
way, they are never turned quite out of the way. And this through the grace of
Christ does turn also unto their advantage. Nay it is not only absolutely a
safe way, but comparatively more safe than the way of Prosperity. And this the
Scripture, with the experience of all Saints, bear plentiful witness unto. And
many other blessed ends are wrought by the consecration of this way for the
Disciples of Christ, not now to be insisted on.

There remains yet to be considered in the words of the Apostle, the Reason why
the Captain of our salvation was to be consecrated by sufferings; and this he
declares in the beginning of the Verse, It became God so to deal with him;
which he amplifies by that description of him, For whom are all things, and by
whom are all things. Having such a design as he had, to bring many sons unto
glory, and being he, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, it
became him so to deal with the Captain of their salvation. What is the (...)
here intended, and what is the importance of the word, was declared before.
This Becomingness, what ever it be, it arises from hence, That God is he for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things. It became him, not only who is
so, but as he is so, and because he is so. There is no reason for the addition
of that consideration of God in this matter, but that the cause is in them
contained and expressed, why it became him to do that which is here ascribed
unto him. We are then to enquire what it is that is principally regarded in God
in this Attribution, and thence we shall learn how it became him to bring the
Lord Christ unto suffering. Now the description of God in these words, is
plainly of him as the first Cause and last End of all things; neither is it
absolutely his Power in making all of nothing, and his Sovereign Eternal Being
requiring that all things tend unto his glory that are intended in the words.
But he is the Governor, Ruler and Judge of all things made by him and for him,
with respect unto that Order and Law of their Creation which they were to
observe. This Rule and Government of all things, taking care that as they are
of God, so they should be for him, is that which the Apostle respects. This
then is that which he asserts, namely that it became God, as the Governor,
Ruler and Judge of all, to consecrate Christ by sufferings; which must be
farther explained.

Man being made an intellectual Creature, had a Rule of Moral Obedience given
unto him. This was he to observe to the glory of his Creator and Lawgiver, and
as the condition of his coming unto him, and enjoyment of him. This is here
supposed by the Apostle; and he discourses how man having broken the Law of
his Creation, and therein come short of the glory of God, might by his grace be
again made partaker of it. With respect unto this state of things, God can be
no otherwise considered but as the Supreme Governor and Judge of them. Now
that Property of God, which he exerteth principally as the Ruler and Governor
of all, is his Justice, Justitia regiminis, the Righteousness of Government.
Hereof there are two branches; for it is either Remunerative or Vindictive. And
this Righteousness of God, as the Supreme Ruler and Judge of all, is that, upon
the account whereof it was meet for him, or became him to bring the sons to
glory by the sufferings of the Captain of their salvation. It was hence just,
equal, and therefore indispensibly necessary that so he should do. Supposing
that man was created in the Image of God, capable of yielding Obedience unto
him, according to the Law concreated with him, and written in his heart, which
Obedience was his moral being for God, as he was from or of him; supposing that
he by sin had broken this Law, and so was no longer for God, according to the
primitive Order and Law of his Creation; supposing also notwithstanding all
this, that God in his infinite, Grace and Love intended to bring some men unto
the enjoyment of himself, by a new way, Law, and appointment, by which they
should be brought to be for him again; Supposing, I say, these things which are
all here supposed by our Apostle, and were granted by the Jews, it became the
Justice of God, that is, it was so just, right, meet and equal, that the Judge
of all the world who does right could no otherwise do, than cause him, who was
to be the Way, Cause, Means and Author of this Recovery of men into a new
condition of being for God, to suffer in their steed. For whereas the
Vindictive Justice of God, which is the respect of the Universal Rectitude of
his Holy Nature, unto the deviation of his rational creatures from the Law of
their Creation, required that that deviation should be revenged, and themselves
brought into a new way of being for God, or of glorifying him by their
sufferings, when they had refused to do so by Obedience, it was necessary on
the account thereof, that if they were to be delivered from that condition,
that the Author of their deliverance should suffer for them. And this
excellently suits the design of the Apostle, which is to prove the necessity of
the suffering of the Messiah, which the Jews so stumbled at. For if the Justice
of God required that so it should be, how could it be dispensed withal? Would
they have God unjust? Shall he fore-go the glory of his Righteousn^ss and
Holiness, to please them in their presumption and prejudices? It is true
indeed, if God had intended no salvation of his sons but one that was temporal,
like that granted unto the people of old under the conduct of Joshua, there had
been no need at all of the sufferings of the Captain of their salvation. But
they being such, as in themselves had sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, and the salvation intended them being spiritual, consisting in a new
ordering of them for God, and the bringing of them unto the eternal enjoyment
of him in Glory, there was no way to maintain the Honor of the Justice of God,
but by his sufferings. And as here lay the great mistake of the Jews, so the
denial of this condecency of Gods Justice, as to the sufferings of the Messiah,
is the (...) of the Socinians. Schlictingius on this place would have no more
intended, but that the way of bringing Christ to suffer was answerable unto
that design which God had laid to glorify himself in the salvation of man. But
the Apostle says not, that it became, or was suitable unto an arbitrary free
decree of God, but it became himself as the Supreme Ruler and Judge of all; he
speaks not of what was meet unto the execution of a free Decree, but what was
meet on the account of Gods Holiness and Righteousness to the constitution of
it, as the description of him annexed does plainly show. And herein have we
with our Apostle discovered the great indispensible and fundamental cause of
the sufferings of Christ. And we may hence observe, that,

V. Such is the desert of sin, and such is the immutability of the Justice of
God, that there was no way possible to bring sinners unto glory, but by the
death and sufferings of the Son of God, who undertook to be the Captain of
their salvation. It would have been unbecoming God, the Supreme Governor of
all the world, to have passed by the desert of sin without this satisfaction.
And this being a truth of great importance, and the foundation of most of the
Apostles ensuing discourses, must be a while insisted on.

In these Verses, that foregoing, this, and some of those following, the
Apostle directly treats of the Causes of the sufferings and death of Christ. A
matter, as of great importance in it self, comprizing no small part of the
mystery of the Gospel, so indispensibly necessary to be explained and confirmed
unto the Hebrews, who had entertained many prejudices against it. In the
foregoing Verse he declared the cause, (...), the inducing, leading, moving
cause, which was the Grace of God; by the grace of God he was to taste death
for men: This grace he farther explains in this Verse, showing that it
consisted in the Design of God to bring many sons to glory. All had sinned and
come short of his glory. He had according to the exigence of his Justice
denounced and declared Death and Judgment to be brought upon all that sinned
without exception. Yet such was his infinite Love and Grace, that he determined
or purposed in himself to deliver some of them, to make them sons, and to bring
them unto glory. Unto this end he resolved to send or give his Son to be a
Captain of salvation unto them. And this Love or Grace of God is every where
set forth in the Gospel. How the sufferings of this Captain of salvation became
useful unto the sons, upon the account of the manifold union that was between
them, he declares in the following Verses, farther explaining the Reasons and
Causes why the benefit of his sufferings should redound unto them. In this
Verse he expresses the cause (...), the procuring cause of the death and
sufferings of Christ, which is the Justice of God, upon supposition of sin, and
his purpose to save sinners. And this upon examination we shall find to be the
great cause of the death of Christ.

That the Son of God, who did no sin, in whom his soul was always well pleased
on the account of his obedience, should suffer and die, and that a death under
the sentence and curse of the Law, is a great and astonishable mystery; all the
Saints of God admire at it, the Angels desire to look into it. What should be
the cause and reason hereof? why God should thus bruise him, and put him to
grief? This is worth our enquiry; and various are the conceptions of men about
it. The Socinians deny that his sufferings were poenal, or that he died to make
satisfaction for sin; but only that he did so, to confirm the Doctrine that he
had taught, and to set us an example to suffer for the truth. But his Doctrine
carried its own evidence with it, that it was from God, and was besides
uncontrollably confirmed by the Miracles that he wrought. So that his
sufferings on that account might have been dispensed withal. And surely this
great and stupendous matter of the dying of the Son of God, is not to be
resolved into a Reason and Cause that might so easily be dispensed with. God
would never have given up his Son to die, but only for such causes and ends as
could no otherwise have been satisfied or accomplished. The like also may be
said of the other cause assigned by them, namely to set us an example. It is
true, in his death he did so, and of great and singular use unto us it is that
so he did. But yet neither was this from any precedent Law or Constitution, nor
from the nature of the thing it self, nor from any property of God
indispensibly necessary: God could by his grace have carried us through
sufferings, although he had not set before us the example of his Son; so he
does through other things no less difficult, wherein the Lord Christ could not
in his own Person go before us; as in our conversion unto God, and
mortification of indwelling sin, neither of which the Lord Christ was capable
of. We shall leave them then, as those who acknowledging the death of Christ,
do not yet acknowledge or own any sufficient cause or reason why he should die.

Christians generally allow that the sufferings of Christ were poenal, and his
death satisfactory for the sins of men; but as to the cause and reason of his
so suffering they differ. Some, following Austine, refer the death of Christ
solely unto the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God. God would have it so, and
therein are we to acquiesce. Other ways of saving the Elect were possible, but
this God chose, because so it seemed good unto him. Hence arose that saying,
That one drop of the blood of Christ was sufficient to redeem the whole world;
only it pleased God that he should suffer unto the utmost. And herein are we to
rest, that He has suffered for us, and that God has revealed. But this seems
not to me any way to answer that which is here affirmed by the Apostle, namely
that it became God, as the Supreme Governor of all the world, so to cause
Christ to suffer; nor do I see what demonstration of the glory of Justice can
arise from the punishing of an innocent Person, who might have been spared, and
yet all the ends of his being so punished to have been otherwise brought about.
And to say, that one drop of Christ's blood was sufficient to redeem the world,
is derogatory unto the Goodness, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God, in causing
not only the whole to be shed, but also his Soul to be made an offering for
sin, which was altogether needless if that were true. But how far this whole
Opinion is from truth, which leaves no necessary cause of the death of Christ,
will afterward appear.

Others say, that on supposition that God had appointed the Curse of the Law,
and death to be the penalty of sin, his faithfulness and Veracity were engaged
so far, that no sinner should go free, or be made partaker of glory but by the
intervention of satisfaction. And therefore on the supposition that God would
make some men his sons, and bring them to glory, it was necessary with respect
unto the engagement of the truth of God, that he should suffer, die, and make
satisfaction for them. But all this they refer originally unto a free
constitution, which might have been otherwise. God might have ordered things
so, without any derogation unto the glory of his Justice or Holiness in the
Government of all things, as that sinners might have been saved without the
death of Christ. For if he had not engaged his Word, and declared that death
should be the penalty of sin, he might have freely remitted it without the
intervention of any satisfaction. And thus all this whole work of death being
the punishment of sin, and of the sufferings of Christ for sinners, is resolved
into a free purpose and Decree of Gods Will, and not into the exigence of any
essential property of his Nature; so that it might have been otherwise in all
the parts of it, and yet the glory of God preserved every way entire. Whether
this be so or no, we shall immediately enquire.

Others grant many free Acts of the Mind and Will of God in this matter: as, 1.
The Creation of man in such a condition, as that he should have a moral
dependence on God in reference unto his utmost end, was an effect of the
Sovereign Pleasure Will and Wisdom of God. But on supposition of this Decree
and Constitution, they say, the Nature, Authority, and Holiness of God required
indispensibly, that man should yield unto him that obedience which he was
directed unto, and guide^ in, by the Law of his Creation; so that God could not
suffer him to do otherwise, and remain in his first state, and come unto the
end first designed unto him, without the loss of his Authority, and wrong of
his Justice. Again, they say, that God did freely by an Act of his Sovereign
Will and Pleasure decree to permit man to sin and fall, which might have been
otherwise. But on supposition that so he should do, and would do, and thereby
infringe the Order of his dependence on God, in reference unto his utmost end,
that the Justice of God, as the Supreme Governor of all things, did
indispensibly require, that he should receive a meet recompense of reward, or
be punished answerably unto hi^ crimes; so that God could not have dealt
otherwise with him, without an high derogation from his own Righteousness.
Again, they say, that God by a mere free Act of his Love and Grace designed the
Lord Jesus Christ to be the way and means for the saving of sinners; which
might have been otherwise. He might without the least impeachment of the glory
of any of his Essential Properties have suffered all mankind to have perished
under that penalty which they had justly incurred; but of his own mere Love,
free Grace and good pleasure he gave and sent him to redeem them. But on the
supposition thereof they say, the Justice of God required, that he should lay
on him the punishment due unto the sons whom he redeemed; it became him on the
account of his Natural Essential Justice to bring him unto sufferings. And in
this Opinion is contained the truth laid down in our Proposition, which we
shall now farther confirm; namely that it became the Nature of God, or the
Essential Properties of his Nature required indispensibly, that sin should be
punished with death, in the sinner or in his surety: And therefore if he would
bring any sons to glory, the Captain of their salvation must undergo death and
sufferings, to make satisfaction for them. For,

First, Consider that description which the Scripture gives us of the Nature
of God in reference unto sin; and this it does either metaphorically, or
properly; in the first way it compares God unto fire, unto a consuming fire,
and his actings toward sin as the acting of fire on that which is combustible,
whose nature it is to consume them, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Thy God is a consuming fire;
which words the Apostle repeats, Heb. 12.23. Devouring fire and everlasting
burnings, Isa. 33.14. Hence when he came to give the Law, which expresses his
wrath and indignation against sin, his presence was manifested by great and
terrible fires and burnings, until the people cried out, Let me not see this
great fire any more, lest I die, Deuteronomy. 18.16. They saw death and destruction in
that fire, because it expressed the indignation of God against sin; and
therefore the Law it self is also called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. because it
contains the sense and judgment of God against sin; as in the execution of the
sentence of it, the breath of the Lord is said to kindle the fire of it like a
stream of brimstone, Isa. 30.33. so chap. 66.15, 16. And by this metaphor does
the Scripture lively represent the Nature of God in reference unto sin. For as
it is the nature of fire to consume and devour all things that are put into
it, without sparing any or making difference; so is the Nature of God in
reference unto sin: where ever it is, he punishes and revengeth it according
to its demerit. The metaphor indeed expresses not the manner of the operation
of the one and the other, but the Certainty and Event of the working of both
from the Principles of the Nature of the one and the other. The fire so burns
by a necessity of nature, as that it acts to the utmost of its quality and
faculty by a pure natural necessity. God punishes sin, as suitably unto the
principle of his Nature, that otherwise he cannot do, yet so, as that for the
manner, time, measure and season, they depend on the constitution of his Wisdom
and Righteousness, assigning a meet and equal recompense of reward unto every
transgression. And this the Scripture teaches us by this metaphor, or
otherwise we are led by it from a right conception of that which it does
propose: for God cannot at all be unto sin and sinners as a devouring fire,
unless it be in the principles of his Nature indispensibly to take vengeance on
them.

Again, The Scripture expresses this Nature of God with reference unto sin,
properly as to what we can conceive thereof in this world, and that is by his
Holiness, which it sets forth to be such, as that on the account thereof he can
bear with no sin, nor suffer any sinner to approach unto him; that is, let no
sin go unpunished, nor admit of any sinner into his presence whose sin is not
expiated and satisfied for. And what is necessary upon the account of the
Holiness of God, is absolutely and indispensibly so, his Holiness being his
Nature. Thou art, says Habakkuk, of purer ey^s than to behold evil, and can
not look on iniquity, chap. 1.13. Thou can not by any means have any thing to
do with sin; that is, it may be, because he will not; nay, says he, it is upon
the account of his Purity, or Holiness. That is such, as he cannot pass by sin,
or let it go unpunished. The Psalmist also expresses the nature of God to the
same purpose, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee; the foolish shall not stand in
thy sight, thou hate all the workers of iniquity, thou shall destroy them
that speak leasing, the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man. What is
the formal Reason and Cause of all these things, that he hates, abhors, and
will destroy sin and sinners? It is because he is such a God; Thou art not a
God to do otherwise; a God of such Purity, such Holiness; and should he pass by
sin without the Punishment of it, he would not be such a God as he is. Without
ceasing to be such a God, so infinitely holy and pure, this cannot be: The
foolish, and all Workers of Iniquity must be destroyed, because he is such a
God. And in that proclamation of his name, wherein he declared many blessed
Eternal Properties of his Nature, he adds this among the rest; that he will by
no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. This his Nature, this his Eternal
Holiness requires, that the guilty be by no means cleared. So Joshua instructs
the people in the Nature of this Holiness of God, Chap. 24.19. Ye cannot serve
the Lord, for he is an holy God; he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your
transgressions, nor your sins. That is, if you continue in your sins, if there
be not a way to free you from them, it is in vain for you to have any thing to
do with this God; for he is Holy and Jealous, and will therefore certainly
destroy you for your iniquities. Now if such be the nature of God, that with
respect thereunto, He cannot but punish sin in whomsoever it be found, then the
suffering of every sinner, in his own person, or by his sur^ty, does not depend
on a mere free Voluntary Constitution, nor is resolved merely into the Veracity
of God, in his commination or thre^tning, but is antecedently unto them
indispensibly necessary, unless we would have the Nature of God changed, that
sinners may be freed. Whereas therefore the Lord Christ is assigned the Captain
of our Salvation, and has undertaken the work of bringing sinners unto Glory,
it was meet with respect unto the Holiness of God, that he should undergo the
punishment due unto their sin. And thus the necessity of the sufferings and
satisfaction of Christ, is resolved into the Holiness and Nature of God; He
being such a God as he is, it could not otherwise be.

Secondly, The same is manifest from that principle whereunto the punishment of
sin is assigned; which is not any free Act of the Will of God, but an Essential
property of his nature; namely, his Justice or Righteousness. What God does
because he is righteous, is necessary to be done. And if it be just with God in
respect of his Essential Justice to punish sin, it would be unjust not to do
it: for to condemn the innocent, and to acquit the guilty is equally unjust.
Justice is an eternal and unalterable Rule, and what is done according unto it,
is necessary; it may not otherwise be, and Justice not be impeached. That which
is to be done with respect to Justice, must be done; or he that is to do it, is
unjust. Thus it is said to be a righteous thing with God to render tribulation
unto sinners, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. Because he is Righteous, and from his Righteousness
or Justice; So that the contrary would be unjust, not answer his Righteousness.
And it is the judgment of God, that they who commit sin, are worthy of death,
Romans 1.32. Namely, it is that which his Justice requires should be so; that
is, the judgment of God. Not only does he render death unto sinners, because
he has threatened so to do, but because his Justice necessarily requires that
so he should do. So the Apostle farther explains himself, Chap. 2.5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Where he calls the last day, the day of the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God; wherein by rendering tribulation unto sinners, he will
manifest what his Righteousness requires. And what that requires cannot
otherwise be; God being naturally, necessarily, essentially Righteous. And this
Property of Gods nature requiring that Punishment be infl^cted on sin and
sinners; is often in Scripture called his Anger and Wrath. For although
sometimes the Effects of Anger and Wrath in Punishment it self, be denoted by
those expressions, yet often also they denote the Habitude of the Nature of God
in his Justice toward sin. For Anger in it self being a Passion and
Perturbation of mind, including change and Weakness, cannot properly be
ascribed unto God; and therefore when it is spoken of, as that which is in him,
and not of the Effects which he works on others, it can intend nothing but his
Vindictive Justice, that property of his nature, which necessarily enclines him
unto the punishment of sin. Thus it is said, that his Wrath or Anger is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, Romans 1.18. That is, he discovers
in his judgments what is his Justice against sin. And thus when he comes to
deal with Christ himself, to make him a propitiation for us; he is said to have
set him forth, (...), Romans 3.25, 26. To declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins; that he might be just, and the justifier of them that
believe in Jesus; as God would pardon sin, and justify them that believe, so
he would be just also; and how could this be; by punishing our sins in Christ:
that declared his Righteousness: (...), here, is as much as (...), documentum;
a declaration by an especial instance or Example; or as (...), as he is said to
have punished Sodom and Gomorrah, and to have left them, (...), an Example unto
them that should live ungodly; that is, an instance of what his dealings would
be with sinners. So God is said here to have declared his Righteousness by an
Example in the sufferings of Christ; which indeed was the greatest instance of
the severity and inexorableness of Justice against sin, that God ever gave in
this world. And this he did, that he might be just as well as gracious and
merciful in the forgiveness of sin. Now if the Justice of God did not require,
that sin should be punished in the Mediator, how did God give an instance of
his Justice in his sufferings; for nothing can be declared, but in and by that
which it requires; For to say, that God showed his Righteousness in doing that,
which might have been omitted without the least impeachment of his
Righteousness, is in this matter not safe.

Thirdly, God is the Supreme Ruler, Governor and Judge of all. To him as such
it belongs to do right. So says Abraham, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right? undoubtedly he will do so, it belongs unto him so to
do: For, says the Apostle, Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance, God
forbid; for then how shall God judge the world, Romans 3.5, 6. Right Judgment in
all things belongs unto the Universal Rectitude of the Nature of God, as he is
the Supreme Governor and Judge of all the world. Now the Goodness and
Rightness of all things, consists in the Observation of that Place and Order
which God in their Creation allotted unto them, whereon he pronounced that they
were exceeding Good. And that this Order be preserved for the good of the
whole, it belongs unto the Government of God to take care; or if it be in any
thing transgressed not to leave all things in Confusion, but to reduce them
into some new Order and subjection unto himself. That this Order was broken by
sin we all know. What shall now the Governor of all the world do? Shall he
leave all things in disorder and confusion? Cast off the works of his hands,
and suffer all things to run at random? Would this become the Righteous
Governor of all the world? What then is to be done to prevent this confusion?
Nothing remains, but that he who brake the first Order by sin, should be
subdued into a new one by punishment. This brings him into subjection unto God
upon a new account. And to say that God might have let his sin go unpunished,
is to say, that he might not be righteous in his Government, nor do that which
is necessary for the Good, Beauty and Order of the whole. But hereof somewhat
was spoken in the opening of the words, so that it needs not farther be
insisted on.

Lastly, There is no common presumption engrafted in the hearts of men,
concerning any free Act of God, and which might have been otherwise. No free
Decree or Act of God is, or can be known unto any of the children of men, but
by Revelation; much less have they all of them universally an inbred Persuasion
concerning any such Acts or actings. But of the natural properties of God, and
his acting suitable unto them; there is a secret Light and Persuasion engrafted
in the hearts of all men by nature. At least, those things of God, whereof
there is a natural and indelible Character in the hearts of all men, are
natural, necessary and essential unto him. Now that God is just, and that
therefore he will punish sin, all sin, is an inbred Presumption of nature, that
can never be rooted out of the minds of men. All sinners have an inbred
Apprehension that God is displeased with sin; and that punishment is due unto
it. They cannot but know, that it is the judgment of God that they who commit
sin are worthy of death. And therefore though they have not the Law written to
instruct them, yet their thoughts accuse them upon sin, Romans 1.14, 15. that is,
their Consciences; which is the judgment which a man makes of himself in
reference unto the judgment of God. And therefore all Nations who retained any
knowledge of a Deity, constantly invented some Ways and Means whereby they
thought they might expiate sin, and appease the God that they feared. All which
manifests that the Punishment of sin, inseparably follows the nature of God,
and such properties thereof, as men have a natural inbred notion and
presumption of. For if it depended merely on the Will of God, and his
Faithfulness in the accomplishing of that Threatening and constitution, whereof
they had no knowledge; they could not have had such an immovable and
unconquerable Apprehension of it. But these things I have handled at large
elsewhere.

And this fully discovers the vile and horrid nature of sin. Fools, as the Wise
man tells us, make a mock of it. Stifling for a while their natural
convictions, they act as if sin were a thing of naught; at least, not so
horrible as by some it is represented. And few there are who endeavor aright
to obtain a true notion of it; contenting themselves in general, that it is a
thing that ought not to be. What direct Opposition it stands in, unto the
Nature, Properties, Rule and Authority of God, they consider not. But the last
day will discover the true nature of it; when all eyes shall see what it
deserves in the judgment of God, which is according unto Righteousness. Is it
a small thing for a Creature to break that Order which God at first placed him
and all things in? To cast off the Rule and Authority of God, to endeavor to
dethrone him, so that he cannot continue to be the Supreme Governor of all
things, and Judge of all the world, unless he punish it? Is it a small thing to
set up that which has an utter inconsistency with the Holiness and
Righteousness of God, so that if it go free, God cannot be holy and righteous?
If these things will not now sink into the minds of men; if they will not learn
the severity of God in this matter from the Law, on the threatening and curse
whereof he has impressed the Image of his Holiness and Justice, as was said,
they will learn it all in Hell. Why does God thus threaten and curse sin and
sinners? Why has he prepared an Eternity of Vengeance and Torment for them? Is
it because he would? Nay, because it could not otherwise be, God being so Holy
and Righteous as he is. Men may thank themselves for Death and Hell; They are
no more than sin has made necessary unless God should cease to be Holy,
Righteous, and the Judge of all, that they might sin freely and endlesly. And
this appears most eminently in the Cross of Christ; for God gave in him an
instance of his Righteousness, and of the desert of sin. Sin being imputed unto
the only Son of God, he could not be spared. If he be made sin, he must be made
a curse; If he will take away our iniquities, he must make his soul an offering
for sins, and bear the punishment due unto them. Obedience in all Duties will
not do it; Intercession and Prayers will not do it, sin required another manner
of Expiation. Nothing but undergoing the wrath of God, and the Curse of the
Law, and therein answering what the eternal Justice of God required, will
effect that End. How can God spare sin in his Enemies, who could not spare it
on his only Son? Had it been possible this Cup should have passed from him: but
this could not be, and God continue Righteous. These things I say will give us
an insight into the nature of sin, and the horrible provocation wherewith it is
attended.

And this also opens the Mystery of the Wisdom and Love and Grace of God in
the salvation of sinners. This is that which he will for ever be admired in; A
way he has found out, to exercise Grace, and satisfy Justice, at the same
time, in and by the same Person; sin shall be punished, all sin, yet Grace
exercised; sinners shall be saved, yet Justice exalted; all in the Cross of
Christ.

Verse XI, XII, XIII.
THe great Reason and Ground of the Necessity of the sufferings of Christ has
been declared. It became God that he should suffer. But it does not yet appear
on what Grounds this suffering of his could be profitable or beneficial unto
the Sons to be brought unto Glory. It was the sinner himself against whom the
Law denounced the Judgment of death. And although the Lord Christ undertaking
to be a Captain of Salvation unto the Sons of God, might be willing to suffer
for them, yet what Reason is there that the Punishment of One, should be
accepted for the sin of Another? Let it be granted, that the Lord Christ had an
absolute and Sovereign Power over his own Life, and all the Concernments of it,
in the nature which he assumed; as also that he was willing to undergo any
sufferings that God should call him unto; this indeed will acquit the Justice
of God in giving him up unto death. But whence is it that sinners should come
to be so interested in these things, as thereon to be acquitted from sin, and
brought unto Glory. In these Verses the Apostle enters upon a discovery of the
Reasons hereof also. He supposes indeed, that there was a Compact and
Agreement between the Father and Son in this matter; which he afterward
expressly treats on, Chap. 10. He supposes also, that in his Sovereign
Authority, God had made a Relaxation of the Law, as to the Person suffering,
though not as to the Penalty to be suffered; which God abundantly declared unto
the Church of the Jews in all their Sacrifices, as we shall manifest. These
things being supposed, the Apostle proceeds to declare the grounds of the
Equity of this Substitution of Christ, in the room of the Sons, and of their
Advantage by his suffering; the Proposition whereof he lays down in these
Verses, and the especial Application in those that ensue.

Verse 11, 12, 13. (...).
There is no Variety in the reading of these words in any Copies; nor do
Translators differ in rendering the sense of them. The Syriack renders the last
Testimony, as if the words were spoken unto God, Behold I and the children,
(...), whom thou have given unto me O God. The Aethiopick; Wherefore they who
sanctify, and they who are sanctified are altogether; to what purpose I cannot
ghess.

(...), Is used in this Epistle both in the Legal sense of it, to separate,
consecrate, (...).
dedicate; and in the Evangelical, to purify, sanctify, to make internally
and really holy. It seems in this place to be used in the latter sense, though
it include the former also, (...), by just consequence, for they who are
sanctified, are separated unto God. The Word then expresses what the Lord
Christ does unto and for the Sons, as he is the Captain of their salvation: He
consecrates them unto God, through the sanctification of the Spirit, and
washing in his own blood.

(...), It may be of the Masculine Gender, and so denote one Person; (...).
or of the Neuter, and so one thing; one Mass, one common Principle; whereof
afterward.

The first Testimony is taken from, Psalm. 22.24. (...).
(...) which the LXX. render, (...). The first word (...), narrab^, annuntiabo,
the Apostle renders by (...), more properly, than they by (...): In the rest of
the words there is a Coincidence, the Original being expressly rendered in
them. For though (...), (...)
be rendered simply to praise, yet its most frequent use, when respecting God
as its Object, it is to praise by Hymns or Psalms: as the Apostle here (...);
tibi hymnos c^nam, or te hymnis celebrabo; I will sing hymns unto thee, or
praise thee with hymns; which was the principal way of setting forth Gods
praise under the Old Testament.

It is not certain whence the second Testimony is taken. Some suppose it to be
from Isa. 8.17. from whence the last also is cited. The words of the Prophet
there (...), are rendered by the LXX. (...), the words here used by the
Apostle. But there are sundry things, that will not allow us to close with this
supposal. First, The Original is not rightly rendered by the LXX. and as we
shall see, the Apostles words do exactly express the Original in another place.
Besides (...), is never but in this place and once more turned into (...), by
the LXX. but is constantly rendered by them, (...), or (...). So that it is not
improbable, but that these words might be inserted into the Greek Text out of
this place of the Apostle, there being some Presumptions and likelihoods, that
it was the place intended by him; especially because the next Testimony used by
the Apostle, consists in the Words immediately ensuing these in the Prophet:
But yet that yields another Reason against this supposition. For if the Apostle
continued on the words of the Prophet, to what end should he insert in the
midst of them, that constant note of proceeding unto another Testimony, (...),
and again, especially considering, that the whole Testimony speaks to the same
purpose.

We shall then referr these words unto Psalm. 18.2. (...), which the LXX.
render, (...).
(...), I will hope in him; the Apostle more properly, (...)* I will put my
trust in him. And that that Psalm had respect unto the Lord Christ and his
Kingdom, our Apostle shows elsewhere, by citing another Testimony out of it,
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, Romans 15.9. Nor was the latter part of
the Psalm properly fulfilled in David at all.

(...).
The last Testimony is unquestionably taken out of Isa. 8.17. where the words
are (...); and rendered by the LXX. as here by the Apostle, (...) is properly
nati, (...), or (...), those that are begotten, or born of any one, whilst
they are in their tender age. But it may be rendered by (...), as it is by the
LXX. Genesis 30.36. Chap. 32.22. Chap. 33.1, 2. which is children in a larger
sense.

Verse 11, 12, 13. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified
are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren;
saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church
will I sing praise unto thee. And again, I will put my trust in him: And again,
behold I and the children which God has given me.
The words contain;

First, A farther Description of the Captain of salvation, and the sons to be
brought unto Glory by him, mentioned in the Verse foregoing, taken from his
Office and Work toward them, and the Effect thereof upon them. He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified; which is the subject of the first
Proposition in these words.

Secondly, An Assertion concerning them; they are all of one.

Thirdly, A natural consequence of that Assertion, which includes also the
scope and design of it, He is not ashamed to call them brethren.

Fourthly, The confirmation hereof by a Triple Testimony from the Old Testament.

First, He describes the Captain of salvation, and the Sons to be brought unto
glory, by their mutual Relation to one another in sanctification. He is (...),
he that sanctifies, and they are (...), they that are sanctified. That it is
the Son, the Captain of salvation, that is intended by the sanctifier, both
what the Apostle affirms immediately of him and them, and the ensuing
Testimonies whereby he confirms it, do make evident. And as in the Verse
foregoing, giving an account why God would have Christ to suffer, he describes
him by that Property of his Nature which includes a necessity of his so doing;
so setting forth the Causes on our part, of that suffering, and the grounds of
our advantage thereby, he expresses him and the children by those terms, which
manifest their Relation unto one another; and which they could not have stood
in, had they not been of the same nature, as he afterward declares. Now the
same word being here used actively and passively, it must in both places be
understood in the same sense, the one expressing the Effect of the other. As
Christ sanctifies, so are the children sanctified. And the Act of Christ which
is here intended, is that which he did for the Sons, when he suffered for them
according to Gods appointment; as v. 10. Now as was said before, to sanctify
is either to separate and to dedicate unto sacred Use, or to purify and make
real^y holy, which latter sense is here principally intended. Thus when the
Apostle speaks of the effects of the Offerings of Christ for the Elect, he
distinguishes between their (...), or consummation, and their (...), or
sanctification, Chap. 10.14. (...); by one offering he consummated or perfected
the sanctified. First, He sanctifies them, and then dedicates them unto God,
so that they shall never more need any Initiation into his Favor and service.
This work was the Captain of salvation designed unto; the children that were to
be brought unto glory, being in themselves unclean and unholy, and on that
account separated from God, he was to purge their natures, and to make them
holy, that they might be admitted into the favor of, and find acceptance with
God. And for the Nature of this work, two things must be considered: (1.) The
Impetration of it, or the Way and Means whereby he obtained this Sanctification
for them; and (2.) The Application of that Means, or real effecting of it. The
first consists in the sufferings of Christ, and the merit thereof. Hence we
are so often said to be sanctified and washed in his blood, Ephesians. 5.25. Acts
20.32. Rev. 1.5. and his blood is said to cleanse us from all our sins, 1 John
1.7. As it was shed for us, he procured by the merit of his Obedience therein,
that those for whom it was shed, should be purged and purified, Titus 2.14. The
other consists in the effectual workings of the Spirit of Grace, communicated
unto us by virtue of the bloodshedding and sufferings of Christ, as the Apostle
declares, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. And they who place this sanctification merely on the
Doctrine and Example of Christ, (as Grotius on this place) besides that they
consider not at all the design and scope of the place, so they reject the
principal End, and the most blessed Effect of the death and bloodshedding of
the Lord Jesus. Now in this Description of the Captain of Salvation, and of the
Sons, the Apostle intimates a farther necessity of his sufferings, because they
were to be sanctified by him, which could no otherwise be done but by his death
and bloodshedding. Having many things to observe from these Verses, we shall
take them up as they offer themselves unto us in our procedure: As here:

I. That all the children which are to be brought unt^ glory, antecedently unto
their Relation unto the Lord Christ, are polluted, defiled, separate from God.
They are all to be sanctified by him, both as to their real Purification and
Consecration to be Gods hallowed Portion. This for many blessed Ends the
Scripture abundantly instructs us in, Tit. 3.3. We our selves also were
sometimes foolish, and disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating of one another. A most
wretched, defiled and loathsome condition, that which justly might be an
Abhorrency to God, and all his holy Angels: and such indeed God describes it to
be by his Prophet, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. Thou wast polluted in thy blood, and cast out
in the field, to the loathing of thy Person; Thus we were says the Apostle;
even w^, who are now sanctified and cleansed by the means which he afterward
relates. The like description he gives of this estate, 1 Cor. 6.11, 12. with an
Assertion of the same delivery from it. We are naturally very proud, apt to
please our selves in our selves; to think of nothing less than of being
polluted or defiled; or at least not so far, but that we can wash our selves.
What a hard thing is it to persuade the great men of the world, in the midst of
their Ornaments, Paintings and Perfumes, that they are all over vile, leprous,
loathsome and defiled? Are they not ready to wash themselves in the blood of
them who intimate any such thing unto them? But whether men will hear or
forbear, this is the condition of all men, even of the Sons of God themselves
before they are washed and sanctified by Christ Jesus. And as this sets out the
Infinite Love of God, in taking notice of such vile creatures as we are, and
the unspeakable Condescension of the Lord Christ, with the Efficacy of his
Grace in cleansing us by his blood, so it is sufficient to keep us humble in
our selves, and thankful unto God all our days.

II. That the Lord Christ is the great sanctifier of the Church. His Title is
(...), the Sanctifier; of which more afterward.

Thirdly, The Lord Christ the Captain of our Salvation, sanctifies every Son
whom he brings unto glory. He will never glorify an unsanctified person. The
world indeed is full of an Expectation of Glory by Christ; but of that which is
indispensibly previous thereunto, they have no regard. But this the Scripture
gives us as a principal Effect of the whole Mediation of Christ. Of his death,
Ephesians. 5.26. Titus 2.14. Of his communication of his Word and Spirit, John
17.19. Titus 3.5, 6. Of his bloodshedding in an especial manner; 1 John 1.7.
Romans 6.5, 6. Rev. 5.5. Of his Life in Heaven and Intercession for us, Col. 3.1,
2, 3. This he creates his people unto by his Grace, Ephesians. 2.8. excites them
unto by his Promises, 2 Cor. 7.1. and commands; John 15.16, 17. So that no End
of the Mediation of Christ is accomplished in them who are not sanctified and
made holy; And this was necessary for him to do, on the part (1.) Of God: (2.)
Of himself: (3.) Of themselves.

1. Of God, unto whom they are to be brought in glory. He is holy; of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity: No unclean thing can stand in his presence. Holy
in his nature, glorious in Holiness; holy in his Commands, and will be
sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him. And this Peter urges as that which
requires Holiness in us, 1 Epist. 1.15, 16. As he that has called them is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation, because it is written; be ye
holy; for I am holy; and thence it is said, that Holiness becomes his house;
that is, all that draw nigh unto him; and the Apostle sets it down as an
uncontrollable Maxim, that without Holiness no man shall see God. If the Lord
Christ then will bring the children unto God, he must make them Holy, or they
can have no admittance into his presence, no acceptance with him; for no
unclean thing, nothing that defiles, can enter into the New Jerusalem, the
place where his Holiness dwells. It is utterly impossible that any soul not
washed with the blood of Christ, not sanctified by his Spirit and Grace, should
stand in the sight of God. And this was expressed in all the typical
Institutions about cleansing which God appointed unto his people of old. He did
it to teach them, that unless they were sanctified, washed and cleansed from
their sins, they could be admitted unto no Communion with him, nor Enjoyment of
him. Neither can any serve him here, unless their consciences be purged by the
blood of Christ from dead works; nor can they come to him hereafter, unless
they are washed from all their defilements. Their services here he rejects as
an unclean and polluted thing, and their confidences for the future he
despises as a presumtuous abomination. God will not divest himself of his
Holiness, that he may receive, or be enjoyed by unholy creature. And the day is
coming wherein poor unsanctified creatures, who think they may miss Holiness in
the way to glory, shall cry out, who amongst us shall inhabit with those
everlasting burnings; for so will he appear unto all unsanctified persons.

2. Of Himself, and the Relation whereunto he takes these Sons with himself. He
is their Head, and they are to be members of his body. Now he is holy, and so
must they be also, or this Revelation will be very unsuitable and uncomely. A
living head and dead members, a beautiful head and rotten members, how uncomely
would it be? Such a monstrous body Christ will never own. Nay, it would
overthrow the whole nature of that Relation, and take away the life and form of
that Union that Christ and his are brought into, as head and members. For
whereas it consists in this, that the whole Head and members are animated,
quickened and acted by one and the self same Spirit of life; nor does any thing
else give Union between head and members; if they be not sanctified by that
Spirit, there can be no such Relation between them. Again, he takes them unto
himself to be his Bride and Spouse. Now you know, that it was appointed of old,
that if any one would take up a Captive Maid to be his Wife, she was to shave
her head, and pare her nayls, and wash her self, that she might be meet for
him. And the Lord Christ taking this Bride unto himself, by the conquest he
has made of her, must by Sanctification make them meet for this Relation with
himself. And therefore he does it, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word, v. 27. that he might present it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such things, but that it
should be holy and without blemish. This it became him to do, this was the End
why he did it; he sanctifies his Church that he may present it a meet Bride or
Spouse unto himself. The like may be said of all other Relations wherein the
Lord Christ stands unto his people; there is no one of them but makes their
sanctification absolutely necessary.

. On the part of the Children themselves; for unless they are Regenerate, or
born again, wherein the foundation of their sanctification is laid, they can by
no means enter into the Kingdom of God. It is this that makes them meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in light. As without it, they are not meet for their
Duty, so are they not capable of their Reward. Yea, Heaven it self in the true
light and notion of it, is undesirable unto an unsanctified person. Such an
one, neither can, nor would enjoy God if he might. In a word, There is no one
thing required of the Sons of God, that an unsanctified Person can do, no one
thing promised unto them, that he can enjoy.

There is surely then a woeful mistake in the world. If Christ sanctifier all
whom he saves, many will appear to have been mistaken in their Expectations
another day. It is grown amongst us almost an Abhorrency unto all flesh, to
say, that the Church of God is to holy. What though God has promised that it
should be so; that Christ has undertaken to make it so; What if it be required
to be so? What if all the duties of it he rejected of God if it be not so; it
is all one; if men be baptized whether they will or no, and outwardly profess
the name of Christ, though not one of them be truly sanctified, yet they are,
as it is said, the Church of Christ. Why then let them be so; but what are they
the better for it? Are their Persons, or their Services therefore accepted with
God? Are they related or united unto Christ? Are they under his conduct unto
glory? Are they meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in light? not at all;
not all, not any of these things do they obtain thereby: What is it then that
they get by the furious contest which they make for the Reputation of this
Previledge? Only this, that satisfying their minds by it, resting, if not
p^iding themselves in it, they obtain many Advantages to stifle all convictions
of their condition, and so perish unavoidably. A sad success, and son ever to
be bewailed. Yet is there nothing at this day more contended for in this world,
than that Christ might be thought to be a Captain of salvation unto them unto
whom he is not a Sanctifier; that he may have an unholy Church, a dead Body.
These things tend neither to the glory of Christ, nor to the good of the souls
of men. Let none then deceive themselves, sanctification is a qualification
indispensibly necessary unto them who will be under the conduct of the Lord
Christ unto salvation, to lead none to heaven but whom he sanctifies on the
earth. The holy God will not receive unholy persons. This living Head will not
admit of dead members, nor bring men into the possession of a glory which they
neither love nor like.

Secondly, Having given this description of the Captain of salvation, and of
the sons to be brought unto glory, The Apostle affirms of them that they are
(...), of one, (...).
which made it meet for him to suffer, and for them to be made partakers of his
sufferings. The equity hereof lies in the agreement, that he and they are of
one; which what it is, we must now enquire.

The word has this ambiguity in it, that it may be of the Masculine Gender,
and denote one person; or of the Neuter, and signify one thing. If it relate
unto the person, it may have a double interpretation.

First, That it is God who is intended; they are of one, that is God. And this
may be spoken in several respects. The Son was of him by Eternal Generation,
the many sons by Temporal Creation, they were made by him. Or they are all of
him, he ordained him to be the Sanctifier, them to be sanctified; Him to be the
Captain of salvation, and them to be brought unto glory. And this sense the
last testimony produced by the Apostles seems to give countenance unto: Behold
I and the children whom God has given unto me; Me to be their Father, Captain,
Leader; they to be the children to be cared for, and conducted by me. And this
way went most of the Ancients, in their Exposition of this place. In this sense
the reason yielded by the Apostle in these words, why the Captain of salvation
should be made perfect by sufferings, because the sons to be brought unto glory
were also to suffer, and they were all of one, both he and they, even of God.
But though these things are true, yet they contain not a full reason of what
the Apostle intends to prove by this assertion. For this Interpretation allows
no other Relation to be expressed between Christ and the sons, than what is
between him and Angels; they are also with him of one God. And yet the Apostle
afterward shows, that there was another Union and Relation between Christ and
the Elect needful, that they might be saved by him, than any that was between
him and Angels. And if nothing be intimated but the good pleasure of God,
appointing him to be a Savior, and them to be saved, because they were all of
himself, of one God, which was sufficient to make that appointment just and
righteous, then is here nothing asserted to prove the meetness of Christ to be
a Savior unto men, and not to Angels, which yet the Apostle in the following
Verses expressly deduceth from hence.

Secondly, If it respect a Person, it may be ex uno homine, of one man, that
is, of Adam; they are all of one common Root and stock, he and they came all of
one Adam: unto him is the Genealogy of Christ referred by Luke. And as a
common stock of our nature he is often called the One, the One man, Romans 5. And
this for the substance of it falls in with what will be next considered.

Secondly, It may be taken in the Neuter sense, and denote one thing; and so
also it may receive a double Interpretation.

First, It may denote the same mass of humane nature. (...), of one and the
same mass of humane nature; or (...), so it is said of all mankind, that God
made them (...), of one blood, Acts 17.26. of one common principle, which gives
an Alliance, Cognation, and Brotherhood unto the whole Race of Mankind. As the
making of all mankind by one God gives them all a relation unto him, as says
the Apostle, We are all his offspring; so their being made of one blood gives
them a Brotherhood among themselves. See Acts 14.15. And this interpretation
differs not in the substance of it from that last preceding; in as much as the
whole mass of humane nature had its existence in the person of Adam, only it
refers not the Oneness mentioned formally unto his person, but unto the nature
it self whereof he was made partaker. And this sense the Apostle farther
explains, verse 14. as he also observes it, Romans 9.5.

Secondly, By One, some understand the same spiritual nature; the principles of
spiritual life which is in Christ the Head, and the children his members. And
this they say is that which is their peculiar Oneness, or being of one; seeing
all wicked men, even Reprobates, are of the same common mass of humane nature
as well as the children. But yet this is not satisfactory. It is true indeed,
that after the children are really sanctified, they are of one and the same
spiritual nature with their Head, 1 Cor. 12.12. and hereby are they differenced
from all others. But the Apostle here treats of their being so of One, that he
might be meet to suffer for them, which is antecedent unto their being
sanctified, as the Cause is unto the Effect. Neither is it of any weight that
the Reprobates are partakers of the same common nature with the children,
seeing the Lord Christ partook of it only on the childrens account, as verse
14. And of their nature he could not be partaker, without being partaker of
that which was common to them all, seeing that of one blood God made all
Nations under heaven. But the bond of nature it self is in the Covenant,
reckoned only unto them that shall be sanctified.

It is then one common nature that is here intended: He and they are of the
same nature, of one mass, of one blood. And hereby he became to be meet to
suffer for them, and they to be in a capacity of enjoying the benefit of his
sufferings; which how it answers the whole design of the Apostle in this place,
does evidently appear.

First, He intends to show that the Lord Christ was meet to suffer for the
children; and this arose from hence, that he was of the same nature with them,
as he afterward at large declares. And he was meet to sanctify them by his
sufferings, as in this verse he intimates. For as in an Offering made unto the
Lord of the first Fruits, of Meat, or of Meal, a parcel of the same nature with
the whole was taken and offered, whereby the whole was sanctified, Levit. 2. So
the Lord Jesus Christ being taken as the first fruits of the nature of the
children, and offered unto God, the whole lump, or the whole nature of man in
the children, that is all the Elect, is separated unto God, and effectually
sanctified in their season. And this gives the ground unto all the testimonies
which the Apostle produces unto his purpose out of the Old Testament. For
being thus of one nature with them, he is not ashamed to call them brethren, as
he proves from Psalm. 22. For although it be true, that as brethren is a term of
spiritual cognation and love, he calls them not so until they are made
partakers of his Spirit, and of the same spiritual nature that is in him; yet
the first foundation of this Appellation lies in his participation of the same
nature with them, without which, however he might love them, he could not
properly call them Brethren. Also his participation of their nature, was that
which brought him into such a condition, as wherein it was needful for him to
put his trust in God, and to look for deliverance from hi^ in a time of danger,
which the Apostle proves in the second place by a testimony out of Psalm. 18.
which could not in any sense have been said of Christ, had he not been partaker
of that nature, which is exposed unto all kind of wants and troubles, with
outward streights and oppositions, which the nature of Angels is not. And as
his being thus of One with us made him our Brother, and placed him in that
condition with us, wherein it was necessary for him to put his trust in God for
deliverance, so being the principal Head and first Fruits of our nature, and
therein the Author and finisher of our salvation, he is a Father unto us, and
we are his children, which the Apostle proves by his last testimony from Isa.
8. Behold I and the children which the Lord has given unto me. And further
upon the close of these testimonies, the Apostle assumes again his Proposition,
and asserts it unto the same purpose, verse 14. showing in what sense he and
the children were of one, namely in their mutual participation of flesh and
blood.

And thus this interpretation of the word will sufficiently bear the whole
weight of the Apostles Argument and Inferences. But if any one list to extend
the word farther, and to comprize in it the manifold Relation that is between
Christ and his Members, I shall not contend about it. There may be in it, 1.
Their being of one God, designing him and them to be one mystical body, one
Church, he the Head, they the Members. 2. Their taking into one Covenant, made
originally with him, and exemplified in them. 3. Their being of one common
principle of humane nature. 4. Disigned unto a manifold spiritual union in
respect of that new nature which the children receive from him, with every
other thing that concurs to serve the union and relation between them; but that
which we have insisted on is principally intended, and to be so considered by
us. And we might teach from hence, that,

III. The agreement of Christ and the Elect in one common nature, is the
foundation of his fitness to be an Undertaker on their behalf, and of the
equity of their being made partakers of the benefits of his Mediation: But that
this will occur unto us again more fully, verse 14.

And by all this does the Apostle discover unto the Hebrews the
unreasonableness of their offense at the affl^cted condition and sufferings of
the Messiah. He had minded them of the work that he had to do, which was to
save his Elect by a spiritual and eternal salvation. He had also intimated what
was their condition by nature, wherein they were unclean, unsanctifi'd,
separate from God. And withal had made known what the Justice of God, as the
Supreme Governor and Judge of all required, that sinners might be saved. He
now minds them of the Union that was between him and them, whereby he became
fit to suffer for them, as that they might enjoy the blessed effects thereof in
deliverance and salvation.

Thirdly, The Apostle lays down an Inference from his preceding assertion, in
those words, For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. In which
words we have 1. The respect of that which is here affirmed unto the assertion
foregoing; for which cause. 2. The thing it self affirmed, which is, That the
Lord Christ calls the sons to be brought unto glory, his brethren. 3. The
manner of his so doing, he is not ashamed to call them so. And herein also the
Apostle, according to his wonted way of proceeding, which we have often
observed, makes a transition toward somewhat else which he had in design,
namely the Prophetical Office of Christ, as we shall see afterward.

For which cause; that is, because they are of one, partakers of one common
nature; He calls them brethren. This gives a rightful foundation unto that
Appellation: Hereon is built that relation which is between him and them. It is
true, there is more required to perfect the relation of Brotherhood between him
and them, than merely their being of one; but it is so far established from
hence, that he was meet to suffer for them, to sanctify and save them. And
without this there could have been no such relation. Now his calling of them
Brethren does both declare, that they are so, and also that he owns them and
avouches them as such. But whereas it may be said, that although they are thus
of one in respect of their common nature, yet upon sundry other accounts he is
so glorious, and they are so vile and miserable, that he might justly disavow
this cognation, and reject them as strangers; The Apostle tells us it is
otherwise, and that passing by all other distances between them, and setting
aside the consideration of their unworthiness, for which he might justly
disavow them, and remembering wherefore he was of one with them, he is not
ashamed to call them brethren. There may be a (...) in the words, and the
contrary asserted to that which is denied; he is not ashamed, that is
willingly, cheerfully, and readily he does it. But I rather look upon it as an
expression of condescension and love; and herein does the Apostle show the use
of what he taught before, that they were of one, namely that thereby they
became Brethren, he meet to suffer for them, and they meet to be saved by him.
What in all this the Apostle confirms by the ensuing testimonies, we shall see
in the explication of them; in the mean time we may learn for our own
instruction,

IV. That notwithstanding the union of nature which is between the Son of God
incarnate the Sanctifier, and the children that are to be sanctified, there is
in respect of their Persons as inconceivable distance between them, so that it
is a mavelous condescension in him to call them brethren.

He is not ashamed to call them so, though considering what himself is, and
what they are, it should seem that he might justly be so. The same expression
for the like reasons is used concerning Gods owning his people in covenant,
chap. 11.16. Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God. And this
distance between Christ and us, which makes his condescension so mavelous,
relates unto a fourfold head.

First, The immunity of the nature wherein he was of one with us in his Person,
from all sin. He was made like unto us in all things, sin excepted. The nature
of man in every other individual person is defiled with, and debased by sin. We
are every one gone astray, and are become altogether filthy or abominable.
This sets us at no small distance from him. Humane nature defiled with sin, is
farther distanced from the same nature as pure and holy, in worth and
excellency, than the meanest worm is from the most glorious Angel. Nothing but
sin casts the creature out of its own place, and puts it into another distance
from God than it has by being a creature. This is a debasement unto hell, as
the Prophet speaks, Thou did debase thy self-even unto hell, Isa. 57.9. And
therefore the condescension of God unto us in Christ is set out by his
regarding of us, when we were enemies unto him, Romans 5.10. that is, whilst we
were sinners, as verse 8. This had cast us into hell it self, at the most
inconceivable distance from him. Yet this hindered not him, who was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, to own us as his brethren. He says
not with those proud hypocrites in the Prophet, Stand farther off, I am holier
than you; but he comes unto us, and takes us by the hand in his love, to
deliver us from this condition.

Secondly, We are in this nature obnoxious unto all miseries in this world, and
that which is to come. Man now is born to trouble, all the trouble that sin can
deserve, or a provoked God inflict; his misery is great upon him, and that
growing and endless. He, justly in himself, free from all, obnoxious to nothing
that was grievous or irksome, no more than the Angels in heaven, or Adam in
Paradise. Poena noxam sequitur, Punishment and trouble follow guilt only,
naturally. He did no sin, nor was there guile found in his mouth; so that God
was always well pleased with him. What ever of hardship or difficulty he
underwent, it was for us, and not for himself. Might not he have left us to
perish in our condition, and freely enjoyed his own? We see how unapt those who
are in prosperity, full and rich, are to take notice of their nearest Relations
in poverty misery and distress: and who among them would do so, if it would
cast them into the state of those who are already miserable? yet so it did the
Lord Christ. His calling us brethren, and owning of us, made him instantly
obnoxious unto all the miseries, the guilt whereof we had contracted upon our
selves. The owning of his alliance unto us cost him, as it were, all he was
worth; for being rich, for our sakes he became poor. He came into the prison,
and into the furnace to own us. And this also renders his condescension
mavelous.

Thirdly, He is inconceivably distanced from us, in respect of that Place and
Dignity which he was designed unto. This, as we have showed at large, was to be
Lord of all, with absolute sovereign authority over the whole Creation of God.
We are poor abjects, who either have not bread to eat, or have no good right to
eat that which we meet withal. Sin has set the whole Creation against us. And
if Mephibosheth thought it a great condescension in David on his Throne, to
take notice of him being poor, who was yet the son of Jonathan, what is it in
this King of Kings to own us for Brethren in our vile and low condition.
Thoughts of his glorious Exaltation will put a luster on his condescension in
this matter.

Fourthly, He is infinitely distanced from us in his Person, in respect of his
Divine Nature, wherein he is and was God over all, blessed for ever. He did not
so become man, as to cease to be God. Though he drew a vail over his infinite
Glory, yet he parted not with it. He who calls us Brethren, who suffered for
us, who died for us, was God still in all these things. The condescension of
Christ in this respect the Apostle in an especial manner insists upon, and
improves, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. That he who in himself is thus over
all, eternally blessed, holy, powerful, should take us poor worms of the earth
into this Relation with himself, and avow us for his brethren, as it is not
easy to be believed, so it is for ever to be admired. And these are some of
the heads of that distance which is between Christ and us. Notwithstanding his
participation of the same nature with us; yet such was his love unto us, such
his constancy in the pursuit of the design and purpose of his Father, in
bringing many sons unto glory, that he over-looks as it were them all, and is
not ashamed to call us brethren. And if he will do this because he is of one
with us, because a foundation of this relation is laid in his participation of
our nature; how much more will he continue so to do, when he has perfected
this Relation by the communication of his Spirit.

And this is a ground of unspeakable consolation unto Believers, with
supportment in every condition. No unworthiness in them, no misery upon them,
shall ever hinder the Lord Christ from owning them, and open avowing them to be
his Brethren. He is a Brother born for the day of trouble, a Redeemer for the
f^iendless and fatherless. Let their miseries be what they will, he will be
ashamed of none but of them who are ashamed of him and his ways, when
persecuted and reproached. A little while will clear up great mistakes; all the
world shall see at the last day whom Christ will own: and it will be a great
surprisal when men shall hear him call them brethren, whom they hate, and
esteem as the offscouring of all things. He does it indeed already by his
Word, but they will not attend thereunto. But at the last day they shall both
see and hear whether they will or no. And herein, I say, lies the great
consolation of Believers. The world rejects them, it may be their own Relations
despise them, they are persecuted, hated, reproached; but the Lord Christ is
not ashamed of them. He will not pass by them because they are poor, and in
rags, it may be reckoned as he himself was for them, among malefactors. They
may see also the Wisdom, Grace, and Love of God in this matter. His great
design in the Incarnation of his Son was to bring him into that condition,
wherein he might naturally care for them as their Brother, that he might not be
ashamed of them, but be sensible of their wants, their state and condition in
all things, and so be always ready and meet to relieve them. Let the World now
take its course, and the men thereof do their worst; let Satan rage, and the
powers of hell be stirred up against them; let them load them with reproaches
and scorn, and cover them all over with the filth and dirt of their false
imputations; let them bring them into rags, into dungeons, unto death; Christ
comes in the midst of all this confusion and says, Surely these are my
Brethren, the children of my Father, and he becomes their Savior. And this is
a stable foundation of comfort and supportment in every condition. And are we
not taught our duty also herein, namely not to be ashamed of him, or his
Gospel, or any one that bears his image. The Lord Christ is now himself in that
condition, that even the worst of men esteem it an honor to own him, when
indeed they are no less ashamed of him, than they would have been when he was
carrying his Cross upon his shoulders, or hanging upon the tree. For every
thing that he has in this world they are ashamed; his Gospel, his Ways, his
Worship, his Spirit, his Saints, they are all of them the objects of their
scorn; and in these things it is, that the Lord Christ may be truly honored or
be despised. For those thoughts which men have of his present glory,
abstracting from these things, he is not concerned in them; they are all
exercised about an imaginary Christ, that is inconcerned in the Word and Spirit
of the Lord Jesus. These are the things when we are not to be ashamed of him.
See Romans 1.16. 2 Timothy 1.16. chap. 4.16.

That which remains of these Verses consists in the testimonies which the
Apostle produces out of the Old Testament in the confirmation of what he had
taught and asserted. And two things are to be considered concerning them; the
end for which they are produced, and the especial importance of the words
contained in them. The first he mentions is from Psalm. 22.22. I will declare
thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I sing praise
unto thee. The end why the Apostle produces this testimony, is to confirm what
he had said immediately before, namely that with respect unto his being one
with the children, Christ owns them for his brethren; for this he does expressly
in this place. And we are to take notice that the Apostle in the use of these
testimonies, does not observe any order, so that one of them should confirm one
part, and another part of his assertion, in the order wherein he had laid them
down; it suffices him, that his whole intendment in all the parts of it, is
confirmed in and by them all, one having a more especial respect unto one part
than another. In this first it is clear, that he proves what he had immediately
before affirmed, namely that the Lord Christ owns the children for his
brethren, because of their common interest in the same nature. And there needs
nothing to evince the pertinency of this testimony, but only to show that it is
the Messiah which speaks in that Psalm, and whose words these are, which we
have done fully already in our Prolegomena.

For the Explication of the words themselves, we may consider the twofold
Ac^or Duty that the Lord Christ takes upon himself in them; first, that he will
declare the Name of God unto his brethren; and, secondly, that he would
celebrate him with praises in the congregation. In the former we must enquire
what is meant by the Name of God, and then how it is or was declared by Jesus
Christ.

This expression, the Name of God is variously used. Sometimes it denotes the
Being of God, God himself; sometimes his Attributes, his Excellencies or Divine
Perfections, some one or more of them. As it is proposed unto sinners as an
object for their Faith, Trust, and Love, it denotes in an especial manner his
Love, Grace, and Goodness, that in himself he is good, gracious and merciful,
Isa. 50.10. And withal it intimates what God requires of them toward whom he
is so good and gracious. This Name of God is unknown to men by nature; so is
the way and means whereby he will communicate his Goodness and Grace unto them.
And this is the Name of God here intended, which the Lord Jesus manifested unto
the men given him out of the world, Joh. 17.5. which is the same with his
declaring the Father, whom no man has seen at any time, Joh. 1.18. This is
that Name of God which the Lord Jesus Christ had experience of in his
sufferings, and the manifestation whereof unto his Brethren he had procured
thereby.

Hereof he says in the Psalm, (...), I will declare it, recount it in order,
number the particulars that belong unto it, and so distinctly and evidently
make it known. (...), I will make it known as a messenger, sent from thee and
by thee. And there are two ways whereby the Lord Christ declared this Name of
God. 1. In his own Person, and that both before and after his sufferings; for
although it be mentioned here, as a work that ensued his death, yet is it not
exclusive of his teachings before his suffering; because they also were built
upon the supposition thereof. Thus in the days of his flesh, he instructed his
Disciples and preached the Gospel in the Synagogues of the Jews, and in the
Temple, declaring the name of God unto them. So also after his Resurrection, he
conferred with his Apostles about the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. (2.) By his
Spirit: and that both in the Effusion of it upon his Disciples enabling them
personally to preach the Gospel unto the men of their own generation, and in
the Inspiration of some of them, enabling them to commit the Truth unto writing
for the Instruction of the Elect unto the end of the world. And herein does the
Apostle according unto his wonted manner, not only confirm what he had before
delivered, but make way for what he had farther to instruct the Hebrews in;
namely, the Prophetical Office of Christ, as he is the great Revealer of the
Will of God and Teacher of the Church, which he professedly insists upon in the
beginning of the next Chapter.

In the second part of this first Testimony, is declared farther: (1) What
Christ will moreover do; He will sing praises unto God, and (2.) Where he will
do it; in the midst of the Congregation. The Expression of both these is
accommodated unto the Declaration of Gods Name, and praising of him in the
Temple. The singing of Hymns of praise unto God in the great Congregation was
then a principal part of his Worship. And in the first Expression two things
are observable. (1.) What Christ undertakes to do, and that is to praise God.
Now this is only Exegetical of what went before. He would praise God by
declaring his name. There is no way whereby the Praise of God may be
celebrated, like that of declaring his Grace, Goodness, and love unto men,
whereby they may be won to believe and trust in him; whence Glory redounds unto
him. (2.) The cheerfulness and alacrity of the Spirit of Christ in this work,
he would do it as with Joy and Singing; with such a frame of heart, as was
required in them, who were to sing the praises of God in the great Assemblies
in the Temple. (2.) Where would he do this, (...), in the midst of the
Congregation; the great Congregation as he calls it, v. 25. that is, the great
Assembly of the people in the Temple. And this was a Type of the whole Church
of the Elect under the New Testament. The Lord Christ in his own Person, by his
Spirit, in his Apostles, and his Word, by all his Messengers unto the end of
the world, setting forth the Love, Grace, Goodness and Mercy of God in him the
Mediator, sets forth the praise of God in the midst of the Congregation. I
shall only add, that whereas singing of hymns unto God was an especial part of
the Instituted Worship under the Old Testament, to whose use these Expressions
are accommodated, it is evident that the Lord Christ has eminently set forth
this praise of God in his Institution of Worship under the New Testament,
wherein God will ever be glorified and praised. This was that which the Lord
Christ engaged to do upon the Issue of his sufferings; and we may propose it
unto our Example and Instruction: namely,

V. That which was principally in the heart of Christ upon his sufferings, was
to declare and manifest the Love, Grace and Good will of God unto men, that
they might come to an Acquaintance with him and Acceptance before him. There
are two things in the Psalm, and the words that manifest how much this was upon
the heart of Christ. The most part of the Psalm contains the great confl^ct
that he had with his sufferings, and the Displeasure of God against sin
declared therein. He is no sooner delivered from thence, but instantly he
engages in this work. As he lands upon the shore from that Tempest wherein he
was tossed in his Passion, he cries out, I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, in the midst of the Congregation will I sing praise unto thee. And
thus we find, that upon his Resurrection he did not immediately ascend into
glory, but first declared the name of God unto his Apostles and Disciples: and
then took order that by them it should be declared and published to all the
world. This was upon his Spirit, and he entered not into his glorious Rest
until he had performed it. The words themselves also do evidence it, in that
Expression of celebrating Gods name with hymns, with singing. It was a joy of
heart unto him to be engaged in this work. Singing is the frame (...), James
5.13. of them that are in a glad, free, rejoicing condition. So was the Lord
Christ in this work. He rejoiced of old with the very thoughts of this work,
Prove. 8.30, 31. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. And it was one of the glorious Promises that
were made unto him upon his undertaking the work of our Salvation; that he
should declare or preach the Gospel, and the name of God therein unto the
Conversion of Jews and Gentiles, Isa. 49.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He
rejoiced therefore greatly to do it; and that,

First, Because herein consisted the Manifestation and Exaltation of the glory
of God which he principally in his whole work aimed at. He came to do the will,
and thereby to set forth the glory of the Father. By and in him God designed to
make his glory known; the glory of his Love and Grace in sending him; the glory
of his Justice and faithfulness in his sufferings; the glory of his Mercy in
the Reconciliation and Pardon of sinners; the glory of his Wisdom in the whole
Mystery of his Mediation; and the glory together of all his Eternal
Excellencies in bringing his Sons unto the everlasting Enjoyment of him. Now
nothing of all this could have been made known, unless the Lord Christ had
taken upon him to preach the Gospel and declare the name of God. Without this,
what ever else he had done or suffered, had been lost as unto the interest of
the glory of God. This then being that which he principally aimed at, this
design must needs be greatly in his mind: He took care that so great Glory,
built on so great a foundation as his Incarnation and Mediation, should not be
lost. His other work was necessary, but this was a Joy of heart and soul unto
him.

Secondly, The Salvation of the Sons to be brought unto glory, with all their
Interest in the Benefit of his sufferings depended on this work of his. How
much he sought that, his whole work declares. For their sakes it was, that he
came down from Heaven, and was made flesh and dwelt amongst them; for their
sakes did he undergo all the miseries that the world could cast upon him; for
their sakes did he undergo the Curse of the Law, and wrestle with the
Displeasure and Wrath of God against sin. And all this seemed as it were little
unto him, for the love he bar^ them, as Jacobs hard service did to him for his
love unto Rachel. Now after he had done all this for them, unless he had
declared the Name of God unto them in the Gospel, they could have had no
Benefit by it. For if they believe not, they cannot be saved. And how should
they believe without the word; and how, or whence could they hear the word,
unless it had been preached unto them. They could not of themselves have known
any thing of that name of God, which is their life and salvation. Some men talk
of I know not what Declaration of Gods Name, Nature and Glory, by the works of
Nature and Providence; but if the Lord Christ had not indeed revealed, declared
and preached these things, these Disputers themselves would not have been in
any other Condition than all mankind is, who are left unto those Teachers,
which is most dark and miserable. The Lord Christ knew, that without his
performance of this work, not one of the Sons, the conduct of whom to glory he
had undertaken, could ever have been brought unto the knowledge of the name of
God, or unto faith in him, or obedience unto him, which made him earnestly and
heartily engage into it.

Thirdly, Hereon depended his own Glory also. His Elect were to be gathered
unto him; in, among, and over them was his glorious Kingdom to be erected.
Without their Conversion unto God, this could not be done. In the state of
nature they also are children of Wrath, and belong to the Kingdom of Satan. And
this Declaration of the name of God, is the great Way and means of their
Calling, Conversion, and Translating from the power of Satan into his Kingdom.
The Gospel is the Rod of his strength, whereby his people are made willing in
the day of his power. In brief, the gathering of his Church, the setting up of
his Kingdom, the establishment of his Throne, the setting of the Crown upon his
head, depend wholly on his declaring the name of God in the preaching of the
Gospel. Seeing therefore that the glory of God which he aimed at, the salvation
of the Sons which he sought for, and the Honor of his Kingdom which was
promised unto him, do all depend on this Work, it is no wonder, if his Heart
were full of it, and that he rejoiced to be engaged in it.

And this Frame of heart ought to be in them, who under him are called unto
this work. The work it self we see is noble and excellent; such as the Lord
Christ carried in his Eye through all his sufferings, as that whereby they were
to be rendered useful unto the glory of God, and the souls of men. And by his
Rejoicing to be engaged in it, he has set a Pattern unto them, whom he calls
to the same Employment. Where men undertake it for filthy lucre, for self Ends,
and carnal Respects, this is not to follow the Example of Christ, nor to serve
him but their own bellies: Zeal for the glory of God, Compassion for the souls
of men, Love to the Honor and Exaltation of Christ, ought to be the principles
of men in this undertaking.

Moreover, the Lord Christ by declaring, that he will set forth the praise of
God in the Church, manifests what is the Duty of the Church it self; namely, to
praise God for the work of his Love and Grace in our Redemption by Christ
Jesus. This he promises to go before them in; and what he leads them unto, is
by them to be persisted in. This is indeed the very End of gathering the
Church, and of all the Duties that are performed therein, and thereby. The
Church is called unto the glory of the Grace of God, Ephesians. 1.6. that it may be
set forth in them, and by them. This is the End of the Institution of all
Ordinances of Worship in the Church, Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10. And in them do they set
forth the Praises of God unto men and Angels. This is the Tendency of Prayer,
the Work of Faith, the fruit of Obedience. It is a fond imagination which some
have fallen upon, that God is not praised in the Church for the work of
Redemption, unless it be done by Words and Hymns particularly expressing it.
All Praying, all Preaching, all Administration of Ordinances, all our Faith,
all our Obedience if ordered aright, are nothing but giving glory to God, for
his Love and Grace in Christ Jesus in a due and acceptable manner. And this is
that which ought to be in our design in all our Worship of God, especially in
what we perform in the Church. To set forth his praise, to declare his name, to
give glory unto him by believing, and the profession of our faith, is the End
of all we do. And this is the first Testimony produced by our Apostle.

His next is taken from Psalm. 18.2. I will put my trust in him. The whole
Psalm literally respects David, with his Streights and Deliverances: not
absolutely, but as he was a Type of Christ. That he was so, the Jews cannot
deny; seeing the Messiah is promised on that account under the name of David.
And the close of the Psalm treating of the calling of the Gentiles, as a fruit
of his deliverance from sufferings, manifest him principally to be intended.
And that which the Apostle intends to prove by this Testimony, is, that he was
really and truly of one with the Sons to be brought unto glory: and that he
does from hence, inasmuch as he was made and brought into that condition,
wherein it was necessary for him to trust in God, and act in that Dependence
upon him, which the nature of man whilst exposed unto Troubles does
indispensibility require: Had he been only God, this could have been spoken of
him. Neither is the nature of Angels exposed to such Dangers and Troubles, as
to make it necessary for them to betake themselves unto Gods Protection with
respect thereunto. And this the word (...), used by the Psalmist properly
signifies; to betake a man's self unto the Care and Protection of another, as
Psalm. 2. ult. This then the condition of the Lord Christ required, and this he
did perform in all Troubles and Difficulties, that he had contended withal; He
put his trust in God, as Isa. 50.8, 9. Psalm. 22.19. And this evinceth him to
have been truly and really of one with the children, his brethren; seeing it
was his Duty no less than it is theirs, to depend on God in troubles and
distresses; And in vain does Schlictingius hence endeavor to prove, that
Christ was the Son of God by Grace only, because he is said to depend on him,
which if he had been God by nature he could not do. True, if he had been God
only; but the Apostle is now proving, that he was man also; like unto us in all
things sin only excepted. And as such his duty it was, in all streights to
betake himself by faith unto the care and protection of God. And some things
may hence also be briefly observed: As,

1. That the Lord Christ the Captain of our salvation, was exposed in the days
of his flesh, unto great Difficulties, Anxiety of mind, Dangers and Troubles.
This is included in what he here affirms about putting his trust in God. And
they were all typified out by the great sufferings of David before he came unto
his Kingdom. In the consideration of the sufferings of Christ, men commonly fix
their thoughts solely unto his Death. And indeed therein was a Recapitulation
of all that he had before undergone, with an addition of the Wrath of God. But
yet neither are the sufferings of his Life to be disregarded. Such they were as
made his whole Pilgrimage on the earth dangerous and dolorous. There was upon
him a confluence of every thing that is evil or troublesome unto Humane Nature.
And herein is he principally our Example; at least so far, that we should think
no kind of sufferings strange unto us.

2. The Lord Christ in all his Perplexities and troubles, betook himself unto
the protection of God, trusting in him. See Isa. 50.7, 8. And he always made
an open Profession of this trust, insomuch as that his Enemies reproached him
with it in his greatest distress, Matthew. 27.39. But this was his Course, this
was his Refuge, wherein at length he had blessed and glorious success.

3. He both suffered and trusted as our Head and President. What he did in both
these kinds he calls us unto. As he did, so must we, undergo Perplexities and
Dangers in the course of our Pilgrimage. The Scripture abounds with
Instructions unto this purpose, and Experience confims it. And Professors of
the Gospel do but indulge unto pleasing dreams, when they fancy any other
condition in this world unto themselves. They would not be willing, I suppose
to purchase it, at the price of Inconformity unto Jesus Christ. And he is a
President unto us in trusting, as well as in suffering. As he betook himself
unto the protection of God, so should we do also; and we shall have the same
blessed success with him.

There remains yet one Testimony more, which we shall briefly pass through the
consideration of. Behold I and the children which God has given me. It is
taken from Isa. 8.18. That it was a Prophecy of Christ which is there insisted
on, we have proved at large in our Prolegomena; so that we need not here again
farther to discourse that matter. That which the Apostle aims at in the
citation of this Testimony is farther to confirm the Union in nature, and the
Relation that ensues thereupon, between the Captain of salvation, and the Sons
to be brought unto glory. Now as this is such, that thereon he calls them
Brethren, and came into the same condition of trouble with them, so they are by
the Grant and Appointment of God, his children. Being of the same nature with
them, and so meet to become a common Parent unto them all, God by an act of
Sovereign Grace, gives them unto him for his children. This is the aim of the
Apostle, in the use of this Testimony unto his present purpose. In the words
themselves we may consider,

First, That God gives all the Sons that are to be brought unto glory, to Jesus
Christ. The Lord has given them unto me. Thine they were, says he, and thou
gave them unto me, John 17.6. God having separated them, as his peculiar
Portion in the Eternal Counsel of his Will, gives them unto the Son to take
care of them, that they may be preserved and brought unto the glory that he had
designed for them. And this work he testifies that he undertook, so that none
of them shall be lost, but that what ever difficulties they may pass through,
he will raise them up at the last day, and give them an entrance into Life and
Immortality.

Secondly, He gives them to him as his children to be provided for; and to have
an Inheritance purchased for them, that they may become Heirs of God and
Coheirs with himself. Adam was their first Parent by nature; and in him they
lost that Inheritance, which they might have expected by the Law of their
Creation. They are threrefore given to the second Adam as their Parent by
Grace, to have an inheritance provided for them, which accordingly he has
purchased with the Price of his Blood.

Thirdly, That the Lord Christ is satisfied with, and rejoices in the portion
given him of his Father, his Children his Redeemed ones. This the manner of the
Expression informs us in. Behold I and the children; though he considers
himself and them at that time as signs and wonders to be spoken against. He
rejoices in his Portion, and does not call it Chabul, as Hiram did the Cities
given him of Solomon, because they displeased him. He is not only satisfied
upon the sight of the travail of his soul, Isa. 53.11. but glories also, that
the lines are fallen unto him in pleasantnesses, that he has a goodly
heritage, Psalm. 16.6. Such was his Love, such was his Grace, for we in our
selves are a people not to be desired.

Fourthly, That the Lord Jesus assumes the children given him of his Father
into the same condition with himself, both as to Life and Eternity. I and the
children; as he is, so are they; His lot is their lot; his God is their God,
his Father their Father; and his Glory shall be theirs.

Fifthly, From the Context of the words in the Prophet, expressing the
separation of Christ and the Children from the world, and all the Hypocrites
therein combined together in the pursuit of their sinful courses; we are
taught, that Christ and believers are in the same Covenant, confederate to
trust in God in difficulties and troubles, in opposition unto all the
confederacies of the men of the world, for their carnal security.

And thus by this Triple Testimony has the Apostle both confirmed his
foregoing Assertion; and farther manifested the Relation that is between the
children to be brought unto Glory, and the Captain of their salvation, whereby
it became righteous that he should suffer for them, and meet that they should
enjoy the benefit of his sufferings; which he more fully expresses in the
following Verses.

Verse XIV, XV.
THe Union of Christ and the Children in their Relation unto one common root
and participation of the same nature being asserted, the Apostle proceeds to
declare the Ends, Use and Necessity of that Union, in respect of the Work which
God had designed him unto, and the Ends which he had to accomplish thereby. Of
these, Two he lays down in these two Verses, namely, the Destruction of the
Devil, and the Delivery thereby of them that were in Bondage by Reason of
Death; neither of which could have been wrought, nor effected, but by the Death
of the Captain of salvation; which he could not have undergone, nor would, what
he could otherwise have done, been profitable unto them, had he not been of the
same nature with the children; as will appear in the opening of the words
themselves.

Verse 14, 15.
(...);
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...), V.L. Quia ergo; Bez. quoniam ergo; because therefore: Sir. (...), for
seeing; or for because, Eras. Posteaquam igitur; Ours; forasmuch then. (...),
is sometimes used for (...), postquam, ex quo tempore; from whence; so as to
express no Causality as to that which follows, but only the Precedence of that
which it relates unto. But it is not in that sense used with (...), which here
is subjoyned; but, quoniam, quandoquidem; the particle (...), (therefore)
plainly expressing a Causality; they are well rendered by ours; Forasmuch then,
or therefore.

(...).
(...). V.L. pueri communicaverunt carni and sanguini: The children communicated
in flesh and blood. Sir. (...); the sons were partakers; or do partake: Eras.
Commercium habent cum carne and sanguine: have communion or commerce with flesh
and blood. Bez. Pueri participes sunt carnis and sanguinis; the children are
partakers of flesh and blood; as Ours. The Vulgar expresses the time past,
which the Original requires. Aethiopick, He made his children partakers of his
flesh and blood: with respect as it should seem to the Sacrament of the
Eucharist.

(...).
(...), V.L. Et ipse similiter (consimiliter A.M.) participavit eisdem. Bez.
Ipse quoque consimiliter particeps factus est eorundem; as ours; He also
himself took part of the same. And the Sir. (...); he himself also, in the same
likeness (or manner) was partaker, or partook in the same, or self same things.
Arab. He also like unto them, partook in the properties of the same. That is,
truly partook of Flesh and Blood in all their Natural or Essential Properties.
Aethiop. And he also was made as a brother unto them.

(...).
(...); Sir. (...); ut per mortem suam; that by his own death, properly as to
the sense. (...), V.L. destrueret; all other Latin Translations, aboleret: that
he might destroy: so ours: but to destroy respects the Person; abolere, in the
first place the Power. (...); eum qui tenebat mortis imperium. Sir. Eras. Vul.
him that held, or had the rule of death. Bez. eum penes quem est mortis robur;
him that had the power of death. Aethiop. the Prince of death. (...); (...).
Sir. (...), which is Satan. (...), (some Copies read (...),) (...); V. and
liberaret eos. Bez. and liberos redderet eos; and free them, and make them free
Sir. and loose them.

(...).
(...); Per omne vivere suum. Whilst they lived: All their lives.

(...); Obnoxii erant servituti: Bez. Mancipati erant servituti; properly,
damnates erant servitutis; obnoxious, subject unto b^ndage.

Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood. This
Expression is not elsewhere used in the Scripture: (...), is to have any thing
what ever in Common with another: (...), is he who has nothing in fellowship
or common with others. And this word is used in reference unto all sorts of
things; Good and Bad; as Nature, Life, Actions, Qualities, Works. Here it
intimates the common and equal share of the Children in the things spoken of.
They are equally common to all. These are (...); Flesh and Blood; That is,
Humane Nature, (...).
liable to Death, Misery, Destruction. Some would have not the nature of man,
but the frail and weak Condition of mankind to be intended in this Expression.
So Eniedinus; and after him Grotius, who refers us to Chap. 5.7. 1 Timothy 3.16. 2
Cor. 4.11. for the confirmation of this sense. But in none of those places is
there mention of Flesh and Blood, as here; but only of flesh, which word is
variously used both in the Old Testament and New. Yet in all the places
referred unto, it is taken not for the Quality of Humane Life, as it is infirm
and weak, but for humane nature it self wnich is so; as concerning that of 1 Timothy 3.16. it has at large been declared. And the design of the place rejects
this Gloss, which was invented, only to defeat the Testimony given in these
words unto the Incarnation of the Son of God. For the Apostle adds a Reason in
these Verses, why the Lord Christ was so to be of one with the children, as to
take upon himself their nature, which is, because that was subject unto death,
which for them he was to undergo. And Flesh and Blood are here only mentioned,
though they complete not Humane Nature without a Rational Soul, because in, and
by them it is, that our Nature is subject unto death. We may only farther
observe, that the Apostle having especial regard unto the Saints under the Old
Testament, expresses their Participation of flesh and blood in the
Preterperfect Tense; or time past; which by Proportion is to be extended to all
that believe in Christ; unless we shall say, that he has respect unto the
common interest of all mankind in the same nature, in the root of it; whence
God is said, of one blood to have made them all.

(...); we see is rendered by Interpreters; similiter, consimiliter codem modo;
(...).
ad eandem similitudinem: That is, (...), or (...); likewise, or, after the
same manner. And (...), is as much as (...), v. 17. every way like. Here it is
restrained by (...), the same, that is, flesh and blood; Humane Nature; as to
the Humane Nature, he was every way, as the children.

(...), Partem habuit; particeps erat; he took part. And in the use of this
Word, (...).
the Dative Case of the Person is still understood, and sometimes expressed. So
Plato, (...); that he might share or partake in the same acts with them. And it
is here also understood; That he might partake with them of flesh and blood.
And the Apostle purposely changes the word from that which he had before used
concerning the children: (...); they had Humane Nature in common; they were
men, and that was all; having no Existence but in and by that nature.
Concerning him he had before proved, that he had a Divine Nature on the account
whereof he was more excellent than the Angels; And here he says of him, (...);
Existing in his Divine Nature, he moreover took part of that nature with them;
which makes a difference between their Persons, though as to Humane Nature they
were every way alike; and this removes the exception of Schlictingius, or
Crellius, that he is no more said to be incarnate than the children.

That by death, (...). This word is peculiar to Paul: (...).
He uses it almost in all his Epistles, and that frequently. Elsewhere it
occurs but once in the New Testament, Luke 13.17. and that in a sense,
whereunto by him it is not applied. That which he usually intends in this word,
is to make a thing or person to cease as to its present condition, and not to
be what it was. So Romans 3.3. (...), shall their unbelief make the faith of God
of none effect? cause it to cease, render the promise useless? And v. 31.
(...); do we make the Law void by faith? take away its use and End, Chap. 4.14.
(...); the promise is made ineffectual, Chap. 7.2. (...); If her husband is
dead, she is freed from the Law: The Law of the Husband has no more power over
her. So v. 6. 1 Cor. 13.8, 10, 11. Chap. 15.24, 26. 2 Cor. 3.10, 13. Gal. 3.17.
Chap. 5.4, 11. Ephesians. 2.15. The Intention of the Apostle in this word, is, the
making of any thing to cease, or to be void as to its former Power and
Efficacy; not to remove, annihilate, or destroy the Essence or Being of it. And
the Expression here used is to the same purpose, with that in Psalm 8.2. (...),
to quiet or make to cease the enemy and self-avenger.

(...), is properly vis, robur, potentia; Force, (...).
Strength, Power, like that of Arms, or Armies in battle. And sometimes it is
used for Rule, Empire, and Authority. (...), is to be in Place of Power; and
(...) is to be able to dispose of what it relates unto. And in both senses we
shall see that the Devil is said to have (...), the power of death.

Now there is not any notion under which the Devil is more known unto, or
spoken of among the Jews, than this of his having the power of death: his
common appellation among them is, (...), the Angel of death. And they call him
Samael also. So the Targum of Jonathan, (...), Genesis 3.6. And the woman saw
Samael the Angel of death. And Maimon: More Nebu. lib. 2. cap. 30. tells us
from the Midrash, that Samael rode upon the Serpent when he deceived Eve; that
is, used him as his instrument in that work. And most of them acknowledge
Satan to be principally intended in the temptation of Eve, though Aben Ezra
deny it in his Comment on the words, and dispute against it. And he adds, that
by Samael, the Angel of death, they understand Satan, which he proves from the
words of their wise men, who say in some places, that Satan would have hindered
Abraham from sacrificing of Isaac; and in others, that Samael would have done
it; which proves that it is one and the same who by both names is intended. And
hence they usually call him, (...), the wicked Samael, the Prince of all the
devils; and say of him, (...), Samael brought death upon all the world. So that
by this Samael, or Angel of death, it is evident that they intend him who is
termed (...), as the Prince and Ruler of the rest. So also they speak expressly
in, Baba Bathra, distinc. Hashatephir. (...) Rabbi Simeon said the same is
Satan, and the Angel of death, and the evil figment; that is the cause and
author of it. And they call him the Angel of death on many accounts, the
consideration whereof may give us some light into the reason of the Expression
here used by the Apostle. The first is that before mentioned, namely that by
his means death entered and came upon all the world. His temptation was the
first occasion of death: and for that reason is he termed by our Savior,
(...), Joh. 8.44. a murderer from the beginning. And herein he had the power
of death, prevailing to render all mankind obnoxious to the sentence and stroke
of it. Secondly, Because he is employed in great and signal Judgments to
inflict death, on men. He is the head of those (...), evil Angels, who slew the
Egyptians, Psalm. 78 49. So in Psalm. 91.5. those words, Thou shall not fear,
(...), from the arrow that flies by day, are rendered by the Targum, (...),
from the arrow of the Angel of death which he shoots by day. And in the next
verse those words, (...), from the destruction that wastes at noon day, they
render, (...), from the troop of devils that walk at noonday; the Psalmist
treating of great and sudden destructions, which they affirm to be all wrought
by Satan: and thence the Hellenists also render the latter place by (...), the
devil at noonday; wherein they are followed by the Vulgar Latin, Arabic and
Aethiopick Translations. And this the Apostle seems to allude unto, 1 Cor.
10.10. where he says, that those who murmured in the wilderness were destroyed
(...), by the destroyer; (...), that (...), the destroying Angel, or the Angel
of death; as in this Epistle he terms him (...), chap. 11.28. And it may be
this is he who is called (...), Job 18.13. the firstborn of death, or he that
has right unto the administration of it. They term him also (...), that is,
(...), the waster or destroyer: and (...), from (...), to waste or destroy, as
also (...); which, as John tells us, is the Hebrew name of the Angel of the
bottomless pit, Revel. 9.11. as his Greek name is (...), that is, (...), and
(...). Thirdly, The latter Jews suppose that this Angel of death takes away the
life of every man, even of those who die a natural death. And hereby as they
express the old faith of the Church, that death is poenal, and that it came
upon all for sin through the temptation of Satan, so also they discover the
bondage that they themselves are in for fear of death all their days. For when
a man is ready to die, they say the Angel of death appears to him in a terrible
manner, with a sword drawn in his hand. From thence drops I know not what
poison into him, whereon he dies. Hence they woefully houl, lament, and rend
their garments upon the death of their friends. And they have composed a prayer
for themselves against this terror. Because also of this their being slain by
the Angel of death, they hope and pray that their death may be an expiation for
all their sins. Here lies the sting of death, mentioned by the Apostle, 1. Cor.
15.55. Hence they have a long story in their Midrash, or mystical Exposition of
the Pentateuch, on the last section of Deuteronomy, about Samaels coming to
take away the life of Moses; whom he repelled and drove away with the Rod that
had the Shem Hamphorash written in it. And the like story they have in a book
about the acts of Moses, which Aben-Ezra rejects on Exodus 4.20. This hand of
Satan in death, manifesting it to be poenal, is that which keeps them in
bondage and fear all their days. Fourthly, they suppose that this Angel of
death has power over men even after death. One horrible penalty they fancy in
particular that he inflicts on them, which is set down by Elias in his Tishbi
in (...), out of the Midrash of Rabbi Isaac the son of Parnaer; for when a man,
as they say, departs out of this world, (...), the Angel of death comes and
sits upon his grave. And he brings with him a Chain, partly of iron, partly of
fire; and making the soul to return into body, he breaks the bones, and
torments variously both body and soul for a season. This is their Purgatory;
and the best of their hopes are, that their punishment after this life shall
not be eternal. And this various interest of Satan in the power of death, both
keeps them in dismal bondage all their days, and puts them upon the invention
of several ways for their deliverance. Thus one of their solemn Prayers on the
day of Expiation is to be delivered from (...), or this punishment of the devil
in their graves; to which purpose also they offer a Cock unto him for his
pacification. And their prayer to this purpose in their Berachoth is this,
(...), That it may please thee, (good Lord) to deliver us from evil Decrees or
Laws, from poverty, from contempt, from all kind of punishments, from the
judgment of hell, and from beating in the grave, by the Angel of death. And
this supposition is in like manner admitted by the Mahumetans, who have also
this prayer, Deus noster libera nos ab Angelo interrogante tormento sepulchri,
and a via mala. And many such lewd imaginations are they now given up unto,
proceeding from their ignorance of the Righteousness of God. But yet from these
apprehensions of theirs, we may see what the Apostle intended in this
expression, calling the devil him that had the power of death.

(...), Et liberaret ipsos, hos, quotquot, quicunque; (...).
and free those who. (...) is to dismiss, discharge, free; and in the use of
the word, unto the Accusative case of the Person, the Genitive of the thing is
added or understood. (...), I free thee from this. (...); Aristoph. to deliver
thee from this eyesore. And sometimes the Genitive case of the thing is
expressed, where the Accusative of the person is omitted. (...), that is (...)
to free or deliver one from fear; as here the Accusative case of the person is
expressed, and the Genitive of the thing omitted. (...), that is (...) or
(...), to deliver them, that is from death, or, from fear because of death.

(...) is obnoxious, obstrictus, reus, damnas. (...)
He that is legally obnoxious, subject, liable to any thing; that is, Law,
Crime, Judge, Judgment, Punishment, in all which respects the word is used. He
that is under the power of any Law is (...), subject unto its authority and
penalty. See Matthew. 5.21, 22. chap. 26.66. Mark 3.29. 1 Cor. 11.27. James 2.10.
Now the (...), (...).
servitude or bondage here mentioned is poenal, and therefore are men said to
be (...), obnoxious unto it.

Verse 14, 15. For as much then as (or, seeing therefore that) the children are
(were in common) partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise (after
the same manner) took part (did partake) of the same; that through (by) death
he might destroy (make void the authority of) him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil. And deliver (free, discharge) them who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage.
In former Verses, as was showed, the Apostle declared the necessity that there
was on the part of God, intending to bring many sons unto glory, to constitute
such an union between them and the Captain of their salvation, as that it might
be just for him to suffer in their stead. In these he proceeds to manifest in
particular what that Nature is, in the common participation whereof their union
designed did consist, wherein they were all of one; and what were the especial
reasons why the Lord Christ was made partaker of that nature. This coherence of
these Verses Chrysostom briefly gives us (...); Having showed the brotherhood
(that was between Christ and the children) he lays down the causes of that
dispensation; and what they are, we shall find here expressed.

There are sundry things which the Apostle supposes in these words, as known
unto, and granted by the Hebrews. As, first, that the Devil had the power of
death. Secondly, That on this account men were filled with fear of it, and led
a life full of anxiety and trouble by reason of that fear. Thirdly, That a
deliverance from this condition was to be effected by the Messiah. Fourthly,
That the way whereby he was to do this was by his suffering. All which, as they
are contained in the first Promise, so that they were allowed of by the Hebrews
of old, we have fully proved elsewhere. And by all these does the Apostle
yield a reason of his former concession, that the Messiah was for a little
while made lower than the Angels, the Causes and Ends whereof he here declares.
There are in the words,

First, A supposition of a twofold state and condition of the children to be
brought unto glory,

First, Natural, or their natural state and condition, they were all of them in
common partakers of flesh and blood: For as much then as the children were
partakers of flesh and blood.

Secondly, Moral, their moral state and condition; they were obnoxious unto
death, as it is poenal for sin, and in great bondage through fear of it: them
who through fear of death were all their life time subject unto bondage.

Secondly, There is a double inference with respect unto this supposition, on
the part of Christ, the Captain of salvation.

First, As to their natural condition, that he did partake of it, he was so to
do; He himself also did partake of the same.

Secondly, As to their moral condition, he freed them from it: and deliver them.

Thirdly, The means whereby he did this, or this was to be done, evidencing the
necessity of his participation with them in their condition of nature, that he
might relieve them from their condition of trouble; he did it by death: that by
death.

Fourthly, The immediate Effect of his death, tending unto their delivery and
freedom, and that is the destruction of the devil, as to his power over and
interest in death as poenal, whereof their deliverance is an infallible
consequent: and destroy him, etc.

In the first place the Apostle expresses, as by way of supposition, the
natural condition of the children, that is the children whom God designed to
bring unto glory; those who were given unto Christ, they were in common
partakers of flesh and blood. I shall not stay to remove the conceit of some,
who yet are not a few among the Romanists, who refer those words unto the
participation of the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, whereunto
also, as we observed, the Aethiopick Version gives countenance. For not only is
there not any thing in the expression that inclines unto such an imagination,
but also it enervates the whole design of the Apostles discourse and argument,
as from the former consideration of it does appear. Flesh and blood are by an
usual Synecdoche put for the whole humane nature; not as though by blood the
soul was intended, because the life is said to be in it, as not acting without
it; but this expression is used, because it is not humane nature as absolutely
considered, but as mortal, passible, subject unto infirmities and death it
self, that is intended. And it is no more than if he had said, the children
were men subject unto death. For he gives his reason herein, why the Lord
Christ was made a man subject unto death. That he and the children should be of
one nature he had showed before; for as much then as this was the condition of
the children, that they were all partakers of humane nature, liable to
sufferings, sorrow, and death; he was so also. And this is thus expressed to
set forth the love and condescension of Jesus Christ, as will afterward appear.

The second thing in these words is the moral condition of the children; and
there are sundry things, partly intimated, partly expressed in the description
that is here given us of it; as, 1. Their estate absolutely considered, they
were subject to death. 2. The consequences of that estate. 1. It wrought fear
in them. 2. That fear brought them into bondage. 3. The continuance of that
condition, it was for the whole course of their lives.

First, It is implied that they were subject, obnoxious unto, guilty of death,
and that as it was poenal, due to sin, as contained in the curse of the Law;
which what it comprehends, and how far it is extended is usually declared. On
this supposition lies the whole weight of the Mediation of Christ. The children
to be brought unto glory were obnoxious unto death, the curse and wrath of God
therein, which he came to deliver them from.

Secondly, The first effect and consequent of this obnoxiousness unto death
concurring unto their state and condition is, that they were filled with fear
of it: for fear of death. Fear is a perturbation of mind, arising from the
apprehension of a future imminent evil. And the greater this evil is, the
greater will the perturbation of the mind be; provided the apprehension of it
be answerable. The fear of death then here intended is that trouble of mind
which men have in the expectation of death to be inflicted on them, as a
punishment due unto their sins. And this apprehension is common to all men,
arising from a general presumption that death is poenal, and that it is the
judgment of God that they which commit sin are worthy of death, as Romans 1.32.
chap. 2.15. But it is cleared and confirmed by the Law, whose known sentence it
is, The soul that sins shall die. And the troublesome expectation of the
event of this apprehension is the fear of death here intended. And according
unto the means that men have to come unto the knowledge of the righteousness of
God, are, or ought to be their apprehensions of the evil that is in death. But
even those who had lost all clear knowledge of the consequents of death
natural, or the dissolution of their present mortal condition, yet on a
confused apprehension of its being poenal, always esteemed it, (...), the most
dreadful of all things that are so unto humane nature. And in some this is
heightened and increased, until it come to be (...), as our Apostle speaks,
chap. 10.27. A fearful expectation of judgment and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries. And this is the second thing that is in this
description of the estate and condition of the children to be brought unto
glory; being obnoxious unto the sentence of death, they could not but live in
fear of the execution of it.

Thirdly, They are by this means brought into bondage. The troublesome
expectation of death as poenal, brings them into bondage; into the nature
whereof we must a little enquire. Sundry things concur to make any state a
state of bondage; as, 1. That it be involuntary; no man is in bondage by his
will, that which a man chooses is not bondage unto him. A man that would have
his ear bored, though he were always a servant was never in bondage, for he
enjoyed the condition that pleased him. Properly all bondage is involuntary. 2.
Bondage ingenerates strong desires after, and puts men on all manner of
attempts for liberty. Yokes gall, and make them on whom they are, desire ease.
So long as men are sensible of bondage, which is against nature, (for that
which is not so is not bondage) they will desire and labor for liberty. When
some in the Roman Senate asked an Ambassador of the Priernates, after they were
overthrown in battle, if they granted them peace, how they would keep it, what
peace they should have with them? He answered, Si bonam dederitis, fidam and
perpetuam; si malam haud diuturnam. Whereat when some in the Senate stormed, as
if he had threatened them with War and Rebellion, the wiser sort commended him,
as one that spoke like a man and a freeman; adding as their reason, An credi
posse ullum populum, aut hominem denique in ea condition, cujus eam poeniteat,
diutius quam necesse sit mansurum, Live. lib. 8. So certain it is, that bondage
wearieth and stirs up restless desires in all, endeavors in some after
liberty. 3. Bondage perplexeth the mind. It arises from fear, the greatest
perturbation of the mind, and is attended with weariness and distrust, all
which are perplexing. 4. Where bondage is complete, it lies in a tendency unto
future and greater evils. Such is the bondage of condemned malefactors,
reserved for the day of execution; such is the bondage of Satan, who is kept
in chains of darkness for the judgment of the great day. And all these things
concur in the bondage here intended; which is, a dejected troublesome state and
condition of mind, arising from the apprehension and fear of death to be
inflicted, and their disability in whom it is to avoid it, attended with
fruitless desires and vain attempts to be delivered from it, and to escape the
evil feared. And this is the condition of sinners out of Christ, whereof there
are various degrees, answerable unto their convictions. For the Apostle treats
not here of men's being servants unto sin, which is voluntary; but of their
sense of the guilt of sin, which is wrought in them even whether they will or
no; and by any means they would cast off the yoke of it, though by none are
they able so to do; for,

Fourthly, They are said to continue in this estate all their lives. Not that
they were always perplexed with this bondage, but that they could never be
utterly freed from it. For the Apostle does not say, that they were thus in
bondage all their days, but that they were obnoxious and subject unto it. They
had no ways to free or deliver themselves from it, but that at any time they
might righteously be brought under its power; and the more they cast off the
thoughts of it, the more they increased their danger. This was the estate of
the children, whose deliverance was undertaken by the Lord Christ, the Captain
of their salvation. And we may hence observe, that,

All sinners are subject unto death, as it is poenal. The first sentence
reaches them all, Genesis 2.17. And thence are they said by nature to be children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. obnoxious unto death to be inflicted in a way of wrath
and revenge for sin. This passes upon all, in as much as all have sinned, Romans
5.12. This all men see and know; but all do not sufficiently consider what is
contained in the sentence of death, and very few how it may be avoided. Most
men look on death as the common lot and condition of mankind, upon the account
of their frail natural condition; as though it belonged to the natural
condition of the children, and not the moral; and were a consequent of their
being, and not the demerit of their sin. They consider not, that although the
principles of our nature are in themselves subject unto a dissolution, yet if,
we had kept the Law of our Creation, it had been prevented by the power of God,
engaged to continue life during our obedience. Life and obedience were to be
commensurate, until temporal obedience ended in life eternal. Death is poenal,
and its being common unto all, hinders not but that it is the punishment of
every one. How it is changed unto Believers by the death of Christ, shall be
afterward declared. In the mean time all mankind is condemned, as soon as born.
Life is a reprieve, a suspension of execution. If during that time a pardon be
not effectually sued out, the sentence will be executed according to the
severity of justice. Under this Law are men now born, this yoke have they
pulled on themselves by their apostasy from God. Neither is it to any purpose
to repine against it, or to conflict with it; there is but one way of delivery.

2. Fear of death, as it is poenal, is inseparable from sin, before the sinner
be delivered by the death of Christ. They were in fear of death. There is a
fear of death that is natural, and inseparable from our present condition; that
is but natures aversation of its own dissolution. And this has various
degrees, occasioned by the differences of men's natural constitution, and other
accidental occurrences and occasions: so that some seem to fear death too much,
and others not at all; I mean of those who are freed from it, as it is in the
curse and under the power of Satan. But this difference is from occasions
foreign and accidental; there is in all naturally the same aversation of it.
And this is a guiltless infirmity, like our weariness, and sickness,
inseparably annexed unto the condition of mortality. But sinners in their
natural state fear death as it is poenal, as an issue of the curse, as under
the power of Satan, as a dreadful entrance into eternal ruin. There are
indeed a thousand ways whereby this fear is for a season stifled in the minds
of men. Some live in brutish ignorance, never receiving any full conviction of
Sin, Judgment, or Eternity. Some put off the thoughts of their present and
future estate, resolving to shut their eyes and rush into it, when as they can
no longer avoid it. Fear presents it self unto them as the forerunner of
death, but they avoid the encounter, and leave themselves to the power of death
it self. Some please themselves with vain hopes of deliverance, though well
they know not how, nor why they should be partakers of it. But let men fore-go
these helpless shifts, and suffer their own innate light to be excited with
such means of conviction as they do enjoy, and they will quickly find what a
judgment there is made in their own souls concerning death to come, and what
effects it will produce. They will conclude that it is the judgment of God,
that they which commit sin are worthy of death, Romans 1.32. and then that their
own consciences do accuse and condemn them, Romans 2.14, 15. Whence unavoidably
fear, dread, and terror will seize upon them. And then,

3. Fear of death, as poenal, renders the minds of men obnoxious unto bondage:
which what it is we have in part before declared. It is a state of trouble,
which men dislike, but cannot avoid. It is a poenal disquietment arising from
sense of future misery: fain would men quit themselves of it, but are not able;
there is a chain of God in it, not to be broken; men may gall themselves with
it, but cannot remove it: and if God take it from them without granting them a
lawful release and delivery, it is to their farther misery. And this is in some
measure or other the portion of every one that is convinced of sin, before they
are freed by the Gospel. And some have disputed what degrees of it are
necessary before believing. But what is necessary for any one to attain unto,
is his duty. But this bondage can be the duty of no man, because it is
involuntary. It will follow conviction of sin, but it is no man's duty; rather
it is such an effect of the Law as every one is to free himself from, so soon
as he may, in a right way and manner. This estate then befalls men whether they
will or no. And this is so, if we take bondage passively, as it affects the
soul of the sinner; which the Apostle seems to intend, by placing it as an
effect of the fear of death; take it actively, and it is no more than the
sentence of the Law, which works and causes it in the soul; and so all sinners
are inevitably obnoxious unto it. And this estate, as we observed, fills men
with desires after, and puts them upon various attempts for deliverance. Some
desire only present ease, and they commonly withdraw themselves from it, by
giving up themselves wholly unto their hearts lusts, and therein to Atheism,
which God oftentimes in his righteous judgment gives them up unto, knowing that
the day is coming wherein their present woeful temporal relief will be
recompensed with eternal misery. Some look forwards unto what is to come, and
accordingly to their light and assistance variously apply themselves to seek
relief. Some do it by a righteousness of their own, and in the pursuit thereof
also there are ways innumerable, not now to be insisted on; and some do it by
Christ, which how it is by him effected, the Apostle in the next place declares.

Two things, as was showed, are affirmed of the Lord Christ, in consequence
unto the premised supposition of the childrens being partakers of flesh and
blood, and of their obnoxiousness unto death, and to bondage. 1. That of their
natural condition, he himself partook. 2. That from their moral condition, he
delivered them; which that he might do, it was necessary that he should partake
of the other.

1. He himself did likewise partake of the same. The word (...), likewise,
(...).
in like manner, does denote such a similitude as is consistent with a
specifical identity. And therefore Chrysostom from hence urges the Marcionites
and Valentinians, who denied the reality of the Humane Nature of Christ, seeing
that he partook of it in like manner with us, that is, truly and really, even
as we do. But yet the word, by force of its composition, does intimate some
disparity and difference. He took part of humane nature really as we do, and
almost in like manner with us. For there were two differences between his being
partaker of humane nature and ours. First, In that we subsist singly in that
nature: but he took his portion in this nature into subsistence with himself in
the Person of the Son of God. Secondly, This nature in us is attended with many
infirmities, that follow the individual persons that are partakers of it; in
him it was free from them all. And this the Apostle also intimates in the word
(...), changing his expression from that whereby he declared the common
interest of the children in the same nature, which is every way equal and
alike. The whole is, That he took his own Portion, in his own Manner, unto
himself.

And this Observation removes what is hence objected against the Deity of
Christ. Cum Christus (says Schlictingius) hominum mortalium and fragilium dux
and fautor sit, propterea is non Angelus aliquis, multo vero minus ipse Deus
summus qui solus immortalitatem habet, sed homo suo tempore malis, and variis
calamitatibus obnoxious esse debuit. It is true, it appears from hence, that
Christ ought to be a man, subject to sufferings and death, and not an Angel, as
the Apostle farther declares in the next verse; but that he ought not to be God
it does not appear. As God indeed he could not die, but if he who was God had
not taken part of flesh and blood, God could not have redeemed his Church with
his own blood. But this is the perpetual Paralogism of these men. Because
Christ is asserted to have been truly a man, therefore he is not God; which is
to deny the Gospel, and the whole mystery of it.

He proceeds with his exceptions against the application of these words unto
the incarnation of the Lord Christ, the sum whereof is, that the words (...)
denote an universal conformity, or specific identity between Christ and the
children, not only as to the Essence, but also as to all other concernments of
humane nature, or else no benefit could redound unto them from what he did or
suffered. But, 1. The words do not assert any such thing, as has been
declared. 2. It is not true. The children were partakers of humane nature,
either by Creation out of the dust of the earth, as Adam; or by natural
generation. The Lord Christ was conceived of a Virgin by the power of the Holy
Ghost; and yet the benefit redounds unto the children. It is evident then, that
the similitude urged by the Apostle is confined to the substance of flesh and
blood, or the Essence of Humane Nature, and is not to be extended unto the
personal concernments of the one or the other; nor the way whereby they became
partakers of the same nature. Nor is the argument for the Incarnation of Christ
taken merely from the expressions in this verse; but whereas he had before
proved him to be above, and before the Angels, even God over all, and here
intimating his existence antecedent to his participation of flesh and blood,
his Incarnation does necessarily ensue.

The necessity of this Incarnation of Christ, with respect unto the End of it,
has before been declared, evinced and confirmed. We shall now stay only a
little to admire the Love, Grace and Mystery of it. And we see here,

IV. That the Lord Christ out of his inexpressible Love, willingly submitted
himself unto every condition of the Children to be saved by him, and to every
thing in every condition of them, sin only excepted. They being of flesh and
blood which must be attended with many infirmities, and exposed unto all sorts
of Temptations and miseries, he himself would also partake of the same. His
delight was of Old in the Sons of men, Prove. 8.30. and his heart was full of
thoughts of Love toward them; and that alone put him on this Resolution, Gal.
2.20. Rev. 1.5. When God refused Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings as insufficient
to make the Atonement required, and the matter was rolled on his hand alone,
it was a Joy unto him that he had Body prepared, wherein he might discharge his
work, although he knew what he had to do and suffer therein, Psalm. 40.8, 9.
Heb. 10.6, 7, 8, 9. He rejoiced to do the will of God, in taking the body
prepared for him, because the children were partakers of flesh and blood.
Though he was in the form of God, equal unto him, yet that Mind, that Love,
that Affection toward us was in him, that to be like unto us, and thereby to
save us, he emptyed himself, and took on him the form of a servant, our form,
and became like unto us, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. He would be like unto us, that he
might make us like unto himself; he would take our flesh, that he might give
unto his Spirit. He would join himself unto us, and become one flesh with us,
that we might be joined unto him, and become one Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6.17.
And as this was a Fruit of his Eternal antecedent Love, so it is a spring of
consequent Love. When Eve was brought unto Adam after she was taken out of him,
Genesis 2.23. to manifest the ground of that Affection which was to be always
between them, he says of her, this is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh. And by this condescension of Christ, says the Apostle, are we members
of his body and of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. Whence he infers,
that he loves and nourishes his Church, as a man does his own flesh. And how
should this inexpressible Love of Christ constrain us to love him and to live
unto him, 2 Cor. 14, 15. As also to labor to be like unto him, wherein all our
blessedness consists, seeing for that end he was willing to be like unto us,
whence all his troubles and sufferings arose. Here also we see that,

V. It was only in flesh and blood the substance and essence of humane nature,
and not in our personal infirmities that the Lord Christ was made like unto us.
He took to himself the nature of all men, and not the Person of any man. We
have not only humane nature in common, but we have every one particular
Infirmities and weaknesses following that nature, as existing in our sinful
persons. Such are the sicknesses and pains of our bodies from inward
distempers; and the disorder of the Passions of our minds. Of these the Lord
Christ did not partake; It was not needful, it was not possible that he should
do so; not needful, because he could provide for their cure without assuming
them, not possible, for they can have no place in a nature innocent and holy.
And therefore he took our nature; not by an immediate new creation out of
nothing, or of the dust of the earth like Adam; for if so, though he might have
been like unto us, yet he would have been no kin to us, and so could not have
been our Goel to whom the right of Redemption did belong; nor by natural
Generation, which would have rendered our nature in him obnoxious to the sin
and punishment of Adam: but by a miraculous conception of a Virgin, whereby he
had truly our nature, yet not subject on its own account, unto any one of those
evils, whereunto it is liable as propagated from Adam in an ordinary course:
And thus though he was joined unto us in our nature; yet as he was holy,
harmless and undefiled in that nature, he was separate from sinners, Heb. 7.25.
So that although our nature suffered more in his Person, then it was capable of
in the Person of any mere man, yet not being debased by any sinful
imperfection, it was always excellent, beautiful and glorious. And then,

VI. That the Son of God should take part in humane nature with the children,
is the greatest and most admirable effect of Divine Love, Wisdom and Grace. So
our Apostle proposes it, 1 Timothy 3.16. A Mystery which the Angels with all
diligence desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. See John 1.14. Isa. 9.6. Romans
9.5. Atheists scoff at it, deluded Christians deny it, but the Angels adore it,
the Church professes it, Believers find the comfort and benefit of it. The
Heavens indeed declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work, Psalm. 19.1. And the invisible things of God from the creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. In particular man himself is fearfully
and wonderfully made. These works of Gods Power and Providence do greatly
manifest the glory of his Wisdom, Omnipotency and Goodness; and are like the
light which was created the first day at the beginning of all things, as we
have showed. But in this instance of assuming humane nature into Personal
su^sistence with himself, that scattered light is gathered into one Sun, giving
out most glorious beams unto the manifestation of his Infinite Excellencies far
above all other things. And this surely was not done, but for the greatest End;
that can be conceived, and such is the salvation of sinners.

But we must proceed with our Apostle; and he gives the Reason and End of this
wonderful Dispensation. The End is, the Delivery of the children from the
condition before described: And first the means whereby he wrought and brought
about this End is proposed unto us; by death, he was to do it by death.

That by death he might deliver them; that is by his own death. This as it is
placed, as one principal End of his being made partaker of flesh and blood, so
it is also the means of the farther end aimed at, namely, the delivery of the
children out of the condition expressed. Some Translations add, by his own
death, which is evidently understood, though it be not literally in the Text;
the death which he underwent in the nature of man, whereof he was partaker. His
Death was the means of delivering them from death. Some distinguish between
Death in the first place, which Christ underwent, and that death in the close
of the Verse, which the children are said to be in fear of; for this latter
they say is more extensive than the former, as comprizing death eternal also.
But there does not any thing in the Text appear to intimate, that the Captain
of Salvation by death of one kind, should deliver the children from that of
another. Neither will the Apostles discourse well bear such a supposition. For
if he might have freed the children by any way or means, but only by undergoing
that which was due unto them for sin, whence could arise that indispensible
necessity which he pleads for by so many considerations of his being made like
unto them, seeing without the participation of their nature which he urges, he
might have done any other thing for their good and benefit, but only suffer
what was due to them. And if it be said, that without this participation of
their nature he could not dye, which it was necessary that he should do; I
desire to know why, if the death which he was to undergo, was not that death
which they were obnoxious unto, for whom he dyed, how could it be any way more
beneficial unto them, than any thing else which he might have done for them,
although he had not dyed. There is no ground then to pretend such an
Amphibologie in the words as that which some contend for. Now as we observed
before, the Death of Christ is here placed in the midst, as the End of one
thing, and the Means or cause of another; the End of his own Incarnation, and
the means of the Childrens Deliverance; from the first we may see,

VII. That the first and principal End of the Lord Christ's assuming Humane
Nature was not to reign in it, but to suffer and dye in it. He was indeed from
of old designed unto a Kingdom, but he was to suffer, and so to enter into his
glory: Luke 24.26. And he so speaks of his coming into the world, to suffer, to
dye, to bear witness unto the truth, as if that had been the only work that he
was incarnate for. Glory was to follow, a Kingdom to ensue, but suffering and
dying was the principal work he came about. Glory he had with his Father before
the world was, John 17.5. and therein a joint Rule with him over all the works
of his hands. He need not have been made partaker of flesh and blood to have
been a King; for he was the King immortal, invisible, the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, the only Potentate from everlasting. But he could not have dyed
if he had not been made partaker of our Nature. And therefore when the People
would have taken him by force, and have made him a King, he hid himself from
them, John 6.15. But he hid not himself, when they came to take him by force,
and put him to death, but affirmed, that for that hour, or business he came
into the world, John 18.4, 5, 11. And this farther sets forth his Love and
Condescension. He saw the work that was proposed unto him; how he was to be
exposed unto Miseries, Afflictions and Persecutions, and at length to make his
soul an offering for sin; yet because it was all for the Salvation of the
children, he was contented with it, and delighted in it. And how then ought we
to be contented with the Difficulties, Sorrows, Afflictions and Persecutions,
which for his sake we are or may be exposed unto; When he on purpose took our
nature, that for our sakes he might be exposed and subject unto much more than
we are called unto.

There yet remains in these Verses, the Effects of the Death of Christ; that he
might destroy sin and deliver: wherein we must consider (1.) Who it is that had
the Power of Death: (2.) Wherein that Power of his did consist: (3.) How he was
destroyed: (4.) How by the Death of Christ: (5.) What was the Delivery that was
obtained for the children thereby.

1. He that had the Power of Death is described by his name, (...) the Devil;
the great Enemy of our salvation; the great Calumniator, makebate, and false
Accuser; the firebrand of the creation. The Head and Captain of the Apostasy
from God, and of all desertion of the Law of the creation. The old Serpent;
Prince of the Apostate Angels, with all his Associates, who first falsely
accused God unto man, and continues to accuse men falsely unto God; of whom
before.

2. His Power in and over Death is variously apprehended. What the Jews
conceive hereof, we have before declared; and much of the Truth is mixed with
their fables. And the Apostle deals with them upon their Acknowledgement in
general, that he had the Power of death. Properly in what sense, or in what
respect he is said so to have it, Learned Expositors are not agreed. All
consent, (1.) That the Devil has no absolute or Sovereign supreme power over
death. Nor (2.) Any (...), or Authority about it, de jure, in his own Right, or
on Grant, so as to act lawfully and rightly about it according unto his own
Will. Nor (3.) Any judging or determining power as to the Guilt of death
committed unto him; which is peculiar to God the supreme Rector and Judge of
all, Genesis 2.17. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Rev. 1.18.

But wherein this Power of Satan does positively consist, they are not agreed.
Some place it in his Temptations unto Sin, which bind unto death: some in his
Execution of the Sentence of death; he has the Power of an Executioner. There
cannot well be any doubt, but that the whole Interest of Satan in reference
unto Death is intended in this Expression. This Death is that which was
threatened in the beginning, Genesis 2.17. Death poenally to be inflicted in the
way of a Curse, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.20. that is, death consisting in the
Dissolution of soul and body, with every thing tending poenally thereunto, with
the everlasting Destruction of body and soul. And there are sundry things
wherein the (...), or Power of Satan in reference unto this death does consist.
As (1.) He was the means of bringing it into the world. So is the Opinion of
the Jews in this matter expressed in the Book of Wisdom, written as is most
probable, by one of them not long before this Epistle. They tell us, Chap.
1.13. (...); God made not death, it belonged not unto the Original Constitution
of all things; but Chap. 2.24. (...) by the Envy of the Devil-death entered into
the world. And that expression of (...), is retained by the Apostle, Romans 5.12.
Only he lays the End of it on the morally deserving cause, the sin of man; as
here it is laid on the efficiently procuring cause, the Envy of the Devil. And
herein consisted no small part of the Power of Satan with respect unto death.
Being able to introduce sin, he had power to bring in death also, which in the
righteous judgment of God, and by the Sentence of the Law was inseparably
annexed thereunto. And by a parity of Reason, so far as he yet continues to
have Power over sin, deserving death, he has Power over death it self.

2. Sin and Death being thus entered into the world, and all mankind being
guilty of the one, and obnoxious unto the other, Satan became thereby to be
their Princess as being the Prince, or Author of that state and condition
whereinto they are brought. Hence he is called the Prince of this world, John
12.32 and the God of it, 2 Cor. 4.4. Inasmuch as all the world is under the
Guilt of that sin and death which he brought them into.

3. God having passed the sentence of death against sin, it was in the Power of
Satan, to terrify and affright the consciences of men, with the Expectation
and dread of it; so bringing them into Bondage. And many God gives up unto him
to be agitated and terrified as it were at his pleasure. To this end were
Persons excommunicate given up unto Satan to vex, 1 Timothy 1.20. He threatens
them as an Executioner, with the work that he has to do upon them.

4. God has ordained him to be the Executioner of the sentence of Death upon
stubborn sinners unto all Eternity; partly for the Aggravation of their
Punishment, when they shall always see, and without relief bewail their folly
in hearkening unto his Allurements; and partly, to punish himself in his woeful
Employment. And for these several Reasons is Satan said to have the power of
death. And hence it is evident; That,

VIII. All the Power of Satan in the world, over any of the sons of men is
founded in Sin, and the Guilt of Death attending it: Death entered by sin; the
Guilt of sin brought it in: Herewith comes in Satan's interest; without which he
could have no more to do in the Earth, than he has in Heaven. And according as
sin abounds, or is subdued, so his Power is enlarged or straightened. As he is a
Spirit, he is mighty, strong, wise; as sinful, he is malicious, subtle,
ambitious, revengeful, proud: Yet none of all these give him his Power. He that
made him, can cause his sword to pierce unto him, and preserve man though weak
and mortal, from all his force, as a mighty Spirit; and his Attempts, as a
wicked one. And yet these are the things in him that men are generally afraid
of; when yet by them he cannot reach one hair of their heads. But here lies the
foundation of his power; even in sin, which so few regard. Then,

IX. All sinners out of Christ, are under the power of Satan. They belong unto
that Kingdom of Death whereof he is the Prince and Ruler. The whole world lies
(...), in the power of this wicked one. If the Guilt of death be not removed
from any, the Power of the Devil extends unto them. A power indeed it is, that
is regulated. Were it Sovereign or absolute, he would continually devour. But
it is limited unto times, seasons and degrees, by the Will of God, the Judge of
all. But yet great it is, and answerable unto his Titles, the Prince, the God
of the world. And however men may flatter themselves, as the Jews did of old,
that they are free; if they are not freed by an interest in the death of
Christ, they are in bondage unto this beastly Tyrant; and as he works
effectually in them here, he will ragingly inflict vengeance on them hereafter.

3. He is destroyed. To destroy him; The sense and importance of the word here
used, was before declared. It is not applied unto the Nature, Essence or Being
of the Devil, but unto his Power in and over death; As it is elsewhere
declared, John 12.32. Now is the Judgment of this world, now is the Prince of
this world cast out; that which is here called the destroying of the Devil, is
there called, the casting out of the Prince of this world. It is, the casting
him out of his Power, from his Princedom and Rule, and Col. 2.15. Having
spoiled principalities and powers, he made an open show of them, triumphing
over them in his cross; as Conquerors used to do, when they had not slain the
Persons of their Enemies, but deprived them of their Rule, and lead them
Captives. The Destruction then here intended of him that had the power of
death, is the Dissolution, Evacuation, and Removing of that Power which he had
in and over death, with all the effects and consequences of it.

4. The means whereby Satan was thus destroyed is also expressed. It was by
death, by his own death. This of all others, seemed the most unlikely way and
means, but indeed was not only the best, but the only way whereby it might be
accomplished. And the manner how it was done thereby, must be declared and
vindicated. The fourfold power of Satan in reference unto death before
mentioned, was all founded in sin. The Obligation of the sinner unto death, was
that which gave him all his Power. The taking away then of that Obligation,
must needs be the Dissolution of his Power. The foundation being removed, all
that is built upon it, must needs fall to the ground. Now this in reference
unto the Children for whom he dyed, was done in the death of Christ; Virtually
in his death it self, Actually in the Application of it unto them. When the
sinner cease to be obnoxious unto death, the Power of Satan cease also. And
this every one does, that has an interest in the death of Christ: for there is
no condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. And this because
he dyed, he dyed for their sins, took that death upon himself which was due
unto them; which being conquered thereby, and their Obligation thereunto
ceasing, the Power of Satan is therewith dissolved. The first Branch of his
Power consisted in the bringing of sin into the world; This is dissolved by
Christ's taking away the sin of the world, John 1.29. which he did as the Lamb
of God, by the Sacrifice of himself in his death, typified by the Paschal Lamb,
and all other Sacrifices of old. Again, His power consisted in his Rule in the
world, as cast under sin and death: From this he was cast out ( John 12.32.) in
the death of Christ, when contending with him for the continuance of his
Sovereignty, he was conquered, the ground whereon he stood, even the guilt of
sin being taken away from under him, and his Title defeated. And actually
Believers are translated from under his Rule, from the Power of Darkness, into
the Kingdom of Light, and of the Son of God. Nor can he longer make use of
death as poenal, as threatened in the curse of the Law, to terrify and affright
the consciences of men; for being justified by faith in the death of Christ,
they have peace with God, Romans 5.1. Christ making Peace between God and us, by
the blood of his Cross, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. the Weapons of
this part of his Power are wrested out of his hand; seeing Death has no power
to terrify the conscience, but as it expresses the curse of God. And lastly,
his final Execution of the sentence of death upon sinners, is utterly taken out
of his hand by the death of Christ, inasmuch as they for whom he dyed shall
never undergo death poenally. And thus was Satan as to his power over death,
fully destroyed by the death of Christ. And all this depended on Gods
Institution; appointing the satisfactory sufferings of Christ, and accepting
them instead of the sufferings of the children themselves.

The Socinians give us another Exposition of these words; as knowing that
insisted on to be no less destructive of their Error, than the death of Christ,
is of the power of the Devil. The Reason hereof, says Schlictingius, is, quia
per mortem Christus adeptus est supremam potestatem in omnia; qua omnes
inimicos suos quorum caput est diabolus coercet, eorum vires frangit, eosque
tandem penitus abolebit. But if this be so, and the abolishing of the power of
Satan be an act of Sovereign Power, then it was not done by the death of
Christ; nor was there any need that he should partake of flesh and blood for
that purpose, or dye. So that this Exposition contradicts both the express
words of the Apostle, and also, the whole design of his discourse: No
proposition can be more plain than this is; that the Power of Satan was
destroyed by the death of Christ, which in this Interpretation of the words is
denied.

5. And hence it lastly appears, what was the Delivery that was procured for
the children by this dissolution of the Power of Satan. It respects both what
they feared, and what ensued on their fear; that is, Death and Bondage. For the
delivery here intended, is not merely a Consequent of the destruction of Satan,
but has regard unto the things themselves, about which the power of Satan was
exercised. They were obnoxious unto death on the Guilt of sin, as poenal, as
under the Curse, as attended with Hell, or everlasting misery. This he
delivered the children from; by making an Atonement for their sins in his
death, virtually loosing their Obligation thereunto; and procuring for them
Eternal Redemption, as shall afterward be fully declared. Hereon also they are
delivered from the Bondage before described. The fear of death being taken
away, the bondage that ensues thereon vanishes also. And these things, as they
are done virtually and legally in the death of Christ; so they are actually
accomplished in and toward the children, upon the Application of the death of
Christ unto them, when they do believe. And we may now close our consideration
of these Verses with one or two other Observations; as,

X. The death of Christ through the wise and righteous disposal of God, is
victorious, all conquering, and prevalent. The aim of the world was to bring
him unto death; and therein they thought they had done with him. The aim of
Satan was so also; who thereby supposed he should have secured his own Kingdom.
And what could worldly or Satanical Wisdom have imagined otherwise? He that is
slain is conquered. His own followers were ready to think so; We trusted, say
they, that it had been he who should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.21. But he
is dead; and their hopes are with him in the grave. What can be expected from
him, who is taken, slain, crucified? Can he save others, who it seems could not
save himself? Per mortem alterius, stultum est sperare salutem. Is it not a
foolish thing to look for life, by the death of another? This was that which
the Pagans of old reproached the Christians withal; that they believed in one
that was crucified and dyed himself, and what could they expect from him? And
our Apostle tells us, that this death, this Cross, was a stumbling block unto
the Jews, and folly to the Greeks, 1 Cor. 1.18, 23. And so would it have been
in its self, Acts 2.13. Chap. 4.28. had not the Will and Counsel, and Wisdom
and Grace of God been in it. But he ordered things so, that this death of
Christ, should pull out that pin, which kept together the whold fabric of sin
and Satan; that like Sampson, he should in his death, pull down the palace of
Satan about his ears, and that in dying he should conquer and subdue all things
unto himself. All the Angels of Heaven stood looking on, to see what would be
the end of this great trial. Men and Devils were ignorant of the great work
which God had in hand. And whilst they thought they were destroying him, God
was in and by him destroying them and their power. Whilst his heel was
bruised, he brake their head. And this should teach us, to leave all Gods works
unto himself: See John 11.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He can bring light out of darkness,
and meat out of the Eater. He can disappoint his Adversaries of their greatest
hopes, and fairest possibilities, and raise up the hopes of his own out of the
grave. He can make suffering to be saving; death victorious, and heal us by the
stripes of his Son. And in particular, it should stir us up to meditate on this
mysterious work of his Love and Wisdom. We can never enough search into it,
whilst our Enquiry is guided by his Word. New Mysteries, all fountains of
Refreshment and Joy, will continually open themselves unto us, until we come
be to satisfied with the endless fullness of it unto Eternity. Again,

XI. One principal end of the death of Christ was to destroy the power of
Satan. To destroy him that had the power of death. This was promised of old,
Genesis 3.15. He was to break the head of the Serpent. From him sprang all the
miseries which he came to deliver his Elect from, and which could not be
affected without the dissolution of his Power. He was anointed to proclaim
liberty to the Captives, and the opening the Prison to them that were bound,
Isa. 61.1. To this End he was to conquer him, who detained them; which he did
by his death, Col. 2.15. and so lead Captivity Captive, Psalm 68.18. stilling
this enemy and self-avenger, Psalm. 8.3. binding the strong man, Mat. 12. and
dividing the spoil with him, Isa. 53.12. And this he did by the merit of his
blood, and the Atonement he made for sin thereby. This took away the
Obligation of the Law unto death, and disarmed Satan. And moreover, by the
Power of the Eternal Spirit whereby he offered himself unto God, he conquered
and quelled him. Satan laid his claim unto the Person of Christ; but coming to
put it in Execution, he met with that great and hidden Power in him, which he
knew not, and was utterly conquered. And this as it gives us a particular
consideration of the Excellency of our Redemption, wherein Satan our old Enemy,
who first foiled us, who always hates us, and seeks our ruin, is conquered,
spoiled and chained; so it teaches us how to contend with him, by what Weapons
to resist his Temptations, and to repel his Affrightments; even those whereby
he has been already subdued. Faith in the death of Christ, is the only Way and
Means of obtaining a Conquest over him. He will fly at the Sign of the Cross
rightly made.

Verse XVI.
HAving asserted the Incarnation of the Lord Christ, the Captain of our
salvation, and showed the necessity of it, from the Ends which were to be
accomplished by it, and therein given the Reason of his concession, that he was
for a season made less than the Angels: The Apostle proceeds in this Verse, to
confirm what he had taught before, by Testimony of the Scripture, and adds an
especial Amplification of the Grace of God in this whole Dispensation, from the
consideration of the Angels, who were not made partakers of the like Love and
Mercy.

Verse 16. (...).
(...).
(...): The Syriack quite omits (...), and reads only (...), non enim; for he
did not. V.L. nusquam enim. (...), he renders usquam, any where; and on the
consideration of the negative particle, is nusquam, no where; Beza, non enim
utique; as Ours; for verily (he took) not; not reaching the force, or use of
(...); Arias; non enim videlicet; which answers not the intent of this place.
Erasmus fully and properly; non enim sane usquam; for verily not any where.
That is in no place of the Scripture, is any such thing testified unto; which
way of Expression we observed our Apostle to use before, (...).
Chap. 1.5.

(...), Sir. (...), ex Angelis assumpsit, he took not of, or from, among the
Angels; that is, of their nature: V.L. Arias, angelos apprehendit; he does not
take hold of Angels. Beza, Angelos assumpsit: he assumed not, he took not
Angels to himself; (...), for (...), by an Enallage of time: which ours follow,
He took not on him the nature of Angels. But this change of the Tense is
needless. For the Apostle intends not to express what Christ had done, but what
the Scripture says and teaches concerning him in this matter. That no where
affirms that he takes hold of Angels.

The remaining words are generally rendered by Translators according to the
Analogy of these. Sed apprehendit, assumit, assumpsit, semen Abrahae, he laid
hold of, he takes, he took the seed of Abraham: only the Aethiopick reads them;
did he not exalt the seed of Abraham: departing from the sense of the words,
and of the Text.

The constant use of this word (...), in the New Testament is to take hold of.
And so in particular it is elsewhere used in this Epistle, Chap. 8.9. (...), in
the day that I took them by the hand. In other Authors, it is so variously
used, that nothing from thence can be determined, as to its precise
signification, in this, or any other place. The first and proper sense of it is
acknowledged to be, to take hold of, as it were with the hand. And however the
sense may be interpreted, the Word cannot properly be translated any otherwise
than to take. For what some contend, that the Effect or end of taking hold of,
that is, to help, to vindicate into liberty, whence by Castalio, it is rendered
opitulatur, yet it belongs to the design of the place, not the meaning of the
word, which in the first place is to be respected.

Verse 16. For verily not any where does he take Angels, but he takes the seed
of Abraham.
In the words, there is first the Reference that the Apostle makes unto
somewhat else, whereby that which he declares is confirmed. For verily not any
where: that is, that which he denies in the following words, is no where
taught in the Scripture; as Chap. 7.5. For unto which of the Angels said he at
any time; That is, there is no Testimony extant in the Scripture concerning
them to that purpose. So here; no where is it spoken in the Scripture, that
Christ takes Angels. And what is so spoken, he is said to do. And thus also
the Affirmative clause of his Proposition, but he takes the seed of Abraham,
is to be referred to the Scripture. There it is promised, there it is spoken,
and therein it is done by him.

Secondly, That which he asserteth has the nature of a discrete axiom, wherein
the same thing is denied, and affirmed of the disparates expressed, and that
univocally in the same sense; he took not Angels, but he took the seed of
Abraham; And this, we being referred to the Scripture for the proof and
confirmation of, gives light and perfect understanding into the meaning of the
words. For how does Christ in the Scripture take the seed of Abraham, in such a
sense as that therein nothing is spoken of him in reference unto Angels: It is
evident, that it was, in that he was of the Posterity of Abraham according to
the flesh; that he was promised to Abraham, that he should be of his seed, yea,
that he should be his seed; as Gal. 3.6. This was the great Principle, the
great expectation of the Hebrews, that the Messiah should be the seed of
Abraham: this was declared unto them in the Promise, and this accordingly was
accomplished. And he is here said to take the seed of Abraham, because in the
Scripture it is so plainly, so often affirmed that he should so do; when not
one word is any where spoken that he should be an Angel, or take their nature
upon him. And this, as I said, gives us the true meaning of the words. The
Apostle in them confirms what he had before affirmed, concerning his being made
partaker of flesh and blood together with the children. This, says he, the
Scripture declares, wherein it is promised that he should be of the seed of
Abraham, which he therein takes upon him, and which was already accomplished in
his being made partaker of flesh and blood. See Joh. 1.14. Romans 9.5. Gal. 4.4.
chap. 3.16. This then the Apostle teaches us, that the Lord Christ, the Son of
God, according to the Promise, took to himself the nature of man, coming of the
seed of Abraham, that is into personal union with himself; but took not the
nature of Angels, no such thing being spoken of him, nor concerning him any
where in the Scripture. And this exposition of the words will be farther
evidenced and confirmed by our examination of another, which with great
endeavor is advanced in opposition unto it.

Some then take the meaning of this Exposition to be, that the Lord Christ by
his participation of flesh and blood brought help and relief, not unto Angels,
but unto men, the seed of Abraham. And they suppose to this purpose, that (...)
is put for (...), to help, to succor, to relieve, to vindicate into liberty.
Of this mind are Castalio, and all the Socinians; among those of the Roman
Church, Ribera; Estius also, and A Lapide speak doubtfully in the case. Of
Protestants, Camero, and Grotius, who affirms moreover, that Chrysostom and the
Greek Scholiasts so interpret the place and words: which I should have
marvelled at, had I not long before observed him greatly to fail or mistake in
many of his Quotations. Chrysostom, whom he names in particular, expressly
refers this whole verse unto the Lord Christ's Assumption of the nature of
man, and not of the nature of Angels. The same also is insisted on by
Theophylact and Oecumenius, without any intimation of the sense that Grotius
would impose upon them.

The Socinians embrace and endeavor to confirm this second Exposition of the
words, and it is their concernment so to do. For if the words express that the
Lord Christ assumed humane nature, which necessarily infers his prae-existence
in another nature, their persuasion about the Person of Christ is utterly
overthrown. Their exceptions in their controversial writings unto this place
have been elsewhere considered. Those of Eniedinus on this Text, are answered
by Paraeus, those of Castalio by Beza; and the objections of some others by
Gomarus. We shall in the first place consider what is proposed for the
confirmation of their sense, by Schlictingius or Crellius; and then the
exception of a very learned Expositor unto the sense before laid down and
confirmed. And Schlictingius first argues from the Context, Praeter ipsa verba
(says he) quae hunc sensum nullo modo patiuntur ut postea dicemus, contextus
and ratiocinatio authoris id repudiat; qui pro ratione and argumento id sumere
non potuit debuitve, quod sibi hoc ipso argumento and ratione probandum
sumsisset. De eo enim erat quaestio, cur Christus qui nunc ad tantam majestatem
and gloriam est evectus, non angelicam sed humanam, morti and variis
calamitatibus obnoxiam habuerit naturam? bujus vero rei, quo pacto ratio
redderetur, per id quod non angelicam sed humanam naturam assumpserit; cum
istius ipsius rei, quae in hac quaestione continetur, nempe quod Christus homo
fuit natus, nunc causa ratioque quaeratur. At vero si haec verba, de juvandis
non Angelis, sed hominibus, deque open iis ferenda intelligamus, pulcherrime
omnia cohaerent; nempe Christum hominem mortalem fuisse, non angelum aliquem,
quod non angelis sed hominibus juvandis, servandisque fuerit destinatus. But
the foundation of this Exposition of the Context is a mistake, which his own
preceding discourse might have relieved him from. For there is no such question
proposed as here is imagined, nor does he in his following Exposition suppose
it. The Apostle does not once propose this unto confirmation, that it behoved
the Lord Christ to be a man and not an Angel. But having proved at large
before, that in Nature and Authority he was above the Angels, he grants, verse
8. that he was for a little while made lower than they; and gives at large the
reason of the necessity of that dispensation, taken from the work which God had
designed him unto, which being to bring many sons unto glory, he shows and
proves by sundry reasons, that it could not be accomplished without his death
and suffering; for which end it was indispensibly necessary that he should be
made partaker of flesh and blood. And this he confirms farther by referring the
Hebrews unto the Scripture, and in especial unto the great Promise of the
Messiah made unto Abraham, that the Messiah was to be his seed; the love and
grace whereof he amplifies by an intimation that he was not to partake of the
Angelical nature. That supposition therefore which is the foundation of this
Exposition, namely that the Apostle had before designed to prove that the
Messiah ought to partake of humane nature, and not of Angelical, which is
nothing to his purpose, is a surmise suited only to the present occasion.
Wherefore Felbinger in his Demonstrationes Evangelica takes another course, and
affirms that these words contain the end of what was before asserted, verse 14,
15. namely about Christ's participation of flesh and blood, which was not to
help Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and to take them into grace and favor.
But these things are both of them expressly declared in those verses, especially
verse 15. where it is directly affirmed, that his design in his Incarnation and
Death was to destroy the devil, and to free and save the children: And to what
end should these things be here again repeated, and that in words and terms far
more obscure and ambiguous than those wherein it was before taught and
declared? For by Angels they understand evil Angels; and there could be no
cause why the Apostle should say in this Verse, that he did not assist or
relieve them, when he had declared in the words immediately foregoing, that he
was born and died that he might destroy them. Neither is it comely to say, that
the end why Christ destroyed the devil was, that he might not help him; or the
end why he saved the children was, that he might assist them. Besides the
introduction of this assertion, (...), will not allow, that here any end is
intimated of what was before expressed, there being no insinuation of any final
cause in them.

The Context therefore, not answering their occasion, they betake themselves to
the words, Verbum (...) (says he) significat proprie, manu aliquem
apprehendere; sive ut illum aliquo ducas, sive ut sustentes; hinc ad
opitulationem significandum commode transfertur; quos enim adjutos volumus ne
cadant, vel sub onere aliquo succumbant, aut si ceciderint erectos cupimus, iis
manum injicere solemus, quo sensu Ecclesiastic. 4. v. 12. De sapientia dictum
est, (...), hoc est, opitulatur quaerentibus se, eadem est significatio verbi
(...), quod qui aliquem sublevatum velint illi (...) adverso manum porrigere
solent.

It is acknowledged that (...) does frequently signify as here is alleged,
namely to help and assist, as it were by putting forth the hand for to give
relief. But if that were intended by the Apostle in this place, what reason can
be assigned why he should wave the use of a word proper unto his purpose, and
frequently so applied by himself in other places, and make use of another,
which signifying no such thing, nor any where used by him in that sense, must
needs obscure his meaning, and render it ambiguous? Whereas therefore (...)
signifies to help and relieve, and is constantly used by our Apostle in that
sense, it being not used or applied by him in this place to express his
intention, but (...), which signifies no such thing, nor is ever used by him to
that purpose, the sense contended for of help and relief is plainly excluded.
The place of Ecclesiasticus, and that alone, is referred unto by all that
embrace this Exposition. But what if the word be abused in that place by that
Writer? must that give a rule unto its interpretation in all other Writers
where it is properly used? But yet neither is the word used there for to help
and relieve, but to take and receive; Wisdom, suscipit, receives, or takes
unto it self, suo more, those that seek it; which is the sense of the word we
plead for, and so is it rendered by Translators. So the Lord Christ, suo modo,
took to himself the seed of Abraham, by uniting it unto his person as he was
the Son of God. In the very entrance also of his discourse this Author
acknowledges that (...) does not directly or properly signify to help or to
relieve, but signifying to take hold of, is transferred unto that use and
sense. I ask, where? by whom? in what Author? If he says in this place by the
Apostle, that will not prove it; and where any will plead for the metaphorical
use of a word, they must either prove that the sense of the place where it is
used inforces that acceptance of it, or at least that in like cases in other
places it is so used, neither of which are here pretended.

But he proceeds. Quod hic dicit, (...), v. 18. per (...), effert; de eadem
enim re u^robique agitur, and rationem consequentiae argumenti, quod in hoc
versiculo proponit illio explicat. This is but imagined, the contrary is
evident unto every one, upon the first view of the Context. Here the Apostle
discourses the Reason of the Humiliation of Christ, and his taking flesh;
there the benefit of his Priestly Office unto them that do believe.

(...) is therefore properly assumo, accipio, to take unto, or to take upon;
And the Apostle teaches us by it, that the Lord Christ took unto him, and took
on him our Humane Nature of the seed of Abraham.

That the Genuine sense of the place may be yet more fully vindicated, I shall
farther consider the exceptions of a very learned man unto our Interpretation
of the words, and his Answers unto the Reasons whereby it is confirmed.

First, he says, that (...), being in the present tense, signifies a continued
action, such as Christ's helping of us is; but his assumption of humane nature
was a momentaneous action, which being past long before, the Apostle would not
express it as a thing present. It is generally answered unto this exception,
that an enallage is to be allowed, and that (...) is put for (...), which is
usual in the Scripture: So Joh. 1.31. chap. 21.13. But yet there is no just
necessity of supposing it in this place. The Apostle in his usual manner
disputing with the Hebrews on the principles wherein they had been instructed
from the Old Testament, minds them that there is nothing said therein of his
taking upon him the nature of Angels, but only of the seed of Abraham. So that,
he takes, is, he does so in the Scripture, that affirms him so to do; and in
respect hereunto the expression in the present tense is proper to his purpose.
This way of arguing and manner of expression we have manifested on chap. 1.5.

Again he adds; this expression, He took not on him Angels, for, the nature of
Angels, is hard and uncouth; as it would be in the affirmative to say,
assumpsit homines, or hominem; he took men, or a man; which we say not,
although we do that he took humane nature. But the reason of this phrase of
speech is evident. Having before affirmed that he was partaker (...), of flesh
and blood, whereby the nature of man is expressed, repeating here again the
same assertion with respect unto the Promise, and a negation of the same thing
in reference unto Angels, because their nature consists not of flesh and
blood, he expresses it indefinitely, and in the concrete; he took not them,
that is, not that in and of them, which answers unto flesh and blood in the
children, that is, their nature. So that there is no need to assert, as he
supposes some may do, that (...), ought to be repeated (...), and referred
unto those bodies which the Angels assumed for a season in their Apparitions
under the Old Testament; there being only an Elipsis easy to be supplied of
that in them which answers unto flesh and blood in the children.

Thirdly, The Apostle, he says, shows, verse 17. that Christ ought in all
things to be made like unto us, by this reason, Quod non assumpsit Angelos, sed
semen Abrabae. But if this be to take on him the nature of man, he comes to
prove the same thing by the same. For to be made like unto us, and to assume
humane nature, differ only in words, and not really, or indeed. But, take (...)
to help or relieve, and all things agree. For because he came to help us and
not Angels, it became him to be made like unto us. But herein lies a double
mistake: First, in the scope and argument of the Apostle; for those words in
the beginning of the 17 verse are not an Inference or Conclusion from what is
asserted in this verse, but an Affirmation of the necessity of what is there
asserted, from that which follows in the same verse, that he might be a
faithful High Priest. Secondly, those words like unto us, do not intend his
conformity unto us in his participation of humane nature, which he had on other
reasons before confirmed, but in the sufferings and temptations which there he
insists upon.

Fourthly, The seed of Abraham, he says, is a collective expression, and
denotes many, at least it must denote the person of some man, which Christ did
not assume. And therefore it is the spiritual seed of Abraham that is intended,
that is, believers. And the Apostle so calls them, because the Hebrews were
well pleased with the mention of that privilege. But this will not abide the
examination. The great promise of old unto Abraham was, that in his seed all
the nations of the earth should be blessed. The intendment of that Promise was,
that the Messiah should be his seed, of his posterity. That by this seed one
individual was intended, our Apostle declares, Gal. 3.16. As Christ in like
manner is said to be of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. Of
this Promise the Apostle minds the Hebrews. So that his taking on him the seed
of Abraham, is not the assuming of many, nor of the person of any one of them,
but merely his being made of the seed of Abraham according to the Promise. And
to bend these words unto any other sense, than the accomplishment of the
Promise made to Abraham, that Christ should be of his seed, is plainly to
pervert them. And this is all of weight that I can meet withal, which is
objected unto our interpretation of this place, which being removed, it is
further established.

Lastly, in the disparate removed, by Angels, the good Angels, not fallen
Angels, are principally regarded. Of fallen Angels he had newly spoken under
the collective expression, the devil, who had the power of death. Norare, it
may be, the devils any where called absolutely by the name of Angels; but they
are termed either evil Angels, or Angels that sinned, that left their
habitation, that are to be judged, the devils Angels; or have some or other
peculiar Adjunct whereby they are marked out and distinguished. Now it cannot
be that this word (...), if it be interpreted to help, assist, or relieve, can
in any sense be applied unto the Angels, that must be intended if any. For the
word must denote either any help, assistance, or relief in general, or that
especial help and assistance which is given by Christ in the work of
Reconciliation and Redemption. If the first be intended, I much question the
truth of the assertion, seeing the Angels owe their establishment in grace unto
Christ, and their advancement in glory, Ephesians. 1.10. If it be to be taken in
the latter sense as is pretended, then the nature of the discrete Axiom here
used by the Apostle requires, that there be the same need of the help intimated
in both the disparates, which is denied as unto the one, and affirmed as unto
the other. But now the Angels, that is the good Angels, had no need of the help
of Redemption and Reconciliation unto God, or of being freed from death, or the
fear of it, which they were never obnoxious unto. And what remains for the
clearing of the mind of the Apostle, will appear yet farther in the ensuing
Observations from the words.

I. The Lord Jesus Christ is truly God and Man in one Person; and this is fully
manifested in these words. For, first, there is supposed in them his
prae-existence in another Nature, than that which he is said here to assume. He
was before, he subsisted before, or he could not have taken on him what he had
not. This was his Divine Nature, as the like is intimated, where he is said to
be made flesh, Joh. 1.14. to be made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. to be manifested in
the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. to take on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.8, 9. as
here, he took the seed of Abraham; he was before he did so; that is the Son,
the Word of God, the Son of God, as in the places mentioned, eternally
prae-existing unto this his Incarnation. For the subject of this Proposition,
he took on him, etc. denotes a person prae-existing unto the act of taking here
ascribed unto him, which was no other than the Son of God. 2. He assumed, he
took to himself another nature, of the seed of Abraham according unto the
promise; so continuing what he was, he became what he was not. For, 3. He took
this to be his own nature; he so took it, as himself to become truly the seed
of Abraham, to whom, and concerning whom, the promise was given, Gal. 3.16. and
was himself made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. and as
concerning the flesh came of the fathers, Romans 9.5. and so was the Son of David
the Son of Abraham, Matthew. 1.1. And this could no otherwise be done, but, 4. by
taking that Nature into Personal Subsistence with himself, in the Hypostasis of
the Son of God; the nature he assumed could no otherwise become his. For if he
had by any ways or means taken the person of a man to be united unto him, in
the strictest union that two persons are capable of, a Divine and an Humane,
the nature had still been the nature of that other person and not his own. But
he took it to be his own nature, which it could no ways be but by personal
union, causing it to subsist in his own person. And he is therefore a true and
perfect Man; for no more is required to make a complete and perfect man, but
the entire nature of man subsisting. And this is in Christ, as a man, the
Humane nature having a subsistence communicated unto it by the Son of God. And
therefore, 6. This is done without a multiplication of persons in him. For the
Humane Nature can have no personality of its own, because it was taken to be
the nature of another person, who was prae-existent unto it, and by assuming of
it, prevented its proper personality. Neither, 7. did hence any mixture or
confusion of natures ensue, or of the essential properties of them; for he took
the seed of Abraham to be his Humane Nature, which if mixed with the Divine, it
could not be. And this he has done, 8. inseparably and for ever. Which things
are handled at large elsewhere.

II. The Redemption of Mankind by the taking of our nature, was a work of mere
Sovereign grace. He took the seed of Abraham; he took not the nature of Angels.
And for what cause or reason? Can any be assigned but the Sovereign Grace,
Pleasure, and Love of God? nor does the Scripture any where assign any other.
And this will the better appear, if we consider,

First, That for a sinning nature to be saved, it was indispensibly necessary
that it should be assumed. The nature of Angels being not taken, those that
sinned in that nature, must perish for ever; and they that fancy a possibility
of saving sinners any other way but by satisfaction made in the nature that had
sinned, seem not to have considered aright the nature of sin, and the Justice
of God. Had any other way been possible, why does the perishing of Angels so
inevitably follow the non-assumption of their nature? This way alone then could
it be wrought.

Secondly, That we were carrying away all humane nature into endless
destruction; for so it is intimated, whence Christ's assumption of it is
expressed by his putting forth his hand and taking hold of it, to stop it in
its course of apostasy and ruin. Of Angels only some individual persons fell
from God; but our whole nature, in every one to whom it was communicated from
and by Adam was running headlong to destruction. In it self there could be no
relief, nor any thing to commend it unto God.

Here Sovereign Grace interposeth. The love of God to mankind, Tit. 3.4. As to
the Angels, he spared them not, 2 Pet. 2.4. He spared not them, and spared not
his Son for us, Romans 8.32. And if we consider rightly what the Scripture
informs us of the number and dignity of the Angels that sinned, of their nature
and ability to accomplish the will of God, and compare therewith our own
vileness and low condition, we may have matter of eternal admiration suggested
unto us. And there was infinite Wisdom as well as Sovereign Grace in this
dispensation; sundry branches whereof the Apostle afterward holds out unto us.

Verse XVII, XVIII.
HAving declared the general Reasons why the Son or Messiah was for a little
while to be made lower than the Angels, in his Incarnation and sufferings, and
showed the ends thereof; the Apostle proceeds to declare other especial ends of
this divine Dispensation, and therein makes way unto what he had to instruct
the Hebrews in, about the Priestly Office of Christ, which was the principal
ground and foundation of what he intended more fully afterward to discourse
with them about, and to inform them in.

Verse 17, 18. (...).
(...); V. unde debuit, whence he ought. So Beza: Sir. (...), (...).
for which cause, or wherefore, it was just, meet, or equal. Others, wherefore
it was due, it was convenient. Wherefore it behoved him; so ours. (...) joined
with an Infinitive Mood, as here it is, signifies commonly oportet me, or
necesse est, or debeo; I ought, it behooves me, it is necessary for me; and
denotes more than a mere Congruency, Convenience, or Expediency; even such a
kind of necessity as arises from that, which in it self is just and equal;
which the Syriack expresses; of the same importance with (...), verse 10.

(...), per omnia; Sir. (...), in omni re, in everything. (...).
Arab. In cunctis little conditionibus, in all conditions; that is, every
condition and state of life: ours, in all things, leaving the words where they
are placed in the Original, Wherefore in all things it behoved him; whereas a
little transposition of them would more clear up the sense; Wherefore it
behoved him to be made like unto his brethren in all things. The Aethiopick
quite omits the words here, and places them after (...), merciful in all
things.

(...), V. Fratribus simulari: Eras. similis reddi: Beza, similis fieri; (...)
as ours, to be made like. The Article prefixed to (...) restrains the name
Brethren unto those whom he had before discoursed of under the names of
children, disciples, sanctified ones.

(...) ut misericors fieret (or esset) pontifex: so. V. Eras. Ben. The Syriack
somewhat otherwise, (...).
(...), that he might be merciful, and a great Priest, or chief Priest; (...),
faithful in the things of God; so making his mercifulness an attribute of his
Person absolutely; and faithfulness only to respect him as an High Priest. So
also the Arabic and Aethiopick. And the word whereby (...), is rendered,
signifies tenderly merciful; with that kind of mercy which is called bowels of
compassion, from (...). And it may be here observed, that that Interpreter
throughout the Epistle renders (...) by (...), Rab Comara; though that word be
always used in an ill sense in the Old Testament. Three times it occurs
therein, 1 Kings 23.5. where we render it Idolatrous Priests, Zeph. 1.4. the
name Chemarims is retained, Hos. 10.5. we express it by Priests, but place
Chemarinus in the Margen. For it principally denoted the Priests of Baal and
Moloch, and their blackness (as the word is rendered, Job 3.5.) not from the
garments they wore, but from the color they contracted in their diabolical
Sacrifices in the fire. Hence where ever the word (...), is applied unto a
Priest of a false God, or one engaged in false Worship the Targumists
constantly render it by (...), see Judge. 17.5. Chap. 18.4.30. But this
Translator respected not so much the use, as the original and extraction of the
word: for from (...), in Niphal (...), is to wax hot, and to be moved with
internal heat, whence it is taken to signify Compassion and pity, the same
with (...); Hence Deuteronomy. 13.17. (...) and shall give thee tender mercy, bowels
of compassion, is rendered by Ben. Vzziel, (...), and shall wax but toward
you, with compassion, and shall have compassion on you. He shall be warmed and
moved with compassion toward you. In like manner is the word used, Psalm
77.10. With respect unto this heat of Affections and abundant Compassion, the
word may well be applied unto the Lord Christ our High Priest.

(...).
(...): V. ad Deum. Pontifex ad Deum: an High Priest toward God. Very
defectively. Eras. in his quae apud Deum forent agenda, in the things that were
to be done before God: so also Beza, noting forent agenda, as a supplement unto
the Text. So Vatablus and others. Sir. (...), in the things of God. The Apostle
explains his own meaning, Chap. 5.1. where he tells us, that every High Priest,
(...), is set over the things appertaining unto God; that he may offer
Sacrifice. In things appertaing unto God: what he has to do with God in their
behalf for whom he ministers in his Office before him. Arab. res nostras apud
Deum peragens.

(...).
(...), V. ut repropitiaret delicta populi: aiming to express the sense of the
Original, it falls upon a barbarous word, yielding no tolerable sense; though
that which seems to be intended in it, is to make Propitiation or Atonement.
Ar. Vatab. Eras. Bez. ad expiandum: Sir. (...), expians super peccata populi;
so the word is constantly translated, though it rather signifies to show mercy
or pity. (...), is commonly used actively, for propitium facio, or propitio, to
please, appease, atone, turn away anger; and when it is taken in a Passive or
Neuter sense, it signifies to be merciful, appeased, reconciled, as Luke 18.13.
(...), God be merciful unto me a sinner. I much doubt whether any instance can
be given of its signifying to expiate, though because of the construction of it
in this place, it be generally so rendered. If it be taken in its first proper
sense, then sin cannot be the next object of the Act denoted by it. Ours, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people; of the sense whereof we shall
deal afterward at large.

(...).
(...), In eo enim, V. for in that: Eras. nam ex hoc; for from hence: Beza, nam
ex eo; Vat. ex eo; ob id: ours, for in that; that is, inasmuch; not, in that
thing wherein he was tempted, but, whereas, inasmuch, seeing that; Arab. for
from those things which happened unto him when he was tempted.

(...).
(...), V. passus est ipse tentatus, in which himself suffered and was tempted.
(Et) Erasmus tell us is not in many ancient Copies; Ar. in quo passus est ipse
tentatus: in that he suffered himself being tempted: Bez. ex eo quod perpessus
ipse fuit, quum est tentatus; for that which he suffered when he was tempted.
But the words rather signify his sufferings by being tempted, or from his
temptations, than his suffering on other accounts when he was tempted. Sir. for
in that he suffered and was tempted; as the Vul. Eras. quod ipsi contigit
tentatum esse; that it befell him to be tempted. Laying the whole upon
Temptation, because in the latter clause mention is made of them that are
tempted, without any addition of sufferings. It is not certain whether (...),
be from (...), or from (...), from whose active (...), the middle signification
in (...), is found, and (...) by an usual Pleonasme of Theta; and if so, not
his suffering, but his laboring under temptation is intended. If, as it is
commonly thought, it be from (...), I confess that word is sometimes used as it
is here rendered by Erasmus, accidit, contigit, usu venit, it happened, it
befell; but it is but rarely, and that not without regard unto suffering. But
it being evident that the suffering of Christ is here intended, his Temptation
being mentioned only as an instance of that whereby he suffered, that is, not
to be passed over, and the sense carried on unto his Temptation only. He
suffered being tempted. (...), (...).
is in it self but to make a trial or Experiment. But this being done from
various Principles by sundry Means, for different Ends, and upon diverse
Subjects, there is a great difference in such trials; and great variety in the
Nature of Temptations. How the Lord Christ was tempted, by whom, and of what
sort his Temptations were, we shall consider afterward. The Aethiop. reads,
when he tempted him, and afflicted him; that is, God.

(...). V. potens est and eis qui tentantur auxiliari. (and) again is added,
(...).
but retained by Beza, as not copulative, but emphatical; potest and eis qui
tentanur succurrere; he can, or is able to help, relieve, succor. (...), is
properly (...), to run in to the cry of any one, that is, to help and relieve
him in his distress, to come speedily, and as it were in have, to the help of
him that cries out in danger. So Thucidides; (...), These came in to the help
of the Athenians; (in their distress.) And this is the direct sense of the word
in this place, as it respects them that are distressed under the power of
Temptation; crying out for help. And it is plainly expressed in the Latin
succurrere, and our succor taken from thence. So Chrysostom interprets these
words, (...). he gives out his hand unto them with all readiness.

Verse 17, 18. Wherefore (hence) it behoved him to (it was meet he should) be
made like unto his (the) brethren in all things, (every manner of way) that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in the things of (pertaining
unto) God, to make reconcilation for the sins of the people. For in that
(whereas) he has suffered being (when he was) tempted, he is able to succor,
(come in to the help of) them that are tempted.
In these two Verses, the Apostle illustrates what he had taught before; and
confirms what he had asserted concerning the Sons participation of flesh and
blood, in like manner with the children, from one especial End thereof. And
this End is, his being an High Priest, which that the Messiah was to be, both
the Hebrews granted, and he himself intended more largely afterward to
demonstrate. Moreover, he was to be such an High Priest, as was settled and
suited for the discharge of his Office, unto the benefit of them, for whose
good he was to minister therein. This the Wisdom of God, and the Nature of the
thing it self does require. Now they being persons obnoxious unto Temptations
and sufferings of all sorts, he must in an especial manner be able, to help,
relieve and save such Persons. And all this the Apostle declares in these
Verses; in the opening whereof we may consider,

1. The importance of the illative expression in the entrance; wherefore, or
hence.

2. The necessity intimated of what is here assigned to the Messiah; it
behooved him, or it was meet that he should.

3. What the Apostle repeats and reasserts; namely, that he was in all things,
or every manner of way, to be made like unto his brethren; or,

4. The general End of this his necessary conformity unto the brethren; that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest.

5. The especial work and end of that Office, which he was so prepared for; in
the things of God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the people.

6. A farther enforcement of the necessity of the foregoing assertion; taken
from a double consideration.

1. Of what he did, or what befell him, in the condition wherein he was made
like unto the Brethren: he suffered being tempted, or when he was tempted.

2. Of the blessed Effect and consequence thereof, both in his own preparation
unto the farther discharge of his Office, and the benefit of them whom he
ministers in it for, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

First, There is the Illation intimated in the word (...), wherefore; Now this
may respect either what had been before discoursed; or what is farther insisted
on in the words ensuing. In the first way, the Apostle would seem to infer the
necessity of his being made like unto his brethren in all things, from what he
had before proved of his participation of humane nature; but this seems not to
be the meaning of the word. That expression to be made like unto his brethren
in all things, is only a Recapitulation of what the Apostle had before taught
concerning his incarnation and sufferings; and here, his design is to show the
Reason or End thereof; namely, that he might be an High Priest, and discharge
his office unto the benefit of the people. He gives therefore an account of
what he had delivered, and declares the End of it, wherefore, or therefore
ought he thus to be made like his brethren, that he might be a merciful High
Priest. And thus did Chrysostom understand the connection of these words,
(...), says he, (...); Therefore was he made man, that he might be a Sacrifice
able to purge our sins.

Secondly, The Necessity of the matter of the Apostles assertion, is expressed
in the word (...), He ought; it must be so; it could not be otherwise, on
supposition that he was to be an High Priest. God having designed him unto that
Office, and the work thereof, it was indispensibly necessary for him to be made
like unto his brethren in all things.

Thirdly, That which the Apostle thus asserts, is, his being made like unto his
brethren in all things. The Proposition is of the nature of them that are
(...); universal, but not universally to be understood. For that expression
(...), is capable of sundry limitations. As First, It respects only all those
things which are necessary unto the End assigned; and Secondly, In them also,
there may be a great difference. The things it respects are Nature with the
essential properties thereof; attended with temptations and sufferings. But
whereas the Brethren are sinners, he was not made like unto them in sin; which
Exception the Apostle elsewhere puts in unto this assertion, Chap. 4.15. For
this would have been so far from conducing unto the End aimed at, that it would
have been utterly destructive thereof. In the things also wherein he was made
like unto them, still the Regulation from the End is to be carried along with
us. That therein which was needful thereunto, this Assimulation or conformity
extends unto; that which was otherwise it supposes not. And as the first part
of this double limitation is made evident in the instance of sin, so the truth
and necessity of the latter will appear in the consideration of the things
wherein this Conformity does consist. As,

First, He was made like unto them in the Essence of humane nature; a Rational
Spiritual Soul, and a mortal body, quickened by its Union therewithal. This it
was necessary he should be like the Brethren in; and not have a fantastical
Body, or a body animated by the Deity as some fancied of old. But that he
should take this nature upon him by natural Generation after the manner of the
Brethren, this was not necessary; yea, so to have done, would not have
farthered the End of his Priesthood, but have enervated the Efficacy of it, and
have rendered him incapable of being such a Priest as he was to be. For whereas
the Original contagion of sin is derived by natural procreation, had he been by
that means made partaker of humane nature, how could he have been holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; as it became our High Priest to be,
Chap. 7.26. Again, it was not necessary that this Humane Nature should have its
individuation from its self, and a particular subsistence in and by its self;
yea, this also would have overthrown his Priesthood. For whereas the efficacy
thereof depends on the excellency of the Divine Nature, this could not have
given its influence thereunto, had not the Humane Nature been taken into the
same personal subsistence with its self. Only, as we said, that he should have
an Humane Nature, truly and really as the Brethren, and therein be like unto
them, this was necessary, that he might be an offering Priest: and have of his
own to offer unto God.

Secondly, It was also necessary, that in and with his Humane Nature he should
take upon him all the Properties and Affections of it, that so he might be made
like unto the Brethren. He was not to have an ubiquatarian body, a body
commensurate to the Deity, that is immense, and consequently no true body at
all. Nor was his soul to be freed from the Affections which are connatural to
an humane rational soul; as Love, Joy, Fear, Sorrow, Shame and the like; nor
was his Body to be free from being obnoxious unto Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Pain,
Death it self. But now whereas these things in the Brethren are attended with
irregular perturbations for the most part; and whereas all the individuals of
them have their proper infirmities in their own Persons, partly, by inordinate
inclinations from their Tempers and Complexions, partly, in Weaknesses and
Sicknesses, proceeding either from their Original Constitutions, or other
following inordinacies, it was no way needful, that in any of these he should
be made like unto the Brethren; yea, a Conformity unto them therein would have
absolutely impeded the work he had to do.

Thirdly, He was also like unto us in Temptations, for the Reason which the
Apostle gives in the last Verse; but herein also some difference may be
observed between him and us. For the most of our Temptations arise from within
us, from our own Unbelief and Lusts. Again, in those that are from without,
there is somewhat in us to take part with them, which always makes us fail in
our duty of resistance, and ofttimes leads to farther miscarriages. But from
these things he was absolutely free. For as he had no inward disposition or
inclination unto the least evil, being perfect in all Graces, and all their
Operations at all times: So when the Prince of this world came unto him, he had
no part in him, nothing to close with his suggestions, or to entertain his
terrors.

Fourthly, His Sufferings were of the same kind, with them that the Brethren
underwent, or ought so to have done; yet they had far different Effects on him,
from what they would have had on them. For whereas he was perfectly innocent,
and perfectly righteous, no way deserving them in his own Person, he was free
from all impressions of those sinful consequents which attend the utmost
sufferings under the Curse of the Law by sinners themselves.

Thus the (...), the likeness in all here asserted, is capable of a double
limitation; the first concerning some things themselves, as sin; the other, the
mode or manner of the things wherein the conformity does really consist.

Now thus to be made like unto them it became him; it was meet, just and
necessary, that God should make him so, because of the Office, Duty and
Employment that he had assigned him unto; which as the End hereof, is nextly to
be enquired after.

Fourthly, The general End of his Conformity unto the Brethren, is that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest. Two things are comprised herein:
First, The Office that he was designed unto; He was to be an High Priest;
Secondly, His Qualifications for that Office: He was to be merciful and
faithful. His conformity unto the Brethren as we have seen, consisted in two
things: First His Participation of their nature: Secondly, His Copartnership
with them in their condition of suffering and temptation. The first of these
was necessary unto his Office; the latter unto his Qualifications. He was made
man, that he might be an High Priest; he suffered being tempted, that he might
be merciful and faithful. There was no more required that he might be an High
Priest, but that he should partake of our nature; but that he might be merciful
and faithful, with that kind of mercy and faithfulness which the Brethren stood
in need of, it was moreover required, that he should suffer and be tempted;
which things must be distinctly considered.

First, That he might be an High Priest, it was necessary that he should be
partaker of the Nature of them, for whom he was to administer in the things of
God. So the Apostle informs us, Chap. 5.1. Every High Priest for men, must be
taken from among men. This is not work for an Angel; nor for God himself as
such. And therefore although the benefits of the Priesthood of Christ, were
communicated unto all Believers from the foundation of the world, by virtue of
the compact and agreement between the Father and him, for the undertaking and
execution of that Office at the time appointed; yet he was not actually, nor
could be an High Priest, until he was clothed with flesh, and made partaker
of the nature of the children. The duty which as an High Priest he had perform,
namely, to offer Gifts and Sacrifices unto God, Chap. 8.3. with the especial
nature of that great Sacrifice that he was to offer, which was himself, his
Body and Soul prepared and given him for that purpose, Chap. 10.10. require and
make necessary this Conformity. For this cause then was he made like unto the
Brethren in a Participation of Humane Nature.

Secondly, That in this nature he should be perfectly Holy, and exactly
discharge his duty according unto the Mind and Will of God, was all that was
required of him as to his being an High Priest. But this was not all that the
estate and condition of the Brethren required. Their sorrows, tenderness,
weakness, miseries, disconsolations are such, that if there be not a
contemperation of his sublime Holiness, and absolute perfection in fulfilling
of all Righteousness, with some Qualifications enclining him to Condescension,
Pity, Compassion, and tender sense of their condition, what ever might be the
issue of their safety in the life to come, their Comforts in this life would be
in continual hazard. For this cause therefore was he made like unto them in the
infirmities of their nature, their Temptations and Sufferings, from whence all
their disconsolations and sorrows do arise. Hence was the necessity of the
Qualifications for his Office which by his sufferings and Temptations he was
furnished withal; and they are two:

First, Mercifulness; he was (...), merciful, tenderly compassionate, as the
Syriack Version renders the word; misericors; one that lays all the miseries
of his people to heart, so caring for them, to relieve them. Mercy in God is
but a naked simple Apprehension of misery, made Effective by an act of his holy
Will to relieve. Mercy in Christ is a compassion, a condolency, and has a
moving of pity and sorrow joined with it. And this was in the Humane Nature of
Christ a Grace of the Spirit in all perfection. Now it being such a Virtue, as
in the operation of it, deeply affects the whole soul and body also, and being
incomparably more excellent in Christ, than in all the Sons of men, it must
needs produce the same effects in him, wherewith in others in lesser degrees it
is attended. Thus we find him at all times full of this Compassion and pity
toward all the Sons of men, yea, the worst of his enemies, expressing it self
by sighs and tears, intimating the deep compassion of his heart. And this made
him, as it were even forget his own miseries in his greatest distress, when
seeing the Daughters of Jerusalem mourn for him, as he was going to his Cross,
he minds them of that which his compassionate heart was fixed on, even their
approaching misery and ruin, Luke 23.28. But yet neither is this Mercifulness
in general that which the Apostle intends; but he considers it, as excited,
provoked, and drawn forth by his own temptations and sufferings. He suffered
and was tempted, that he might be merciful, not absolutely, but a merciful High
Priest. The Relation of the Sufferings and Temptations of Christ unto his
Mercifulness, is not as unto the Grace, or Habit of it, but as unto its
especial Exercise as our High Priest. And this mercifulness of Christ is, the
gracious Condolency and Compassion of his whole soul with his people in all
their temptations, sufferings, dangers, fears and sorrows, with a continual
propensity of Will and Affections unto their Relief, implanted in him by the
Holy Ghost, as one of those Graces which were to dwell in his nature in all
fullness, excited and provoked, as to its continual exercise in his Office of
High Priest, by the sense and experience, which he himself had of those
Miseries which they undergo; whereof more on the last Verse.

Secondly, The other Qualification mentioned, is that he should be (...),
faithful. Some understand by (...), verus, legitimus, true and rightful; made
so in a due manner, whereof the Apostle treats expressly, Chap. 5.5. Others, his
general Faithfulness, Integrity, and Righteousness in the discharge of his
Office, being faithful unto him that appointed him, as Chap. 3.2. But neither
of these senses answer the especial design of the Apostle, nor his referring of
this Qualification unto his conformity with the Brethren in sufferings and
temptations. It must also answer that mercifulness which we have before
described. It consists therefore in his exact, constant, careful consideration
of all the concernments of the Brethren under their temptations and sufferings.
This he is excited unto by his own Experience of what it is to serve God in
such a condition. It is described, Isa. 40.11. Not his Faithfulness then in
general, whereby he discharged his whole Office, and accomplished the work
committed unto him, mentioned, John 17.4. but his constant Care and
Condescension unto the Wants and Sorrows of his suffering and tempted Brethren,
is here intended.

Before we proceed unto the Explication of the remaining passages of these
Verses, what offers it self from what has been already discoursed unto our
Instruction, may be observed: As,

First, The promised Messiah was to be the great High Priest of the people of
God. This the Apostle here presumes and proves elsewhere. And this we have
elsewhere confirmed. The especial Office of Priesthood, for one to perform it
in the behalf of others, came in after sin, upon the first Promise. In the
state of Innocence every one was to be Priest for himself, or perform in his
own name the things which with God he had to do according unto the Law of his
Creation. This privilege failing by sin, which cut off all gracious
intercourse between God and man, a new way was provided and included in the
first Promise for the transaction of things between God and sinners. This was
by Christ alone, the promised seed. But because he was not to be immediately
exhibited in the flesh, and it was the will of God that sundry Sacrifices
should be offered unto him, partly for his Honor and Glory in the world, and
to testify the subjection of his people unto him, partly to teach and instruct
them in the Nature and Benefits of the Priesthood which he had designed for
them, and to exemplify it in such Representations as they were capable of, he
did at several seasons institute various sorts of temporary fading typical
Priests; this he did both before and after the Law. Not that ever there was
amongst them a Priest properly and absolutely so called, by whom the things of
men might be completely and ultimately transacted with God. Only those who were
appointed to administer before the Lord in the behalf of others, were called
Priests, as Rulers are called gods; because they represented the true Priest,
and outwardly expressed his actings unto the people. The true, proper, and
absolute High Priest, is Jesus Christ alone, the Son of God; for he alone had
all the solemnities that were necessary for the constitution and confirmation
of such a Priest. As in particular, the Oath of God was necessary hereunto,
that his Priesthood might be stable and unchangeable. Now none was ever
appointed a Priest by the Oath of God, but Christ alone, as the Apostle
declares, chap. 7.20, 21. And how this differences his Office from that of
others, shall on that place be made manifest. 2. He alone had somewhat of his
own to offer unto God; other Priests had somewhat to offer, but nothing of
their own; only they offered up the beasts that were brought unto them by the
people. But the Lord Christ had a Body and Soul of his own prepared for him to
offer, which was properly his own and at his own disposal, chap. 10.5. 3. He
alone was set over the whole spiritual House of God, the whole Family of God in
heaven and earth. This belongs unto the Office of a High Priest, to preside in
and over the House of God, to look to the rule and disposal of all things
therein. Now the Priests of old were, as unto this part of their Office,
confined unto the material House or Temple of God; but Jesus Christ was set
over the whole spiritual House of God to rule and dispose of it, chap. 3.6. 4.
He alone abides for ever. The true and real High Priest was not to minister for
one Age or Generation only, but for the whole people of God unto the end of the
world. And this Prerogative of the Priesthood of Christ the Apostle insists
upon, chap. 7.23, 24. 5. He alone did, and could do the true and proper work of
a Priest; namely, make reconciliation for the sins of the people. The
Sacrifices of other Priests could only represent what was to be done, the thing
it self they could not effect; for it was not possible that the blood of bulls
and goats should take away sin, as the Apostle shows, chap. 10.4. but this was
done effectually by that one offering which this High Priest offered, verse 11,
12, 13, 14. All which things must be afterward insisted on in their proper
places, if God permit. This then is his Prerogative, this is our privilege and
advantage.

II. The assumption of our nature, and his conformity unto us therein, was
principally necessary unto the Lord Jesus, on the account of his being an High
Priest for us. It behoved him to be made like unto us, that he might be an High
Priest; it is true, that as the great Prophet of his Church he did in part
teach and instruct it, whilst he was in the flesh in his own Person: but this
was in a manner a mere consequence of his assuming our nature to be our High
Priest. For he instructed his Church before and after principally by his
Spirit. And this he might have done to the full, though he had never been
incarnate. So also might he have ruled it with supreme Power as its King and
Head. But our High Priest without the assumption of our nature he could not be,
because without this he had nothing to offer; and of necessity, says the
Apostle, he must have somewhat to offer unto God. A Priest without a Sacrifice
is as a King without a Subject. Had not God prepared him a body, he could have
had nothing to offer. He was to have a self to offer to God, or his Priesthood
had been in vain. For God had showed that no other Sacrifice would be accepted,
or was effectual for that end which was designed unto this Office. On this
therefore is laid the indispensible necessity of the Incarnation of Christ.

III. Such was the unspeakable love of Christ unto the Brethren, than he would
refuse nothing, no condition, that was needful to fit him for the discharge of
the work which he h^d undertaken for them. Their High Priest he must be, this
he could not, unless he were made like unto them in all things. He knew what
this would cost him, what trouble, sorrow, suffering in that conformity unto
them he must undergo; what miseries he must conflict withal all his life; what
a close was to be put unto his pilgrimage on the earth; what woeful temptations
he was to pass through: all lay open and naked before him. But such was his
Love, shadowed out unto us by that of Jac^b to Rachel, that he was content to
submit unto any terms, to undergo any condition, so that he might save and
enjoy his beloved Church. See Ephesians. 5.25, 26. And surely he who was so intense
in his love, is no less constant therein. Nor has he left any thing undone
that was needful to bring us unto God. But we are yet farther to proceed with
our explication of the words.

V.
The Apostle having asserted the Priesthood of Christ, describes in the fifth
place the nature of the Office it self, (...).
as it was vested in him: and this he does two ways. 1. By a general
description of the Object of it, or that which it is exercised about; (...),
the things appertaining unto God. 2. In a particular instance taken from the
end of his Priesthood, and the great work that he performed thereby, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.

First, He was to be an High Priest in the things pertaining unto God; that is,
either in things that were to be done for God with men, as the Apostle speaks,
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, 2 Cor.
5.20. Or in things that were to be done with God for men. For there were two
general parts of the Office of the High Priest: the one to preside in the House
and over the Worship of God, to do the things of God with men. This the Prophet
assigns unto Joshua the High Priest, an especial Type of Christ, Zech. 3.7.
Thus says the Lord of hosts, If thou will walk, in my ways, and if thou will
keep my charge, then thou shall also judge my house, and thou shall also keep
my courts. And of Christ himself, even he shall build the Temple of the Lord,
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he
shall be a priest upon his throne, chap. 6.13. that is, the High Priest of our
profession, chap. 3.1. He was set authoritatively over the House of God, to
take care that the whole Worship of it were performed according unto his
appointment, and to declare his Statutes and Ordinances unto the people. And in
this sense the Lord Christ is also the High Priest of his Church, (...),
feeding and ruling them in the Name and Authority of God, Mich. 5.4. Yet this
is not that part of his Office which is here intended by the Apostle. The other
part of the High Priests Office was to perform the things toward God, which on
the part of the people were to be performed. So Jethro advises Moses, Exodus
18.19. (...), Be thou unto the people before God; which words the LXX render,
(...), in the phrase here used by the Apostle, Be thou unto the people in
things appertaining unto God. And this was the principal part of the Office and
Duty of the High Priest, the other being only a consequent thereof. And that it
was so, as to the Office of Christ, the Apostle manifests in the especial
limitation which he adjoyns unto this general assertion; he was an High Priest
in things appertaining unto God, (...), to reconcile; that is, make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.

Two things are to be considered in these words: 1. The Object of the Priestly
action here assigned to the Lord Christ. 2. The Action it self, which with
respect thereunto he is said to perform.

The first is, (...); the people; that is, say some; the seed of Abraham, whose
interest in the Mediation of Christ, and their privilege therein, the Apostle
here minds them of, to provoke the Hebrews to constancy in their faith and
profession. And so also they limit the term Brethren before used, not, as they
say, that the Elect among the Gentiles are excluded, but that he expressly
mentions only the first fruits in the Jews. But this sense is not necessarily
included in the words; the intention of the Apostle in the expression is only
to give some light into the effect of the Priesthood of Christ, from the Office
of the High Priest under the Old Testament, and the discharge thereof. For as
he had a peculiar people for whom he made atonement, so also has Christ, that
is, all his Elect.

(...).
2. The Action ascribed unto him is expressed in those words, (...); which want
not their difficulty, the construction of the Verb being inconsistent with its
native and proper signification; (...) is properly and usually in all Writers,
Sacred and others, to appease, to atone, to please, to propitiate, to
recon^ile. But the following word seems not to admit of that sense in this
place, (...). For how can any one be said to please, or atone, or reconcile
sin? Wherefore some laying the emphasis of the expression on the construction,
do regulate the sense of the Verb by the Noun, of the Act by the Object* and so
will have it signify to expiate, cleanse, and do away sin; to cleanse the sins
of the people, to do away the sins of the people. The Vulgar Latin renders the
word repropitio, ut repropit^aret; which, as Anselm tells us, and he has those
that follow him, is composed of re, prope, and cleo; a barbarous Etymology of
a barbarous word. Propitio, is a Latin^ word, and used not only by Plautus, but
by Suetonius and Pliny; and that to appease, atone, please, or turn away
anger. Most Translations render it by expio, ad expiandum peccata; but the
signification of that word is also doubtful. It is indeed sometimes used for to
cleanse, make pure, and to take away sin; but never in any good Author but with
reference unto atonement; to take them away by sacrifice, by public
punishments, by men's devoting themselves to destruction. So Livy, speaking of
Horatius who killed his sister, Ita ut caedes manifesta aliquo tamen piaculo
lueretur, imperatum patri, ut filium expiaret pecunia publica. Expiare is the
same with luere piaculo, which is to take away the guilt of a crime by a
commutation of punishments. There may then be a double sense of these words. 1.
To make atonement and reconciliation for sin, appeasing the anger and wrath of
God against it. 2. To remove and take away sin, either by the cleansing and
sanctifying of the sinner, or by any means prevailing with him not to continue
in sin. Against the first sense, the construction of the word with (...) sins,
is objected; Against the latter, the constant sense of the word it self, which
is not to be deserted. It is the former sense therefore which we do embrace,
and shall confirm.

1. The constant use of the word in all good Authors of the Greek Tongue, will
admit no other; (...) is of an active importance, and denotes propitium facio,
placo, as we observed before, to appease and atone. And this is that whereby
the Heathen generally expressed their endeavors to turn away the wrath of
their gods, to appease them; and then they use it transitively, with an
Accusative case of the Object; as Homer, Iliad 3.

-- (...). To propitiate or appease God. And Iliad 1.

(...)
(...)
(...).
To offer an Hecatomb unto Apollo for the Greeks, and appease him who has sent
on them so many sorrows, or atone him. And when it has the Accusative case of
the person joined with it, it can bear no other sense. So Plutarch, (...); and
Lucian, (...), to appease God. Sometimes it is used with a Dative case, as
Plutarch in Public. (...); and then it has respect unto the Sacrifice whereby
atonement is made, and anger turned away; and is rendered piaculare sacrum
facere, to offer a piacular sacrifice. So that the word constantly has regard
unto the anger and wrath of some person, which is deprecated, turned away,
appeased, by reconciliation made.

2. The use of the word by the LXX confirms it unto this sense. Commonly they
render the Hebrew (...) by it; which when regarding God, always signifies
atonement, and to atone. So the Noun, Psalm. 48.17. No man can redeem his
brother, (...) nor can he give to God his ransom, or the price of his
redemption, (...). And unto the Verb where it respects the offense to be
attoned for, they usually annex (...) to it. Exodus 32.30. You have sinned a
great sin, and now I will go up unto the Lord, (...), that I may atone for
your sins. And it is God who is the Object of the Act of appeasing, or
attoning; to make atonement with God for your sin. So Numb. 28.22, 30. Nehem.
10.33. Once in the Old Testament it is used transitively, and sin placed as the
Object of it, Dan. 9.24. (...), to atone sin, or unrighteousness; that is,
(...), to make atonement with God for sin. And so also they express the person
with (...) for whom the atonement is made. (...), Exodus 30.15, 16. Levit. 1.4.
chap. 4.20, 26, and 6.30. Numb. 15.23, 26. And still God is respected as he who
is offended, and is to be reconciled; as it is expressed, Levit. 10.17. (...),
shall make atonement for them before the Lord. And sometimes they add that
wherewith the atonement is made, namely Offerings or Sacrifices of one sort or
another, Levit. 8.17. And they will give us the sense of the word in another
place, Prove. 16.15. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death, (...), a
wise man shall appease him; referring that to the King, which the Original does
to his wrath, (...), shall turn away, that is, by appeasing him. In the use of
this word then there is always understood, 1. An offense, crime, guilt or debt,
to be taken away. 2. A person offended, to be pacified, attoned, reconciled. 3.
A person offending to be pardoned, accepted. 4. A Sac^i^ice or other means of
making the atonement, sometimes one is expressed, sometimes another, but the
use of the word has respect unto them all. And in vain does Crellius pretend,
ad Grot. ad cap. 7. p. 360. that (...) and (...) are the same, and denote the
same thing, the former always denoting the person offended, the latter the
person offending, or the offense it self; the one is to atone or appease
another, the other to make atonement for another; which surely are
sufficiently different.

3. The Jews to whom Paul wrote, knew that the principal work of the High
Priest was to make atonement with God for sin; whereof their Expiations and
freedom from it was a consequent; and therefore they understood this act and
duty accordingly, it b^ing the usual expression of it that the Apostle applies
unto it. They knew that the great work of their High Priest was to make
atonement for them, for their sins and transgressions, that they might not
die, that the punishment threatened in the Law might not come upon them, as
Levit. 16.10, and 21. is fully declared. And the Apostle now instructs them in
the substance, of what they had before attended unto in types and shadows. Nor
is there any mention in the Scripture of the expiation of sins but by
atonement; nor does this word ever in any place signify the real cleansing of
sin inherent from the sinner; so that the latter sense proposed has no
consistency with it.

The difficulty pretended from the construction, is not of any moment. The
sense and constant use of the word being what we have evinced* there must be an
Ellipsis supposed, and (...), is the same in sense with (...), to make
reconciliation with God for sins; as the same phrase is in other places
explained.

Sixthly, There is a farther double enforcement of the necessity of what was
before affirmed, concerning his being made like unto his brethren in all
things, with reference unto his Priesthood; and the first is taken from what he
did or suffered in that condition; the other from the benefits and advantages
which ensued thereon. The first in those words, For that he himself has
suffered being tempted.

(...).
(...), for in that; that is, say some, in the same nature, he suffered in the
flesh that he took, being tempted. But the words seem rather only an illation
of what the Apostle concludes or infers from that which he had before laid
down; (...), whereas, in as much, seeing that; so both (...) and (...) are
often used, Romans 6.12.

(...).
Now it is here affirmed of Christ that (...), he suffered being tempted; not,
it happened unto him to be tempted, which we before rejected. The Vulgar Latin,
and Expositors following that Translation; He suffered and was tempted. But the
[and] inserted we have showed to be superfluous, and it is acknowledged to be
so by Erasmus, Estius, A Lapide; though Tena with some others contend for the
retaining of it. It is not the suffering of Christ in general that is here
intended; nor is the end mentioned of it that of his suffering in general,
which was to make reconciliation; but the succouring and relieving of them that
are tempted, which regards the sufferings that befell him in his temptations.
It is not his sufferings absolutely considered, nor his being tempted that is
peculiarly designed, but his suffering in his temptation, as was before
observed. To know then what were these sufferings, we must enquire what were
his temptations, and how he was affected with them.

To tempt, and temptations are things in themselves of an indifferent nature,
and have no moral evil in them absolutely considered. What ever attends them of
that kind, proceeds either from the intention of the tempter, or the condition
of them that are tempted. Hence God is said to tempt men, but not to induce
them unto sin, Genesis 22.1. James 1.13. What of evil ensues on temptation, is
from the tempted themselves. Moreover, though temptation seems to be of an
active importance, yet in it self it is merely for the most part neutral. Hence
it compriseth any thing, state or condition, whereby a man may be tried,
exercised or tempted. And this will give us light into the various temptations
under which the Lord Christ suffered. For although they were all external, and
by impressions from without, yet they were not confined unto the assaults of
Satan, which are principally regarded under that name. Some of the heads of
them we may briefly recount.

1. His state and condition in the world; He was poor, despised, persecuted,
reproached, especially from the beginning unto the end of his public
ministry. Herein lay one continued temptation, that is, a trial of his
obedience by all manner of hardships. Hence he calls this whole time, the time
of his temptations; You have abode with me in my temptations; or in the work
that he carried on in a constant course of temptation, arising from his outward
state and condition. See James 1.2. 1 Pet. 5.9. In this temptation he suffered
Hunger, Poverty, Weariness, Sorrow, Reproach, Shame, Contempt, wherewith his
holy Soul was deeply affected. And he underwent it cheerfully, because it was
to be the condition of them, whose preservation and salvation as their High
Priest he had undertaken, as we shall see. And his experience hereof is the
spring of their comfort and safety.

2. Whilst he was in this state and condition, innumerable particular
temptations befell him, under all which he suffered. 1. Temptations from his
Relations in the flesh, being disregarded and disbelieved by them, which deeply
affected his compassionate heart with sorrow. 2. From his Followers, being
forsaken by them upon his preaching the Mysteries of the Gospel. 3. From his
chosen Disciples, all of whom left him, one denied him, and one betrayed him.
4. From the anguish of his Mother, when a sword pierced through her soul in his
sufferings. 5. From his enemies of all sorts. All which are at large related in
the Gospel; from all which his sufferings were inexpressible.

3. Satan had a principal hand in the temptations wherein he suffered. He set
upon him in the entrance of his Ministry immediately in his own Person, and
followed him in the whole course of it by the instruments that he set on work.
He had also a season, an hour of darkness allowed unto him, when he was to try
his utmost strength and policy against him; under which assault from him he
suffered, as was foretold, from the foundation of the world, the bruising of
his heel, or the temporal ruin of all his concernments.

4. Gods desertion of him was another temptation under which he suffered. As
this was most mysterious, so his sufferings under it were his greatest
perplexity, Psalm. 22.1, 2. Heb. 5.7.

These are some of the heads and springs of those various and innumerable
temptations that the Lord Christ suffered in and under.

Lastly, The b^e^sed effect and consequent hereof is expressed in those words,
He is able to succor them that are tempted; wherein we have, 1. The
description of them for whose sake the Lord Christ underwent this condition. 2.
The Ability that accrued unto him thereby for their relief. And, 3. The
Advantage that they are thereby made partakers of.

First, They for whose sakes he underwent this condition, are those whom he
reconciled unto God by his Sacrifice as an High Priest, but are here described
by an especial concerment of their obedience, which producing all their sorrow
and trouble, makes them stand in continual need of aid and assistance. They are
(...), (...).
tempted ones. Notwithstanding their reconciliation unto God by the death of
Christ, they have a course of obedience prescribed unto them. In this course
they meet with many difficulties, dangers, and sorrows, all proceeding from the
temptations that they are exercised withal. Hence is this description of them,
they are those who are tempted, and suffer greatly on that account. Others are
little concerned in temptations; outward it may be as unto danger they have not
many; and if they have, it is the trouble and not the temptations which they
regard; inward and unto sin, they yield obedience unto; and the trouble from
temptation is in the opposition made unto it. It is reconciled persons who
emphatically are the tempted ones, especially as temptations are looked on as
the cause of sufferings. They are the mark of Satan and the world, against
which all their arrows and darts are directed, the subject whereon God himself
exercises his trials. And besides all this, they maintain a continual warfare
within them against temptations in the remainder of their own corruptions: so
that within and about them are they conversant in the whole course of their
lives. Moreover unto this constant and perpetual conflict, there do befall them
in the Holy Wise Providence of God certain seasons wherein Temptations grow
high, strong, impetous, and are even ready to ruin them. As Christ had an Hour
of Darkness to conflict withal; so have they also. Such was the condition of
the believing Hebrews, when Paul wrote this Epistle unto them. What through the
Persecution, wherein they endured a great fight of Afflictions, and what
through the Seductions of false brethren, alluring them unto an Apostasy unto
Judaism, and an acquiescency in Mosaical Ceremonies, they were even ready to be
utterly ruined. Unto them therefore, and by them unto all others in the like
condition the Apostle has respect in his description of those whom the Lord
Christ is ready to succor; they are tempted ones. This is the proper name of
Believers. As Satan from what he does, is called the Tempter; so they from what
they endure, may be called the Tempted ones. Their calling is to oppose
Temptations; and their lives a conflict with them. The High Priest having
suffered the like things with them, they have an assured ground of consolation
in all their temptations and suf^erings. Which he confirms by what is added in
the second place, namely, his ability to help them.

(...).
2. (...), he is able. Now this Ability is such, as arises from that peculiar
mercifulness, which he is disposed unto from that experience which he had of
suffering under Temptation. A Moral Power, not a Natural. It is not (...), an
executive Power, a Power of working or operation, not a power of the hand, but
(...), a Power of heart and will, an Ability in readiness of mind, that is here
assigned unto Christ. It is this latter, and not the former that was a
Consequent of his temptations and sufferings. A gracious, ready enlargedness of
heart, and constant inclination unto the succor of them that are tempted, is
the Ability here designed. For as this Power was originally and radically
implanted in the Humane Nature of Christ, by the communication of all habitual
grace unto him, so its next inclination to exert it self in suitable Effects,
with a constant actual excitation thereunto, he had upon the account of his
suffering in temptations. For,

1. He had particular Experience thereby of the Weakness, Sorrows and Miseries
of Humane Nature under the assaults of Temptations; he tried it, self it, and
will never forget it,

2. His Heart is hereby inclined to Compassion, and acquainted with what it is
that will afford Relief. In his Throne of Eternal Peace and Glory, he sees his
poor Brethren laboring in that storm, which with so much travail of soul
himself passed through, and is intimately affected with their condition. Thus
Moses stirs up the Israelites unto Compassion unto Strangers, from the
Experience they had themselves of the sorrows of their hearts; thou know the
heart of a stranger. And the Jews tell us, that the (...), or Officers that he
set over the people in the Wilderness were of those Elders who were so evily
entreated by the Taskmasters in Egypt; that from their own sufferings, they
might know how to exercise tenderness over their brethren now put under their
rule.

3. This Compassion moves and excites him unto their Relief and Succor. This
is the proper effect of mercy and compassion. It sets Power on work for the
relief of them whose condition it is affected withal. So said she.

Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. Being exercised with evils and
troubles her self, she had thence learned to relieve the miserable so far as
she was able. This is the Ability ascribed unto our High Priest. Compassion and
Mercy arising from an Experience of the sufferings and dangers of Humane Nature
under Temptations, exciting his Power for the relief of them that are tempted.

3. Lastly, The Advantage of the Brethren from hence lies in the succor that
he is thus able to afford unto them. This in general, as we have showed,
consists in a speedy coming in with relief unto them who being in distress do
cry out, or call for it. There are three things that tempted Believers do stand
in need of; and which they cry out for, (1.) Strength to withstand their
temptations, that they prevail not against them: (2.) Consolation to support
their Spirits under them. (3.) Seasonable Deliveranc^ from them. Unto these is
the succor afforded by our High Priest suited; and it is variously administered
unto them. As (1.) By his Word or Promises: (2.) By his Spirit: and that, (1.)
By communicating unto them supplies of Grace or spiritual strength. (2.) Strong
consolation. (3.) By rebuking their Tempters and temptations (3.) By his
Providence disposing of all things to their good and Advantage in the issue;
and what is more in the words, will be manifest in the ensuing Observations
taken from them.

1. The principal work of the Lord Christ as our High Priest, and from which
all other actings of his and that Office do flow, was to make Reconciliation or
Atonement for sin. This John declares, 1 Ep. 2.2. We have an Advocate with the
Father, and he is a propitiation for our sins. What he does for us in Heaven as
our Advocate, depends on what he did on earth, when he was a Propitiation for
our sins. This work was that which was principally regarded in the first
Promise, Genesis 3.15. namely, That which he was to do by his sufferings. To
shadow out and represent this unto the Church of old, were all the Sacrifices
of the Law, and the Typical Priesthood it self instituted. They all directed
Believers to look for, and to believe the Atonement that was to be made by
him. And that this should be the foundation of all his other actings as an High
Priest, was necessary;

First, On the part of his Elect, for whom he undertook that Office. They were
by nature Enemies of God, and children of Wrath; unless Peace and
Reconciliation be made for them in the first place, they could neither have
encouragement to go to him with their Obedience, nor to expect any mercy from
him, or Acceptance with him. For as Enemies, they could neither have any mind
to serve him, nor hope to please him. Here lie the first thoughts of all who
have any design seriously to appear before God, or to have to do with him;
wherewith shall we come before him, how shall we obtain Reconciliation with
him? Until this Enquiry be answered and satisfied, they find it in vain to
address themselves unto any thing else, nor can obtain any ground of hope to
receive any good thing from the hand of God. This order of things the Apostle
lays down, Romans 5.8, 9, 10. The first thing to be done for us, was to
reconcile us to God whilst we were sinners and enemies; this was done by the
death, by the blood of Christ, when as our High Priest he offered himself a
Sacrifice for us. This being performed, as we have abundant Cause of, and
Encouragement unto Obedience, so also just ground to expect what ever else
belongs unto our salvation; as he also argues, Chap. 8.

Secondly, It was so on his own part also. Had not this been first
accomplished, he could not have undertaken any other Act of his Priestly Office
for us. What the Lord Christ does in Heaven on our behalf, was prefigured by
the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy Place. Now this he could not do,
unless he had before offered his Sacrifice of Atonement, the blood whereof he
carried along with him into the presence of God. All his Intercession for us,
his watching for our Good, as the merciful High Priest over the House of God,
is grounded upon the Reconciliation and Atonement which he made: his
Intercession indeed being nothing but the blessed Representation of the Blood
of the Atonement. Besides, this was required of him in the first place,
namely, that he should make his soul an Offering for sin, and do that, in the
Body prepared for him, which all the Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings of old
could not effect nor accomplish. And therefore hereon depended all the Promises
that were made unto him about the success of his Mediation, so that without the
performance of it he could not claim the accomplishment of them.

Thirdly, It was so on the part of God also; For herein principally had he
designed to manifest his Righteousness, Grace, Love and Wisdom, wherein he will
be glorified, Romans 3.25. He set him forth to be a propitiation to declare h^s
Righteousness; the Righteousness of God was most eminently glorified in the
Reconciliation wrought by Christ, when he was a Propitiation for us, or made
atonement for us in his blood. And herein also God commends his Love unto
us, Romans 5.8, John 3.16. 1 John 4.9. And what greater demonstration of it could
possibly be made, than to send his Son to dye for us when we were enemies, that
we might be reconciled unto him. All after actings of God toward us indeed are
full of Love, but they are all streams from this fountain, or Rivers from this
Ocean. And the Apostle sums up all the Grace of the Gospel in this; that God
was in Christ reconciling us to himself; and that by this way of Atonement,
making him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. And so also he declares, that
this was the mystery of his Will wherein he abounded toward us in all Wisdom
and Prudence, Ephesians. 1.8, 9, 10. So that in all things the great glory which
God designed in the Mediation of Christ, is founded alone in that Act of his
Priesthood, whereby he made Reconciliation for the sins of his people. And
therefore.

1. They who weaken, oppose, or take away this Reconciliation, are Enemies to
the salvation of men, the Honor of Christ, and the Glory of God, From men they
take their Hopes and Happiness, from Christ his Office and Honor, from God his
Grace and Glory. I know they will allow of a Reconciliation in Words, but it is
of Men to God, not of God unto men. They would have us reconcile our selves
unto God by Faith and Obedience, but for the Reconciliation of God unto us, by
Sacrifice, Satisfaction and Atonement, that they deny. What would they have
poor sinners do in this case? they are Enemies unto God; go say they, and be
reconciled unto him; lay aside your Enmity, and be no more his adversaries: but
alas, he is our Enemy also; we are children of wrath, obnoxious to the curse as
transgressors of his Law, and how shall we be delivered from the wrath to come?
Take no care of that, there is no such Justice in God, no such Indignation
against sin and sinners as you imagine; but our Consciences tell us otherwise;
the Law of God tells us otherwise; the whole Scripture testifies to the
contrary; all the Creation is filled with tokens and evidences of this Justice
and Indignation of God against sin, which you deny: And would you have us to
give credit unto you, contrary to the constant dictates of our own Consciences,
the Sentence of the Law, the Testimony of the Word, the Voice of the whole
Creation, and that in a matter of such importance and everlasting concernment
unto us? What if all these should prove true, and you should prove liars,
should we not perish for ever, by relying on your testimony? Is it reasonable
we should attend unto you in this matter? Go with your Sophisms unto men who
were never burdened with a sense of the Guilt of sin, whose Spirits never took
in a sense of Gods displeasure against it, who never were brought under bondage
by the sentence of the Law, who never were forced to cry out in the bitterness
and anguish of their souls, what shall we do to be saved? Wherewith shall we
come before the Lord, or appear before the High God? and it may be they will be
entangled and seduced by you; but for those who have thus in any measure known
the terror of the Lord, they will be secured from you by his Grace. Besides,
what ground do such men leave unto the Lord Christ to stand upon as it were in
his Intercession for us in Heaven? Do they not take that blood out of his hand,
which he is carrying into the Holy Place? And how do they despoil him of his
Honor, in taking of from his work? a miserable employment; when men shall study
and take pains to persuade themselves and others, that Christ has not done
that for them, which he has done for all that are his; and which if he has
not done for them, they must perish for evermore; Is it worth the while for
them to weaken Faith, Love and Thankfulness unto Christ? From whom can such men
look for their Reward? Can Right Reason, or a Light within, be no otherwise
adored, but by sacrificing the blood of Christ unto them? no otherwise be
enthroned, but by deposing him from his Office, and taking his work out of his
hand; and by an horrible ingratitude, because they know no other could do that
work, to conclude that it is needless? Are men so resolved not to be beholding
unto Jesus Christ, that rather than grant that he has made Reconciliation for
us by his blood, they will deny that there was any need that any such
Reconciliation should be made? O the depths of Satan; Oh the stupidity and
blindness of men that are taken alive by him, and lead captive at his pleasure.

2. They who would come unto God by Christ, may see what in the first place,
they are to look after. Indeed if they are once brought into that Condition
wherein they will seriously look after him, they will not be able to look from
it, though for a while it may be they will be unwilling to look unto it.
Reconciliation they must have, or they can have no peace. This lies straight
before them; they are willing it may be to look upon the right hand, and the
left, to see if there be any thing nigh them that will yield them relief; but
all is in vain: If any thing else gives them ease, it gives them poison: if it
gives them peace, it gives them ruin. Reconciliation by the blood of Christ is
the only relief for their souls. And nothing more discovers the vanity of much
of that Religion which is in the world, than the regardlesness of men in
looking after this, which is the Foundation-stone of any durable building in
the things of God. This they will do, and that they will do, but how they shall
have an interest in the Reconciliation made for sin, they trouble not
themselves withal.

II. The Lord Christ suffered under all his temptations, sinned in none. He
suffered being tempted, sinned not being tempted. He had the Heart of a man,
the Affections of a man, and that in the highest degree offense and tenderness.
What ever sufferings the soul of a man may be brought under, by Grief, Sorrow,
Shame, Fear, Pain, Danger, loss, by any afflictive passions within, or
impressions of force from without, he underwent, he felt it all. Because he was
always in the Favor of God, and in the assurance of the indissolubility of
the Union of his Person, we are apt to think, that what came upon him, was so
overballanced by the Blessedness of his Relation unto God, as not to cause any
great Trouble unto him. But we mistake when we so conceive. No sorrows were
like to his, no sufferings like unto his. He fortified not himself against
them, but as they were merely poenal, he made bare his breast unto their
strokes, and laid open his soul that they might soak into the inmost parts of
it, Isa. 50.6. All those Reliefs and diversions of this life which we may make
use of, to alleviate our sorrows and sufferings, he utterly abandoned. He left
nothing in the whole Nature of sorrow or suffering, that he tasted not, and
made experience of. Indeed in all his sufferings and temptations, he was
supported with the thoughts of the glory that was set before him; but our
thoughts of his present glory should not divert us from the contemplation of
his past real sufferings. All the advantage that he had above us by the
Excellency of his Person, was only that the sorrows of his heart were enlarged
thereby, and he was made capable of greater enduring without sin. And it was to
be thus with him.

1. Because, although the Participation of Humane Nature was only necessary,
that he might be an High Priest, yet his sufferings under Temptations were so,
that he might be a merciful High Priest for tempted sufferers. Such have need
not only to be saved by his Atonement, but to be relieved, favored, comforted
by his Grace. They did not only want one to undertake for them, but to
undertake for them with Care, Pity and tenderness. Their state required
delivery with compassion. God by that way of Salvation that he provides for
them, intends not only their final Safety in Heaven, but also that in the sense
of the first fruits of it in this world, they may glorify him by Faith and
Thankful Obedience. To this end it was necessary that they should have relief
provided for them in the Tenderness and Compassion of their High Priest, which
they could have no greater pledge of, than by seeing him for their sakes,
exposing himself unto the miseries which they had to conflict withal: and so
always to bear that sense of them, which that impression would surely leave
upon his soul. And,

2. Because, although the Lord Jesus by virtue of the Union of his Person and
plenary unction with the Spirit, had an habitual fullness of mercy and
compassion, yet he was to be particularly excited unto the exercise of them
toward the Brethren, by the experience he had of their condition. His internal
habitual fullness of Grace and mercy was capable of excitation unto suitable
actings by external Objects, and sensible Experience. It added not to his
mercifulness, but occasioned his readiness to dispose it unto others; and shut
the door against pleas of delaying succor. He bears still in his holy mind the
sense he had of the sorrows wherewith he was pressed in the time of his
Temptations; and thereon seeing his Brethren conflicting with the like
difficulties, is ready to help them; and because his Power is proportioned unto
his Will, it is said he is able. And what ever may be the real effects on the
mind of Christ from his temptations and sufferings now he is in Heaven; I am
sure they ought to be great on our Faith and Consolation, when we consider him
undergoing them for this very end and purpose, that seeing he was constituted
our High Priest to transact all our Affairs with God, he would be sensible of
that condition in his own person, which he was afterward to present unto God,
for relief to be afforded unto it.

III. Temptations cast souls into Danger. They have need under them of relief
and succor. Their spring, rise, nature, tendency, effects, all make this
manifest. Many perish by them, many are wounded, none escape free that fall
into them. Their kinds are various; so are their degrees, and seasons, but all
dangerous. But this I have elsewhere particularly insisted on.

IV. The great duty of tempted souls, is to cry out unto the Lord Christ for
help and relief. To succor any one, is to come unto his help upon his cry and
call. This being promised by Christ, unto those that are tempted, supposes
their earnest cry unto him. If we be slothful, if we be negligent under our
Temptations, if we look other ways for Assistance, if we trust unto, or rest
in our own endeavors for the conquest of them, no wonder if we are wounded by
them, or fall under them. This is the great arcanum for the cure of this
disease, the only means for supportment, deliverance and conquest, namely, that
we earnestly and constantly apply our selves unto the Lord Christ for succor,
and that as our merciful High Priest, who had experience of them. This is our
duty upon our first surprizal with them, which would put a stop to their
progress, this our Wisdom in their success and prevalency. What ever we do
against them without this, we strive not lawfully, and shall not receive the
crown. Were this more our practice than it is, we should have more freedom from
them, more success against them than usually we have. Never any soul miscarried
under temptation, that cried unto the Lord Christ for succor in a due manner,
that cried unto him under a real apprehension of his danger, with Faith and
Expectation of relief. And hereunto have we encouragement given us, by the
great qualifications of his Person in this Office; he is faithful, he is
merciful, and that which is the Effect of them both, he is able; he is every
way sufficient to relieve and succor poor tempted souls. He has a sufficiency
of Care, Wisdom and Faithfulness, to observe and know the seasons wherein
succor is necessary unto us: a sufficiency of Tenderness, Mercy and Compassion
to excite him thereunto; a sufficiency of Power to afford succor that shall be
effectual; a sufficiency of Acceptance at the Throne of Grace, to prevail with
God for suitable supplies and succor. He is every way able to succor them
that are tempted; to Him be Praise and Glory for evermore.

FINIS.

